From India to the Planet Mars (Théodore Flournoy, 1900)
=======================================================
Théodore Flournoy — The Hélène Smith case — the founding psychological study of a medium. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (fromindiatoplane00flou) — 1900 first English edition.

/f.^6r 

FROM    INDIA 

TO 

THE    PLANET    MARS 

A     STUDY    OF    A     CASE     OF 
SOMNAMBULISM 

WITH      GLOSSOLALIA 
BY 

TH.  FLOURNOY 

PROFESSOR    OF    PSYCHOLOGY    AT    THE 
UNIVERSITY    OF    GENEVA 

TRANSLATED  BY 

DANIEL  B.VERMILYE 

HARPER    &    BROTHERS    PUBLISHERS 

NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 

1900 

Copyright,  1900,  by  Daniel  B.  Vermilye. 

All  rizhts  reserved. 

/  cui/iH'Ax  IflmhiA-j  /foA/M^ 
l/damL  4  Si/  ^lA/  ^'^  //M^Jt 

[translation.] 

I  authorize  Messrs.  Harper  &  Brothers  to  translate 
and  to  publish  in  the  English  language  my  book  "  From 
India  to  the  Planet  Mars." 

THEODORE  FLOURNOY 
Geneva,  June  20,  igcx) 

CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

Translator's  Preface vii 

I.  Introduction i 

II.  Childhood  and  Youth  of  Mlle.  Smith  ....  15 

III.  Mlle.  Smith  Since  Her  Initiation  into  Spiritism  35 

I.  The  Mediumistic  Beginnings  of  Mlle.  Smith  36 

II.  Mlle.  Smith  in  her  Normal  State  ....  41 

III.  Spontaneous  Automatic  Phenomena      ,     .     .  48 

1.  Permanence  of  Exterior  Suggestions   .  49 

2.  Irruptions  of  Subliminal  Reveries    .     .  51 

3.  Teleological  Automatisms 58 

IV.  The  Seances 60 

IV.  The  Personality  of  Leopold 76 

I.  Psychogenesis  of  Leopold 80 

II.  Personification  of  Bai-samo  by  Leopold  .     .  96 

III.  Leopold  and  the  True  Joseph  Balsamo    .     .  107 

IV.  Leopold  and  Mlle.  Smith 116 

V.  The  Martian  Cycle 139 

I.  Origin  and  Birth  of  the  Martian  Cycle    .  140 

II.  Later  Development  of  the  Martian  Cycle  .  152 

III.  The  Personages  of  the  Martian  Romance  .  172 

Esenale 173 

Astane 177 

Pouze,  Ramie — Various  Personages    ...  188 

IV.  Concerning    the   Author   of  the    Martian 

Romance ,,,,,..  190 

V 

'       ■  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAG^ 

VI.  The  Martian   Cycle  (continued)— The    Martian 

Language 195 

I.  Verbal  Martian  Automatisms 198 

II.  The  Martian  Texts •  .     .  210 

III.  Remarks  on  the  Martian  Language     .     .     .  241 

1.  Martian  Phonetics  and  Handwriting  .  246 

2.  Grammatical  Forms 249 

3.  Construction  and  Syntax 251 

4.  Vocabulary 252 

5.  Style 255 

IV.  Mlle.  Smith  and  the  Inventor  of  Martian  .  257 

VII.  The    Martian    Cycle   (concluded)— The    Ultra- 
Martian     261 

VIII.  The  Hindoo  Cycle 275 

I.  Apparition  and   Development  of  the   Hin- 
doo Cycle 279 

II.  Sivrouka  and  M.  de  Marles 297 

III.  The  Arab  Elements  of  the  Oriental  Cycle  309 

IV.  The  Hindoo  Language  of  Mlle.  Smith     .     .  314 
V.  The  Sources  of  the  Hindoo  Dream      .     .     .  337 

IX.  The  Royal  Cycle 342 

X.  Supernormal  Appearances 364 

I.  The  Study  of  the  Supernormal 365 

II.  Physical  Phenomena 375 

1.  Apports 375 

2.  Movements  of  Objects  Without  Contact  377 

III.  Telepathy 387 

IV.  Lucidity 39^ 

1.  Medical  Consultations 398 

2.  Objects  Recovered 401 

3.  Retrocognitions 406 

V.  Incarnations  and  Spirit  Messages    ....  413 

1.  Case  of  Mlle.  Vignier 425 

2.  Case  of  Jean  the  Quarryman   ....  430 

3.  Case    of  the   Syndic    Chaumontet   and 

of  the  Cure  Burnier 431 

XL  Conclusion. 44i 

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 

THE  translation  into  English  of  From  India 
to  the  Planet  Mars  has  been  undertaken  in 
response  to  the  demand  created  by  the  wide- 
spread and  increasing  interest  which  is  manifest- 
ing itself  both  in  Great  Britain  and  the  United 
States  in  the  phenomena  exhibited  by  its  heroine — 
an  interest  which  marks  a  new  era  in  the  progress 
of  hmnan  knowledge. 

Twenty — even  ten — years  ago  the  phenomena 
which  Prof.  Flournoy  here  describes  in  detail,  and 
of  which  he  offers  a  keen,  skilful,  psychological 
analysis,  would  have  met  with  the  sneers  of  popular 
science  and  the  contempt  of  obscurantist  ortho- 
doxy ;  the  book  would  have  found  few  readers. 

Times  have  greatly  changed  since  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  was  founded,  eighteen  years 
ago,  by  a  few  thoughtful  men  (included  among 
them  were  those  whose  names  would  have  con- 
ferred honor  upon  any  body  of  men)  interested  in 
the  investigation  of  abnormal  mental  or  psychic 
phenomena. 

In  explaining  their  reasons  for  organizing  that 
vii 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

society,   its   founders   made  the   following   state- 
ment : 

"  From  the  recorded  testimony  of  many  compe- 
tent witnesses,  past  and  present,  including  obser- 
vations accuratel}^  made  by  scientific  men  of  emi- 
nence of  various  countries,  there  appears  to  be, 
among  much  illusion  and  deception,  an  important 
body  of  remarkable  phenomena  which  are  prima 
facie  inexplicable  on  any  generally  recognized  hy- 
pothesis, and  which,  if  incontestably  established, 
would  be  of  the  highest  possible  value." 

The  organization  of  this  society  constituted  the 
first  attempt  in  the  world's  history  to  investigate 
the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance,  automatic  writing 
and  speaking,  trance  conditions,  second  sight,  appa- 
ritions of  persons  at  the  point  of  death,  alleged 
spirit  messages,  etc.,  by  a  scientific  body  formed 
upon  a  broad  basis. 

As  was  to  have  been  expected,  the  work  and  aims 
of  the  society  were  met  by  a  storm  of  derision  and 
ridicule,  and  by  attacks  which  poured  in  from  every 
quarter,  the  bitterest  of  which  came  from  the  always 
too  numerous  class  of  narrow-minded  scientists, 
whose  partisan  prejudices,  confining  them  to  a  nar- 
row rut,  hinder  their  seeing  anything  from  a  point 
of  view  other  than  that  of  their  preconceived  hy- 
potheses, and  prevent  them  from  attaining  that 
open-mindedness  which  is  indispensable  to  and  one 
of  the  first  requisites  of  a  true  scientist  in  any  field 

of  investigation. 

viii 

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 

The  interest  shown  to-day  in  the  work  of  psy- 
chical research — among  the  evidences  of  which  may 
be  noted  the  reception  accorded  this  work  of  Prof. 
Flournoy,  which  has,  within  a  few  months  from 
the  date  of  its  pubhcation,  attained  its  third  French 
edition — demonstrates  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the 
founders  of  that  society  in  their  efforts  to  bring  the 
thinking  public  to  a  realization  of  the  supreme  im- 
portance of  a  systematic  scientific  study  of  the  mys- 
terious psychic  phenomena  so  long  neglected  by 
official  science,  but  which  are  now  beginning  to 
assume  their  rightful  place  in  the  field  of  study  and 
observation. 

Men  have  come  to  realize  that  the  facts  proved  by 
science  have  not  thus  far  been  adequate  to  satisfy 
the  needs  of  mankind,  and  many  are  to-day  asking 
whether  the  scientific  investigation  of  psychic  phe- 
nomena may  not  succeed  in  proving  the  preamble 
of  all  religions. 

Already  science  has  disclosed  the  existence  of  a 
hidden,  subliminal  world  within  each  individual  be- 
ing, and  it  is  the  investigation  of  that  part  of  the 
individuality  of  Helene  Smith  which  our  author 
has  undertaken  in  the  following  pages. 

The  importance  of  the  subject  and  its  intense  in- 
terest lie  in  the  fact  that  psychical  research  hints 
at  a  possible  solution,  by  means  of  the  same  methods 
which  science  has  been  accustomed  to  use  in  the 
physical  world,  of  the  great  problem  of  man's  future 
destiny,  of  an  answer  to  the  question  asked  by  Job 

ix 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

four  thousand  years  ago,  'Tf  a  man  die,  shall  he 
live  again  ?  ''  and  which  has  been  repeated  in  vain 
b}^  ever}^  generation  of  men  who  have  since  inhab- 
ited the  earth. 

While,  it  is  true,  the  great  majority  of  men  are 
still  skeptical  as  to  the  ability  of  science  ever  to 
solve  this  problem,  it  is,  however,  a  fact  that  a  con- 
tinually increasing  number  of  thoughtful  men  are 
coming  to  believe  that  the  hidden  subliminal  world 
within  us  may  point  to  an  unseen  but  spiritual 
world  without,  communication  with  which,  if  once 
established,  would  furnish  us  with  the  solution  so 
ardently  longed  for. 

Such  men  do  not  believe  that  it  behooves  them 
to  be  content  with  the  passivity  of  pure  Agnosticism 
are  not  willing  that  Ignoramus  et  Ignorahimus 
should  be  their  only  creed.  They  are  beginning 
to  search  for  new  facts  in  the  domain  of  the  human 
mind,  just  as  they  have  searched  for  and  found 
them  everywhere  else  they  have  looked  for  them. 

Mr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  the  pioneer  and  leader  of 
the  psychical  research  movement,  in  an  address 
recently  delivered,  says  :  ''  Starting  from  various 
wstand-points,  we  endeavor  to  carrj^  the  newer,  the 
intellectual  virtues  into  regions  where  dispassionate 
tranquillity  has  seldom  3^et  been  known.  .  .  .  First, 
we  adopt  the  ancient  belief — implied  in  all  mono- 
theistic religion,  and  conspicuously  confirmed  by 
the  progress  of  modern  science — that  the  world  as  a 
whole,  spiritual  and  material  together,  has  in  some 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

way  a  systematic  unity  :  and  on  this  we  base 
the  novel  presumption  that  there  should  be  a  unity 
of  method  in  the  investigation  of  all  fact.  We  hold 
therefore  that  the  attitude,  the  habits  of  mind,  the 
methods  by  which  physical  science  has  grown  deep 
and  wide,  should  be  applied  also  to  the  spiritual 
world.  We  endeavor  to  approach  the  problems 
of  that  world  by  careful  collection,  scrutiny,  testing 
of  particular  facts  ;  and  we  account  no  unexplained 
fact  too  trivial  for  our  attention." 

This  is  just  what  Prof.  Flournoy  has  endeavored 
to  do  in  regard  to  the  strange  phenomena  mani- 
fested by  Mile.  Helene  Smith.  No  fact  has  been 
regarded  by  him  as  too  trivial  to  escape  his  keen, 
careful  scrutiny  from  a  psychological  point  of  view. 

The  first  task  which  the  investigators  of  these 
obscure  mental  phenomena  set  themselves  was, 
naturally,  that  of  separating  and  sifting  the  real, 
actually  existent  facts  from  the  mass  of  fraud  and 
deception  in  which  mercenary  charlatans,  aided 
by  the  easy  credulity  of  the  simple-minded,  had  con- 
trived so  completely  to  bury  from  sight  the  true 
phenomena  that  for  a  long  time  the  intelligent 
public  refused  utterly  to  believe  in  the  existence  of 
any  real  phenomena  of  the  kind,  but  insisted  that 
everything  when  fully  probed  would  be  found  to 
be  mere  delusion,  the  result  of  trickery  and  fraud. 

Probably  no  scientific  fact  since  the  dawn  of 
modern  science  has  required  so  great  a  weight  of 
cumulative  evidence  in  its  favor  to  establish  the 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

reality  of  its  existence  in  the  popular  mind  than 
have  the  phenomena  in  question.  The  task,  how- 
ever, has  been  accomplished. 

Prof.  Flournoy's  heroine,  although  she  is  a  high- 
minded,  honorable  woman,  regarded  by  all  her 
neighbors  and  friends  as  wholly  ncapable  of  con- 
scious fraud,  has  been  subjected  to  the  closest  sur- 
veillance on  the  part  of  a  number  of  eminent  phy- 
sicians and  scientists  of  Geneva  for  more  than  five 
years  past,  while  Mrs.  Piper,  the  famous  Boston 
medium,  has  been  subjected  to  an  even  closer  scru- 
tiny by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  for  the 
past  fifteen  years.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  this 
society  has  announced  its  willingness  to  become 
responsible  for  the  entire  absence  of  fraud  in  Mrs. 
Piper's  case,  and  of  a  similar  declaration  on  the 
part  of  Prof.  Flournoy  and  his  associates  in  regard 
to  Mile.  Smith,  there  still  remain  a  considerable 
number  of  ultra-skeptical  persons  who  persist  in 
asserting  that  fraud  and  deceit  are  at  the  bottom 
of,  and  account  for,  all  this  species  of  phenomena. 

The  well-known  gentlemen  who  have  investi- 
gated these  cases  have  never  been  accused  of  easy 
credulity  in  other  matters,  and  have  cautiously 
and  perseveringly  continued,  in  their  endeavor  to 
satisfy  skepticism,  to  pile  Pelion  upon  Ossa  in  the 
way  of  cumulative  proofs  of  the  genuineness  of 
the  phenomena  and  to  safeguard  their  investiga- 
tions in  every  possible  manner  against  all  possi- 
bility of  fraud,  until  they  have  finally  come  to  feel 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

that  more  than  sufficient  proof  has  been  furnished 
to  satisfy  any  honest,  fair-minded,  sensible  doubt. 
They  do  not  feel  that  they  have  the  right  to  devote 
further  time  to  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of 
the  facts  observed  by  them — time  which  they  be- 
lieve might  be  better  employed  in  endeavoring  to 
discover  the  laws  by  which  the  phenomena  are 
governed.  They  believe  that  those  who  are  not  sat- 
isfied with  the  evidence  alreadj^  offered  will  not  be 
convinced  by  any  amount  of  further  testimony — 
that  their  skepticism  is  invincible.  For  persons  so 
constituted  this  book  will  have  no  interest ;  its  per- 
usal will  afford  them  no  pleasure. 

The  endeavor  to  explain  these  mysterious  phe- 
nomena by  scientific  investigators  has  resulted  in 
their  adoption  of  one  or  other  of  two  hypotheses,  viz. : 

1.  That  the  phenomena  are  the  product  of  and 
originate  in  the  subliminal  consciousness  of  the 
medium ;  or, 

2.  That  the  phenomena  are  really  of  supernor- 
mal origin  and  emanate  from  the  disincarnate  spir- 
its of  the  dead,  who  return  to  earth  and  take  tem- 
porary possession  of  the  organism  of  the  medium, 
talking  through  her  mouth,  writing  with  her  hand 
while  she  is  in  a  somnambulistic  state. 

The  first  theory  involves  the  crediting  of  the  sub- 
liminal consciousness  with  almost  miraculous  pow- 
ers of  telepathy,  since,  on  that  hypothesis,  it  is  nec- 
essary, in  order  to  account  for  the  knowledge  pos- 
sessed by  the  medium,  to  suppose  that  her  sublim- 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

inal  consciousness  is  able  to  roam  at  will  through- 
out the  entire  universe  and  read  the  mind  of  any 
being  possessing  the  information  sought  for. 

All  open-minded  investigators  freely  admit  that 
either  of  the  above  hypotheses  may  be  untrue; 
that  verj^  little  is  known  by  them  as  j^et  in  regard  to 
the  nature  of  the  phenomena;  that  the  data  are  too 
slight  to  justif^^  more  than  a  provisional  hypothesis, 
which  the  discovery  of  new  facts  may  at  any  time 
entirely  demolish.  But,  thus  far,  the  hypotheses 
above  given  seem  to  be  the  only  ones  which  will 
in  any  way  rationally  account  for  the  facts  :  in 
which  case,  it  is  evident  that  each  individual  ob- 
server will  be  influenced  in  his  choice  of  a  hypoth- 
esis by  his  religious  belief,  which  will  greatly  affect 
the  point  of  view  from  which  he  approaches  the  sub- 
ject, and  also  by  his  natural  temperament,  habits 
of  thought,  etc. 

Prof.  Flournoy  states  that  he  has  endeavored  to 
keep  constantly  in  mind  and  to  be  guided  b3^  two 
propositions,  which  he  designates  respectively  the 
''  Principle  of  Hamlet ''  and  the  ''  Principle  of  La 
Place/'  the  former  being, ''  All  things  are  possible/' 
the  latter,  ''  The  weight  of  the  evidence  ought  to  he 
proportioned  to  the  strangeness  of  the  facts." 

Guided  by  these  two  principles.  Prof.  Flournoy 
has  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Mile.  Smith  really 
possesses  the  faculty  of  telekinesis — the  ability  to 
move  ponderable  objects  situated  at  a  distance, 
without  contact  and  contrary  to  known  natural 

xiv 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

laws.  On  the  other  hand,  he  does  not  believe 
the  phenomena  manifested  by  her  to  be  of  super- 
normal origin.  The  various  alleged  "  spirit  "  mes- 
sages, "incarnations/'  ^^gift  of  tongues/'  and  all 
other  apparently  supernormal  phenomena,  in  his 
opinion,  spring  from  Mile.  Smith's  subliminal  con- 
sciousness, and  he  exercises  great  skill  and  inge- 
nuity in  his  effort  to  trace  the  yery  wonderful  and 
astonishing  manifestations  with  which  he  has  had 
to  deal  to  natural  sources. 

Whether  the  individual  reader  adopts  the  author's 
views  and  theories,  or  finds  in  others  a  more  natural 
explanation  of  the  facts  narrated  by  Prof.  Flournoy, 
he  cannot  fail  to  admire  the  frankness,  candor,  and 
entire  freedom  from  pre'udice  displayed  by  him. 
He  evinces  a  true,  open-minded,  scientific  spirit, 
never  distorting  facts  in  order  to  make  them  fit  his 
hypotheses,  and  freely  admitting  the  possibility  of 
the  discovery  of  new  facts  at  any  time,  of  a  nature 
to  compel  him  to  adopt  some  other  hypothesis  than 
that  which  he  has  provisionally  assumed  to  ex- 
plain the  phenomena. 

A  word  on  another  subject  before  the  reader  goes 
on  to  the  perusal  of  this  narrative  of  strange  facts  : 

One  who  is  interested  in  Psychical  Research,  when 
he  has  finally  succeeded  in.  convincing  some  obsti- 
nate skeptic  of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena 
— when  the  doubter  has  at  last  yielded  to  the  weight 
of  evidence,  then,  very  frequently,  the  next  ques- 

XV 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

tion,  which  comes  as  a  wet  blanket  to  dampen  the 
ardor  of  the  enthusiastic  devotee,  is :  "Cm  bono  ? 
Admitting  the  truth  of  the  facts,  what  useful  pur- 
pose is  subserved  by  their  study?  Science  will 
never  succeed  in  solving  the  problem  of  man's 
future  destiny.  It  is  all  a  waste  of  time  and  will 
end  in  nothing."  And  in  a  review  of  this  very  book, 
which  recently  appeared  in  one  of  our  leading  metro- 
politan newspapers,  the  reviewer  asks,  "  What  will 
science  make  of  all  this  T'  (referring  to  the  phenom- 
ena manifested  by  Mile.  Smith);  and  then  answers 
his  own  question  by  saying,  "  It  is  very  unlikely 
that  science  will  ever  discover  the  nature  of  these 
mysterious  phenomena  or  the  laws  which  govern 
them." 

From  this  conclusion  the  followers  of  Psychical 
Research  emphatically  dissent.  It  seems  passing 
strange  to  them  that  such  an  opinion  should  be 
held  by  intelligent  men  at  the  present  stage  of  de- 
velopment of  human  knowledge,  in  view  of  the 
mighty  discoveries  which  have  been  wrested  from 
nature  by  the  laborious  process  of  persevering  ob- 
servation of  seemingly  trivial  facts.  An  eigh- 
teenth-century writer  might  with  some  show  of 
reason  have  made  a  similar  observation  in  regard 
to  Dr.  Franklin  and  his  experiments  with  kite  and 
key  in  a  thunder-storm.  It  would  indeed,  at  that 
epoch,  have  seemed  unlikely  that  science  would 
succeed  in  discovering  the  secret  of  the  electric  fluid 
by  such  means.     But  to-daj^  at  the  dawn  of  the 

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 

twentieth  century,  with  all  the  experience  of  the 
past  to  judge  from,  are  not  the  probabilities  all  in 
favor  of  great  results  to  science  from  repeated  ex- 
periments by  trained  observers,  such  as  Prof.  Flour- 
noy,  upon  cases  similar  to  that  of  Mile.  Smith  ? 

If  the  hypothesis  that  the  world  as  a  whole,  spir- 
itual and  material  together,  has  in  some  way  a  sys- 
tematic unity,  be  true — and  that  is  the  hypothesis 
accepted  by  a  majority  of  thinking  men  at  the  pres- 
ent time — then  the  importance  of  collecting  and 
recording  and  analyzing  such  facts  as  those  pre- 
sented to  us  in  the  present  narrative  cannot  be 
overestimated. 

The  scientific  demonstration  of  a  future  life  may 
be  one  of  the  great  triumphs  reserved  for  the  science 
of  the  twentieth  century  to  win,  and  Helene  Smith 
and  Prof.  Flournoy  may  ultimately  appear  to  have 
contributed  largely  to  its  accomplishment. 

To  those  who  still  persist  in  asking  Cut  bono  ?  in 
reference  to  such  work  as  that  which  Prof.  Flournoy 
has  here  so  ably  performed,  I  beg  leave  to  quote 
further  from  Mr.  Myers  the  following  : 

"  The  faith  to  which  Science  is  sworn  is  a  faith 
in  the  uniformity,  the  coherence,  the  intelligibil- 
ity of,  at  any  rate,  the  material  universe.  Science 
herself  is  but  the  practical  development  of  this 
mighty  postulate.  And  if  any  phenomenon  on 
which  she  chances  on  her  onward  way  seems  arbi- 
trary, or  incoherent,  or  unintelligible,  she  does  not 
therefore  suppose  that  she  has  come  upon  an  un- 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

ravelled  end  in  the  texture  of  things ;  but  rather 
takes  for  granted  that  a  rational  answer  to  the  new 
problem  must  somewhere  exist — an  answer  which 
will  be  all  the  more  instructive  because  it  will  in- 
volve facts  of  which  that  first  question  must  have 
failed  to  take  due  account. 

"  This  faith  in  the  uniformity  of  material  Nature 
formulates  itself  in  two  great  dogmas — for  such 
they  are ;— the  dogma  of  the  Conservation  of  Mat- 
ter and  the  dogma  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy. 
Of  the  Conservation  of  Matter,  within  earthly  lim- 
its, we  are  fairly  well  assured ;  but  of  the  Con- 
servation of  Energy  the  proof  is  far  less  complete, 
simply  because  Energy  is  a  conception  which  does 
not  belong  to  the  material  world  alone.  Life  is  to 
us  the  most  important  of  all  forms  of  activit}^^ — 
of  energy,  I  would  say  —  except  that  we  cannot 
transform  other  energies  into  Life,  nor  measure  in 
foot-pounds  that  directive  force  which  has  changed 
the  face  of  the  world.  Life  comes  we  know  not 
whence ;  it  vanishes  we  know^  not  whither ;  it  is 
interlocked  with  a  mov  ng  system  vaster  than  that 
we  know.  To  grasp  the  whole  of  its  manifesta- 
tion, we  should  have  to  follow  it  into  an  unseen 
world.  Yet  scientific  faith  bids  us  believe  that 
there,  too,  there  is  continuity ;  and  that  the  past 
and  the  future  of  that  force  which  we  discern  for 
a  moment  are  still  subject  to  universal  Law. 

''Out  of  the  long  Stone  Age  our  race  is  awaken- 
ing into  consciousness  of  itself.     We  stand  in  the 

xviii 

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 

da^^/n  of  history.  Behind  us  lies  a  vast  and  unre- 
corded waste — the  mighty  struggle  humanam 
condere  gentem.  Since  the  times  of  that  igno- 
rance we  have  not  yet  gone  far ;  a  few  thousand 
years,  a  few  hundred  thinkers,  have  barely  start- 
ed the  human  mind  upon  the  great  aeons  of  its  on- 
ward way.  It  is  not  yet  the  hour  to  sit  down  in  our 
studies  and  try  to  eke  out  Tradition  with  Intu- 
ition— as  one  might  be  forced  to  do  in  a  planet's 
senility,  by  the  glimmer  of  a  fading  sun.  Daphni, 
quid  antiquos  signorum  suspicis  ortus  ?  The  tra- 
ditions, the  intuitions  of  our  race  are  themselves 
in  their  infancy  ;  and  before  we  abandon  ourselves 
to  brooding  over  them  let  us  at  least  first  try  the 
upshot  of  a  systematic  search  for  actual  facts. 
For  what  should  hinder  ?  If  our  inquiry  lead  us 
first  through  a  jungle  of  fraud  and  folly,  need  that 
alarm  us  ?  As  well  might  Columbus  have  yield- 
ed to  the  sailors'  panic  when  he  was  entangled  in 
the  Sargasso  Sea.  If  our  first  clear  facts  about 
the  Unseen  World  seem  small  and  trivial,  should 
that  deter  us  from  the  quest  ?  As  well  might  Co- 
lumbus have  sailed  home  again,  with  America  in 
the  offing,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  not  worth 
while  to  discover  a  continent  which  manifested 
itself  only  by  dead  logs." 

It  is  deeply  to  be  regretted  that  no  appeals  have 
availed  to  persuade  Mile.  Smith  to  consent  to  the 
publication  of  her  photograph,  in  connection  with 

TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

Prof.  Flournoy's  account  of  the  phenomena  mani- 
fested by  her. 

She  shrinks  from  the  publicity  which  her  pos- 
session of  these  strange  powers  has  thrust  upon 
her.  She  disHkes  extremely  the  notoriety  given 
to  her  mysterious  faculties,  and  refuses  to  be  inter- 
viewed concerning  them,  or  to  discuss  Prof.  Flour- 
noy's  book. 

The  name  Helene  Smith  is,  as  the  reader  will 
doubtless  guess,  merely  a  pseudonym.  The  indi- 
viduality designated  by  that  name,  however,  is  held 
in  highest  esteem — in  veneration  even — by  a  very 
large  circle  of  friends  and  acquaintances  in  the 
city  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Leman,  in  which  she 
has  passed  her  life  from  infancy,  for  whose  benefit 
she  is  always  ready  to  exercise  her  mysterious 
gifts  and  to  give  her  services  freely  to  such  as  seek 
her  aid,  refusing  always  to  accept  any  pecuniary 
compensation  for  her  services.  Attaching,  as  she 
does,  a  religious  significance  to  her  powers,  she 
would  deem  it  a  sacrilege  to  traffic  in  them. 

Daniel  B.  Vermilye. 

Columbia  University,  New  York, 
July,  1900. 

MARseigi?  ^ 

4[BRAK:i 

FROM   INDIA 
TO  THE   PLANET   MARS 

CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTION 

IN  the  month  of  December,  1894,  I  was  invited  by 
M.  Aug.  Lemaitre,  Professor  of  the  College  of 
Geneva,  to  attend  some  seances  of  a  non-pro- 
fessional medium,  receiving  no  compensation  for  her 
services,  and  of  whose  extraordinary  gifts  and  ap- 
parently supernormal  faculties  I  had  frequently 
heard. 

Having  gladly  accepted  the  invitation  of  my 
worthy  colleague,  I  found  the  medium  in  question, 
whom  I  shall  call  Mile.  Helene  Smith,  to  be  a  beauti- 
ful woman  about  thirty  years  of  age,  tall,  vigorous, 
of  a  fresh,  healthy  complexion,  with  hair  and  eyes 
almost  black,  of  an  open  and  intelligent  counte- 
nance, which  at  once  invoked  sympathy.  •  She 
evinced  nothing  of  the  emaciated  or  tragic  aspect 
which  one  habitually  ascribes  to  the  sibyls  of  tradi- 
tion, but  wore  an  air  of  health,  of  physical  and  men- 

A  I 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

tal  vigor,  very  pleasant  to  behold,  and  which,  by-the- 
way,  is  not  often  encountered  in  those  who  are  good 
mediums. 

The  number  of  those  invited  to  take  part  in  the 
seance  being  complete,  we  seated  ourselves  in  a  cir- 
cle, with  our  hands  resting  upon  the  traditional 
round  table  of  spiritistic  circles.  Mile.  Smith — who 
possesses  a  triple  mediumship  :  visual,  auditive,  and 
typtologicaP — began,  in  the  most  natural  manner, 
to  describe  the  various  apparitions  which  passed  be- 
fore her  eyes  in  the  partially  darkened  room.  Sud- 
denly she  stops  and  listens;  she  hears  a  name  spoken 
in  her  ear,  which  she  repeats  to  us  with  astonish- 
ment; then  brief  sentences,  the  words  of  which  are 
spelled  out  by  raps  on  the  table,  explain  the  mean- 
ing of  the  vision.  Speaking  for  myself  alone  (there 
were  three  of  us  to  divide  the  honor  of  the  seance), 
I  was  greatly  surprised  to  recognize  in  scenes  which 
passed  before  my  eyes  events  which  had  transpired 
in  my  own  family  prior  to  my  birth.  Whence  could 
the  medium,  whom  I  had  never  met  before,  have 
derived  the  knowledge  of  events  belonging  to  a  re- 
mote past,  of  a  private  nature,  and  utterly  unknown 
to  any  living  person? 

The  astounding  powers  of  Mrs.  Piper,  the  famous 
Boston  medium,  whose  wonderful  intuition  reads  the 
latent  memories  of  her  visitors  like  an  open  book, 
recurred  to  my  mind,  and  I  went  out  from  that  seance 
with  renewed  hope  of  finding  myself  some  day  face 
to  face  with  the  ''supernormar' — a  true  and  genu- 

*/.  e.y  spirit-rapping— the  faculty  of  obtaining  responses  by 
means  of  raps  upon  a  table. 

2 

INTRODUCTION 

ine  supernormal — telepathy,  clairvoyance,  spiritistic 
manifestations,  it  matters  not  by  what  name  it  be 
called,  provided  only  that  it  be  wholly  out  of  the 
ordinary,  and  that  it  succeed  in  utterly  demolish- 
ing the  entire  framework  of  established  present-day 
science. 

I  was  able  at  this  time  to  obtain  general  informa- 
tion only  concerning  the  past  of  Mile.  Smith,  but  it 
was  all  of  a  character  favorable  to  her,  and  has  since 
been  fully  confirmed. 

Of  modest  bearing  and  an  irreproachable  moral 
character,  she  has  for  years  earned  an  honorable 
living  as  an  employee  of  a  commercial  house,  in 
which  her  industry,  her  perseverance,  and  her  high 
character  have  combined  to  secure  her  a  very  respon- 
sible and  important  position. 

Some  three  years  prior  to  the  date  of  my  introduc- 
tion to  her  she  had  been  initiated  into  a  spiritistic 
group,  where  her  remarkable  psychic  powers  almost 
immediately  manifested  themselves ;  and  she  then 
became  a  member  of  various  other  spiritistic  circles. 
From  its  commencement  her  mediumship  mani- 
fested the  complex  type  to  which  I  have  already  al- 
luded, and  from  which  it  has  never  deviated.  Vi- 
sions in  a  waking  state,  accompanied  by  typtological 
dictation  and  auditive  hallucinations,  alternately  ap- 
peared. From  the  point  of  view  of  their  content 
these  messages  had  generally  a  bearing  on  past 
events  usually  unknown  to  the  persons  present,  but 
which  were  always  verified  by  referring  to  biograph- 
ical dictionaries  or  to  the  traditions  of  the  families 
interested.      To  these  phenomena  of  retrocognition 

3 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

or  of  hypermnesia  were  joined  occasionally,  ac- 
cording to  the  environment,  moral  exhortations,  com- 
municated through  the  table,  more  frequently  in 
poetry  than  in  prose,  addressed  to  the  sitters ;  med- 
ical consultations,  accompanied  by  prescriptions 
generally  appropriate  ;  communications  from  parents 
or  friends  recently  deceased ;  or,  finally,  revelations 
as  piquant  as  they  were  unverifiable  concerning  the 
anteriorites  (that  is,  the  previous  existences)  of  the 
sitters,  almost  all  of  whom,  being  profound  believers 
in  spiritism,  would  not  have  been  at  all  surprised  to 
learn  that  they  were  the  reincarnations  respectively 
of  Coligny,  of  Vergniaud,  of  the  Princess  Lamballe, 
or  of  other  notable  personages.  It  is  necessary, 
finally,  to  add  that  all  these  messages  seemed  to 
be  more  or  less  bound  up  with  the  mysterious  pres- 
ence of  a  ''spirit"  answering  to  the  name  of*  Leopold, 
who  assumed  to  be  the  guide  and  protector  of  the 
medium. 

I  at  once  undertook  to  improve  my  acquaintance 
with  H^lene  Smith.  She  freely  consented  to  give 
seances  for  my  benefit,  alternating  with  a  series 
which  she  was  giving  M.  Lemaitre,  and  another  for 
the  benefit  of  Prof.  Cuendet,  vice-president  of  the 
Geneva  Society  (spiritistic)  for  Psychic  Studies,  all 
of  which  I  was  permitted  to  attend.  In  this  way 
I  have  been  able  to  be  present  at  the  greater  part  of 
Helene's  seances  during  the  past  five  years.  The 
personal  observations  that  I  have  thus  been  able  to 
make,  reinforced  by  notes  on  sittings  which  I  was 
unable  to  attend,  kindly  furnished  me  by  MM. 
Lemaitre  and  Cuendet,  form  the  basis  of  the  study 

4 

INTRODUCTION 

which  follows;  to  which  must  be  added,  however,  cer- 
tain letters  of  Mile.  Smith,  as  well  as  the  numerous 
and  very  interesting  conversations  I  have  held  with 
her  either  immediately  preceding  or  following  her 
seances,  or  at  her  home,  where  I  also  have  had  the 
advantage  of  being  able  to  talk  with  her  mother. 
Finally,  various  documents  and  accessory  informa- 
tion, which  will  be  cited  in  their  respective  time  and 
place,  have  also  been  of  assistance  in  enabling  me 
partiallv"  to  elucidate  certain  obscure  points.  Not- 
withstanding all  these  sources  of  information,  how- 
ever, I  am  still  very  far  from  being  able  to  disentangle 
and  satisfactorily  explain  the  complex  phenomena 
which  constitute  Helene's  mediumship. 

Dating  from  the  period  at  which  I  made  the  ac- 
quaintance of  Mile.  Smith  (i.  e.,  from  the  winter  of 
1894-95),  while  most  of  her  spiritistic  communica- 
tions have  continued  to  present  he  same  character 
as  to  form  and  content  as  before,  a  double  and  very 
important  modification  in  her  mediumship  has  been 
observed. 

I.  As  to  their  psychological  form. — While  up  to 
that  time  Helene  had  experienced  partial  and  lim- 
ited automatisms  only — visual,  auditive,  typtomotor 
hallucinations — compatible  with  the  preservation  to 
a  certain  extent  of  the  waking  state,  and  not  involv- 
ing noticeable  loss  of  memory,  from  that  time  and 
with  increasing  frequency  she  has  been  subject  to 
an  entire  loss  of  consciousness  and  a  failure  to  retain, 
on  returning  to  her  normal  state,  any  recollection  of 
what  has  transpired  during  the  seance.  In  physio- 
logical terms,  the  hemisomnambulism  without  am- 

5 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

nesia,  which  had  been  her  stopping-point  up  to  that 
time,  and  which  the  sitters  mistook  for  the  ordinary 
waking  state,  was  now  transformed  into  total  som- 
nambulism with  consecutive  amnesia. 

In  spiritistic  parlance.  Mile.  Smith  now  became 
completely  entranced,  and  having  formerly  been  an 
ordinary  visual  and  auditive  medium,  she  now  ad- 
vanced to  the  higher  plane  of  an  ''incarnating  me- 
dium." 

I  fear  that  this  change  must  in  a  great  measure 
be  attributed  to  my  influence,  since  it  followed  almost 
immediately  upon  my  introduction  to  Helene's 
seances.  Or,  even  if  the  total  somnambulism  would 
have  inevitably  been  eventually  developed  by  virtue 
of  an  organic  predisposition  and  of  a  tendency  favor- 
able to  hypnoid  states,  it  is  nevertheless  probable  that 
I  aided  in  hastening  its  appearance  by  my  presence 
as  well  as  by  a  few  experiments  which  I  permitted 
myself  to  make  upon  Helene. 

As  is  well  known,  mediums  are  usually  surrounded 
by  a  halo  of  veneration,  which  prevents  any  one  from 
touching  them  during  their  trances  The  idea  would 
never  occur  to  any  ordinary  frequenter  of  spiritistic 
circles  to  endeavor  to  ascertain  the  condition  of  the 
medium's  sensory  and  motor  functions  by  feeling 
her  hands,  pinching  the  flesh,  or  pricking  the  skin 
with  a  pin.  Silence  and  immobility  are  the  strict 
rule,  in  order  not  to  hinder  the  spontaneous  production 
of  the  phenomena,  and  a  few  questions  or  brief  ob- 
servations on  the  receipt  of  a  message  is  all  that  is 
permissible  by  way  of  conversation,  and  no  one 
therefore  would,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  dare 

6 

INTRODUCTION 

to  attempt  any  manipulation  of  the  medium  Mile. 
Smith  had  always  been  surrounded  by  this  respectful 
consideration,  and  during  the  first  three  seances  I 
conformed  myself  strictly  to  the  passive  and  purely 
contemplative  attitude  of  the  other  sitters.  But  at 
the  fourth  sitting  my  discretion  vanished.  I  could 
not  resist  a  strong  desire  to  ascertain  the  physiological 
condition  of  the  charming  seeress,  and  I  made  some 
vigorous  elementary  experiments  upon  her  hands, 
which  lay  temptingly  spread  out  opposite  me  on  the 
table.  These  experiments,  which  I  renewed  and 
followed  up  at  the  succeeding  seance  (February  3, 
1895),  demonstrated  that  there  is  present  in  Mile. 
Smith,  during  her  visions,  a  large  and  varied  assort- 
ment of  sensory  and  motor  disturbances  which  had 
hitherto  escaped  the  notice  of  the  sitters,  and  which 
are  thoroughly  identical  with  those  that  may  be  ob- 
served in  cases  of  hysteria  (where  they  are  more 
permanent),  and  those  that  may  be  momentarily 
produced  in  hypnotic  subjects  by  suggestion.  This 
was  not  at  all  astonishing,  and  was  to  have  been 
expected.  But  one  consequence,  which  I  had  not 
foreseen,  did  occur  when,  four  days  after  my  second 
experimental  seance.  Mile.  Smith  fell  completely 
asleep  for  the  first  time  at  a  sitting  with  M.  Cuendet 
(February  7th),  at  which  I  was  not  present.  The 
sitters  were  somewhat  frightened,  and,  in  trying  to 
awaken  her,  discovered  the  rigidity  of  her  arms, 
which  were  considerably  contractured.  Leopold 
however,  communicating  by  means  of  the  table  upon 
which  she  was  leaning,  fully  reassured  them,  and 
gav^  them  to  understand  that  such  sleep  was  not  at 

7 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

all  prejudicial  to  the  medium.  After  assuming  va- 
rious attitudes  and  indulging  in  some  amusing  mim- 
icry. Mile.  Smith  awoke  in  excellent  spirits,  retaining 
as  a  last  recollection  of  her  dream  that  of  a  kiss 
which  Leopold  had  imprinted  upon  her  forehead. 

From  that  day  on  somnambulisms  were  the  rule 
with  Helene,  and  the  seances  at  which  she  did  not 
fall  completely  asleep  for  at  least  a  few  moments 
formed  rare  exceptions  to  the  course  of  events  during 
the  next  four  years.  It  is  a  great  deprivation  for  Mile. 
Smith  that  these  slumbers  ordinarily  leave  her  no 
memory  upon  her  awakening  of  what  has  transpired 
in  her  trance,  and  she  longs  for  the  seances  of  former 
times  when  the  visions  unfolded  themselves  before 
her  eyes,  furnishing  her  with  a  pleasing  spectacle 
which  was  always  unexpected,  and  which,  continu- 
ally being  renewed,  caused  the  seances  to  be  to  her 
a  source  of  great  delight.  For  the  sitters,  on  the 
other  hand,  these  scenes  of  somnambulism  and  in- 
carnation, together  with  the  various  physiological 
phenomena  of  catalepsy,  lethargy,  contractures,  etc., 
which  accompanied  them,  added  great  variety  and 
additional  interest  to  Helene  Smith's  remarkable 
and  instructive  triple  mediumship. 

The  greater  sometimes  implies  the  less :  simulta- 
neously with  the  access  of  complete  somnambulism 
came  new  forms  and  innumerable  shades  of  hemi- 
somnambulism.  The  triple  form  of  automatism 
which  distinguished  the  first  years  of  Mile.  Smith's 
spiritistic  experiences  has  been  wonderfully  devel- 
oped since  1895,  and  it  would  now  be  difficult  to  name 
any  principal  forms  of  psychic  mediumship  of  which 

3 

INTRODUCTION 

she  has  not  furnished  curious  specimens.  I  shall 
have  occasion  to  cite  several  of  them  in  the  course  of 
this  work.  Helene  constitutes  the  most  remarkable 
medium  I  have  ever  met,  and  very  nearly  approaches 
the  ideal  of  what  might  be  called  the  polymorphous, 
or  multiform,  medium,  in  contradistinction  to  the  uni- 
form mediums,  whose  faculties  only  concern  them- 
selves with  one  kind  of  automatism. 

2.  A  modification  analogous  to  that  which  took 
place  in  the  psychologic  form  of  the  messages  con- 
sisting of  a  marked  improvement  in  their  depth  and 
importance,  was  noticeable  simultaneously  in  their 
content. 

Alongside  of  the  unimportant  communications,  com- 
plete at  one  sitting  and  independent  one  of  another, 
which  filled  up  a  large  part  of  each  of  Helene' s  seances 
and  in  no  wise  differentiated  her  faculties  from  those 
of  the  majority  of  mediums,  she  manifested  from  the 
beginning  a  marked  tendency  to  a  superior  system- 
atization  and  a  more  lofty  chain  of  visions ;  com- 
munications were  often  continued  through  several 
seances,  and,  reached  their  conclusion  only  at  the  end 
of  several  weeks.  But  from  the  period  at  which  I 
made  the  acquaintance  of  Mile.  Smith  this  tendency 
towards  unity  began  to  assert  itself  still  more  strongly. 
Several  long  somnambulistic  dreams  began  to  appear 
and  to  develop,  the  events  of  which  continued  to  be 
unfolded  through  months,  even  years,  and  indeed 
still  continue;  a  species  of  romance  of  the  subliminal 
imagination  analogous  to  those  "continued  stories" 
which  so  many  of  our  race  tell  themselves  in  their 
moments  of  far  niente,  or  at  times  when  their  routine 

9 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

occupations  offer  only  slight  obstacles  to  day-dream^ 
ing,  and  of  which  they  themselves  are  generally  the 
heroes. 

Mile.  Smith  has  no  fewer  than  three  distinct  som- 
nambulistic romances^  and  if  to  these  is  added  the 
existence  of  that  secondary  personality  to  which  I 
have  already  alluded,  and  which  reveals  itself  under 
the  name  of  Leopold,  we  find  ourselves  in  the  presence 
of  four  subconscious  creations  of  vast  extent,  which 
have  been  evolved  on  parallel  lines  for  several  years, 
and  which  manifest  themselves  in  irregular  alterna- 
tion during  the  course  of  different  seances,  or  often 
even  in  the  same  seance. 

All  of  these  have  undoubtedly  a  common  origin  in 
Helene's  subliminal  consciousness  ;  but  in  practice, 
at  least,  and  to  all  appearance,  these  imaginative 
constructions  present  a  relative  independence  and  a 
diversity  of  content  sufficiently  great  to  render  it 
necessary  to  study  them  separately.  I  shall  confine 
myself  at  present  to  a  general  view  of  them. 

Two  of  these  romances  are  connected  with  the 
spiritistic  idea  of  previous  existences.  It  has,  indeed, 
been  revealed  that  Helene  Smith  has  already  lived 
twice  before  on  this  globe.  Five  hundred  years  ago 
she  was  the  daughter  of  an  Arab  sheik,  and  became, 
under  the  name  of  Simandini,  the  favorite  wife  of  a 
Hindoo  prince  named  Sivrouka  Nayaka,  who  reigned 
over  Kanara,  and  built  in  the  year  140 1  the  fortress  of 
Tchandraguiri.  In  the  last  century  she  reappeared 
in  the  person  of  the  illustrious  and  unfortunate  Marie 
Antoinette.  Again  reincarnated,  as  a  punishment 
for  her  sins  and  the  perfecting  of  her  character,  iri 

10 

INTRODUCTION 

the  humble  circumstances  of  Helene  Smith,  she  in 
certain  somnambulistic  states  recovers  the  memory 
of  her  glorious  avatars  of  old,  and  becomes  again  for 
the  moment  Hindoo  princess  or  queen  of  France. 

I  will  designate  under  the  names  of  ''Hindoo"  or 
''Oriental"  cycle  and  "Royal"  cycle  the  whole  of  the 
automatic  manifestations  relative  to  these  two  pre- 
vious existences.  I  shall  call  the  third  romance  the 
"  Martian"  cycle,  in  which  Mile.  Smith,  by  virtue  of 
the  mediumistic  faculties,  which  are  the  appanage  and 
the  consolation  of  her  present  life,  has  been  able  to 
enter  into  relation  with  the  people  and  affairs  of  the 
planet  Mars,  and  to  unveil  their  mysteries  to  us. 
It  is  in  this  astronomical  somnambulism  that  the 
phenomenon  of  glossolalia*  appears,  which  consists 
of  the  fabrication  and  the  use  of  an  unknown  lan- 
guage, and  which  is  one  of  the  principal  objects  of 
this  study ;  we  shall  see,  however,  that  analogous 
facts  are  likewise  presented  in  the  Hindoo  cycle. 

The  personality  of  Leopold  maintains  very  com- 
plex relations  with  the  preceding  creations.  On  the 
one  hand,  it  is  very  closely  connected  with  the  Royal 
cycle,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  name  of  Leopold  is 
only  a  pseudonym  under  which  is  concealed  the  il- 
lustrious Cagliostro,  who,  it  appears,  was  madly  in- 
fatuated with  Queen  Marie  Antoinette,  and  who 
now,  discarnate  and  floating  in  space,  has  constituted 
himself  the  guardian  angel  in  some  respects  of  Mile. 
Smith,  in  whom  after  a  long  search  he  has  again 

*  Glossolalia  signifies  the  "gift  of  tongues,"  or  the  ability  to 
speak  foreign  languages  without  having  consciously  acquired 
them. 

II 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

found  the  august  object  of  his  unhappy  passion  of  a 
century  ago. 

On  the  other  hand,  this  role  of  protector  and  spirit- 
ual guide  which  he  assumes  towards  Helene  confers 
upon  him  a  privileged  place  in  her  somnambulisms. 
He  is  more  or  less  mixed  up  in  the  greater  part  of 
them ;  assists  at  them,  watches  over  them,  and  per- 
haps in  a  measure  directs  them.  He  also  occasionally 
appears  in  the  midst  of  a  Hindoo  or  a  Martian  scene, 
delivering  his  message  by  certain  characteristic  move- 
ments of  the  hand. 

To  sum  up :  sometimes  revealing  himself  by  raps 
upon  the  table,  the  taps  of  a  finger,  or  by  automatic 
writing;  sometimes  incarnating  himself  completely 
and  speaking  by  the  mouth  of  Mile.  Smith  while  en- 
tranced— Leopold  fulfils  in  these  seances  the  multiple 
and  varied  functions  of  spirit-guide,  giving  good  ad- 
vice relative  to  the  manner  of  acting  towards  the 
medium;  of  stage-manager  hidden  behind  the  scenes 
watching  the  performance  and  ready  at  any  time  to 
intervene;  of  benevolently  disposed  interpreter  will- 
ing to  furnish  explanations  of  all  that  is  obscure;  of 
censor  of  morals  sharply  reprimanding  the  sitters 
when  he  deems  it  necessary;  of  sympathetic  phy- 
sician prompt  at  diagnosis  and  well  versed  in  the 
pharmacopoeia,  etc.  He  also  appears  under  his  own 
name  of  Cagliostro  to  the  somnambulistic  gaze  of 
the  resuscitated  Marie  Antoinette  and  answers  her 
questions  by  means  of  auditive  hallucinations.  Nor 
is  this  all :  to  make  our  summary  complete,  it  is  nec- 
essary also  to  investigate  the  personal  connection 
of  Mile.    Smith  with  her  invisible  protector.     She 

12 

INTRODUCTION 

often  invokes  and  questions  Leopold  at  her  own  con- 
venience, and  while  he  remains  sometimes  for  weeks 
without  giving  any  sign  of  hfe,  he  at  other  times 
readily  responds  to  her  by  means  of  voices  or  visions 
which  surprise  her  while  fully  awake  in  the  course 
of  her  daily  duties,  and  in  which  he  lavishes  upon  her 
in  turn  material  or  moral  advice,  useful  information, 
or  the  encouragement  and  consolation  of  which  she 
has  need. 

Although  I  have  accused  myself  of  perhaps  having 
had  much  to  do  with  the  transformation  of  Helene's 
hemisomnambulism  into  complete  trances,  I  believe 
myself,  however,  altogether  innocent  of  the  origin, 
and  therefore  of  the  subsequent  development,  of  the 
great  subliminal  creations  of  which  I  have  spoken. 
The  first,  that  of  Leopold,  is  of  very  early  date,  even 
going  back  probably,  as  we  shall  see,  prior  to  Mile. 
Smith's  initiation  into  spiritism.  As  to  the  three 
cycles,  they  did  not,  it  is  true,  commence  to  display 
their  full  amplitude  until  after  I  had  made  Helene's 
acquaintance;  and  vsince  they  start  from  the  time 
when  she  first  became  subject  to  veritable  trances,  it 
would  seem  as  though  that  supreme  form  of  automa- 
tism is  the  only  one  capable  of  allowing  the  full  ex- 
pansion of  productions  so  complex,  and  the  only 
psychological  container  appropriate  and  adequate  to 
such  a  content.  But  the  first  appearance  of  all  three 
was  clearly  prior  to  my  presence  at  the  seances. 
The  Hindoo  dream,  where  I  shall  be  found  playing 
a  role  which  I  did  not  seek,  evidently  began  (October 
i6,  1894)  eight  weeks  before  my  admission  to  Mile. 
Smith's  seances.     The  Martian  romance,  which  dates 

13 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

from  the  same  period,  is  closely  connected,  as  I  shall 
also  show,  with  an  involuntary  suggestion  of  M. 
Lemaitre,  who  made  the  acquaintance  of  Helene  in 
the  spring  of  1894,  nine  months  before  my  intro- 
duction to  her.  The  Royal  cycle,  finally,  had  been 
roughly  outlined  at  seances  held  at  the  home  of  M. 
Cuendet,  in  December,  1893.  Nevertheless,  I  repeat, 
only  since  1895  have  the  exuberant  growth  and 
magnificent  flowering  of  that  subliminal  vegetation 
taken  place  under  the  stimulating  and  provocative 
influence,  albeit  wholly  unintentional  and  altogether 
unsuspected  at  the  time,  of  the  varied  environments 
of  Mile.  Smith's  seances. 

As  far  as  the  indiscreet  revelations  in  regard  to  my 
own  family,  which  so  much  astonished  me  at  my  first 
meeting  with  Mile.  Smith,  are  concerned,  as  well  as 
the  innumerable  extraordinary  facts  of  the  same  kind 
with  which  her  mediumship  abounds,  and  to  which 
she  owes  her  immense  reputation  in  spiritistic  circles, 
it  will  suffice  to  return  in  the  closing  chapters  of  this 
book. 

CHAPTER  II 
CHILDHOOD   AND   YOUTH   OF   MLLE.   SMITH 

THE  psychological  history  of  Mile.  Smith  and 
her  automatisms  is  naturally  divided  into 
two  separate  periods  by  the  important  fact 
of  her  initiation  into  spiritism  at  the  beginning  of 
1892.  Before  that  time,  not  suspecting  the  possibil- 
ity of  voluntary  communication  with  the  world  of 
disincarnate  spirits,  she  naturally  manifested  noth- 
ing more  than  a  few  spontaneous  phenomena,  the 
first  fiutterings  of  her  mediumistic  faculties  which 
still  lay  dormant,  the  exact  nature  and  progress  of 
which  it  would  be  interesting  to  know  in  detail;  un- 
fortunately, in  the  absence  of  written  documents  con- 
cerning that  pre-spiritistic  period,  we  are  confined  to 
the  statements  of  Helene  and  her  parents  in  regard 
to  it,  and  the  untrustworthiness  of  the  memory  in 
connection  with  events  of  a  remote  past  is  only  too 
well  known. 

The  spiritistic  period,  on  the  contrary,  extending 
over  the  last  seven  years,  and  infinitely  more  fertile 
in  artificially  promoted  {e.g.,  the  seances)  as  well  as 
in  spontaneous  manifestations,  is  much  better  known 
to  us  ;  but  in  order  to  comprehend  it  intelligently,  it 
is  necessary  first   to  pass  in  review  the  few  facts 

15 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

which  we  have  been  able  to  gather  relating  to  the 
pre-spiritistic  period — that  is  to  say,  the  childhood 
and  youth  of  Mile.  Smith.  That  will  be  the  subject 
of  this  chapter. 

Mile.  Smith  has  lived  in  Geneva  since  her  in- 
fancy. After  attending  school,  she  entered  as  an 
apprentice,  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  a  large  commercial 
house,  where,  as  I  have  already  stated,  she  still  re- 
mains, and  where,  little  by  little,  she  has  risen  to  a 
very  responsible  position.  Her  father,  a  merchant, 
was  a  Hungarian,  and  possessed  a  remarkable  facil- 
ity for  languages,  which  is  of  interest  to  us  in  pres- 
ence of  the  phenomena  of  glossolalia,  a  subject  which 
will  be  discussed  hereafter.  Her  mother  is  a  Gene- 
vese.  Both  enjoyed  excellent  health  and  attained  a 
venerable  old  age.  Helene  had  a  younger  sister 
who  died  in  early  childhood,  and  two  brothers  older 
than  herself,  who  are  now  fathers  of  families  and 
established  abroad,  where  they  have  had  successful 
business  careers. 

I  am  not  aware  that  M.  Smith,  who  was  a  man  of 
positive  character,  ever  displayed  any  phenomena  of 
automatisms.  Mme.  Smith,  however,  as  well  as 
her  grandmother,  has  experienced  several  thoroughly 
characteristic  phenomena  of  that  kind,  and  one,  at 
least,  of  Helene's  brothers,  it  appears,  could  easily 
have  become  a  good  medium.  This  is  another  in- 
stance of  the  distinctly  hereditary  tendency  of  me- 
diumistic  faculties. 

M.  Smith,  a  man  of  active  and  enterprising  char- 
acter, died  quite  suddenly,  probably  of  an  embolism, 
at  the  age  of  seventy-five  years.     He  had  l,eft  Hun- 

i6 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

gary  in  his  youth,  and  finally  established  himself  at 
Geneva,  after  having  travelled  extensively  in  Italy 
and  Algiers,  where  he  remained  for  several  years. 
He  spoke  fluently  Hungarian,  German,  French,  Ital- 
ian, and  Spanish,  understood  English  fairly  well,  and 
also  knew  Latin  and  a  little  Greek.  It  would  seem 
that  his  daughter  has  inherited  these  linguistic  apti- 
tudes, but  only  in  a  latent  and  subliminal  manner, 
for  she  has  always  detested  the  study  of  languages, 
and  rebelled  against  learning  German,  in  which  she 
took  lessons  for  three  years. 

Mme.  Smith,  who  is  a  kind-hearted  woman,  with 
much  good,  practical  sense,  is  sixty-seven  years  of 
age.  Neither  she  nor  her  husband  was  ever  a  ner- 
vous or  psychopatliic  subject,  but  both  showed  a 
marked  tendency  to  broncho-pulmonary  affections  of 
a  somewhat  alarming  type.  Mme.  Smith  has,  be- 
sides, suffered  frequently  from  rheumatism.  Helene 
does  not  appear  to  have  inherited  these  tendencies; 
she  has  always  enjoyed  robust  health,  and  has  not 
even  had  the  slight  diseases  usually  incidental  to 
childhood. 

Although  both  M.  and  Mme.  Smith  were  Protes- 
tants, through  a  chain  of  peculiar  circumstances  their 
daughter  was  baptized  a  Catholic  shortly  after  her 
birth,  her  name  being  inscribed  some  months  later 
on  the  register  of  the  Protestant  church  of  Geneva. 
The  memory  of  this  unusual  baptism  has  certainly 
not  been  lost  by  Helene's  subliminal  imagination, 
and  has  duly  contributed  to  the  hypothesis  of  a  mys- 
terious origin.  Of  the  years  of  childhood  I  know 
nothing  specially  interesting.     At  the  intermediate 

B  17 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

school,  at  which  she  passed  only  a  year,  and  where  I 
have  consulted  the  records  of  her  class,  she  was  not 
distinguished  either  for  good  or  ill  from  the  point 
of  view  of  deportment,  but  she  certainly  did  not  reveal 
the  full  measure  of  her  intelligence,  since  she  failed 
to  pass  the  examinations  at  the  end  of  the  year, 
a  fact  which  decided  her  entrance  upon  an  appren- 
ticeship. On  the  other  hand,  the  worthy  pastor 
who  gave  her  religious  instruction  somewhat  later, 
and  who  has  never  lost  sight  of  her  since,  has  fur- 
nished me  with  most  eulogistic  testimonials  as  to 
her  character ;  he  remembers  her  as  a  young  girl  of 
serious  disposition,  intelligent,  thoughtful,  faithful 
in  the  discharge  of  her  duties,  and  devoted  to  her 
family. 

M.  Smith  never  showed  the  least  trace  of  mediumis- 
tic  phenomena;  from  having  been  very  indifferent,  ox 
even  hostile,  to  spiritism  until  his  daughter  began  to 
interest  herself  in  it,  he  finally  succumbed  to  her  in- 
fluence and  became  a  believer  in  that  doctrine  towards 
the  close  of  his  life.  Mme.  Smith,  on  the  contrary, 
has  always  been  predisposed  to  it,  and  has  experienced 
several  phenomena  of  that  nature  in  the  course  of  her 
life.  At  the  period  of  the  epidemic  of  "table-tipping" 
which  raged  in  our  country  about  the  middle  of  this 
century,  she  too  experimented  quite  successfully  for 
a  while  upon  the  table  with  her  friends  and  acquaint- 
ances. Later,  she  had  some  sporadic  visions.  The 
following  is  one  of  the  most  typical.  While  her  lit- 
tle daughter  three  years  old  was  ill,  Mme.  Smith 
awoke  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  saw  an  angel, 
of  dazzling  brightness,  standing  by  the  side  of  the 

i8 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

little  bed  with  its  hands  stretched  out  above  the 
child ;  after  some  moments  the  apparition  gradual- 
ly dissolved.  Mme.  Smith  awakened  her  husband 
and  told  him  of  the  fatal  significance  which  she  at- 
tached to  the  vision,  but  he,  unable  to  see  anything, 
ridiculed  her  superstitious  fears.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  child  died  on  the  following  day,  to  the  great  sur- 
prise of  the  physician  attending  her.  This  is  a  fine  ex- 
ample of  true  maternal  presentiment,  subconsciously 
felt  and  transferring  itself  into  the  normal  conscious- 
ness by  a  visual  hallucination  which  borrowed  for  its 
symbolic  content  an  appropriate  popular  image. 

Mme.  Smith  never  knew  her  mother,  who  died 
shortly  after  her  birth;  but  she  recalls  and  has  related" 
to  me  some  characteristic  visions  of  her  grandmother, 
who  brought  her  up;  various  phenomena  connected 
with  one  of  Helene's  brothers  (hearing  of  steps  in  the 
night,  etc.)  have  proved  to  her  that  one  of  her  sons,  at 
least,  is  a  medium. 

Helene  Smith  was  certainly  predisposed,  both  by 
heredity  and  temperament,  to  become  a  medium,  as 
soon  as  the  outward  opportunity — that  is,  the  sug- 
gestions of  spiritism — should  present  itself. 

It  is  evident,  indeed,  from  her  recital  of  events,  that 
she  was  more  or  less  visionary  from  her  infancy.  It 
does  not  appear,  however,  that  she  ever  manifested 
phenomena  capable  in  themselves  of  attracting  the 
attention  of  her  family.  I  have  not  been  able  to  dis- 
cover any  indication  whatever  of  crises  or  attacks  of 
an  abnormal  nature,  not  even  of  sleep-walking.  Her 
automatisms  have  been  always  almost  entirely  con- 
fined to  the  sensory  or  mental  sphere,  and  it  is  only 

19 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

from  her  own  narratives  that  other  people  have  any 
knowledge  of  them.  They  assume  the  double  form 
of  reveries  more  or  less  conscious,  and  of  hallucina- 
tions properly  so  called. 

I.  Reveries. — The  habit  of  falling  into  reverie,  of 
building  castles  in  the  air,  of  transporting  one's  self 
into  other  conditions  of  existence,  or  of  telling  one's 
self  stories  in  which  one  plays  the  chief  role,  is  more 
frequent  among  women  than  among  men,  and  in 
childhood  and  youth  than  in  mature  years.  This  pro- 
pensity seems  to  have  always  been  extremely  marked 
in  the  case  of  Mile.  Smith,  since  from  her  school-girl 
days  she  has  shown  herself  to  be  of  a  sedentary  and 
domestic  temperament,  preferring  the  quiet  compan- 
ionship of  her  mother  to  the  games  of  her  comrades, 
and  her  needle-work  to  out-door  recreations.  The 
fragments  which  have  survived  in  Helene's  conscious 
memory  are  all  that  is  known  to  us  of  the  content  of 
these  reveries,  but  it  suffices,  nevertheless,  to  reveal 
to  us  the  general  tone  of  her  fictions,  and  to  show 
us  that  the  images  suddenly  surging  up  before  her 
mental  vision  had  a  peculiar,  often  very  fantastic, 
character,  and  which  enables  us  to  see  in  them  the  be- 
ginnings of  her  later  great  somnambulistic  romances. 
It  is  to  be  noticed  also  that  the  designs,  embroideries, 
varied  artistic  works,  which  were  always  the  favorite 
occupations  of  her  moments  of  leisure  and  in  which 
she  excels,  were  almost  always,  from  her  infancy, 
not  copies  of  exterior  models,  but  the  products  of  her 
own  invention,  marked  with  the  bizarre  and  original 
stamp  of  her  internal  images.  Moreover,  these  pieces 
of  work  grew  under  her  fingers  with  an  ease  and 

20 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

rapidity  that  astonished  herself.  They  made  them- 
selves, as  it  were. 

She  was  always  fond  of  indulging  in  day-dreams, 
and  recalls  many  a  half-hour  passed  motionless  in 
an  easy -chair,  on  which  occasions  she  was  accus- 
tomed to  see  all  kinds  of  strange  things,  but,  being 
of  a  very  reticent  nature,  she  seldom  mentioned  them 
to  her  parents  for  fear  of  not  being  understood.  She 
used  to  see  highly  colored  landscapes,  a  lion  of  stone 
with  a  mutilated  head,  fanciful  objects  on  pedestals, 
etc.  She  does  not  remember  the  details,  but  does 
clearly  recollect  that  they  all  bore  a  close  resemblance 
to  her  Hindoo  and  Martian  visions  of  later  years. 

These  phantasmagoria  also  appeared  to  her  in 
the  night.  She  remembers,  among  other  things,  to 
have  seen,  when  about  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  old, 
a  bright  light  thrown  against  the  wall  of  her  room, 
which  then  seemed  to  be  filled  with  strange  and  un- 
known beings.  She  had  the  impression  of  being 
fully  awake,  but  it  suddenly  occurred  to  her  that  she 
must  have  been  dreaming,  and  it  was  only  then  that 
she  comprehended  that  it  was  really  a  ''  vision  "  which 
she  had  experienced. 

2  Hallucinations. — In  the  foregoing  examples  it 
would  be  difficult  to  say  to  exactly  which  category 
the  psychologic  facts  belong,  especially  the  noctur- 
nal phenomena,  and  one  may  hesitate  whether  to  re- 
gard them  as  simple  dreams  of  a  very  vivid  character, 
hypnagogic  or  hypnopompic  '•'  visions,  or  as  veritable 

*This  term  is  used  to  designate  the  visions  which  manifest 
themselves  at  the  moment  of  awakening  from  sleep  immediate- 

21 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

hallucinations.  On  the  other  hand,  we  undoubtedly 
have  the  right  to  give  the  latter  designation  to  the 
numerous  apparitions  which  Mile.  Smith  has  when 
in  full  possession  of  her  senses  in  the  daytime. 

One  day,  for  example,  as  she  was  playing  out-of- 
doors  with  a  friend,  she  saw  some  one  following  her, 
and  mentioned  the  fact  to  her  companion,  who  could 
not  see  any  one.  The  imaginary  individual,  after 
having  followed  her  around  a  tree  for  a  moment, 
disappeared,  and  she  was  unable  to  find  him  again. 

Of  an  entirely  different  order  are  the  strange  char- 
acters which  she  remembers  having  sometimes  in- 
voluntarily substituted  for  French  letters  when  writ- 
ing to  her  friends,  which  must  be  regarded  as  grapho- 
motor hallucinations.  These  were  undoubtedly  the 
same  characters  which  at  other  times  appeared  to  her 
in  visual  images. 

This  was  the  prelude  to  the  phenomenon  so  fre- 
quently experienced  by  her  in  the  last  few  years,  and 
of  which  we  shall  hereafter  see  many  examples — 
namely,  automatic  writing,  mingling  with  her  ordi- 
nary chirography  in  her  waking  state. 

Alongside  of  hallucinations  like  these,  which  do 
not  show  any  intentional  or  useful  character  and  are 
only  a  capricious  and  fortuitous  irruption  into  the  nor- 
mal consciousness,  mere  dreams  or  fancies  filling  up 
the  sub-conscious  strata,  there  are  also  manifested 
in  Helene's  case  some  hallucinations  of  a  manifest 
utility,  which  have  in  consequence  the  sense  of  mes- 

ly  prior  to  complete  awakening,  and  which  form  a  pendant  to 
the  well-known,  much  more  frequent  hypnagogic  hallucinations, 
arising  in  the  intermediate  state  between  sleep  and  waking. 

22 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

sages  addressed  by  the  subliminal  consciousness  of 
the  subject  to  her  normal  consciousness,  by  way  of 
warning  and  protection.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  these 
hallucinations,  which  might  be  called  teleological, 
have  lately  been  claimed  by  Leopold,  although  he 
has  no  recollection  of,  and  does  not  assert  himself  to 
be  the  author  of,  the  earlier  ones. 

The  following  is  a  curious  example  :  At  about  the 
age  of  seventeen  or  eighteen,  Hel  ne  was  returning 
from  the  country  one  evening,  carrying  a  fine  bou- 
quet of  flowers.  During  the  last  minutes  of  the  jour- 
ney she  heard  behind  her  a  peculiar  cry  of  a  bird, 
which  seemed  to  her  to  warn  her  against  some 
danger,  and  she  hastened  her  steps  without  looking 
behind.  On  her  arrival  at  home  the  cry  followed  her 
into  her  room  without  her  having  been  able  to  see  the 
creature  from  which  it  emanated.  She  went  tired  to 
bed,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  night  awoke  in  great 
pain,  but  was  unable  to  cry  out.  At  that  moment 
she  felt  herself  gently  lifted,  together  with  the  pillow 
on  which  she  lay,  as  if  by  two  friendly  hands,  which 
enabled  her  to  recover  her  voice  and  call  her  moth- 
er, who  hastened  to  comfort  her,  and  carried  the 
flowers,  which  were  too  odorous,  out  of  the  room. 
Leopold,  on  being  interrogated  recently  during  a 
somnambulism  of  Helene  as  to  this  incident,  coming 
up  again  after  so  many  years,  has  a  very  clear  rec- 
ollection of  it  and  gives  the  following  explanation. 

It  was  not  really  the  cry  of  a  bird,  but  it  was  he, 
Leopold,  who  caused  Helene  to  hear  a  sort  of  whistle, 
hoping  thereby  to  attract  her  attention  to  the  dan- 
ger lurking  in  the  bouquet  of  flowers,  in  which  wa3 

23 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

a  great  deal  of  garden-mint  of  powerful  odor.  Un- 
fortunately Helene  did  not  understand,  and  retained 
the  bouquet  in  her  room.  He  adds  that  his  failure 
to  give  a  more  clear  and  intelligible  warning  was 
due  to  the  fact  that  it  was  at  that  time  impossible 
for  him  to  do  so.  The  whistle  which  Helene  took 
for  the  cry  of  a  bird  was  all  that  it  was  in  his  power 
to  utter.  It  was  again  he  who  intervened  at  the 
moment  of  her  nocturnal  illness  by  raising  her  head 
in  order  to  enable  her  to  call  for  help. 

I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  substantial  accuracy 
either  of  the  account  given  by  Helene  and  her  mother, 
or  of  the  explanation  recently  furnished  by  Leopold. 
The  incident  belongs  to  the  category  of  well-known 
cases  where  a  danger  of  some  sort  not  suspected  by 
the  normal  personality,  but  which  is  subconsciously 
known  or  recognized,  is  warded  off  by  a  preservative 
hallucination,  either  sensory  (as  here — the  cry  of  the 
bird)  or  motor  (as  in  the  lifting  of  the  body).  The 
subliminal  consciousness  is  not  always  able  to  give 
a  clear  message;  in  the  present  case,  the  auditive 
automatism  remained  in  a  state  of  elementary  hal- 
lucination, a  simple  whistle,  without  being  able  to 
elevate  it  to  a  distinct  verbal  hallucination.  Its  gen- 
eral warning  sense,  however,  was  understood  by 
Helene,  thanks  to  the  confused  feeling  of  danger  that 
she  felt  at  the  same  time.  Moreover,  this  confused 
feeling,  which  caused  her  to  quicken  her  steps,  it 
seems  to  me,  ought  not  to  be  considered  as  the  conse- 
quence of  the  whistle  she  heard,  but  rather  as  a  par- 
allel phenomenon;  the  appearance  or  the  odor  of  the 
mint  she  was  carrying,  while  not  attracting  her  con- 

24 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

scious  attention,  nevertheless  dimly  roused  in  her  an 
idea  of  the  danger  lurking  in  the  flowers,  and  that 
idea  in  turn  affected  her  clear  consciousness  under  the 
double  form  of  a  vague  emotion  of  danger  and  a  verbo- 
auditive  translation  which  did  not  go  so  far  as  to 
formulate  itself  explicitly. 

Under  circumstances  of  a  nature  calculated  to  cause 
a  strong  emotional  shock,  and  especially  when  the 
psychic  sphere  which  involves  the  sentiment  of 
modesty  is  strongly  acted  upon,  Helene  has  a  vis- 
ual hallucination  of  a  man  clothed  in  a  long,  brown 
robe,  with  a  white  cross  on  his  breast,  like  a  monk, 
who  comes  to  her  aid,  and  accompanies  her  in  silence 
as  long  as  the  necessity  for  his  presence  continues. 
This  unknown  protector,  always  silent,  each  time 
appearing  and  disappearing  in  a  sudden  and  mys- 
terious manner,  is  no  other  than  Leopold  himself, 
according  to  the  recent  affirmations  of  the  latter. 

We  should  naturally  expect  that  Helene  would  have 
had  in  her  youth  many  striking  experiences  of  pre- 
vision, marvellous  intuition,  divination,  etc.,  which 
are  among  the  most  diffuse  forms  of  teleological 
automatism.  Such,  however,  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  the  fact;  neither  she  nor  her  mother  has  re- 
counted to  me  anything  remarkable  of  this  nature, 
and  they  confine  themselves  to  a  general  affirmation 
of  frequent  presentiments,  which  were  subsequently 
justified  as  to  the  persons  and  events  with  which  they 
were  connected. 

All  the  examples  which  I  have  above  cited  concur 
in  bringing  to  light  the  strong  penchant  of  Mile. 
Smith  towards  automatism.     But  from  the  point  of 

25 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

view  of  their  meaning  there  is  a  notable  difference 
between  the  teleological  phenomena,  presentiments 
or  hallucinations  of  a  manifest  utility,  and  those 
which  have  none — mere  reveries  and  other  perturba- 
tions, which  are  altogether  superfluous,  if  not  actually 
detrimental,  to  Helene's  normal  personality. 

There  are  dreams  and  other  automatisms  abso- 
lutel3^  useless  which  have  insinuated  themselves 
without  rhyme  or  reason  into  Helena's  normal  life. 
One  does  not  know  how  or  in  what  manner  to  inter- 
pret these  phenomena,  capricious  and  fortuitous  as 
they  seem  to  be,  and  they  remain  isolated,  inconsid- 
erable facts,  without  bearing  and  without  interest, 
since  they  cannot  be  attached  to  any  central  prin- 
ciple, to  one  mother-idea  or  fundamental  emotion. 

We  are,  therefore,  reduced  to  certain  conjectures, 
the  most  reasonable  of  which  is  that  these  diverse 
fragments  make  part  of  some  vast  subconscious  cre- 
ation, in  which  all  the  being  of  Mile.  Smith,  crushed 
and  bruised  by  the  conditions  which  the  realities  of  life 
have  imposed  upon  her,  as  is  more  or  less  the  case  with 
each  one  of  us,  gave  free  wing  to  the  deep  aspirations 
of  its  nature  and  expanded  into  the  fiction  of  an  exist- 
ence more  brilliant  than  her  own.  All  that  we  know 
of  Helene's  character,  both  as  a  child  and  as  a  young 
girl,  shows  us  that  her  dominant  emotional  note  was 
a  sort  of  instinctive  inward  revolt  against  the  modest 
environment  in  which  it  was  her  lot  to  be  born,  a  pro- 
found feeling  of  dread  and  opposition,  of  inexplicable 
malaise,  of  bitter  antagonism  against  the  whole  of 
her  material  and  intellectual  environment.  While 
showing  herself  always  very  devoted  to  her  parents 

S6 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

and  brothers,  she  had  only  feeble  natural  affinities  for 
them.  She  felt  like  a  stranger  in  her  family  and  as 
one  away  from  home.  She  had  a  feeling  of  isolation, 
of  abandonment,  of  exile,  which  created  a  sort  of  gulf 
between  her  and  her  family.  So  strong  were  these 
feelings  that  she  actually  one  day  seriously  asked  her 
parents  if  it  was  absolutely  certain  that  she  was  their 
daughter,  or  whether  it  was  not  possible  that  the  nurse 
might  some  day  by  mistake  have  brought  home  an- 
other child  from  the  daily  walk. 

This  want  of  adaptation  to  her  environment,  this 
sort  of  mysterious  homesickness  for  an  unknown 
country,  shows  itself  in  a  characteristic  manner  in  the 
following  fragment  of  narrative,  in  which  Helene, 
who  has  always  attributed  great  importance  to 
dreams,  tells  of  one  in  which  an  isolated  house  fig- 
ured. "  To  me  this  retired  mansion,  in  which  I  lived 
alone,  isolated,  represents  my  life,  which  from  my  in- 
fancy has  been  neither  happy  nor  gay.  Even  while 
very  young  I  do  not  remember  to  have  shared  any  of 
the  tastes  or  any  of  the  ideas  of  the  members  of  my 
family.  Thus  during  the  whole  of  my  childhood  I 
was  left  in  what  I  call  a  profound  isolation  of  heart 
And  in  spite  of  all,  in  spite  of  this  complete  want  of 
sympathy,  I  could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  marry, 
althoLigh  I  had  several  opportunities.  A  voice  was 
always  saying,  'Do  not  hurry:  the  time  has  not  ar- 
rived; this  is  not  the  destiny  for  which  you  are  re^ 
served.'  And  I  have  listened  to  that  voice,  which 
has  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  conscience,  and  I 
do  not  regret  it,  for  since  I  have  engaged  in  spirit- 
ism I  have  found  myself  so  surrounded  with  sym- 

27 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

pathy  and  friendships  that  I  have  somewhat  forgot- 
ten my  sad  lot." 

This  quotation  speaks  volumes  in  regard  to  the 
turn  of  mind  and  the  emotional  disposition  which 
ruled  fielene  as  a  little  girl.  It  is  surely,  so  to  speak, 
the  vulgar  story  and  the  common  lot  of  all;  many  a 
child,  many  a  youth,  many  an  unrecognized  genius, 
feel  themselves  suffocating  in  their  too  narrow  en- 
vironment when  the  latent  energies  of  life  begin  to 
ferment.  But  there  are  differences  in  kind  and  in 
degree.  With  Mile.  Helene  Smith  the  sentiment  of 
not  having  been  made  for  her  environment,  and  of  be- 
longing by  nature  to  a  higher  sphere,  was  intense 
and  lasting.  Her  mother  always  had  the  impres- 
sion that  Helene  was  not  happy,  and  wondered  that 
she  was  so  serious,  so  absorbed,  so  wanting  in  the 
exuberance  of  spirits  natural  to  her  age.  Her  father 
and  her  brothers,  not  comprehending  the  real  reasons 
for  this  absence  of  gayety,  taxed  her  very  unjustly 
with  pride  and  hauteur,  and  accused  her  sometimes  of 
despising  her  humble  surroundings.  There  are  shades 
of  feeling  which  can  only  be  understood  when  they 
have  been  experienced.  Helene  well  knew  that  she 
really  had  no  contempt  for  her  material  and  social 
environment,  which,  on  the  contrary,  inspired  her 
with  respect,  but  which  simply  was  not  congenial  to 
her  nature  and  temperament. 

To  this  fundamental  feeling  of  imprisonment  in  a 
too  paltry  sphere  was  joined,  in  Helene's  case,  a 
timid  disposition.  Darkness,  the  least  noise,  the 
creaking  of  the  furniture,  made  her  tremble;  by  day, 
a  person  walking  behind  her,  an  unexpected  move- 

28 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

merit,  the  ringing  of  the  door-bell,  gave  her  the  im- 
pression that  some  one  wishing  to  harm  her  had 
come  to  seize  her  and  carry  her  off.  On  the  whole, 
Helene's  tendency  to  be  startled  by  everything  and 
nothing  constituted  with  her  a  grievous  panophobia, 
a  state  of  fear  and  insecurity  which  greatly  strength- 
ened her  impression  of  want  of  union  —  of  mesal- 
liance— with  an  environment  to  which  she  was  de- 
cidedly superior. 

It  is  easy  now  to  see  the  connection  between  that 
depressing  emotionalism  which  was  the  attribute  of 
Helene's  childhood  and  the  slightly  megalomaniac 
tone  of  her  later  subliminal  romances.  The  idea 
intrudes  itself  that,  in  spite  of — or  by  reason  of — 
their  apparent  contrast,  these  two  traits  are  not 
independent  of  each  other,  but  bound  by  the  tie  of 
cause  and  effect.  But  this  causal  connection  is  in 
great  danger  of  being  interpreted  in  a  precisely  in- 
verse sense  by  the  empirical  psychologist  and  the 
metaphysical  occultist.  The  latter  will  explain  Mile. 
Smith's  curious  impression  of  strangeness  and  su- 
periority to  the  base  conditions  of  her  actual  existence, 
by  her  illustrious  previous  incarnations;  the  psy- 
chologist, on  the  contrary,  will  see  in  that  same  im- 
pression the  wholly  natural  origin  of  her  grandiose 
somnambulistic  personifications.  In  default  of  a  com- 
plete understanding,  always  dubious,  between  these 
so  different  points  of  view,  of  which  we  shall  speak 
later,  it  will  be  advisable  to  adopt  at  least  a  pro- 
visional modus  Vivendi,  based  on  the  party-wall  of 
the  native  constitution  or  individual  character  of  Mile. 
Smith.     On  the  farther  side  of  that  wall,  in  eternity, 

29 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

so  to  speak,  a  parte  ante  which  precedes  the  arrival 
of  Helene  into  this  hf e,  the  occultist  will  have  full  lati- 
tude to  imagine  such  a  succession  of  existences  as  it 
shall  please  him  in  order  to  explain  the  character  she 
has  had  from  her  infancy.  But  on  this  side  of  the 
wall — that  is  to  say,  within  the  limits  of  her  present 
life — the  psychologist  will  have  the  right  to  ignore  all 
these  prenatal  metempsychoses,  and  taking  for  his 
point  of  departure  the  innate  constitution  of  Helene, 
without  troubling  himself  about  anything  she  may 
have  received  by  the  accidents  of  heredity  or  preserved 
from  her  royal  pre-existences,  he  will  endeavor  to  ex- 
plain by  that  same  constitution,  as  it  reveals  itself 
in  her  daily  life,  the  genesis  of  her  subliminal  crea- 
tions under  the  action  of  occasional  exterior  influ- 
ences. The  occultist,  then,  can  have  the  pleasure 
of  regarding  Mile.  Smith's  characteristic  trait  as  a 
child,  that  impression  of  solitude  and  wandering 
about  in  a  world  for  which  she  was  not  made,  as  the 
effect  of  her  real  past  greatnesses,  while  the  psychol- 
ogist will  be  permitted  to  see  in  it  the  cause  of  her 
future  dreams  of  grandeur. 

The  emotional  disposition  which  I  have  depicted, 
and  which  is  one  of  the  forms  under  which  the  mal- 
adaptation  of  the  organism,  physical  and  mental, 
to  the  hard  conditions  of  the  environment,  betrays 
itself,  seems  therefore  to  me  to  have  been  the  source 
and  starting-point  for  all  the  dreamings  of  He- 
lene in  her  childhood.  Thence  came  these  visions, 
always  warm,  luminous,  highly  colored,  exotic, 
bizarre;  and  these  brilliant  apparitions,  superbly 
dressed,  in  which  her  antipathy  for  her  insipid  and 

30 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

unpleasant  surroundings  betrays  itself,  her  weari- 
ness of  ordinary,  commonplace  people,  her  disgust 
for  prosaic  occupations,  for  vulgar  and  disagreeable 
things,  for  the  narrow  house,  the  dirty  streets,  the 
cold  winters,  and  the  gray  sky.  Whether  these  im- 
ages, very  diverse,  but  of  the  same  brilliant  quality, 
were  already  existent  in  Helene's  subconscious 
thought  while  still  a  child  or  a  young  girl,  we  are  un- 
able to  say.  It  is,  however,  probable  that  their  sys- 
tematization  was  far  from  attaining  to  such  a  degree 
of  perfection  as  they  have  presented  during  the  past 
few  years  under  the  influence  of  spiritism. 

All  the  facts  of  automatism  to  which  Helene  can 
assign  a  vaguely  approximate  date  group  them- 
selves around  her  fifteenth  year,  and  are  all  included 
between  the  limits  of  her  ninth  and  twentieth  years. 

This  evident  connection  with  a  phase  of  develop- 
ment of  major  importance  has  been  confirmed  to  me 
by  Leopold  on  various  occasions,  who  says  that  he 
appeared  to  Helene  for  the  first  time  in  her  tenth 
year,  on  an  exceptional  occasion  of  extreme  fright, 
but  after  that,  not  until  about  four  years  later,  be- 
cause the  ''physiological  conditions"  necessary  to 
his  apparition  were  not  yet  reaHzed.  The  moment 
they  were  realized,  he  says,  he  began  to  manifest 
himself,  and  it  is  at  the  same  period,  according  to 
him,  that  Helene  commenced  to  recover  memories 
of  her  Hindoo  existence,  under  the  form  of  strange 
visions  of  which  she  comprehended  neither  the  nat- 
ure nor  the  origin. 

After  the  age  of  about  twenty  years,  without  af- 
firming or  beheving   that  her  visions   and  appari- 

3i 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

tions  ceased  altogether.  Mile.  Smith  has  no  striking 
recollections  of  any,  and  she  has  not  told  me  of  any 
psychic  phenomenon  experienced  by  her  in  the  series 
of  3^ears  immediately  preceding  her  entrance  into 
spiritism.  We  may  infer  from  this,  with  some  reason, 
that  the  ebullitions  of  the  imaginative  subconscious 
life  gradually  became  calm  after  the  explosion  of 
the  period  we  have  mentioned.  They  had  been  ap- 
peased. The  conflict  between  Helene's  inner  nature 
and  the  environment  in  which  she  was  forced  to  live 
became  less  fierce.  A  certain  equilibrium  was  estab- 
lished between  the  necessities  of  practical  life  and 
her  inward  aspirations.  On  the  one  hand,  she  re- 
signed herself  to  the  necessities  of  reality;  and  if  her 
native  pride  could  not  yield  to  the  point  of  condescend- 
ing to  a  marriage,  honorable  undoubtedly,  but  for 
which  she  felt  she  was  not  intended,  we  must  never- 
theless pay  homage  to  the  perseverance,  the  fidelity, 
the  devotion  which  she  always  brought  to  the  ful- 
filment of  her  family  and  business  duties.  On  the 
other  hand,  she  did  not  permit  the  flame  of  the  ideal 
to  be  extinguished  in  her,  and  it  reacted  upon  her 
environment  as  strongly  as  possible,  making  its 
imprint  upon  her  personality  well  marked. 

She  introduced  a  certain  stamp  of  elegance  into 
the  modest  home  of  her  parents.  She  arranged  for 
herself  a  small  salon,  coquettish  and  comfortable  in 
its  simplicity.  She  took  lessons  in  music,  and 
bought  herself  a  piano.  She  hung  some  old  engrav- 
ings on  her  walls,  secured  some  Japanese  vases,  a 
jardiniere  filled  with  plants,  cut  flowers  in  pretty 
vases,  a  hanging  lamp  with  a  beautiful  shade  of  her 

32 

CHILDHOOD  AND  YOUTH  OF  MLLE.  SMITH 

own  make,  a  table-cover  which  she  had  put  together 
and  embroidered  herself,  some  photographs  curiously 
framed  according  to  her  own  design;  and  out  of  this 
harmonious  whole,  always  beautifully  kept,  she 
evolved  something  original,  bizarre,  and  delightful, 
conforming  well  to  the  general  character  of  her  fan- 
tastic subconsciousness. 

At  the  same  time  that  Mile.  Smith  succeeded  in  ac- 
commodating herself  to  the  conditions  of  her  exist- 
ence, the  state  of  latent  timidity  in  which  she  lived 
gradually  diminished.  She  is  still  occasionally 
overcome  by  fear,  but  much  less  frequently  than 
formerly,  and  never  without  a  legitimate  exterior 
cause. 

Indeed,  judging  her  by  these  latter  years,  I  do  not 
recognize  in  her  the  child  or  young  girl  of  former 
days,  always  timid,  trembling,  and  frightened,  tac- 
iturn and  morose,  who  has  been  depicted  to  me  by 
herself  and  her  mother. 

It  seems  to  me,  then,  that  the  wildness  of  the 
dreams  and  automatisms,  which  were  symptoms  of 
a  tendency  to  mental  disintegration,  which  marked 
the  years  of  pubert}^  was  succeeded  by  a  progres- 
sive diminution  of  these  troubles  and  a  gradual  gain- 
ing of  wisdom  on  the  part  of  the  subliminal  strata. 
We  may  presume  that  this  harmonization,  this  re- 
ciprocal adaptation  of  the  internal  to  the  external, 
would  in  time  have  perfected  itself,  and  that  the  whole 
personality  of  Mile.  Smith  would  have  continued  to 
consolidate  and  unify  itself,  if  spiritism  had  not  come 
all  of  a  sudden  to  rekindle  the  fire  which  still  slum- 
bered under  the  ashes  and  to  give  a  new  start  to  the 
C  33 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

subliminal  mechanism  which  was  beginning  to  grow 
rusty. 

The  suppressed  fictions  aroused  themselves,  the 
reveries  of  former  years  resumed  their  sway,  and  the 
images  of  subliminal  phantasy  began  to  be  more  pro- 
lific than  ever  under  the  fertile  suggestions  of  occult 
philosophy,  rallying-points  or  centres  of  crystalliza- 
tion— such  as  the  idea  of  former  existences  and  re- 
incarnations— around  which  they  had  only  to  group 
and  organize  themselves  in  order  to  give  birth  to  the 
vast  somnambulistic  constructions  the  development 
of  which  we  shall  be  obliged  to  follow. 

CHAPTER  III 

MLLE.    SMITH    SINCE    HER   INITIATION   INTO 
SPIRITISM 

HAVING  endeavored  in  the  preceding  chapter 
to  reconstruct  in  its  chief  characteristics  the 
history  of  Mile.  Smith  up  to  the  time  when 
spiritism  begins  to  be  mixed  up  with  it,  I  would  have 
preferred  in  the  present  chapter  to  make  a  detailed 
study  of  her  psychological  life  during  these  last  years, 
without  however,  as  yet,  touching  upon  the  content, 
properly  so  called,  of  her  automatisms.  Not  having 
been  able  to  accomplish  this  design  to  my  satisfaction, 
for  want  of  time  and  patience,  I  shall  endeavor  at  least 
to  systematize  my  notes  somewhat  by  grouping  them 
under  four  heads.  I  shall  trace  the  birth  of  Helene's 
mediumship  as  far  as  it  is  possible  for  me  to  do 
so  from  the  meagre  accounts  I  have  been  able  to 
procure  concerning  a  time  at  which  I  was  not  ac- 
quainted with  her.  Then,  passing  to  facts  with 
which  I  am  more  familiar,  I  will  describe  rapidly 
her  normal  state  as  I  have  been  able  to  see  it  for  the 
last  five  years.  This  would  have  been  the  place  for  a 
study  of  individual  psychology,  but  I  have  been  com- 
pelled to  abandon  the  idea  on  account  of  multiple 
difficulties.     Finally,  I  will  offer  a  few  remarks  on 

35 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

the  abnormal  side  of  her  existence,  which  it  is  con- 
venient to  divide  into  two  groups,  namely,  the  spon- 
taneous— that  is  to  say,  springing  up  of  themselves  in 
the  course  of  her  ordinary  life;  or  those  provoked  by 
the  voluntary  seeking  for  favorable  circumstances, 
and  which  constitute  the  seances  properly  so  called. 

I.  The  Mediumistic  Beginnings  of  Mlle. 
Smith 

In  the  winter  of  1891-92  Mile.  Smith  heard  spirit- 
ism spoken  of  by  one  of  her  acquaintances,  Mme. 
Y.,  who  lent  her  Denis's  book,  Apres  la  Mort.  The 
perusal  of  this  work  having  vividly  excited  Helene's 
curiosity,  Mme.  Y.  agreed  to  accompany  her  to  her 
friend,  Mlle.  Z.,  who  was  interested  in  the  same 
questions,  and  who  produced  automatic  writing. 
They  then  decided  to  form  a  circle  for  regular  experi- 
mentation. I  take  from  the  notes  which  Mlle.  Z.  has 
had  the  kindness  to  furnish  me,  the  account,  unfort- 
unately very  brief,  of  the  seances  at  which  Helene^s 
mediumistic  faculties  first  made  their  appearance. 

"It  was  on  the  20th  of  February,  1892,  that  I  made 
the  acquaintance  of  Mlle.  Smith.  She  was  introduced 
to  me  by  Mme.  Y.,  for  the  purpose  of  endeavoring  to 
form  a  spiritistic  group.  She  was  then  altogether  a 
novice  in  spiritism,  never  having  attempted  any- 
thing, and  did  not  suspect  the  faculties  that  have 
since  developed  themselves  in  her. 

"February  20. — First  reunion:  We  seat  ourselves 
at  the  table  ;  we  succeed  in  making  it  oscillate.  We 
regard  Mme.  Y.  as  the  medium  upon  whom  we  can 

36 

MLLfi.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

reckon.  We  try  for  writing.  We  receive  through  me 
encouragements  to  proceed. 

''February  26. — Progress;  the  table  moves  itself 
considerably,  salutes  one  by  one  all  the  members  of 
the  group,  and  gives  us  certain  names,  of  which  only 
one  is  recognized  .  .  .  Writing  :  Mile.  Smith,  who 
tries  for  the  first  time,  writes  mechanically,  her  eyes 
closed,  some  phrases,  of  which  we  can  decipher  some 
words. 

"March  11. — Nothing  at  this  seance,  except  a  com- 
munication written  by  myself. 

''March  18. — Progress;  clear  communication  by  the 
table.  Attempt  to  experiment  in  the  darkness  (which 
was  not  absolute,  the  hall  outside  having  some  incan- 
descent lights  which  diffused  a  feeble  light;  we  could 
distinguish  each  other  with  difficulty).  Mile.  Smith 
sees  a  balloon,  now  luminous,  now  becoming  dark : 
she  has  seen  nothing  tip  to  this  time.  Writing:  Mile. 
Smith  writes  mechanically  a  quite  long  communica- 
tion from  the  father  of  M.  K.  [a  Bulgarian  student 
present  at  the  seance];  advice  to  him." 

At  this  point  the  sitters  became  so  numerous  that 
they  broke  up  into  two  groups,  of  which  the  one  con- 
tinuing to  meet  with  Mile.  Z.  does  not  concern  us. 
Mile.  Smith  became  a  member  of  the  other,  which 
met  at  the  house  of  a  lady  named  N.,  where  weekly 
seances  were  held  for  a  year  and  a  half  (up  to  the 
end  of  June,  1893).  The  records  of  these  meetings, 
kept  by  Mme.  N.,  are  unfortunately  very  brief  and 
obscure  on  many  points  of  interest  to  the  psychologist. 
Those  of  the  first  months  are  in  the  handwriting  of 
Mile.  Smith,  who  acted  as  secretary  of  the  group  for 

37 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

thirty  seances.  As  she  only  took  down  at  the  time 
the  headings  of  the  communications  of  the  spirits 
and  wrote  out  the  remainder  on  the  following  day, 
we  cannot  rely  very  strongly  on  the  objective  ac- 
curacy of  these  accounts,  which,  however,  have  the 
advantage  of  presenting  to  us  the  mediumship  of 
Helene,  as  related  by  herself.  She  speaks  of  herself 
in  the  third  person. 

The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  two  first  se- 
ances held  in  this  new  environment : 

"March  25,  1892. — Eleven  persons  around  a  large 
and  heavy  dining-table  of  oak  with  two  leaves.  The 
table  is  set  in  motion,  and  several  spirits  come  and 
give  their  names  (by  raps),  and  testify  to  the  pleasure 
it  gives  them  to  find  themselves  among  us.  It  is  at 
this  seance  that  Mile.  Smith  begins  to  distinguish 
vague  gleams  with  long  white  streamers  moving 
from  the  floor  to  the  ceiling,  and  then  a  magnificent 
star,  which  in  the  darkness  appears  to  her  alone 
throughout  the  whole  of  the  seance.  We  augur  from 
this  that  she  will  end  by  seeing  things  more  distinctly 
and  will  possess  the  gift  of  clairvoyance. 

''April  I. — Violent  movements  of  the  table,  due  to 
a  spirit  who  calls  himself  David  and  announces  him- 
self as  the  spiritual  guide  of  the  group.  Then  he 
gives  way  to  another  spirit  who  says  he  is  Victor 
Hugo,  and  the  guide  and  protector  of  Mile.  Smith, 
who  is  very  much  surprised  to  be  assisted  by  a  per- 
son of  such  importance.  He  soon  disappears.  Mile. 
Smith  is  very  much  agitated;  she  has  fits  of  shiv- 
ering, is  very  cold.  She  is  very  restless,  and  sees 
suddenly,  balancing  itself  above  the  table,  a  grin- 

38 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

ning,  very  ill-favored  face,  with  long  red  hair.  She 
is  so  frightened  that  she  demands  that  the  Lights  be 
lit.  She  is  calmed  and  reassured.  The  figure  dis- 
appears. Afterwards  she  sees  a  magnificent  bouquet 
of  roses  of  different  hues  being  placed  on  the  table 
before  one  of  the  sitters,  M.  P.  All  at  once  she  sees 
a  small  snake  come  out  from  underneath  the  bou- 
quet, which,  crawling  quickly,  perceives  the  flowers, 
looks  at  them,  tries  to  reach  the  hand  of  M.  P., 
withdraws  for  an  instant,  comes  back  slowly,  and 
disappears  in  the  interior  of  the  bouquet.  Then  all 
is  dissolved  and  three  raps  are  given  on  the  table, 
terminating  the  seance.  [M.  P.  interprets  the  mean- 
ing of  the  vision  of  the  bouquet  and  the  serpent  as  a 
symbolic  translation  of  an  emotional  impression  ex- 
perienced by  Mile.  Smith]. '^ 

Such  was  the  birth  of  Helene's  mediumship. 
Scarcely  anything  happened  on  the  20th  of  Febru- 
ary, when  the  movements  of  the  table  were  not  at- 
tributed to  her  (although  in  all  probability  she  caused 
them);  in  the  following  seances  she  appeared  in 
two  attempts  at  automatic  writing  (unfortunately 
lost)  in  imitation  of  the  writing  medium  with  whom 
she  was  sitting.  The  outcome  of  this  second  at- 
tempt leads  us  to  suppose  that  Helene's  faculties 
would  have  developed  rapidly  in  that  direction  if  she 
had  not  abandoned  it  and  changed  her  environment. 

Her  visual  faculty,  suggested  by  the  experiments 
at  obscure  seances,  shows  itself  on  the  i8th  and  25th 
of  March  in  the  form  of  elementary  hallucinations 
or  vague  figures  having  their  point  of  departure 
probably  in  the  simple  entoptical   phenomena,  the 

39 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

retina's  own  light,  consecutive  images,  etc.  Then, 
encouraged  by  the  predictions  of  the  sitters,  she  at- 
tained on  the  1st  of  April  to  visions  properly  so 
called,  having  a  varied  content  and  a  real  or  symbol- 
ic signification.  At  the  same  time  her  typtological 
automatism  was  perfecting  itself.  We  recognize  it 
in  the  name  of  Victor  Hugo,  coming  especially  for 
Mile.  Smith,  and  suspect  it  to  have  been  a  name  al- 
ready given  at  the  second  seance. 

Auditive  hallucinations  follow  closely  upon  the 
visual,  but  it  is  impossible  to  know  at  just  what 
date,  as  the  records  do  not  clearly  indicate  wheth- 
er the  messages  recorded  had  that  origin  or  were 
rapped  out  on  the  table.  To  these  known  forms 
of  automatism  must  be  added  the  frequent  phe- 
nomena of  emotion,  shiverings,  sadness,  restless- 
ness, fear,  etc.,  which  are  experienced  by  Helena 
without  knowing  why,  and  are  afterwards  found 
to  be  in  perfect  conformity  to,  and  in  evident  con- 
nection with,  the  content  of  those  emotional  phe- 
nomena which  they  generally  precede  by  a  few  mo- 
ments. 

Thus,  in  a  half-dozen  weekly  seances,  the  me- 
diumship  of  Mile.  Smith  was  invested  with  a  com- 
plex psychological  aspect,  which  from  that  time  it 
preserved  intact  for  three  years,  and  of  which  I  was 
a  witness  after  I  made  her  acquaintance.  This 
rapidity  of  development  is  not  at  all  unusual;  but 
there  is  this  peculiarity  about  Helene,  that  her  me- 
diumistic  faculties,  after  their  first  appearance,  re- 
mained for  a  long  time  stationary,  and  then  under- 
went all  at  once,  in  the  spring  of  1895,  the  enormous 

40 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE   HER  INITIATION 

transformation  and  tremendous  expansion  which  I 
have  described  in  the  first  chapter,  and  to  which  I 
will  not  again  refer. 

11.  Mlle.  Smith  in  Her  Normal  State 

I  was  about  to  say  that  in  her  normal  state  Mlle. 
Smith  is  normal.  Certain  scruples  restrain  me,  and 
I  correct  myself  by  saying  that  in  her  ordinary  state 
she  seems  just  like  anybody  else.  By  this  I  mean 
that  outside  of  the  gaps  which  the  seances  and  the 
spontaneous  eruptions  of  automatism  make  in  her 
life,  no  one  would  suspect,  observing  her  performance 
of  her  various  duties,  or  in  talking  with  her  on  all  sorts 
of  subjects,  all  that  she  is  capable  of  in  her  abnormal 
states,  or  the  curious  treasures  which  are  concealed  in 
her  subliminal  strata. 

With  a  healthy  and  ruddy  complexion,  of  good 
height,  well  proportioned,  of  regular  and  harmonious 
features,  she  breathes  health  in  everything.  She  pre- 
sents no  visible  stigmata  of  degeneration.  As  to 
psychic  defects  or  anomalies,  with  the  exception  of  her 
mediumship  itself,  I  know  of  none,  the  timidity  of  her 
youth  having  entirely  disappeared.  Her  physical 
strength  is  marvellous,  as  shown  by  the  fact  that 
she  bears  up  under  the  strain  of  a  business  which 
demands  nearly  eleven  hours  of  her  time  each  day, 
nearly  all  of  which  she  is  compelled  to  stand  on  her 
feet,  and  from  which  she  takes  only  one  week's  va- 
cation in  summer.  Besides  this  confining  work  away 
from  home,  she  assists  her  mother  about  the  house 
morning  and  evening,  in  the  housekeeping  duties, 

4? 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

and  finds  time  besides  to  read  a  little,  to  practise  at 
her  piano,  and  to  make  the  lovely  handiwork,  which 
she  designs  and  executes  herself  with  remarkable 
originality  and  good  taste.  To  a  life  so  full  must 
be  added,  besides,  the  spiritistic  seances  which  she 
is  generally  willing  to  give  on  Sunday,  and  some- 
times on  a  weekday  evening,  very  disinterestedly,  to 
persons  who  are  interested  in  psychic  questions  or 
who  desire  to  consult  Leopold  on  important  subjects. 

While  hesitating  to  afl&rm  that  a  person  present- 
ing phenomena  so  extraordinary  as  those  of  medi- 
umship  is  perfectly  normal  in  other  respects,  I  am 
pleased  to  discover  that  as  far  as  Mile.  Smith  is  con- 
cerned, through  my  conversations  with  her  and  as 
the  result  of  my  investigations  concerning  her,  she 
does  not  present  a  single  abnormality,  physical,  in- 
tellectual, or  moral,  between  the  periods  of  the  ir- 
ruptions of  her  automatisms.  Her  field  of  vision, 
which  she  has  permitted  me  to  measure  with  a  Lan- 
dolt  perimeter,  is  normal  for  white  as  well  as  for  col- 
ors, for  which  latter  she  has  a  very  delicate  percep- 
tion. There  is  no  trace  of  tactile  anaesthesia  in  her 
hands.  There  is  no  known  motor  trouble.  The 
tremor  of  the  index-finger  gives  a  line,  of  four  oscil- 
lations per  second  on  an  average,  differing  not  at 
all  from  the  lines  obtained  from  persons  perfectly 
normal  (see  Fig.  2). 

It  cannot  be  expected  that  I  should  paint  a  full 
moral  and  intellectual  portrait  of  Mile.  Smith,  as  I 
should  be  in  danger  of  hurting  her  feelings  in  case  my 
attempt  should  come  to  her  notice.  I  can  only  touch 
on  a  few  points.     One  of  the  most  striking  is  her  great 

43 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

native  dignity;  her  bearing,  her  manners,  her  lan- 
guage are  always  perfect,  and  have  a  certain  quality  of 
noblesse  and  pride  which  accords  well  with  her  som- 
nambulistic roles.  On  occasion  she  shows  a  stately 
and  regal  hauteur.  She  is  very  impressionable,  and 
feels  little  things  very  keenly.  Her  antipathies  as  well 
as  her  sympathies  are  quick,  Hvely,  and  tenacious. 
She  is  energetic  and  persevering.  She  knows  very 
well  what  she  wants,  and  nothing  passes  her  by  un- 
perceived,  nor  does  she  forget  anything  in  the  con- 
duct of  others  towards  her.  "  I  see  everything,  noth- 
ing escapes  me,  and  I  forgive  but  never  forget,"  she 
has  often  said  to  me.  Perhaps  a  severe  moralist 
would  find  in  her  a  certain  exaggeration  of  personal 
sensibility,  but  that  sort  of  self-love  is  a  very  common 
characteristic  of  human  nature,  and  is  very  natural  in 
mediums  who  are  continually  exposed  to  public  crit- 
icism. 

She  is  very  intelligent  and  highly  gifted.  In  con- 
versation she  shows  herself  vivacious,  sprightly,  and 
sometimes  sarcastic.  Psychic  problems,  and  all  ques- 
tions connected  with  mediumistic  phenomena,  of  which 
she  is  herself  so  striking  an  example,  occupy  her  mind 
a  great  deal  and  form  the  principal  subject  of  her  pri- 
vate thoughts  and  of  her  conversations  with  people  in 
whom  she  is  interested. 

Her  philosophical  views  are  not  wanting  in  origi- 
nality or  breadth.  She  does  not  believe  in  spiritism, 
in  the  generally  accepted  sense  of  the  term,  and  has 
never  consented,  in  spite  of  the  advances  which  have 
been  made  to  her,  to  become  a  member  of  the  Geneva 
Society  (spiritistic)  for  Psychic  Studies^  because,  as 

43 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

she  says,  she  has  no  fixed  ideas  on  subjects  so  obscure, 
does  not  care  for  theories,  and  "  does  not  work  in  the 
interest  of  any  party."  She  investigates,  she  observes, 
she  reflects  and  discusses,  having  adopted  for  her  mot- 
to," The  truth  in  all  things,  for  all  things,  and  always," 
There  are  two  points  in  regard  to  which  she  is 
uncompromising — namely,  the  objective  reality  of 
Leopold,  and  the  supernormal  content  of  her  automa- 
tisms. No  one  dares  tell  her  that  her  great  invisible 
protector  is  only  an  illusory  apparition,  another  part 
of  herself,  a  product  of  her  subconscious  imagination; 
nor  that  the  strange  peculiarities  of  her  mediumistic 
communications — the  Sanscrit,  the  recognizable  sig- 
natures of  deceased  persons,  the  thousand  correct 
revelations  of  facts  unknown  to  her — are  but  old  for- 
gotten memories  of  things  which  she  saw  or  heard  in 
her  childhood.  Such  suppositions  being  contrary  to 
her  inmost  beliefs,  and  seemingly  false  in  fact,  easily 
irritate  her,  as  being  in  defiance  of  good  sense  and 
an  outrage  on  truth.  But  outside  of  these  two  sub- 
jects she  will  examine  and  discuss  coolly  any  hypoth- 
esis one  chooses.  The  idea  that  she  should  be  the 
reincarnation  of  a  Hindoo  princess  or  of  Marie  An- 
toinette, that  Leopold  is  really  Cagliostro,  that  the 
visions  called  Martian  are  really  from  the  planet 
Mars,  etc.,  all  seem  to  her  to  conform  fully  to  the 
facts  ;  but  these  beliefs  are  not  indispensable  to  her, 
and  she  is  ready,  should  they  prove  to  be  false,  to 
change  to  other  theories — as,  for  example,  telepathy, 
a  mixture  of  occult  influences,  a  mysterious  meet- 
ing in  her  of  intuitions  coming  from  some  higher 
sphere,  etc. 

44 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

Undoubtedly  the  supposition  of  her  pre-existences 
in  India  and  on  the  throne  of  France  seems  to  her  to 
explain  in  a  plausible  manner  the  feeling,  which  has 
followed  her  from  childhood,  of  belonging  to  a  world 
higher  than  that  in  which  the  chance  of  birth  has 
imprisoned  her  for  this  life ;  but  she  does  not  affirm  a 
positive  belief  in  that  brilliant  past,  is  not  wholly 
convinced  of  it,  and  remains  in  a  sensible  state  of 
expectancy  of  the  true  explanation  of  these  ultimate 
mysteries  of  her  life. 

There  is  another  subject,  also,  which  is  close  to 
her  heart.  She  has  heard  it  said  that  in  the  eyes 
of  scientists  and  physicians  mediums  are  considered 
to  be  fools,  hysterical  subjects,  or  insane,  or,  in  any 
event,  abnormal,  in  the  bad  sense  of  the  word.  But, 
in  the  light  of  the  experience  of  every  day  of  her  life, 
she  protests  vigorously  against  this  odious  insinua- 
tion. She  declares  emphatically  that  she  is  "  perfectly 
sane  in  body  and  mind,  not  in  the  least  unbalanced," 
and  repels  with  indignation  the  idea  there  can  be 
any  serious  abnormality  or  the  least  danger  in  me- 
diumship  such  as  she  practises.  "I  am  far  from 
being  abnormal,"  she  wrote  me  recently,  "  and  I  have 
never  been  so  clear  of  vision,  so  lucid,  and  so  apt  to 
judge  correctly  as  since  I  have  begun  to  develop  as 
a  medium." 

Leopold,  too,  speaking  through  her  voice  during 
her  trances,  has  more  than  once  solemnly  testified 
as  to  her  perfect  health.  He  has  also  returned  to  the 
subject  by  letter;  we  shall  find  farther  on  a  very  in- 
teresting certificate  of  mental  equilibrium  dictated 
by  him  and  written  by  him  with  her  hand,  as  if  to 

45 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

give  more  weight  to  his  declarations    (see  Fig.  8, 

PI37.) 

It  is  incontestable  that  Helene  has  a  very  well-or- 
ganized brain,  as  is  evidenced  by  the  admirable  man- 
ner in  which  she  manages  the  important  and  compli- 
cated department  which  is  under  her  direction  in  the 
commercial  establishment  in  which  she  is  employed. 
To  accuse  her  of  being  insane,  simply  because  she 
is  a  medium,  as  some  charitable  souls  (the  world  is 
full  of  them)  do  not  hesitate  to  do  sometimes,  is,  to 
say  the  least,  a  most  inadmissible  petitio  principii. 

The  opinion  which  Mile.  Smith  holds  in  her  normal 
state  concerning  her  automatic  faculties  is  altogether 
optimistic;  and  there  is  nothing  to  prove  her  in  the 
wrong.  She  regards  her  mediumship  as  a  rare  and 
precious  privilege,  with  which  nothing  in  the  world 
would  induce  her  to  part.  True,  she  also  sees  in  it 
the  reason  for  the  malevolent  and  unjust  judgments, 
the  jealousies,  the  base  suspicions,  to  which  the  ig- 
norant multitude  have  in  all  ages  subjected  those 
who  have  succeeded  in  elevating  themselves  above 
it  through  the  possession  of  faculties  of  this  kind. 
But,  on  the  whole,  the  disadvantages  are  more  than 
counterbalanced  by  gains  of  a  high  order,  and  the 
inward  satisfaction  attached  to  such  a  gift.  And 
here  I  desire  to  emphasize  the  statement,  once  for 
all,  that  Helene  does  not  belong  to  the  class  of  pro- 
fessional mediums,  nor  to  those  who  use  their  me- 
diumship for  the  purpose  of  coining  money.  Mile. 
Smith,  who  earns  her  living  in  the  position  which  her 
intelligence  and  fitness  have  secured  for  her,  and 
through  which  her  family  enjoys  a  modest  ease, 

46 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

never  accepts  any  pecuniary  compensation  for  her 
seances  or  consultations.  Such  a  traffic  in  faculties 
which  have  a  sort  of  religious  signification  in  her 
eyes  would  be  absolutely  repugnant  to  her  feelings. 

Helene's  spontaneous  automatisms  have  often  aided 
her  in,  without  ever  having  interfered  with,  her  daily 
occupations.  There  is,  happily  for  her,  a  great  differ- 
ence in  intensity  between  the  phenomena  of  her 
seances  and  those  which  break  in  upon  her  habitual 
existence,  the  latter  never  having  caused  such  dis- 
turbance of  her  personality  as  the  former. 

In  her  daily  life  she  has  only  passing  hallucina- 
tions limited  to  one  or  two  of  the  senses,  superficial 
hemisomnambulisms,  compatible  with  a  certain 
amount  of  self-possession — in  short,  ephemeral  per- 
turbations of  no  importance  from  a  practical  point  of 
view.  Taken  as  a  whole,  the  interventions  of  the 
subliminal  in  her  ordinary  existence  are  more  bene- 
ficial to  her  than  otherwise,  since  they  often  bear  the 
stamp  of  utility  and  appropriateness,  which  make 
them  very  serviceable. 

Phenomena  of  hypermnesia,  divination,  lost  objects 
mysteriously  recovered,  happy  inspirations,  true  pre- 
sentiments, correct  intuitions — in  a  word,  teleologi- 
cal  automatisms  of  every  sort — she  possesses  in  so 
high  a  degree  that  this  small  coin  of  genius  is  more 
than  sufficient  to  compensate  for  the  inconveniences 
resulting  from  the  distraction  and  momentary  ab- 
sence of  mind  with  which  the  vision  is  accompanied. 

In  the  seances,  on  the  contrary,  she  presents  the 
most  grave  functional  alterations  that  one  can 
imagine,  and  passes  through  accesses  of  lethargy, 

47 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

catalepsy,  somnambulism,  total  change  of  person- 
ality, etc.,  the  least  of  which  would  be  a  very  dis- 
agreeable adventure  for  her  if  it  should  happen  to 
occur  in  the  street  or  at  her  office. 

But  here  I  am  obliged  to  leave  Helene's  ordinary 
state  to  enter  upon  the  study  of  her  automatisms. 

Ill  Spontaneous  Automatic  Phenomena 

The  automatisms  which  occur  outside  the  seances 
in  Mile.  Smith's  every-day  life,  those,  at  least,  which 
she  is  able  to  recall  and  narrate,  are  of  a  frequency 
very  variable  and  utterly  independent  of  any  known 
circumstances  ;  sometimes  presenting  themselves 
two  or  three  times  in  the  same  day;  at  others,  two 
or  three  weeks  will  elapse  without  a  single  one. 
Extremely  diverse  in  their  form  and  content,  these 
phenomena  may  be  divided  into  three  categories, 
based  upon  their  origin.  The  first  proceed  from 
impressions  received  by  Helene  in  moments  of  special 
suggestibility;  the  second  are  the  fortuitous  appa- 
ritions above  the  ordinary  level  of  her  consciousness, 
the  romances  in  process  of  elaboration  to  which  we 
are  coming  ;  the  last,  which  differ  from  the  two 
preceding  species  (which  are  always  useless,  if  not 
detrimental)  by  their  beneficial  character  and  their 
adaptation  to  the  needs  of  the  moment,  are  roused 
by  those  teleological  automatisms  to  which  I  have 
already  called  attention  as  having  occurred  in  her 
childhood,  and  which  have  shared  in  the  general  re- 
crudescence of  her  subconscious  life  under  the  lash 
of  the  spiritistic  experiences. 

48 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

Let  us  pass  these  different  cases  rapidly  in  review. 

I.  Permanence  of  exterior  suggestions. — The  spirit- 
istic reunions  are  naturally  their  principal  source.  I 
do  not  mean  that  she  has  there  been  subjected  to 
experiments  in  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  Justice  to 
all  those  who  have  attended  the  seances  compels  the 
statement  that  they  have  never  abused  the  suggesti- 
bility which  she  shows  on  such  occasions,  by  sug- 
gesting ideas  of  such  a  nature  as  to  cause  her  an- 
noyance on  the  following  days.  The  most  that  has 
been  attempted  has  been  the  suggestion  of  some  small 
matters  by  way  of  harmless  experiment,  to  be  exe- 
ecuted  by  her  a  few  moments  after  awaking  from 
her  trance.  There  is  no  need  of  intentional  sugges- 
tions to  influence  her  in  a  lasting  manner ;  there- 
fore we  have  avoided  as  far  as  possible  everything 
that  might  leave  disagreeable  traces  behind,  and 
have  suggested  to  her  before  the  end  of  the  seance 
that  she  have  on  the  morrow  no  headache,  fatigue, 
etc.;  but  it  sometimes  happens  that  certain  inci- 
dents, often  absolutely  insignificant,  are  engraved 
on  her  memory  in  a  most  unlooked-for  manner  and 
assail  her  as  inexplicable  obsessions  during  the  en- 
suing week.  The  following  are  some  specimens  of 
involuntary  suggestion,  which  generally  linger  for 
three  or  four  days,  but  may  occasionally  continue 
for  twelve  or  fifteen. 

Helene  told  me  one  Sunday  that  she  had  been  pos- 
sessed several  times  during  the  day  by  the  hallu- 
cinatory image  of  a  straw  hat,  the  inside  of  which 
was  turned  towards  her,  and  which  remained  verti- 
cally in  the  air  about  three  or  four  feet  in  front  of 
D  49 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

her,  without  being  held  by  any  one.  She  had  the 
feeling  that  this  hat  belonged  to  me,  and  I  happened 
finally  to  recollect  that  at  the  seance  of  the  preceding 
Sunda}^  I  happened  to  fan  myself  with  this  very 
hat  during  her  final  trance,  the  image  of  which  had 
been  engraved  on  her  mind  in  one  of  the  flashes  in 
which  she  opened  her  eyes  and  closed  them  again 
instantly  before  her  final  awaking.  This  obses- 
sion, said  she,  was  very  strong  on  Monday  and  the 
following  day  or  two,  but  lessened  somewhat  towards 
the  end  of  the  week. 

At  another  time  she  preserved  during  a  whole  week 
the  sensation  of  the  pressure  of  my  thumb  on  her  left 
eyebrow.  (Compression  of  the  external  frontal  and 
suborbital  nerves  is  a  means  I  often  emploj^  to  hasten 
her  awaking,  after  a  hint  given  by  Leopold.) 

There  happened  to  her  also  twice  in  the  same  day 
an  auditive  and  visual  hallucination  of  an  aged  per- 
son whom  she  did  not  recognize,  but  the  extremely 
characteristic  description  of  whom  corresponds  so 
well  with  that  of  a  gentleman  of  Geneva  who  had  been 
mentioned  to  her  a  few  days  previously,  immediately 
before  the  commencement  of  a  seance  (when  she  was 
probably  already  in  her  state  of  suggestibility),  that 
there  is  scarcely  any  doubt  but  that  these  apparitions 
were  the  consequence  of  that  conversation. 

Following  another  seance  where  she  had,  at  the 
beginning  of  a  Hindoo  scene,  made  vain  efforts  to 
detach  a  bracelet  from  her  left  wrist,  she  preserved 
for  three  days  the  feeling  of  something  grasping  that 
wrist,  without  understanding  what  it  could  be. 

In  the  same  way,  various  feelings  of  sadness,  anger, 

% 

MAR  3  0  1917       ] 
^  4/ 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE   HER  INITIATION 

a  desire  to  laugh  or  to  weep,  etc.,  the  cause  of  which 
she  was  unable  to  explain,  have  often  followed  her  for 
a  considerable  length  of  time  after  the  seances  of  which 
these  feelings  were  the  manifest  emotional  echo.  This 
is  often  the  effect  of  our  dreams  on  our  waking  state : 
we  forget  the  dreams,  but  their  influence  remains,  and 
is  often  more  marked  in  the  dreams  of  a  hypnotized 
person  or  a  somnambulist  than  in  those  of  ordinary 
sleep. 

The  seances  are  not  the  exclusive  source  of  the 
involuntary  suggestions  which  trouble  Mile.  Smith 
in  her  daily  life  without  any  benefit  to  herself.  It  is 
evident  that  on  every  occasion  when  she  finds  herself 
in  that  particular  condition  of  least  resistance  which 
we,  in  our  ignorance  of  its  intrinsic  nature,  designate 
by  the  convenient  name  of  ''suggestibility,"  she  is 
exposed  to  impressions  capable  of  returning  to  assail 
her  in  the  course  of  her  daily  occupations.  Fortu- 
nately this  condition  of  suggestibility  does  not  seem 
to  develop  itself  readily  in  her  outside  of  the  spiritistic 
reunions. 

2.  Irruptions  of  subliminal  reveries. — I  shall  have 
too  many  occasions  to  cite  concrete  examples  of  vi- 
sions, voices,  and  other  spontaneous  outpourings  of 
the  work  of  imagination,  which  are  continually  going 
on  under  the  ordinary  consciousness  of  Mile.  Smith, 
to  dwell  long  on  this  point.  Some  general  remarks 
will  suffice. 

The  connection  which  the  unforeseen  phenomena 
maintain  with  those  of  the  seances  themselves  is  very 
varied.  Sometimes  we  are  able  to  recognize  them  as 
reproductions,  more  or  less  incomplete,  of  episodes 

51 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

which  occurred  at  the  preceding  seances,  and  con- 
sider them  simple  echoes  or  post-hypnotic  repetitions 
of  these  last.  Sometimes,  on  the  contrary,  it  appears 
that  we  have  to  deal  with  preparatory  rehearsals  of 
scenes  which  will  unfold  themselves  at  length  and 
will  be  continued  at  some  later  seance.  Finally, 
sometimes  it  is  a  question  of  tableaux,  having  no  con- 
nection with  those  which  fill  up  the  seances  ;  they  are 
like  leaves,  flying  away  never  to  return,  romances 
which  are  continually  being  fabricated  in  the  deep 
subliminal  strata  of  Mile.  Smith's  consciousness. 

H^lene,  in  fact,  does  not  long  remember,  nor  in  much 
detail,  with  a  few  exceptions,  those  visions  which  take 
place  in  her  ordinary  state,  and  which  occur  mo>^t 
frequently  early  in  the  morning,  while  she  is  still  in 
bed,  or  just  after  she  has  arisen  and  while  working 
by  the  light  of  her  lamp ;  sometimes  in  the  evening, 
or  during  the  brief  moments  of  rest  in  the  middle  of 
the  day,  and,  much  more  rarely,  while  in  the  full 
activity  of  waking  hours  she  is  at  her  desk.  If  she 
had  not  long  since,  at  my  request,  and  with  great  good 
will,  acquired  the  habit  of  noting  in  pencil  the  essen- 
tial content  of  these  apparitions,  either  during  the 
apparition  itself  (which  she  is  not  always  able  to  do) 
or  else  immediately  afterwards,  we  should  have  still 
more  deficiencies  in  the  plot  of  her  romances  to  deplore. 
Helene's  psychological  state,  during  her  spontaneous 
visions,  is  known  to  me  only  by  her  own  descriptions. 
She  is  fortunately  a  very  intelligent  observer  and  a 
good  psychologist. 

Her  narratives  show  that  her  visions  are  accom- 
panied by  a  certain  degree  of  obnubilation.     For  a 

52 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

few  moments,  for  instance,  the  room,  the  light  of 
Ihe  lamp,  disappear  from  before  her  eyes  ;  the  noise 
of  the  wheels  in  the  street  ceases  to  be  heard  ;  she 
feels  herself  becoming  inert  and  passive,  while  a  feel- 
ing of  bliss  and  ecstatic  well-being  permeates  her 
entire  individuality  in  the  presence  of  the  spectacle 
which  appears  to  her  ;  then  the  vision,  to  her  great 
regret,  slowly  fades  from  her  view,  the  lamp  and  the 
furniture  reappear,  the  outside  noises  again  make 
themselves  heard,  and  she  is  astonished  that  the 
idea  did  not  occur  to  her  to  put  down  in  pencil  the 
strange  words  she  has  heard,  or  that  she  did  not 
touch  or  caress,  for  example,  the  beautiful  birds  of 
many-colored  plumage  flying  and  singing  around 
her.  Sometimes  she  has  maintained  sufficient  pres- 
ence of  mind  to  scribble  from  dictation  the  words 
striking  her  ear ;  but  the  wretched  handwriting 
proves  that  her  attention,  all  absorbed  by  the  appari- 
tion, could  not  follow  the  pencil,  and  that  the  hand 
directed  it  badly.  At  other  times  the  reverse  is  the 
fact.  It  appears  in  the  course  of  the  vision  as  though 
some  one  took  hold  of  her  arm  and  guided  it  in  spite 
of  herself ;  the  result  is  splendid  calligraphies,  wholly 
different  from  her  own  handwriting,  executed  with- 
out her  knowledge,  and  during  the  execution  of 
which  her  mind  was  wholly  absent,  if  we  can  judge 
from  the  surprise  she  shows  on  awaking  when  she 
finds  before  her  these  strange  writings,  and  from 
analogous  scenes  which  transpire  at  the  seances. 

The  preceding  is  applicable  especially  to  the  more 
frequent  cases — that  is,  to  the  morning  or  evening 
visions  which  happen  to  her  at  home,  in  that  inter- 

53 

FROM  liNDJA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

mediate  condition  between  sleep  and  waking,  always 
so  favorable,  as  we  know,  to  the  development  of  un- 
conscious cerebration.  But  there  are  innumerable 
shades  and  gradations  between  this  middle  type, 
so  to  speak,  and  its  opposite  extremes  ;  on  the  one 
hand  is  the  fortunately  very  exceptional  case  where 
she  is  seized  with  ecstasy  while  at  her  place  of  busi- 
ness ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  in  which  the  auto- 
matism limits  itself  to  inscribing  some  unknown 
characters  or  words  in  another  hand  than  her  own  in 
her  correspondence  and  writings  —  peculiar  lapsus 
calami,  which  she  is  not  slow  to  perceive  on  coming 
to  herself. 

The  following  is  an  example  of  a  case  of  ecstasy  : 
Having  ascended  one  day  to  an  upper  story,  to 
look  for  something  in  a  dark  store-room,  she  had  an 
apparition  of  a  man  in  a  turban  and  large  white  cloak, 
whom  she  had  the  impression  of  recognizing,'''  and 
whose  presence  filled  her  with  a  delightful  calm  and 
profound  happiness.  She  could  not  recall  the  con- 
versation which  passed  between  them,  which,  though 
in  an  unknown  language,  she  nevertheless  had  the 
feeling  of  having  perfectly  comprehended.  On  the 
departure  of  the  mysterious  visitor  she  was  astonished 
to  find  herself  brought  back  to  sombre  reality,  and 
stupefied  on  noting  by  her  watch  that  the  interview 
had  lasted  much  longer  than  it  had  seemed  to  do. 
She  preserved  all  that  day  a  delicious  feeling  of  well- 
being  as  the  effect  of  the  strange  apparition. 

*  Vision  relating  to  the  Oriental  cycle  ;  the  man  was  the  Arab 
sheik,  the  father  of  Simandini. 

54 

MLLE.  SMITH   SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

The  phenomenon  of  mingling  strange  writing  with 
her  own  is  of  relatively  frequent  occurrence,  and  we 
shall  see  divers  specimens  of  it  in  the  following 
chapters,  apropos  of  the  romances  to  which  it  especial- 
ly belongs.  I  will  give  here  only  one  complex  ex- 
ample, which  will  serve  at  the  same  time  as  an 
illustration  of  a  special  kind  of  automatism,  very 
harmless,  to  which  Helene  is  also  subject,  and  which 
consists  in  making  verses,  not  without  knowing,  but 
at  least  without  intending  to  do  so,  and  in  connec- 
tion with  the  most  trifling  matters. 

There  are  times  when,  in  spite  of  herself,  she 
feels  compelled  to  speak  in  distinct  rhymes  of  eight 
feet,  which  she  does  not  prepare,  and  does  not  per- 
ceive until  the  moment  she  has  finished  uttering 
them.'"  In  this  particular  case  it  is  by  a  quatrain 
(a  very  unusual  occurrence)  that  she  replies  to  some 
one  who  had  consulted  her  in  regard  to  some  blue 

*  The  following  are  some  of  these  impromptu  rhymes,  surely 
up  to  the  level  of  the  circumstances  which  inspired  them,  but  by 
which  we  ought  not  to  judge  the  conscious  poetic  faculties  of 
Mile.  Smith  : 

To  a  little  girl  proud  of  her  new  shoes  : 

"  Marcelle  est  la,  venez  la  voir, 
Elle  a  ses  petits  souliers  noirs." 

In  a  "  culinary"  discussion  : 

"Vous  detestez  les  omelettes, 
Autant  que  moi  les  cotelettes." 

To  a  person  slightly  vain  : 

"Vos  richesses,  ma  chere  amie, 
Ne  me  font  point  du  tout  envie  !" 

55 

FROM  INDIA  TO   THE  PLANET  MARS 

ribbon.  But  this  quatrain,  by  its  style,  by  the  vision 
of  the  blond  head  of  a  child  which  accompanies  it, 
and  by  the  manner  also  in  which  she  writes  it,  causes 
us  to  hazard  the  conjecture  that  it  is  an  inspiration 
depending  on  the  underlying  Royal  cycle;  while  in  the 
following  letter,  in  which  she  narrates  the  affair  to 
M.  Lemaitre,  her  pen  inscribes,  all  unknown  to  her, 
strange  characters  evidently  due  to  the  cropping  out 
of  the  Martian  cycle,  of  which  she  speaks  in  the 
letter  (see  Fig.  i,  a  passage  of  that  letter  making  a 
Martian  M  and  V  in  the  words  vers  and  rimait) : 

^h-oud/ta^  4iCU&'  en.  J^  -Jci^  ^'^n- 

Fig.  I.     Fragment  of  a  letter  (normal  handwriting)  of  Mile.  Smith,  containing  two 
Martian  letters.     (Collection  of  M.  Lemaitre.) 

"  I  have  heard  some  Martian  words  this  afternoon, 
but  have  not  been  able  to  retain  them  in  my  mind.  I 
send  you  those  heard  a  few  days  ago,  when  I  had  the 
vision  of  which  I  am  about  to  make  you  the  design 
(Martian  lamp).  Yesterday  morning  I  for  the  first 
time  spoke  in  verse,  without  being  aware  of  it ;  it  was 
only  on  finishing  the  sentence  that  I  perceived  that 
it  rhymed,  and  I  reconstructed  it  to  assure  myself  of 
the  fact.  A  Httle  later,  on  examining  some  ribbons, 
I  began  anew  to  speak  in  verse,  and  I  send  those  also ; 

56 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

they  will  amuse  you.  It  is  a  curious  thing  that  1 
had  at  that  same  moment  the  vision  of  the  blond 
curly  head  of  a  child  bound  with  a  blue  ribbon.  The 
vision  lasted  more  than  a  minute.  What  is  still  more 
curious,  I  do  not  at  all  recollect  having  worn  ribbons 
of  that  shade  as  a  child :  I  remember  some  rose-colored, 
some  red,  but  I  have  no  recollection  whatever  of  any 
blue  ribbons.  I  really  do  not  know  why  I  spoke  these 
words  ;  it  is  the  more  amusing.  I  was  obliged  to 
speak  them,  I  assure  you,  in  spite  of  myself.  I  was 
eager  to  put  them  on  paper,  and  I  noticed  in  writing 
them  down  that,  for  a  moment,  the  handwriting  was 
not  regular,  that  is,  it  was  slightly  different  from 
mine." 

Here  is  the  quatrain,  the  pencil  impression  of  which 
is  too  faint  to  enable  a  fac-simile  to  be  reproduced 
here,  and  in  it  I  have  indicated  by  italics  the  words 
and  syllables  the  calligraphy  or  orthography  of  which 
differs  from  that  of  Helene  and  becomes  the  style  of  au- 
tomatic handwriting  called  that  of  Marie  Antoinette : 

"  Les  nuances  de  ces  rubans 
Me  rappelent  mes  jeunes  ans  ; 
Ce  bleu  verdl,  je  m'en  souvien, 
Sans  mes  cheveux  alloit  si  bien  !" 

The  head  of  curly  blond  hair,  ornamented  with 
blue  ribbons,  also  figures  in  the  visions  of  the  Royal 
cycle,  and  appears  to  belong,  as  is  here  the  case,  some- 
times to  Marie  Antoinette  herself,  sometimes  to  one 
or  other  of  her  children,  especially  the  Dauphin. 

While  it  is  generally  easy  to  connect  these  eruptions 
of  the  subliminal  volcano  with  the  various  dreams 

57 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

from  which  they  emanate,  such  is  not  always  the  case, 
and  there  are  visions  the  origin  of  which  is  doubtful 
and  ambiguous.  We  must  not  forget  that,  alongside 
of  the  grand  cycles  of  Helene  which  are  better  known, 
there  also  float  in  her  latent  imagination  innumer- 
able small  accessory  systems,  more  or  less  indepen- 
dent, which  supply  a  large  part  of  the  seances,  such 
as  revelations  of  former  events  connected  with  the 
families  of  the  sitters,  etc. ;  it  is  not  always  possible 
to  identify  the  fragments  coming  from  these  isolated 
dreams. 

3.  Teleological  automatisms.  —  The  spontaneous 
phenomena  of  this  category,  possessing  as  a  common 
characteristic  a  practical  utility  for  Helene  more  or 
less  marked,  can  be  subdivided  into  two  classes,  ac- 
cording to  their  direct  attachment  to  the  personality 
of  Leopold,  or  their  not  belonging  to  any  distinct  per- 
sonality, and  which  only  express  in  a  vivid  manner 
the  result  of  the  normal  working,  although  more  or 
less  unconscious,  of  the  faculties  of  memory  and  of 
reason.  I  confine  myself  now  to  citing  one  case  of 
each  of  these  classes,  of  which  we  shall  see  other 
examples  in  the  chapters  relating  to  Leopold  and  to 
supernormal  appearances. 

One  day  Mile.  Smi  h,  wishing  to  take  down  a  large 
and  heavy  object  from  a  high  shelf ,  was  prevented  from 
so  doing  by  the  fact  that  her  uplifted  arms  seemed  as 
though  petrified  and  incapable  of  being  moved  for 
some  seconds  ;  she  saw  in  this  a  warning  and  gave 
up  her  intention.  In  a  later  seance  Leopold  said 
that  it  was  he  himself  who  had  caused  Helene's 
arms  to  become  rigid,  in  order  to  prevent  her  frorrj 

58 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

attempting  to  lift  the  object  which  was  too  heavy  for 
her  and  would  have  caused  some  accident  to  befall 
her. 

On  another  occasion  a  clerk  who  sought  vainly  for 
a  certain  pattern  asked  Helene  if  she  knew  what  had 
become  of  it,  Helene  replied  mechanically  and  with- 
out reflection,  "Yes,  it  was  sent  to  Mr.  J."  (a  customer 
of  the  firm) ;  at  the  same  time  there  appeared  before 
her  in  ferge  black  figures  about  eight  or  ten  inches  in 
height  the  number  1 8,  and  she  added,  instinctively,  "  It 
was  eighteen  days  ago."  This  statement  caused  the 
clerk  to  smile,  because  of  its  improbability,  the  rule 
of  the  house  being  that  customers  to  whom  patterns 
were  lent  for  examination  must  return  them  inside  of 
three  days  or  a  messenger  would  be  sent  for  them. 
Helene,  struck  by  this  objection,  and  having  no  con- 
scious recollection  of  the  affair,  replied,  "  Really,  per- 
haps I  am  wrong."  Meanwhile,  an  investigation  of 
the  date  indicated  in  the  records  of  the  house  showed 
that  she  was  perfectly  correct.  It  was  through  vari- 
ous negligences,  with  which  she  had  nothing  at  all  to 
do,  that  the  pattern  had  not  been  sent  for  or  recovered. 
Leopold,  on  being  asked,  has  no  recollection  of  this 
circumstance,  and  does  not  appear  to  have  been  the 
author  of  this  automatism  of  cryptomnesia,  nor  of 
many  other  analogous  phenomena  through  which 
Helene's  subconscious  memory  renders  her  signal 
services  and  has  gained  for  her  a  well-merited  and 
highly  valued  reputation. 

Thus  we  see  that  if  the  spontaneous  automatisms 
of  Mile.  Smith  are  often  the  vexatious  result  of  her 
moments  of  suggestibility,  or  the  tempestuous  irrup- 

59 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

tion  of  her  subliminal  reveries,  they  also  often  as- 
sume the  form  of  useful  messages.  Such  compensa- 
tion is  not  to  be  despised. 

IV.  The  Seances 

Mile.  Smith  has  never  been  hypnotized.  In  her 
instinctive  aversion,  which  she  shares  with  the  ma- 
jority of  mediums,  to  anything  that  seems  like  an 
attempt  to  experiment  upon  her,  she  has  always  re- 
fused to  allow  herself  to  be  put  to  sleep.  She  does  not 
realize  that  in  avoiding  the  idea  she  has  actually 
accepted  the  reality,  since  her  spiritistic  experiences 
in  reality  constitute  for  her  an  auto-hypnotization, 
which  inevitably  degenerates  into  a  hetero-hypnoti- 
zation,  as  she  is  brought  under  the  influence  of  one  or 
other  of  the  persons  present  at  the  seance. 

All  her  seances  have  somewhat  of  the  same  psy- 
chologic form,  the  same  method  of  development  run- 
ning through  their  immense  diversity  of  content. 
She  places  herself  at  the  table  with  the  idea  and  the 
intention  of  bringing  into  play  her  mediumistic  fac- 
ulties. After  an  interval,  varying  from  a  few  seconds 
to  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  generally  in  a  shorter  time 
if  the  room  is  well  darkened  and  the  sitters  are  per- 
fectly silent,  she  begins  to  have  visions,  preceded  and 
accompanied  by  very  varied  sensory  and  motor  dis- 
turbances, after  which  she  passes  into  a  complete 
trance.  In  that  state,  it  rarely  happens,  and  then 
only  for  a  few  moments,  that  she  is  entirely  uncon- 
scious of  the  persons  present,  and,  as  it  were,  shut 
up  within  her  personal  dream  and  plunged  into  pro- 

60 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

found  lethargy  (hypnotic  syncope).  Ordinarily  she 
remains  in  communication,  more  or  less  close,  with 
one  of  the  sitters,  who  thus  finds  himself  in  the  same 
relation  towards  her  as  a  hypnotizer  towards  his 
subject,  and  able  to  take  advantage  of  that  rapport, 
by  giving  her  any  immediate  or  future  suggestions 
that  he  may  desire.  When  the  seance  consists  only 
of  waking  visions,  it  lasts  generally  only  a  short 
time — an  hour  to  an  hour  and  a  half — and  is  ended 
quickly  by  three  sharp  raps  upon  the  table,  after 
which  Mile.  Smith  returns  to  her  normal  state, 
which  she  scarcely  seems  to  have  left.  If  the  som- 
nambulism has  been  complete,  the  seance  is  pro- 
longed to  double  that  length  of  time,  and  often  longer, 
and  the  return  to  the  normal  state  comes  slowly 
through  phases  of  deep  sleep,  alternating  with  re- 
lapses into  somnambulistic  gestures  and  attitudes, 
moments  of  catalepsy,  etc.  The  final  awakening  is 
always  preceded  by  several  brief  awakenings,  fol- 
lowed by  relapses  into  sleep. 

Each  of  these  preliminary  awakenings,  as  well 
as  the  final  one,  is  accompanied  by  the  same  char- 
acteristic movements  of  the  features.  The  eyes, 
which  have  been  for  a  long  time  closed,  open  wide, 
stupidly  staring  into  vacancy,  or  fix  themselves 
slowly  on  the  objects  and  the  sitters  within  their 
range  of  vision,  the  dilated  pupils  do  not  react,  the 
face  is  an  impassive  and  rigid  mask,  devoid  of  ex- 
pression. Helene  seems  altogether  absent.  All  at 
once,  with  a  slight  heaving  of  the  breast  and  raising 
of  the  head,  and  a  quick  breath,  a  gleam  of  intelli- 
gence illumines  her  countenance,  the  mouth  is  grace- 

6i 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

fully  opened,  the  eyes  become  brilliant,  the  entire 
countenance  Hghts  up  with  a  pleasant  smile  and  gives 
evidence  of  her  recognition  of  the  world  and  of  her 
return  to  herself.  But  with  the  same  suddenness 
with  which  it  appeared,  that  appearance  of  life  lasts 
but  a  second  or  two,  the  physiognomy  resumes  its 
lifeless  mask,  the  eyes  becoming  haggard  and  fixed 
close  again,  and  the  head  falls  on  the  back  of  the 
chair.  This  return  of  sleep  will  be  followed  by  an- 
other sudden  awaking,  then  perhaps  by  several  more, 
until  the  final  awaking,  always  distinguished,  af- 
ter the  smile  at  the  beginning,  by  the  stereotyped 
question,  "  What  time  is  it  ?"  and  by  a  movement  of 
surprise  on  learning  that  it  is  so  late.  There  is  no 
memory  of  what  has  transpired  during  the  seance. 

A  complete  description  of  the  psychological  and 
physiological  phenomena  which  present  them- 
selves, or  which  might  be  obtained  in  the  course  of 
the  seances,  would  detain  me  too  long,  since  there 
is  absolutely  nothing  constant  either  in  the  nature 
or  in  the  succession  of  the  phenomena,  and  no  two 
seances  are  evolved  exactly  in  the  same  manner. 
I  must  confine  myself  to  some  striking  character- 
istics. 

Three  principal  symptoms,  almost  contemporane- 
ous generally,  announce  that  Mile.  Smith  is  begin- 
ning to  enter  into  her  trance. 

There  are  on  the  one  side  emotional  or  coenaesthe- 
tic  modifications,  the  cause  of  which  is  revealed  a 
Httle  later  in  the  subsequent  messages.  Helene  is, 
for  instance,  seized  by  an  invincible  desire  to  laugh, 
which  she  cannot  or  will  not  explain  ;    or  she  com- 

62 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

plains  of  sadness,  fear,  of  different  unpleasant  sen- 
sations, of  heat  or  of  cold,  of  nausea,  etc.,  according 
to  the  nature  of  the  communications  which  are  ap- 
proaching and  of  which  these  emotional  states  are 
the  forerunners. 

There  are,  on  the  other  hand,  phenomena  of  sys- 
tematic anaesthesia  (negative  hallucinations),  limit- 
ed to  those  sitters  whom  the  coming  messages  con- 
cern. Helene  ceases  to  see  them,  while  continuing 
to  hear  their  voices  and  feel  their  touch ;  or,  on  the 
contrary,  she  is  astonished  to  no  longer  hear  them, 
though  she  sees  their  lips  moving,  etc.;  or,  finally, 
she  does  not  perceive  them  in  any  manner,  and  de- 
mands to  know  why  they  are  leaving  when  the  se- 
ance is  hardly  begun,  In  its  details  this  systematic 
anaesthesia  varies  infinitely,  and  extends  sometimes 
to  but  one  part  of  the  person  concerned,  to  his  hand, 
to  a  portion  of  his  face,  etc.,  without  it  always  being 
possible  to  explain  these  capricious  details  by  the 
content  of  the  following  visions ;  it  would  seem  that 
the  incoherence  of  the  dream  presides  over  this  pre- 
liminary work  of  disintegration,  and  that  the  normal 
perceptions  are  absorbed  by  the  subconscious  per- 
sonality eager  for  material  for  the  building  up  of  the 
hallucinations  which  it  is  preparing. 

Systematic  anaesthesia  is  often  complicated  with 
positive  hallucinations,  and  Helene  will  manifest  her 
surprise  at  seeing,  for  example,  a  strange  costume 
or  an  unusual  coiffure.  This,  in  reality,  is  the  vi- 
sion which  is  already  being  installed. 

The  third  symptom,  which  does  not  manifest  itself 
clearly  in  her,  but  the  presence  of  which  can  be  often 

63 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

established  before  all  the  others  by  investigation,  is 
a  complete  allochiria/"  ordinarily  accompanied  by 
various  other  sensory  and  motor  disturbances.  If, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  seance,  Helene  is  asked,  for 
example,  to  raise  her  right  hand,  to  move  the  left 
index-finger,  or  to  close  one  eye,  she  begins  straight- 
way to  carry  into  effect  these  different  acts;  then 
all  at  once,  without  knowing  why  and  without  hesi- 
tation, she  deceives  herself  in  regard  to  the  side,  and 
raises  her  left  hand,  moves  her  right  index-finger, 
closes  the  other  eye,  etc.  This  indicates  that  she 
is  no  longer  in  her  normal  state,  though  still  appearing 
to  retain  her  ordinary  consciousness,  and  with  the 
liveliness  of  a  normal  person  discusses  the  question 
of  her  having  mistaken  her  right  hand  or  eye  for 
her  left,  and  vice  versa.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  Leopold, 
on  such  occasions  of  pronounced  allochiria,  does  not 
share  this  error  in  regard  to  the  side.  1  have  assisted 
at  some  curious  discussions  between  him  and  Helene, 
she  insisting  that  such  a  hand  was  her  right,  or  that 
the  Isle  Rousseau  is  on  the  left  as  one  passes  the 
bridge  of  Mont  Blanc  or  coming  from  the  railway 
station,  and  Leopold  all  the  while,  by  means  of  raps 
upon  the  table,  giving  her  clearly  to  understand 
she  was  wrong. f 

A  little  after  the  allochiria,  and  sometimes  simul- 
taneously with  it,  are  to  be  found  various  other  phe- 
nomena, extremely  variable,  of  which  I  here  cite  only 

*  The  confusion  of  sensations  in  the  two  sides  of  the  body,  as 
when  a  person  locates  in  the  right  leg  a  touch  upon  the  left  leg. 

f  See,  on  allochiria,  P.  Janet,  Stigmates  mentaux  des  hysteriques, 
pp.  66-71  ;  and  Nevroses  et  id^es  fixes,  vol.  i.  p.  234. 

64 

MLLfi.  Smith  since  hei?  Initiation 

a  few  One  of  her  arms  is  contractured  as  it  rests 
upon  the  table,  and  resists  the  efforts  of  the  sitters 
to  lift  it  up,  as  though  it  were  a  bar  of  iron  ;  the 
fingers  of  the  hand  also  participate  in  this  rigidity. 
Sometimes  this  contracture  does  not  exist  before, 
but  establishes  itself  at  the  same  instant  that  some 
one  touches  the  forearm,  and  increases  in  proportion 
to  the  efforts  which  are  made  to  overcome  it.  There 
is  no  regularity  in  the  distribution  of  the  anaesthesia 
(changing  from  one  instant  to  another),  the  con- 
tractures, or  convulsions  which  the  hands  and  arms 
of  Helene  exhibit.  It  all  seems  due  to  pure  caprice,  or 
to  depend  only  on  underlying  dreams,  of  which  little 
is  known. 

Certain  analogous  and  likewise  capricious  phe- 
nomena of  anaesthesia,  paralysis,  sensations  of  all 
sorts,  of  which  Helene  complains,  often  appear  in 
her  face,  her  eyes,  her  mouth,  etc.  In  the  midst  of 
all  these  disturbances  the  visions  announce  them- 
selves, and  the  somnambulism  is  introduced  with 
modifications,  equally  variable,  of  other  functions, 
evidenced  by  tears,  sobbings,  sighs,  repeated  hic- 
coughs, various  changing  of  the  rhythm  of  respira- 
tion, etc. 

If  Helene  is  experimented  upon  and  questioned  too 
long,  the  development  of  the  original  visions  is  ob- 
structed, and  she  easily  reaches  a  degree  of  sensi- 
bility where  she  falls  into  the  standard  class  of  pub- 
lic representations  of  hypnotism — a  charmed  and 
fascinated  state  in  which  she  remains  riveted  before 
some  brilliant  object,  as,  for  example,  the  ring, 
trinkets,  or  cuff-button  of  one  of  the  sitters  ;  then 
E  65 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

precipitates  herself  in  a  frenzy  upon  the  object,  and 
tries  to  secure  it ;  or  assumes  emotional  attitudes  and 
poses  under  the  influence  of  joyous  airs  upon  the 
piano  ;  experiences  suggested  hallucinations  of  all 
kinds,  sees  terrible  serpents,  which  she  pursues  with 
a  pair  of  pincers ;  beautif id  flowers,  which  she  smells 
with  deep  respirations  and  distributes  to  the  sitters  ; 
or,  again,  bleeding  wounds  which  have  been  made 
on  her  hand,  and  which  cause  her  to  shed  tears. 
The  common-place  character  of  these  phenomena 
causes  their  long  continuance  to  be  deprecated,  and 
the  ingenuity  of  all  is  exercised  in  endeavoring  by 
different  means,  none  of  which  is  very  efficacious  or 
very  rapid,  to  plunge  her  into  profound  and  tran- 
quil sleep,  from  which  she  is  not  long  in  passing  of 
her  own  accord  into  complete  somnambulism  and  in 
taking  up  the  thread  of  her  personal  imaginations. 

If  all  these  disturbing  investigations  have  been 
successfully  avoided,  the  spontaneous  development 
of  the  automatisms  is  effected  with  greater  rapidity 
and  fulness.  It  is  possible  then  to  behold,  in  the 
same  seance,  a  very  varied  spectacle,  and  to  listen, 
besides,  to  certain  special  communications  made  in 
a  semi -waking  state  to  one  or  other  of  the  sitters; 
then,  in  complete  somnambulism,  a  Hindoo  vision 
is  presented,  followed  by  a  Martian  dream,  with  an 
incarnation  of  Leopold  in  the  middle,  and  a  scene  of 
Marie  Antoinette  to  wind  up  with.  Ordinarily  two 
of  these  last  creations  will  suffice  to  fill  up  a  seance. 
One  such  representation  is  not  performed  without  the 
loss  of  considerable  strength  by  the  medium,  which 
shows  itself  by  the  final  sleep  being  prolonged  some- 

66 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

times  for  an  hour,  interrupted,  as  I  have  said,  by 
repetitions  of  the  preceding  somnambulistic  scenes, 
easily  recognizable  by  certain  gestures  or  the  mur- 
muring of  characteristic  words.  Passing  through 
these  diverse  oscillations  and  the  ephemeral  awak- 
ing, of  which  I  have  spoken  above,  Helene  finishes 
by  returning  to  her  normal  state ;  but  the  seances 
which  have  been  too  long  continued  or  too  full  of 
movement  leave  her  very  much  fatigued  for  the  rest 
of  the  day.  It  has  also  sometimes  happened  to  her  to 
re-enter  the  somnambulism  (from  which  she  had  prob- 
ably not  completely  emerged)  during  the  course  of 
the  evening  or  on  returning  home,  and  only  to  succeed 
in  recovering  her  perfectly  normal  state  through  the 
assistance  of  a  night's  sleep. 

As  to  the  real  nature  of  Helene' s  slumbers  at  the 
end  of  the  seances,  and  her  states  of  consciousness 
when  she  awakes,  it  is  difficult  for  me  to  pronounce, 
having  only  been  able  to  observe  them  under  unfa- 
vorable conditions — that  is,  in  the  presence  of  sitters 
more  or  less  numerous  and  restless.  The  greater 
part  certainly  consist  of  somnambulisms,  in  which 
she  hears  all  that  passes  around  her,  since  although 
she  seems  profoundly  asleep  and  absent,  the  sugges- 
tions then  given  her  to  be  carried  out  after  awaking 
are  registered  and  performed  wonderfully — at  least 
when  Leopold,  who  is  almost  always  on  hand  and  an- 
swers by  movements  of  one  finger  or  another  to  ques- 
tions put  to  him,  does  not  make  any  opposition  or  de- 
clare that  the  suggestion  shall  not  be  carried  out! 
There  are  also  brief  moments  when  Helene  seems  to 
be  in  a  profound  state  of  coma  and  kind  of  syncope 

^1 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

without  trace  of  psychic  life ;  her  pulse  and  respira- 
tion continue  to  be  regular,  but  she  does  not  react  to 
any  excitation,  her  arms,  if  raised,  fall  heavily,  no 
sign  of  Leopold  can  be  obtained,  and  suggestions 
made  at  that  instant  will  not  be  acted  upon. 

These  lethargic  phases,  during  which  all  conscious- 
ness seems  to  be  abolished,  are  generally  followed  by 
cataleptic  phases  in  which  the  hands  and  arms  pre- 
serve every  position  in  which  they  may  be  placed, 
and  continue  the  movements  of  rotation  or  of  oscilla- 
tion which  may  be  forced  upon  them,  but  never  for 
more  than  one  or  two  minutes. 

In  default  ot  more  complete  experiments,  I  submit 
the  following  comparison  of  Helene's  muscular  force 
and  of  her  sensibility  to  pain  before  and  after  a  seance 
lasting  nearly  three  hours,  the  second  half  being  in 
full  somnambulism.  At  4. 50  o'clock,  on  sitting  down 
at  the  table  three  dynamometric  tests  with  her  right 
hand  gave  kilos.  27.5,  27,  25 — average,  26.5.  The 
sensibility  to  pain  measured  on  the  back  of  the  me- 
dian phalanx  of  the  index-finger  with  the  algesiom- 
eter  of  Griesbach,  gave  for  the  right,  grs.  35,  40,  20,  20 
— average,  29  ;  for  the  left,  35,  20,  20,  15 — average, 
22.5  grs.  (Sensibility  slightly  more  delicate  than  that 
of  another  lady  present  at  the  seance,  not  a  medium 
and  in  perfect  health.) 

At  7.45  o'clock,  some  minutes  after  the  final  awak- 
ing :  dynamometer,  right  hand,  8,  4.5,  4.5 — aver- 
age, 5.7;  algesiometer,  complete  analgesia  both  as 
to  right  and  left,  on  the  whole  of  the  back  of  the 
index  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  hand  and  wrist,  the 
maximum  of  the  instrument  (100  grs.)  was  attained 

68 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE   HER  INITIATION 

and  passed  without  arousing  any  painful  sensation 
but  only  an  impression  of  contact. 

One  hour  later,  after  dinner  :  dynamometer  22,  22, 
19 — average,  21  ;  algesiometer,  20, 18  for  the  right : 
15,  20  for  the  left.  It  is  possible,  then,  to  say  that 
her  muscular  force  and  sensibility  to  pain,  both 
normal  immediately  before  her  entrance  upon  the 
seance,  are  still  abolished  in  the  first  fifteen  min- 
utes after  awaking,  but  are  found  to  be  restored  in 
about  an  hour.  Perception  of  colors,  on  the  contrary, 
appeared  to  be  as  perfect  immediately  after  awaking 
as  before  the  seance.  The  tremor  of  the  index-finger, 
normal  before  the  seance,  is  very  much  exaggerated 
in  its  amplitude  for  a  certain  time  after  awaking 
and  reflects  sometimes  the  respiratory  movements, 
as  can  be  seen  by  the  curves  of  Fig.  2.  This  denotes 
a  great  diminution  of  kinesthetic  sensibility  and  of 
voluntary  control  over  the  immobility  of  the  hand. 

The  state  in  which  Mile.  Smith  carries  out  the 
post-hypnotic  suggestions  made  to  her  in  the  course 
of  her  somnambulisms,  when  they  do  not  come  into 
collision  with  either  the  pronounced  opposition  of 
Leopold  or  the  states  of  lethargy  of  which  I  have 
spoken,  is  interesting  on  account  of  its  varied  char- 
acter, which  seems  to  depend  upon  the  greater  or  less 
ease  with  which  the  hallucination  or  the  act  sug- 
gested can  be  reconciled  with  Helene's  normal  per- 
sonality. Their  execution  in  the  full  waking  state 
seems  to  be  confined  to  suggestions  of  simple  acts, 
free  from  absurdity, the  idea  of  which  would  be  easily 
accepted  and  carried  out  by  the  normal  self  when  the 
desired  moment  arrived.     If,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  a 

69 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

question  of  more  complicated  and  difficult  things, 
compatible,  however,  with  the  rational  points  of  view 
of  the  normal  waking  state,  Helene  falls  momentar- 
ily into  somnambulism  for  the  execution  of  the  order 
given,  unless  she  has  permanently  remained  in  that 
state,  in  spite  of  her  apparent  awaking,  in  order  not 

Fig.  2.  Tremor  of  right  index-finger.  A,  B,  C,  fragments  of  curves  taken  in  the 
normal  state  before  the  seance  (A  and  C  with  closed  eyes ;  B,  with  open  eyes  look- 
ing at  the  index-finger) ;  D,  E,  F,  fragments  of  curves  received  in  succession  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  seance.  The  curve  F  reflects  the  respiratory  oscilla- 
tions. The  curves  go  from  right  to  left,  and  the  interval  between  the  two  vertical 
lines  is  ten  seconds. 

70 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

to  re-enter  definitely  and  completely  upon  her  ordinary 
state  until  after  the  execution  of  the  order,  of  which 
there  then  remains  to  her  no  recollection  whatever. 

From  the  foregoing  facts  we  may  conclude  that 
little  or  nothing  of  that  which  goes  on  around  her 
escapes  her  subconscious  intelligence,  and  it  is  from 
this  source  that  her  somnambulistic  romances  are 
nourished  afresh. 

A  word  more  as  to  the  preparation  for  the  seances. 
I  do  not  refer  to  a  conscious  preparation,  but  to  a 
subliminal  incubation  or  elaboration,  unknown  by 
her,  showing  itself  on  the  level  of  her  ordinary  per- 
sonality in  the  form  of  fugitive  gleams  and  frag- 
mentary images  during  her  sleep  at  night  or  the 
moments  of  awaking  in  the  morning.  Mile.  Smith, 
in  reality,  has  no  hold,  possesses  no  influence,  upon 
the  nature  of  her  visions  and  somnambulisms.  She 
is  able,  undoubtedly,  up  to  a  certain  point,  to  aid 
their  appearance  in  a  general  way,  by  cultivating 
tranquillity  of  mind,  securing  darkness  and  silence 
in  the  room,  and  by  abandoning  herself  to  a  passive 
attitude  of  mind;  or  to  hinder  it,  on  the  other  hand, 
by  movement,  or  distraction  of  attention;  but  with 
the  fixed  and  concrete  content  itself  of  her  auto- 
matisms she  has  nothing  to  do  and  no  share  in  the 
responsibility  for  it.  So  far  as  her  great  cycles  or 
her  detached  messages  are  concerned,  they  are  fab- 
ricated in  her  in  spite  of  herself,  and  without  her 
having  a  word  to  say  about  their  production,  any 
more  than  one  has  in  the  formation  of  his  dreams. 
When  it  is  recollected,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the 
phenomena  of  incubation,  of  subliminal  preparation, 

71 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

or  unconscious  cerebration,  are  universal  facts,  play- 
ing their  role  in  the  psychology  of  every  human  be- 
ing, we  can  rely  upon  finding  them  also  among  the 
mediums,  and  upon  their  holding  a  place  with  them 
much  more  important  than  with  others,  owing  to  the 
fact  that  their  subconscious  life  is  so  much  more 
fully  developed. 

With  each  one  of  us  the  expectation  or  the  simple 
perspective  of  any  event — a  departure,  a  visit,  an 
errand,  or  undertaking  to  do  anything,  a  letter  to 
write,  in  short,  all  the  more  insignificant  incidents 
of  daily  existence,  when  they  are  not  absolutely 
unforeseen  —  promote  a  psychological  adaptation 
more  or  less  extended  and  profound. 

Alongside  of  and  underneath  the  conscious  ex- 
pectancy, certain  physical  or  mental  attitudes,  vol- 
untarily assumed  in  view  of  the  event,  always  effect 
an  underlying  preparation  of  an  inward  kind,  a 
change  which  we  may  regard,  according  to  the  side 
from  which  we  consider  the  individual,  as  a  peculiar 
psychical  orientation  or  cerebral  adjustment,  a  modi- 
fication in  the  association  of  ideas  or  in  the  dynamics 
of  the  cortical  nerves.  But  everything  points  to  the 
fact  that  in  persons  gifted  with  mediumship  this  un- 
derlying preparation  is  capable  of  assuming  on  occa- 
sion a  greater  importance  than  is  the  case  with  ordi- 
nary mortals,  a  much  more  complete  independence 
of  the  ordinary  consciousness 

To  return  to  Mile.  Smith,  when  she  knows  some 
time  in  advance  who  will  be  present  at  her  next 
seance,  and  what  people  she  will  almost  surely  meet 
there,  it  would  be  altogether  natural  that  such  pre- 

72 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE   HER  INITIATION 

vious  knowledge  of  the  environment  and  of  the  sit- 
ters would  influence  her  subliminal  thoughts  and  in 
some  degree  direct  the  course  of  the  latent  incuba- 
tion. It  may  well  be  asked,  therefore,  whether  the 
varied  spectacle  which  the  seances  furnish  is  really 
always  impromptu  and  has  its  birth  on  the  spur  of 
the  moment  like  ordinary  dreams,  or  whether  it  has 
been  subconsciously  thought  out,  the  seance  being 
only  the  performance  of  an  arrested  programme,  the 
representation  coram  populo  of  scenes  already  ri- 
pened in  the  deep  subliminal  strata  of  the  medium. 

Neither  of  these  two  hypotheses,  held  to  exclude 
the  other,  answers  to  the  facts,  but  there  is  some 
truth  in  both  of  them. 

The  menu  of  the  seances — if  the  expression  is  per- 
missible— is  always  composed  of  one  or  two  plats  de 
resistance,  carefully  prepared  in  advance  in  the  sub- 
liminal laboratories,  and  of  various  hors  d'oeuvres 
left  to  the  inspiration  of  the  moment.  To  speak 
more  exactly,  the  general  plot,  the  chief  lines  and 
more  striking  points  of  the  scenes  which  unfold  them- 
selves are  fixed  according  to  a  previous  arrange- 
ment, but  the  details  of  execution  and  accessory 
embellishments  are  entirely  dependent  upon  chance 
circumstances.  The  proof  of  this  is  found,  on  the 
one  hand,  in  the  suppleness,  the  perfect  ease,  the  ap- 
propriateness with  which  Helene's  automatisms — if 
we  can  still  apply  the  word  automatism  to  those  cases 
in  which  spontaneity,  self-possession,  free  use  of  all 
the  faculties  constitute  the  dominant  characteristics 
— often  adapt  themselves  to  unexpected  situations 
in  the  environment  or  capricious  interruptions  on 

73 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  part  of  the  sitters ;  on  the  other  hand,  in  the 
fact  that  Leopold,  interrogated  at  the  beginning  of 
the  seance,  ordinarily  knows  very  well  and  announ- 
ces the  principal  vision  or  incarnations  which  are 
about  to  make  their  appearance,  provided,  at  least, 
the  spectators  do  not  hinder  their  unfolding  by  their 
tempestuous  clamor  for  something  else. 

The  animated  conversations,  sometimes  full  of  spir- 
ited repartee,  between  Leopold  or  Marie  Antoinette 
and  the  sitters,  could  not  have  been  prepared  in  ad- 
vance, and  are  altogether  opposed  to  the  stereotyped 
repetition  which  is  generally  expected  of  automatic 
phenomena.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  such  repetition, 
almost  entirely  mechanical  and  devoid  of  sense,  pre- 
sents itself  on  frequent  occasions.  I  have,  for  in- 
stance, seen  somnambulistic  scenes  presented  which 
were  entirely  misplaced,  and  constituted  at  the  time 
veritable  anachronisms,  which  would  have  perfectly 
fitted  the  situation  eight  days  previously  in  another 
environment,  and  for  which  the  aforesaid  scenes  had 
been  evidently  intended ;  but,  having  been  withheld 
until  the  last  moment  by  unforeseen  circumstances, 
the  following  seance  gets  the  benefit  of  these  post- 
poned messages. 

Here  is  proof  that  H61ene's  subliminal  imagination 
prepares  up  to  a  certain  point  her  principal  produc- 
tions, in  view  of  the  conditions  and  surroundings  un- 
der which  the  seance  will  probably  take  place,  and  also 
that  these  products,  once  elaborated,  must  be  elim- 
inated and  poured  forth  with  a  sort  of  blind  necessity, 
at  the  right  or  the  wrong  time,  whenever  the  entrance 
of  Helene  into  a  favorable  hypnoid  state  furnishes 

74 

MLLE.  SMITH  SINCE  HER  INITIATION 

them  an  opportunity  so  to  do.  It  follows  also  that 
her  normal  personality  has  nothing  whatever  to  do 
with  the  preparation  of  the  seances,  since  she  can 
neither  suppress  nor  change  scenes  badly  adapted 
to  the  actual  environment,  the  appearance  of  which 
sometimes  greatly  annoys  Mile.  Smith  when  they  are 
recounted  to  her  after  the  seance ;  nor  can  she  provoke 
the  messages,  the  production  of  which  she  desires 
and  vainly  hopes  for — as,  for  example,  a  medical  con- 
sultation with  Leopold,  the  incarnation  of  a  deceased 
parent,  or  a  scene  from  one  cycle  rather  than  from  the 
others,  for  the  benefit  of  a  sitter  who  particularly  de- 
sires it,  and  whom  she  is  very  desirous  to  please. 

Much  more  could  be  said  concerning  the  psycho- 
logical side  of  the  seances  of  Mile.  Smith,  but  I  must 
limit  myself.  It  will  be  possible  to  gain  a  more  com- 
plete idea  of  this  subject  by  studying  the  illustrations 
in  the  following  chapters  on  the  chief  cycles  of  her 
brilliant  subliminal  fantasy. 

CHAPTER  IV 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

IS  Leopold  really  Joseph  Balsamo,  as  he  pretends  ? 
Or,  since  he  has  nothing  in  common  with  the 
famous  thaumaturgist  of  the  last  century,  save 
a  certain  superficial  resemblance,  is  he,  at  any  rate, 
a  real  being,  separate  from,  and  independent  of.  Mile. 
Smith  ?  Or,  finally,  is  he  only  a  pseudo-reality,  a 
kind  of  allotropic  modification  of  Helene  herself,  a 
product  of  her  subliminal  imagination,  just  like  our 
dream  creations  and  the  roles  suggested  to  a  hypnotic 
subject  ? 

Of  these  three  suppositions  it  is  the  last  which  to 
my  mind  is  undoubtedly  the  true  one,  while  in  Mile. 
Smith's  eyes  it  is  as  certainly  the  false  view.  It 
would  be  hard  to  imagine  a  more  profound  differ- 
ence of  opinion  than  that  which  exists  between  Mile. 
Smith  and  myself  on  this  subject.  It  is  I,  always, 
who  get  the  worst  of  a  discussion  with  her  concern- 
ing it.  I  yield  for  two  reasons.  First,  out  of  polite- 
ness ;  and,  secondly,  because  I  understand  Helene  per- 
fectly, and,  putting  myself  in  her  place,  realize  that 
I  should  think  exactly  as  she  does  about  the  matter. 

Given  her  surroundings  and  personal  experiences, 
it  is  impossible  for  her  to  do  otherwise  than  believe 

76 

THE   PERSONALITY  OF   LEOPOLD 

ill  the  objective  distinct  existence  of  that  mysterious 
being  who  constantly  enters  into  her  life  in  a  sensible 
and«quasi-material  way,  leaving  her  no  room  to  doubt. 
He  presents  himself  before  her  endowed  with  corpo- 
reality like  that  of  other  people,  and  hides  objects 
which  are  behind  him  exactly  as  an  ordinary  indi- 
vidual of  flesh  and  bone  would  do  He  talks  into 
her  ears,  generally  into  the  left,  in  a  characteristic 
voice,  which  appears  to  come  from  a  variable  dis- 
tance, sometimes  about  six  feet  off,  sometimes  much 
farther.  He  jars  the  table  on  which  she  has  placed 
her  immobile  arms,  takes  hold  of  her  wrist  and  writes 
with  her  hand,  holding  the  pen  in  a  manner  unlike 
her,  and  with  a  handwriting  wholly  different  from 
hers.  He  puts  her  to  sleep  without  her  knowledge, 
and  she  is  astonished  to  learn  upon  awaking  that 
he  has  gesticulated  with  her  arms  and  spoken  through 
her  mouth  in  the  deep  bass  voice  of  a  man,  with  an 
Italian  accent,  which  has  nothing  in  common  with 
the  clear  and  beautiful  quality  of  her  feminine  voice. 
Moreover,  he  is  not  always  on  hand.  He  by  no 
means  answers  Helene's  appeals  on  all  occasions ;  is 
not  at  her  mercy;  far  from  it.  His  conduct,  his  mani- 
festations, his  comings  and  goings  cannot  be  predict- 
ed with  any  certainty,  and  testify  to  an  autonomous 
being,  endowed  with  free-will,  often  otherwise  occu- 
pied or  absent  on  his  own  affairs,  which  do  not  permit 
of  his  holding  himself  constantly  at  the  disposal  of 
Mile.  Smith.  Sometimes  he  remains  for  weeks  with- 
out revealing  himself,  in  spite  of  her  wishing  for  him 
and  calling  upon  him.  Then,  all  at  once,  he  makes 
his  appearance  when  she  least  expects  him.     He 

n 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

speaks  for  her  in  a  way  she  would  have  no  idea  of 
doing,  he  dictates  to  her  poems  of  which  she  would  be 
incapable.  He  replies  to  her  oral  or  mental  questions, 
converses  with  her,  and  discusses  various  questions. 
Like  a  wise  friend,  a  rational  mentor,  and  as  one 
seeing  things  from  a  higher  plane,  he  gives  her  ad- 
vice, counsel,  orders  even  sometimes  directly  oppo- 
site to  her  wishes  and  against  which  she  rebels. 
He  consoles  her,  exhorts  her,  soothes,  encourages, 
and  reprimands  her ;  he  undertakes  against  her  the 
defence  of  persons  she  does  not  like,  and  pleads  the 
cause  of  those  who  are  antipathetic  to  her.  In  a 
word,  it  would  be  impossible  to  imagine  a  being  more 
independent  or  more  different  from  Mile.  Smith  her- 
self, having  a  more  personal  character,  an  individual- 
ity more  marked,  or  a  more  certain  actual  existence. 
Helene  is  also  fortified  in  this  conviction  by  the 
belief  not  only  of  members  of  her  own  family,  but  by 
that  of  other  cultivated  people  who,  having  attended 
many  of  her  seances,  have  no  doubt  whatever  of  Leo- 
pold's  objective  and  separate  existence.  There  are 
those  who  believe  so  firmly  in  the  reality  of  this  supe- 
rior being,  invisible  to  them,  that  they  are  in  the  habit 
of  calling  upon  him  during  the  absence  of  Mile.  Smith. 
Naturally  they  obtain  responses,  through  the  table  or 
otherwise,  and  that  causes  unforeseen  complications 
sometimes  when  she  comes  to  learn  of  it.  For  while 
she  admits  theoretically — and  Leopold  himself  has 
often  declared  the  same  thing — that  he  extends  his 
surveillance  and  protection  from  afar  over  other 
spiritistic  groups,  and  especially  over  all  Helene's 
friends  and  acquaintances,  in  practice  and  in  fact, 

78 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

however,  it  happens  that  neither  he  nor  she  will  will- 
ingly admit  the  authenticity  of  those  pretended  com- 
munications from  Leopold  obtained  in  the  absence  of 
the  medium  of  his  predilection.  It  is  generally  some 
deceiving  spirit  who  has  manifested  in  his  place 
on  these  occasions.  These  denials,  however,  do  not 
prevent  those  who  have  become  believers  from  con- 
tinuing to  believe  in  the  omnipresence  of  this  good 
genius,  or  from  teaching  their  children  to  revere  him, 
to  make  vows  and  address  prayers  to  him.  It  must 
not  be  forgotten  that  spiritism  is  a  religion.  This 
also  explains  the  great  respect  shown  to  mediums, 
which  is  like  that  accorded  to  priests. 

It  follows  that,  without  in  the  least  refraining  from 
speaking  ill  of  them  whenever  they  think  they  have 
a  grievance  against  them,  on  the  other  hand  they 
bestow  on  them  the  same  marks  of  respect  as  are  only 
accorded  to  the  most  sublime  product  of  the  human 
race. 

I  have  known  a  salon  where,  on  the  centre  table,  in 
full  view  and  in  the  place  of  honor,  were  two  photo- 
graphs in  beautiful  frames  :  on  the  one  side  the  head 
of  Christ,  on  the  other  the  portrait  of — Mile.  Helene 
Smith.  Among  other  believers,  with  less  ideal  but 
more  practical  aspirations,  no  business  matter  of  im- 
portance is  closed,  no  serious  decision  made,  until 
Leopold  has  been  consulted  through  Helene  as  an 
intermediary,  and  the  cases  are  too  numerous  to 
mention  in  which  he  has  furnished  important  in- 
formation, prevented  a  heavy  precuniary  loss,  given 
an  efficacious  medical  prescription,  etc. 

It  is  easily  seen  how  all  the  successes  obtained  by 
79 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Leopold,  and  the  mystical  veneration  which  many 
very  estimable  persons  accord  him,  must  contribute 
to  strengthen  the  faith  of  Helene  in  her  all-powerful 
protector.  It  is  in  vain  that,  against  this  absolute 
assurance,  one  seeks  to  avail  one's  self  of  the  argu- 
ments of  contemporary  psychology.  The  example 
of  the  fictions  of  the  dream,  the  analogies  taken  from 
hypnotism  and  from  psychopathology,  considera- 
tions of  mental  disintegration,  the  division  of  the 
consciousness  and  the  formation  of  second  person- 
alities, all  these  refined  subtleties  of  our  modern  sci- 
entists break  in  pieces  like  glass  against  immovable 
rock.  I  shall  not  undertake  to  combat  a  proposi- 
tion which,  for  her,  has  incontestably  so  much  evi- 
dence in  its  favor,  and  which  resolves  all  difficulties 
in  the  most  felicitous  manner  and  in  conformity  to 
good  common-sense. 

Nevertheless,  since  each  individual  has  a  right  to 
his  own  opinion  in  the  world,  I  beg  leave  to  assume, 
for  the  time  being,  that  Leopold  does  not  exist  outside 
of  Mile.  Smith,  and  to  try  to  discover  his  possible 
genesis  in  the  mental  fife  of  the  latter — solely  by  hy- 
pothesis and  by  means  of  psychological  experiment. 
Therefore,  readers  who  have  little  taste  for  this  kind 
of  academic  composition  had  better  skip  this  chapter. 

I.    PSYCHOGENESIS   OF   LEOPOLD 

A  description  of  the  development  of  Leopold  is  not 
easy,  since  he  has  a  double  origin,  apparent  and 
real,  like  the  cranial  nerves  which  give  so  much 
trouble  to  the  students  of  anatomy. 

80 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

His  apparent  origin,  or,  I  should  say,  the  moment 
when  he  is  outwardly  separated  from  the  personality 
of  Helene,  and  manifests  as  an  independent  "spirit," 
is  relatively  clear  and  well  marked;  but  his  actual 
origin,profoundly  enfolded  in  the  most  inward  strata 
of  Helene's  personality  and  inextricably  mixed  up 
with  them,  presents  great  obscurities  and  can  only 
be  determined  in  a  very  conjectural  manner.  Let 
us  begin  with  the  apparent  origin,  or  the  first  appear- 
ance of  Leopold  at  the  seances. 

It  is  easy  to  understand  that,  once  initiated  into 
spiritism  and  plunged  into  a  current  of  ideas  where 
the  comforting  doctrine  of  spirit- guides  and  protect- 
ors holds  an  important  place.  Mile.  Smith  did  not 
delay  in  coming  into  possession  of,  like  all  good  me- 
diums, a  disincarnate  spirit  specially  attached  to 
her  person.  She  even  had  two  in  succession,  Victor 
Hugo  and  Cagliostro.  It  is  not  a  question  of  a  sim- 
ple change  of  name  of  the  guide  of  Helene,  who  pre- 
sented himself  first  under  the  aspect  and  the  name 
of  the  great  poet  and  then  afterwards  adopted  that 
of  the  renowned  thaumaturgist,  but  there  were,  at 
least  at  the  beginning,  two  different  personalities, 
apparently  hostile  to  each  other,  one  of  whom  by 
degrees  supplanted  the  other,  after  a  struggle,  a 
trace  of  which  is  found  in  the  very  incomplete  re- 
ports of  the  seances  of  that  period.  Three  phases 
can  also  be  distinguished  in  the  psychogenesis  of 
Mile.  Smith's  guide:  an  initial  phase  of  five  months, 
during  which  Victor  Hugo  reigns  alone  ;  a  phase  of 
transition  of  about  a  year,  when  the  protection  of 
Victor  Hugo  is  seen  to  be  powerless  to  protect  H6- 
F  8i 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

lene  and  her  spiritistic  group  against  the  invasion 
of  an  intruder  called  Leopold,  who  claims  and  mani- 
fests an  increasing  authority  over  the  medium  by 
virtue  of  mysterious  relations  in  the  course  of  a  pre- 
vious existence  ;  finally,  the  present  period,  which 
has  lasted  for  six  years  past,  in  which  Victor  Hugo 
no  longer  figures,  and  which  may  be  dated  approx- 
imately from  the  moment  when  it  was  revealed  that 
Leopold  is  only  an  assumed  name,  under  which  he 
hides  in  reality  the  great  personality  of  Joseph  Bal- 
samo. 

I  do  not  find  any  fact  worthy  of  mention  in  the 
first  phase,  in  which  Victor  Hugo,  who  seems  to  have 
appeared  as  the  guide  of  Mile.  Smith  about  the  1st 
of  April,  1892  (see  above,  p.  38),  played  a  role  of  no 
importance.  In  the  second  phase,  however,  it  is 
necessary  to  cite  some  extracts  from  the  reports  of 
the  seances  of  the  N.  group,  in  order  to  throw  light 
upon  the  singular  character  which  Leopold  mani- 
fested there  from  the  beginning. 

August  26,  1892. — "A  spirit  announces  himself 
under  the  name  of  Leopold.  He  comes  for  Mile. 
Smith,  and  seems  to  wish  to  have  a  great  authority 
over  her.  She  sees  him  for  some  moments,  he  ap- 
pears to  be  about  thirty-five  years  of  age,  and  is 
clothed  altogether  in  black.  The  expression  of  his 
countenance  is  rather  pleasing,  and  through  an- 
swers to  some  questions  which  we  put  to  him  we 
are  given  to  understand  that  he  knew  her  in  an- 
other existence,  and  that  he  does  not  wish  her  to 
give  her  heart  to  any  one  here  below.  .  .  Mile.  Smith 
recognizes  her  guide,  Victor   Hugo.     She   is  made 

82 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF   LEOPOLD 

happy  by  his  arrival,  and  asks  his  protection 
against  the  obsession  of  this  new  spirit.  He  an- 
swers that  she  has  nothing  to  fear,  that  he  will 
always  be  present.  She  is  joyful  at  being  guarded 
and  protected  by  him,  and  feels  that  she  has  noth- 
ing to  fear.'' 

September  2. —  .  .  .  ''Leopold  comes  also,  but  Mile. 
Smith  fears  nothing,  since  her  guide  (Victor  Hugo) 
is  there  to  protect  her.'' 

September  2^. —  .  .  .  ''An  unpleasant  evening. 
A  spirit  announces  himself.  It  is  Leopold.  He 
speaks  to  us  at  once  :  '  I  am  here.  I  wish  to  be 
master  of  this  sitting.'  We  are  very  much  disap- 
pointed, and  do  not  expect  any  good  of  him.  He 
tries,  as  he  had  already  done  once  before,  to  put 
Mile.  Smith  to  sleep,  who  has  great  difficulty  in  strug- 
gling against  this  sleep.  She  rises  from  the  table, 
hoping  by  this  means  to  rid  herself  of  him,  and  that 
he  will  give  up  his  place  to  others.  She  returns  in 
about  ten  minutes,  but  he  is  still  there,  and  appar- 
ently has  no  intention  of  abandoning  his  place.  We 
summon  our  friends  (spiritual)  to  our  aid.  .  .  .  They 
take  Leopold's  place  momentarily,  but  very  soon  Leo- 
pold returns ;  we  struggle  with  him,  we  desire  him  to 
go  away,  but  neither  soft  nor  hard  words  have  any 
effect;  before  that  dogged  determination  we  realize 
that  all  our  efforts  will  be  useless,  and  we  decide  to 
close  the  seance." 

October  3. — "  [Manifestation  by  the  favorite  spir- 
its of  the  group,  who  declare]  that  they  have  not 
been  able  to  come,  as  they  would  have  liked  to  do; 
that  they  were  prevented  by  the  spirit  of  Leopold, 

83 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

who  is  trying  to  introduce  himself  to  us;  that  we 
should  repulse  him  as  much  as  possible,  persuaded 
that  he  does  not  come  for  any  good  end.  I  do  not 
know  whether  we  shall  be  able  to  rid  ourselves  of 
him,  but  we  greatly  fear  that  he  will  injure  us  and 
retard  our  advancement/' 

October  7.  —  .  .  "  Leopold  announces  himself. 
We  try  to  reason  with  him ;  we  do  not  wish  to  forbid 
his  coming,  but  we  ask  of  him  that  he  shall  come  as 
a  friend  to  all,  and  not  in  the  role  of  master.  He  is 
not  satisfied  ;  appears  to  bear  much  malice.  We 
trust  he  will  come  to  have  better  feelings.  He 
shows  himself,  walks  around  the  table,  bows  to  us, 
and  salutes  each  one  with  his  hand,  and  retires  again, 
leaving  his  place  to  others." 

October  14. — ''  [After  a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  mo- 
tionless and  silent  waiting  in  darkness  around  the 
table  Mile.  Smith  is  questioned,  and  she  is  shaken 
in  vain.]  She  is  asleep.  By  the  advice  of  persons 
present  we  allow  her  to  remain  asleep,  when,  at  the 
end  of  five  minutes,  the  table  raises  itself,  a  spirit 
announces  himself.  It  is  Victor  Hugo ;  we  ask  if  he 
has  anything  to  say  ;  he  answers  yes,  and  spells 
out  :  Wake  her ;  do  not  allow  her  ever  to  sleep.  We 
try  to  do  so.  We  are  nervous  about  that  sleep  ;  we 
have  great  difficulty  in  awakening  her.'' 

January  6,  1893. — -''After  twenty  minutes  of  wait- 
ing, Leopold  arrives,  and,  as  is  his  habit,  puts  the 
medium  to  sleep  for  some  minutes  ;  he  torments  us, 
and  prevents  our  friends  (disincarnate)  from  coming 
to  the  table.  He  vexes  us  in  every  way,  and  goes 
contrary  to  all  our  wishes.     In  presence  of  that  ran- 

84 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

cor  the  sitters  regret  the  indications  of  ill -humor 
they  have  shown  towards  him,  and  deplore  having 
to  pay  so  dear  for  them.  It  is  with  difficulty  that 
the  medium  can  be  awakened/' 

February,  1893. — "  In  one  of  the  seances  of  this 
month  a  remarkable  thing  happened :  the  spirit  of 
Leopold,  who  was  very  much  irritated  on  that  day, 
twice  in  succession  took  away  her  chair  from  our 
medium  and  carried  it  to  the  farther  end  of  the  room, 
while  Mile.  Smith  fell  heavily  to  the  floor.  Not  ex- 
pecting this  wretched  farce.  Mile.  Smith  struck  her 
knee  so  hard  that  for  several  days  she  suffered  pain 
in  walking.  We  were  obliged  to  terminate  the 
seance  ;  we  were  not  comfortable.  Why  this  ani- 
mosity T 

This  word  animosity  describes  very  well  the  con- 
duct and  the  feelings  that  Leopold  seemed  to  have 
towards  the  N.  group  and  against  his  placid  rival, 
Victor  Hugo.  The  personal  recollections  of  the  sit- 
ters whom  I  have  been  able  to  interrogate  confirm  the 
substantial  physiognomy  of  the  two  figures.  That  of 
Hugo  is,  in  effect,  effaced  and  altogether  eclipsed  by 
the  totally  opposite  character  of  the  arrogant  Leopold, 
who  takes  a  peculiar  pleasure  in  the  role  of  vindictive 
and  jealous  mischief-maker,  obstructing  the  appear- 
ance of  the  ''  spirits''  devsired  by  the  group,  putting 
the  medium  to  sleep,  or  causing  her  to  fall  on  the 
floor,  forbidding  her  to  give  her  heart  to  another,  and 
breaking  up  the  seances  as  far  as  he  is  able.  It  seems 
to  have  finally  resulted  in  the  meetings  of  the  N.  group 
coming  to  an  end  at  the  beginning  of  the  summer  ; 
then  comes  a  break  of  six  months,  after  which  I  find 

85 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Mile.  Smith  on  tlie  I2tli  of  December  inaugurating 
a  new  series  of  seances,  with  an  entirely  different 
spiritistic  group  organized  by  Prof.  Cuendet.  Here 
Victor  Hugo  very  rarely  appears,  and  never  in  the 
role  of  guide,  which  role  is  freely  accorded,  without 
objection,  to  Leopold,  whose  real  identity  (Cagliostro) 
was  no  secret  to  any  one  in  the  new  environment. 
It  was,  therefore,  in  the  course  of  the  3^ear  1893,  at  a 
period  which  cannot  be  precisely  determined  from  the 
records,  that  the  rivalry  of  these  two  personalities 
was  terminated  by  the  complete  triumph  of  the  sec- 
ond. 

It  follows  from  the  preceding  recital  that  the  ap- 
pearance of  Leopold  in  seances  of  the  N.  group  was 
a  phenomenon  of  manifest  contrast,  of  hostility,  and 
of  antagonism  towards  that  group. 

It  is  a  difficult  and  delicate  task  to  pronounce  upon 
the  complex  spirit  of  an  environment  of  which  one 
was  not  a  part,  and  in  regard  to  which  one  possesses 
only  a  few  and  not  very  concordant  incidents.  The 
following,  however,  seem  to  be  the  facts  : 

The  N.  group,  much  more  numerous  than  is  con- 
venient in  seances  of  that  kind,  was  composed  of  very 
varied  elements.  Alongside  of  serious  believers  were 
ordinarily  some  students  who  boarded  with  one  of 
the  ladies  of  the  group,  and  who  do  not  appear  to 
have  felt  the  seriousness  of  spiritistic  reunions. 

That  age  has  no  mercy,  and  the  profound  signi- 
fication of  the  seances  often  escaped  their  superficial 
and  frivolous  intelligence.  Under  such  conditions 
Mile.  Smith  was  inevitably  compelled  to  experience 
two  contrary  impressions.     On  the  one  hand,  she  per- 

86 

THE  PERSONALITY   OF  LEOPOLD 

ceived  herself  admired,  made  much  of,  feted,  as  the 
unrivalled  medium,  which  she  really  was,  and  upon 
whom  the  group  depended  for  its  existence  ;  on  the 
other  hand,  her  secret  instincts  and  high  personal 
dignity  could  not  but  be  offended  by  the  familiarities 
to  which  she  was  exposed  in  this  mixed  environment. 

I  regard  the  two  rival  and  successive  guides  of 
Helene  as  the  expression  of  this  double  sentiment. 
If  she  had  been  brought  up  like  an  American  woman, 
or  if  her  nature  had  been  a  degree  less  fine,  the  frivol- 
ity of  the  seances  would  undoubtedly  have  only  given 
more  warmth  and  brilliancy  to  Victor  Hugo  ;  instead 
of  which,  the  victorious  colors  of  Leopold  are  raised 
over  a  nature  of  great  native  pride,  extremely  sensi- 
tive on  the  point  of  feminine  dignity,  and  whose  se- 
vere and  rigid  education  had  already  exalted  her 
sense  of  self-respect.  After  a  struggle  of  a  year  be- 
tween these  two  personifications  of  opposite  emotional 
tendencies,  the  second,  as  we  have  seen,  finally  tri- 
umphs ;  and  Mile.  Smith  withdraws  from  the  N. 
group,  which  at  the  same  time  breaks  up. 

The  idea  I  have  formed  of  Leopold  is  now  appar- 
ent. He  represents,  to  my  mind,  in  Mile.  Smith,  the 
synthesis,  the  quintessence — and  the  expansion,  too — 
of  the  most  hidden  springs  of  the  psychological  organ- 
ism. He  gushes  forth  from  that  deep  and  myste- 
rious sphere  into  which  the  deepest  roots  of  our  indi- 
vidual existence  are  plunged,  which  bind  us  to  the 
species  itself,  and  perhaps  to  the  Absolute,  and  whence 
confusedly  spring  our  instincts  of  physical  and  moral 
self-preservation,  our  sexual  feelings.  When  Helene 
found  herself  in  an  environment  not  exactly  dan- 

87 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

gerous,  but  where  she  simply  ran  the  risk,  as  in  the 
N.  group,  of  yielding  to  some  inclination  contrary  to 
her  fundamental  aspirations,  it  is  then  that  Leopold 
suddenly  springs  up,  speaking  as  the  master,  taking 
possession  of  the  medium  for  himself,  and  indicating 
his  unwillingness  that  she  should  attach  herself  to 
SLYij  one  here  below.  We  here  recognize  the  same 
principle  of  self  -  protection  and  self-preservation 
which  was  already  active  in  her  as  a  young  girl  in 
the  teleological  automatisms  arising  on  the  occasion 
of  certain  emotional  shocks,  of  which  I  have  spoken 
on  p.  25. 

But,  by  these  considerations,  we  have  travelled 
very  far  from  the  original  appearance  of  Leopold  in 
the  seance  of  the  26th  of  August,  1892,  towards  his 
actual,  more  ancient  origin.  This  seems  to  date  from 
a  great  fright  which  Helene  had  in  the  course  of  her 
tenth  year.  As  she  was  walking  along  the  street,  on 
her  way  home  from  school,  she  was  attacked  by  a  big 
dog:.  The  terror  of  the  poor  child  can  well  be  im- 
agined, and  from  which  she  was  happily  delivered  by 
a  personage  clothed  in  a  long  brown  robe  with  flow- 
ing sleeves  and  with  a  white  cross  on  the  breast,  who, 
appearing  to  her  suddenly  and  as  by  a  miracle, 
chased  the  dog  awa^^  and  disappeared  before  she 
had  time  to  thank  him.  But,  according  to  Leopold, 
this  personage  was  no  other  than  himself,  who  on 
this  occasion  for  the  first  time  appeared  to  Helene, 
and  saved  her  by  driving  away  the  dog. 

This  explanation  was  given  by  Leopold  on  the  6th 
of  October,  1895,  in  a  seance  in  which  Helene  expe- 
rienced, in  a   somnambulistic  state,  a  repetition  of 

THE   PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

that  scene  of  fright,  with  heart  -  rending  cries,  gest- 
ures of  struggle  and  defence,  attempts  at  flight,  etc. 
In  the  waking  state  she  very  well  recalls  this  epi- 
sode of  her  childhood,  but  cannot  accept  Leopold  as 
the  person  who  came  to  her  rescue,  but  believes  it 
to  have  been  a  priest  or  member  of  some  religious 
order  who  rushed  to  her  assistance  and  drove  the 
animal  away.  Her  parents  also  recollected  the  in- 
cident, whicli  she  told  them  one  day  on  returning 
from  school  in  a  very  excited  state,  and  after  which 
she  could  not  for  a  long  time  encounter  a  dog  in  the 
street  without  hiding  herself  in  the  folds  of  her 
mother's  dress.  She  has  since  always  preserved  an 
instinctive  aversion  towards  dogs. 

We  have  seen  (p.  31)  that  after  this  first  incident, 
matters  remained  in  statu  quo  for  four  years,  up  to 
the  time  when  the  age  of  puberty  began  to  favor  the 
development  of  the  Oriental  visions.  Here,  Leopold, 
to  whom  we  owe  this  information,  does  not  altogether 
agree  with  himself,  for  at  one  time  he  says  that  it  was 
he  himself  who  furnished  Mile.  Smith  with  her  visions 
of  India,  at  another  time  he  says  that  they  are  rem- 
iniscences of  one  of  her  former  existences. 

Alongside  of  these  varied  visions,  Leopold  has 
clearly  appeared  under  the  form  of  the  protector  in  the 
dark  robe  in  a  number  of  cases.  I  will  only  cite  two 
examples,  one  very  remote,  the  other  quite  recent. 

One  day  Helene  went  to  consult  her  family  physi- 
cian for  some  trifling  ailment,  who,  having  known 
her  for  a  long  time  and  being  an  old  friend  of  her 
family,  presumed  to  give  her  an  innocent  kiss.  He 
was  quite  unprepared  for  the  explosion  of  wrath 

89 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

which  this  familiarity  provoked^  and  hastened  to 
make  his  apologies  :  but  what  is  of  interest  to  us  in 
this  connection  is  the  fact  that  under  the  shock  of 
this  emotion  her  defender  of  the  brown  robe  appeared 
before  her  in  the  corner  of  the  room,  and  did  not  leave 
her  side  until  she  had  reached  home. 

A  short  time  ago  this  same  protector,  always  in 
the  same  costume,  accompanied  her  several  days  in 
succession  while  she  was  traversing  a  little-frequented 
part  of  the  route  towards  her  place  of  buvsiness.  One 
evening,  also,  he  appeared  to  her  at  the  entrance  to 
the  street  leading  to  the  locality  in  question,  in  the 
attitude  of  barring  the  way,  and  obliged  her  to  make 
a  detour  to  regain  her  house. 

Mile.  Smith  has  the  impression — and  several  indi- 
cations go  to  show  that  she  is  not  deceived — that  it  is 
with  the  purpose  of  sparing  her  some  unpleasant  sight 
or  a  dangerous  encounter  that  Leopold,  in  the  brown 
robe,  appears  to  her  under  perfectly  well-known  condi- 
tions. He  rises  before  her  always  at  a  distance  of 
about  ten  yards,  walks,  or  rather  glides,  along  in  si- 
lence, at  the  same  rate  as  she  advances  towards  him, 
attracting  and  fascinating  her  gaze  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  prevent  her  turning  her  eyes  away  from  him  either 
to  the  right  or  the  left,  until  she  has  passed  the  place 
of  danger.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  whereas  Leopold, 
under  other  circumstances — for  instance,  at  the  se- 
ances— shows  himself  to  her  in  the  most  varied  cos- 
tumes and  speaks  on  all  subjects,  it  is  always  under 
his  hieratic  aspect,  silent,  and  clothed  in  his  long  dark 
robe,  that  he  appears  to  her  on  those  occasions  of  real 
life  in  which  she  is  exposed  to  feelings  of  fright  pe- 

90 

THE   PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

culiar  to  her  sex,  as  he  appeared  to  her  on  that  first 
occasion  in  her  tenth  year. 

The  hints  I  have  given  sufficiently  justify,  I  think, 
my  opinion  that  the  real  and  primordial  origin  of 
Leopold  is  to  be  found  in  that  deep  and  delicate 
sphere  in  which  we  so  often  encounter  the  roots  of 
hypnoid  phenomena,  and  to  which  the  most  illustri- 
ous visionaries,  such  as  Swedenborg,"  seem  to  owe 
a  great  part  not  only  of  the  intellectual  content  but 
of  the  imaginative  form,  the  hallucinatory  wrapping, 
of  their  genius.  There  is  a  double  problem  to  be 
solved  in  Mile.  Smith's  case.  Why  have  these  in- 
stinctive feelings  and  emotional  tendencies  which 
are  common  to  the  entire  human  race  SLicceeded  in 
developing  in  her  a  product  so  complex  and  highly 
organized  as  is  the  personahty  of  Leopold  ?  and  why, 
in  the  second  place,  does  that  personality  believe 
itself  to  be  Joseph  Balsamo? 

I  instantly  reply  that  these  two  results  are,  to  my 
mind,  entirely  the  effect  of  autosuggestion.  To 
explain  the  first,  the  simple  fact  of  her  being  occu- 
pied with  spiritism  and  engaged  in  mediumistic  ex- 
periments, is  sufficient.  Take  any  individual  hav- 
ing in  her  subconsciousness  memories,  scruples, 
emotional  tendencies,  put  into  her  head  spiritistic 
leanings,  then  seat  her  at  a  table,  or  put  a  pencil 
in  her  hand  :  even  though  she  may  not  be  of  a  very 
impressionable  or  suggestible  temperament,  or  in- 
clined to  the  mental  disintegration  which  the  general 

*  See  Lehmann's  Auberglaube  und  Zauberei,  p.  217  et  seq.  Stutt- 
gart, 1898. 

91 

Prom  india  to  the  planet  mars 

public  calls  the  mediumistic  faculty,  nevertheless, 
it  will  not  be  long  before  her  subliminal  elements 
group  themselves  and  arrange  themselves  accord- 
ing to  the  ''personal"  form  to  which  all  conscious- 
ness tends,"  and  which  discloses  itself  outwardly 
by  communications  which  have  the  appearance  of 
coming  directly  from  disincarnate  spirits. 

In  the  case  of  Mile.  Smith,  Leopold  did  not  exist 
under  the  title  of  a  distinct  secondary  personality 
before  Helene  began  to  be  occupied  with  spiritism. 
It  was  at  the  seances  of  the  N.  group,  by  an  emotion- 
al reaction  against  certain  influences,  as  we  have 
seen,  that  he  began,  little  by  little,  to  take  shape, 
aided  by  memories  of  the  same  general  tone,  until 
he  finally  grew  into  an  apparently  independent  be- 
ing, revealing  himself  through  the  table,  manifest- 
ing a  will  and  a  mind  of  his  own,  recalling  analo- 
gous former  incidents  of  Helene's  life,  and  claiming 
for  himself  the  merit  of  having  intervened  in  it  in  the 
role  of  her  protector. 

Once  established,  this  secondary  self  could  not 
do  otherwise  than  to  grow,  and  to  develop  and 
strengthen  itself  in  all  directions,  assimilating  to 
itself  a  host  of  new  data  favoring  the  state  of  sug- 
gestibility which  accompanies  the  exercise  of  medi- 
umship.  Without  the  spiritism  and  the  autohyp- 
notization  of  the  seances,  Leopold  could  never  have 
been  truly  developed  into  a  personality,  but  would 
have  continued   to  remain    in  the   nebulous,  inco- 

*  W.  James,  "  Thought  Tends  to  Personal  Form."  Principles 
of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  p.  225  et  seq.     New  York,  1890. 

92 

THE  PERSONALITY   OF    LEOPOLD 

herent  vstate  of  vague  subliminal  reveries  and  of 
occasional  automatic  phenomena. 

The  second  problem,  that  of  explaining  why  this 
secondary  personality,  once  established,  believes 
itself  to  be  Cagliostro  rather  than  any  other  cele- 
brated personage,  or  of  remaining  simply  the  anony- 
mous guardian  angel  of  Mile.  Smith,  would  demand 
a  very  complete  knowledge  of  the  thousand  outside 
influences  which  have  surrounded  Helene  since  the 
beginning  of  her  mediumship,  and  which  may  have 
involuntarily  influenced  her. 

But  on  this  point  I  have  only  succeeded  in  collecting 
a  very  few  incidents,  which  leave  much  still  to  be  de- 
sired, and  are  of  such  a  character  that  it  is  entirely 
permissible  for  any  one  to  claim  that  the  purely  psy- 
chological origin  of  that  personality  is  not  clearly 
established,  and  to  prefer,  if  he  chooses,  the  actual 
intervention  of  the  disincarnate  Joseph  Balsamo 
to  my  hypothesis  of  autosuggestion. 

The  following,  however,  are  the  facts  advanced 
by  me  in  support  of  the  latter : 

The  authoritative  and  jealous  spirit,  the  evident 
enemy  of  the  N.  group,  who  manifested  himself  on 
the  26th  of  August,  1892,  under  the  name  of  Leo- 
pold, did  not  reveal  his  identity  as  that  of  Cagliostro 
until  some  time  afterwards,  under  the  following  cir- 
cumstances : 

One  of  the  most  regular  attendants  at  the  re- 
unions of  the  N.  group  was  a  Mme.  B,,  who  had  long 
been  an  adherent  of  spiritism,  and  who  had  pre- 
viously attended  numerous  seances  at  the  house  of 
M.  and  Mme.  Badel,  a  thoroughly  convinced  couple 

93 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

of  amateurs,  now  deceased,  whose  salon  and  round 
table  have  held  a  very  honorable  place  in  the  history 
of  Genevese  occultism.  But  I  learned  from  Mme.  B. 
that  one  of  the  disincarnate  spirits  who  manifested 
himself  oftenest  at  the  seances  of  M.  and  Mme.  Badel 
was  this  very  Joseph  Balsamo.  There  is,  indeed, 
no  figure  in  history  which  accords  better  with  the 
idea  of  a  posthumous  return  to  the  mysteries  of  the 
round  table  than  that  of  the  enigmatic  Sicilian, 
especially  since  Alexandre  Dumas,  pere,  has  sur- 
rounded him  with  an  additional  halo  of  romance. 

Not  content  with  the  public  reunions  of  the  N. 
group,  Mme.  B.  often  invited  Helene  to  her  house  foi 
private  seances,  of  which  no  record  was  made.  At 
one  of  these,  Helene  having  had  a  vision  of  Leopold, 
who  pointed  out  to  her  with  a  wand  a  decanter,  Mme. 
B.  suddenly  thought  of  a  celebrated  episode  in  the  life 
of  Cagliostro,  and  after  the  seance  she  proceeded  to 
take  from  a  drawer  and  show  to  Helene  an  engraving 
taken  from  an  illustrated  edition  of  Dumas,  repre- 
senting the  famous  scene  of  the  decanter  between  Bal- 
samo and  the  Dauphin  at  the  chateau  of  Taverney. 
At  the  same  time  she  gave  utterance  to  the  idea  that 
the  spirit  who  manifested  himself  at  the  table  by  means 
of  Helene's  hands  was  certainly  Joseph  Balsamo  ; 
and  she  expressed  her  astonishment  that  Helene  had 
given  him  the  name  of  Leopold,  to  which  Helene  re- 
plied that  it  was  he  himself  who  had  given  that  name. 
Mme.  B.,  continuing  her  deductions,  told  Mile.  Smith 
that  perhaps  she  had  formerly  been  the  medium  of  the 
great  magician,  and  consequently  had  been  Lorenza 
Feliciani  in  a  former  life.     Helene  at  once  accepted  the 

94 

THE  PERSONALITY  OP  LEOPOLD 

idea,  and  for  several  weeks  considered  herself  to  be  the 
reincarnation  of  Lorenza,  until  one  day  a  lady  of  her 
acquaintance  remarked  that  it  was  impossible,  Loren- 
za  Feliciani  having  never  existed  save  in  the  imagina- 
tion and  the  romances  of  Alexandre  Dumas,  pere.''' 

Thus  dispossessed  of  her  supposed  former  existence, 
Helene  was  not  long  in  declaring  through  the  table 
that  she  was  Marie  Antoinette.  As  to  Leopold,  a 
short  time  after  Mme.  B.  had  hypothetically  identified 
him  with  Cagliostro,  he  himself  confirmed  that  hy- 
pothesis at  a  seance  of  the  N.  group,  dictating  to  the 
table  that  his  real  name  was  Joseph  Balsamo. 

The  origin  of  the  name  of  Leopold  is  very  obscure, 
and  many  hypotheses  have  been  advanced  to  ac- 
count for  it  without  our  being  able  to  establish  any 
of  them  with  certainty. 

One  fact,  however,  is  certain,  namely,  that  save  for 
the  vague  affirmation  that  he  had  known  Helene  in 
a  previous  existence,  Leopold  had  never  pretended  to 
be  Cagliostro,  or  given  any  reason  for  being  thought 
so,  before  the  reunion  where  Mme.  B.,  who  had  been 
for  some  time  accustomed  to  manifestations  of  that 
personage,  announced  the  supposition  and  showed 
Mile.  Smith  immediately  after  the  seance  (at  a  mo- 
ment when  she  was  probably  still  in  a  very  suggest- 
ible state)  an  engraving  from  Dumas'  works  repre- 
senting Balsamo  and  the  Dauphin.  From  that  day 
Leopold,  on  his  part,  never  failed  to  claim  that  per- 
sonality, and  progressively  to  realize  the  character  of 
the  role  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  as  we  shall  see. 

*  Alexandre  Dumas, /i^^^,  Memoirs  of  a  Physician,  chap.  xv. 

95 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

11.  Personification  of  Balsamo  by 

Leopold 

There  is  no  need,  1  think,  to  remind  the  reader  of 
the  well-known  fact — so  often  described  under  the 
names  of  objectivity  of  types,  personification,  change 
of  personality,  etc. — that  a  hypnotized  subject  can  be 
transformed  by  a  word  into  such  other  living  being 
as  may  be  desired,  according  to  the  measure  in 
which  his  suggestibility  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
vividness  of  his  imagination  and  the  fulness  of  his 
stored-up  knowledge  or  memories  on  the  other,  en- 
ables him  to  fulfil  the  role  which  is  imposed  upon 
him.  Without  investigating  here  to  what  extent 
mediums  may  be  likened  to  hypnotized  subjects,  it 
is  undeniable  that  an  analogous  phenomenon  takes 
place  in  them ;  but  the  process  is  more  gradual,  and 
may  extend  itself  over  several  years.  In  place  of 
the  immediate  metamorphosis  which  modifies  at  one 
stroke  and  instantly,  conformably  to  a  prescribed 
type,  the  attitude,  the  physiognomy,  the  gestures,  the 
words,  the  intonations  of  voice,  the  style,  the  hand- 
writing, and  other  functions  besides,  we  are,  in  the 
case  of  the  medium,  in  the  presence  of  a  develop- 
ment formed  by  successive  stages  arranged  accord- 
ing to  grades,  with  intervals  of  different  lengths, 
which  finally  succeed  in  creating  a  complete  person- 
ality, all  the  more  astonishing,  at  first  sight,  be- 
cause the  involuntary  suggestions  have  not  been 
noticed,  the  accumulations  of  which  have  little  by 
little  caused  its  birth.     This  process  of  development 

96 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

is  present  in  a  high  degree  in  the  case  of  Mile. 
Smith,  in  the  elaboration  of  her  secondary  person- 
ality, Leopold-Cagliostro. 

In  the  beginning,  in  1892  and  1893,  this  ''spirit" 
only  manifested  himself  by  the  brief  periods  of  sleep 
which  he  induced  in  Helene  at  certain  seances,  by 
raps  struck  upon  the  table,  by  visions  in  which  he 
showed  himself  clothed  in  black  and  of  youthful 
appearance,  and,  more  rarely,  by  auditive  hallu- 
cinations. His  character  and  the  content  of  his  mes- 
sages were  summed  up  in  imperious,  authoritative, 
domineering  manners,  with  the  pretension  of  claim- 
ing Mile.  Smith  all  for  himself,  of  defending  her 
against  the  influences  of  the  N.  group,  and,  finally, 
of  detaching  her  from  that  environment. 

There  was  nothing,  however,  in  this  general  char- 
acter of  monopoly  and  of  protection  which  specially 
recalled  the  Balsamo  of  history  or  of  romance.  The 
personification  of  complete  objectivity  of  this  estab- 
lished type  really  began  only  in  1894,  when  Leopold 
had  no  longer  to  struggle  with  an  environment  for- 
eign to  his  nature.  The  subconscious  psychological 
task  of  realization  of  the  proposed  model  could  then 
be  followed  by  him  more  freely  ;  in  spiritistic  terms, 
Joseph  Balsamo  was  able  to  manifest  himself  and 
make  himself  known  in  a  manner  more  complete 
through  Helene  as  an  intermediary,  while  contin- 
uing to  follow  and  protect  her  as  the  reincarnation 
of  the  royal  object  of  his  passion. 

At  the  seances  held  with  M.  Cuendet,  Leopold 
frequently  showed  himself  to  Helene  clothed  after 
the  fashion  of  the  last  century  and  with  a  face  like 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

that  of  Louis  XVL,  under  the  different  phases  of 
his  multiplex  genius.  He  also  showed  himself  to 
her  in  his  laboratory,  surrounded  by  utensils  and 
instruments  appropriate  to  the  sorcerer  and  alchem- 
ist that  he  was ;  or,  again,  as  the  physician  and  pos- 
sessor of  secret  elixirs,  the  knowledge  of  which  is 
productive  of  consultations  or  remedies  for  the  use 
of  sitters  who  need  them ;  or,  again,  as  the  illu- 
mined theosophist,  the  verbose  prophet  of  the  broth- 
erhood of  man,  who  diffuses  limping  Alexandrine 
verses  —  which  seem  to  have  been  inherited  from 
his  predecessor,  Victor  Hugo — containing  exhorta- 
tions a  little  weak  at  times,  but  always  stamped  with 
a  pure  moral  tone,  elevated  and  noble  sentiments, 
and  a  very  touching  religious  spirit — in  short,  a  fine 
example  of  that  "  ethico-deific  verbiage  "  (if  I  may  be 
allowed  the  expression,  which  is  an  Americanism), 
which,  both  in  prose  and  in  verse,  is  one  of  the  most 
frequent  and  estimable  products  of  mediumship. 

But  it  was  not  until  1895  that  Leopold,  benefiting 
by  the  progress  made  by  the  automatic  phenomena 
in  Helene,  multiplied  and  perfected  his  processes 
of  communication.  The  first  step  consisted  in  sub- 
stituting, in  his  dictations  by  spelling,  the  move- 
ments of  the  hand  or  of  a  single  finger  for  those  of 
the  whole  table.  This  was  the  immediate  result  of 
a  suggestion  of  mine. 

The  second  step  in  advance  was  the  handwriting, 
which  shows  two  stages.  In  the  first,  Leopold  gave 
Helene  the  impression  of  a  phrase  (verbo-visual  hal- 
lucination), which  she  copied  in  pencil  on  a  sheet 
of  paper,   in   her   own   handwriting.     The   second, 

98 

THE   PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

J 1 1  a  n  ct  inhnt  fu  4t  roc's  ^JattJ^cclt 
c/buracS  ^iu  ^Qour  cePa  j^tuJ  d^  /6ii 

te  ^^  qu  'au'jourd'^ouc'    a  cet  i^ozyCa-oit 
^6  -Hu^  ^oTce  d'^tr^  dUtne  mande 
^tdocS   <in  ' ahteozi'T'  de  iiccucouja 

Fig.  3.  Handwriting  of  Leopold.  Fragments  of  two  letters,  one  in  Alexandrine  verse, 
the  other  in  prose,  entirely  in  the  hand  of  Leopold,  automatically  written  by  Mile. 
Smith  in  spontaneous  hemisomnambulism. 

Fig.  4.    Normal  handwriting  of  Mile.  Smith. 

99 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

which  was  only  accompHshed  five  months  later, 
and  which  consisted  in  writing  directly  with  He- 
lene's  hand,  permitted  the  immediate  establishment 
of  three  curious  facts.  One  is,  that  Leopold  holds 
his  pen  in  the  usual  manner,  the  handle  resting  be- 
tween the  thumb  and  the  index-finger,  while  Helene, 
in  writing,  always  holds  her  pen-handle  or  pencil 
between  the  index  and  middle  fingers,  a  very  rare 
habit  with  us.  The  next  is  that  Leopold  has  an 
entirely  different  handwriting  from  that  of  Helene, 
a  calligraphy  more  regular,  larger,  more  painstak- 
ing, and  with  marked  differences  in  the  formation 
of  the  letters  (see  Figs.  3  and  4).  The  third  is 
that  he  uses  the  style  of  handwriting  of  the  last  cen- 
tury, and  puts  an  o  instead  of  an  a  in  the  tenses  of 
the  verbs,  j'amois,  for  j'amais,  etc.  These  three 
characteristics  he  has  never  departed  from  during 
all  the  four  years  that  I  have  been  accumulating 
specimens  of  his  handwriting. 

The  following  is  a  resume  of  the  seances  at  which 
these  two  innovations  took  place. 

April  21,  1895. — As  I  had  just  asked  Leopold  a 
question  which  he  did  not  like,  Helene,  being  in  a 
state  of  hemisomnambulism,  with  a  pencil  and  some 
sheets  of  paper  placed  before  her,  in  the  hope  of  ob- 
taining some  communication  (not  from  Leopold), 
seemed  about  to  plunge  into  a  very  interesting  peru- 
sal of  one  of  the  blank  sheets  ;  then,  at  my  request, 
which  she  with  difficulty  comprehended,  she  com- 
menced to  write  rapidly  and  nervously  on  another 
sheet,  in  her  usual  handwriting,  a  copy  of  the  im- 
aginary text  which  Leopold  was  showing  her  ("  in 

100 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

fluid  letters/'  as  he  said  afterwards  at  the  seance)  as 
follows  :  "  My  thoughts  are  not  thy  thoughts,  and  thy 
wishes  are  not  mine,  friend  Flournoy — Leopold"  At 
the  final  awakening  Helene  recognized  perfectly  her 
own  handwriting  in  his  phrase,  but  had  no  recol- 
lection of  the  occurrence. 

September  22,  1895. — After  different  visions  and 
some  stanzas  of  Victor  Hugo,  dictated  by  the  table, 
Helene  appeared  to  suffer  considerably  in  her  right 
arm,  which  she  was  holding  at  the  wrist  with  her  left 
hand,  when  the  table  at  which  she  was  seated  gave 
out  the  following,  dictated  by  Leopold  :  "  I  shall 
hold  her  hand,"  meaning  that  it  was  he,  Leopold, 
who  was  causing  Mile.  Smith  to  suffer  pain  by  seiz- 
ing her  right  hand.  As  she  seemed  to  feel  very 
badly  and  began  to  weep,  Leopold  was  asked  to  de- 
sist ;  but  he  refused,  and,  still  speaking  through  the 
table,  said,  "  Give  her  some  paper,"  then,  "  More 
light."  Writing  material  was  furnished  her  and 
the  lamp  brought  in,  which  Helene  gazed  at  fixed- 
ly, while  Leopold  continued  to  dictate  (this  time  with 
the  little  finger  of  her  left  hand),  "  Let  her  gaze  on 
the  lamp  until  she  forgets  the  pain  in  her  arm."  She 
then  seemed,  in  fact,  to  forget  her  pain,  and  to  find 
satisfaction  in  looking  at  the  lamp ;  then  she  fast- 
ened her  eyes  on  the  paper,  and  seemed  to  read 
something  there  which  she  endeavored  to  copy  in 
pencil.  But  here  the  right  hand  began  a  curious 
alternation  of  contrary  motions,  expressing  in  a  very 
clear  manner  a  contest  with  Leopold,  who  was  try- 
ing to  compel  her  to  hold  the  pencil  in  a  certain 
way,  which  Helene  refused  to  do,  with  a  great  pre- 

lOI 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

tence  of  anger.  She  persisted  in  holding  it  between 
the  index  and  middle  fingers,  as  was  her  wont,  while 
Leopold  wanted  her  to  hold  it  in  the  usual  way,  be- 
tween the  thumb  and  the  index-finger,  and  said :  "  I 
do  not  wish  her  to  .  .  .  she  is  holding  the  pencil 
very  badly."  The  right  index  -  finger  then  went 
through  a  very  comical  gymnastic  performance,  be- 
ing seized  with  a  tremor,  which  caused  her  to  place 
it  on  one  side  or  the  other  of  the  pencil,  according  to 
whether  it  was  Leopold  or  Helene  who  was  victori- 
ous ;  during  this  time  she  frequently  raised  her  eyes, 
with  a  look  sometimes  reproachful,  sometimes  sup- 
plicating, as  if  to  gaze  at  Leopold  standing  bj^  her 
side  endeavoring  to  force  her  to  hold  the  pencil  in 
the  manner  he  preferred.  After  a  contest  of  nearly 
twenty  minutes,  Helene,  vanquished  and  completely 
subdued  by  Leopold,  seemed  to  be  absent,  while  her 
hand,  holding  the  pencil  in  the  manner  she  did  not 
like,  wrote  slowly  the  two  following  lines,  followed  by 
a  rapid  and  feverish  signature  of  Leopold  : 

"  Mes  vers  sont  si  mauvais  que  pour  toi  j'aurois  dui 
Laisser  a  tout  jamais  le  poete  tetu. — Leopold." 

An  allusion,  which  was  of  no  importance,  to  a  re- 
mark made  by  me  at  the  commencement  of  the  se- 
ance on  the  verses  of  Victor  Hugo  and  those  of  Leo- 
pold frequently  dictated  by  the  table.  The  seance 
lasted  some  time  longer  ;  on  awakening,  Helene 
vaguely  remembered  having  seen  Leopold,  but  knew 
nothing  more  concerning  the  handwriting  scene. 

It  is  a  fact  that  while  her  other  incarnations  are 
always   accomplished   passively   and   without   any 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

struggle,  that  of  Leopold  has  the  peculiarity  of  reg- 
ularly provoking  more  or  less  resistance  on  the  part 
of  Helene.  "  I  do  not  make  of  her  all  that  I  wish 
.  .  .  she  is  headstrong.  ...  I  do  not  know  whether 
I  shall  succeed.  ...  I  do  not  believe  I  can  master 
her  to-day  ..."  replies  he  often  when  asked  to  in- 
carnate himself  or  write  with  her  hand,  and,  indeed, 
his  efforts  often  fail.  There  exists  between  Helene 
and  her  guide  a  curious  phenomenon  of  contrast  and 
opposition,  which  only  breaks  out  in  the  higher  and 
more  recent  forms  of  motor  automatism,  the  hand- 
writing, the  speech,  or  the  complete  incarnation,  but 
from  which  the  sensory  messages  and  simple  raps 
on  the  table  or  of  the  finger  are  free.  It  is  very  pos- 
sible that  the  idea,  very  antipathetic  to  Helene,  of 
the  hypnotizer  mastering  his  subjects  in  spite  of 
themselves — of  the  disincarnated  Cagliostro  using  his 
medium  as  a  simple  tool — has  been  subconsciously 
the  origin  of  this  constant  note  of  revolt  against  the 
total  domination  of  Leopold,  and  of  the  intense  suffer- 
ing which  accompanied  his  first  incarnations,  and 
which  has  slowly  diminished  through  her  becoming 
accustomed  to  the  process,  though  it  has  never  been 
completely  banished. 

After  the  handwriting,  in  its  turn  came  speech, 
which  also  was  attained  by  means  of  two  stages. 
In  a  first  attempt  Leopold  only  succeeded  in  giving 
Helene  his  intonation  and  pronunciation  after  a 
seance  in  which  she  suffered  acutely  in  her  mouth 
and  in  her  neck,  as  though  her  vocal  organs  were 
being  manipulated  or  removed;  she  began  to  talk 
in  a  natural  tone,  and  was  apparently  wide  awake 

103 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

and  feeling  well,  but  spoke  with  a  deep  bass  voice, 
and  a  strong,  easilj^  recognizable  Italian  accent.  It 
was  not  until  a  year  later  that  Leopold  was  finally 
able  to  speak  himself  by  the  mouth  of  Mile.  Smith, 
while  she  was  completely  entranced,  and  who  did  not 
retain  on  awakening  any  memory  of  this  strange  oc- 
currence. Since  then  the  complete  control  of  the 
medium  by  her  guide  is  a  frequent  occurrence  at 
the  seances,  and  affords  a  tableau  very  character- 
istic and  always  impressive. 

Leopold  succeeds  in  incarnating  himself  only  by 
slow  degrees  and  progressive  stages.  Helene  then 
feels  as  though  her  arms  had  been  seized,  or  as  if  they 
were  absent  altogether;  then  she  complains  of  dis- 
agreeable sensations,  which  were  formerly  painful,  in 
her  throat,  the  nape  of  her  neck,  and  in  her  head  ;  her 
eyelids  droop  ;  her  expression  changes  ;  her  throat 
swells  into  a  sort  of  double  chin,  which  gives  her  a 
likeness  of  some  sort  to  the  well  -  known  figure  of 
Cagliostro.  All  at  once  she  rises,  then,  turning 
slowly  towards  the  sitter  whom  Leopold  is  about  to 
address,  draws  herself  up  proudly,  turns  her  back 
quickly,  sometimes  with  her  arms  crossed  on  her 
breast  with  a  magisterial  air,  sometimes  with  one 
of  them  hanging  down  while  the  other  is  pointed 
solemnly  towards  heaven,  and  with  her  fingers  makes 
a  sort  of  masonic  sign,  which  never  varies.  Soon 
after  a  series  of  hiccoughs,  sighs,  and  various  noises 
indicate  the  difficulty  Leopold  is  experiencing  in  tak- 
ing hold  of  the  vocal  apparatus  ;  the  words  come  forth 
slowly  but  strong  ;  the  deep  bass  voice  of  a  man, 
slightly  confused,  with  a  pronunciation  and  accent 

104 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF   LEOPOLD 

markedly  foreign,  certainly  more  like  Italian  than 
anything  else.  Leopold  is  not  always  easily  under- 
stood, especially  when  his  voice  swells  and  thunders 
out  a  reply  to  some  indiscreet  question  or  to  the  dis- 
respectful remarks  of  some  skeptical  sitter.  He 
speaks  thickly,  pronounces  g  like  j,  and  all  his  u's  like 
ou,  accents  the  final  syllables,  embellishes  his  vo- 
cabulary with  obsolete  words,  or  words  which  do 
not  fit  the  circumstances,  such  as  fiole  for  bouteille, 
omnibus  for  tramways,  etc.  He  is  pompous,  grandil- 
oquent, unctuous,  sometimes  severe  and  terrible, 
sometimes  also  sentimental.  He  says  "  thee  "  and 
''  thou  "  to  everybody,  and  appears  to  believe  that  he 
is  still  grand-master  of  the  secret  societies,  from  the 
emphatic  and  sonorous  manner  in  which  he  pro- 
nounces the  words  ''  Brother ''  or  ''And  thou,  my  sis- 
ter," by  which  he  addresses  the  sitters.  Although 
he  generally  addresses  himself  to  one  of  them  in 
particular,  and  holds  very  little  collective  discourse, 
he  is  in  touch  with  every  one,  listens  to  everything 
that  is  said,  and  each  one  may  have  his  turn  in  con- 
versation with  him.  Ordinarily  he  keeps  his  eye- 
lids closed  :  he  has,  nevertheless,  been  persuaded 
to  open  his  eyes  in  order  to  permit  the  taking  of  a 
photograph  by  a  flash  light.  I  regret  that  Mile. 
Smith  would  not  consent  to  the  publication  of  her 
photographs,  either  in  her  normal  state  or  in  that  of 
Leopold,  in  connection  with  the  reproduction  of  a 
portrait  of  Cagliostro.*     The  reader  may  assure  him- 

*  The  one  which  is  found,  for  example,  at  the  beginning  of 
the  Vie  de  Joseph  Balsamo^  etc.,  translated  from  the  Italian  (3d 
edition,    P^ris,  1791),  and  which  has  been  several  tinies  reprg- 

105 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

self  that  when  she  incarnates  her  guide  she  really 
assumes  a  certain  resemblance  of  features  to  him, 
and  there  is  something  in  her  attitude  which  is  some- 
times somewhat  theatrical,  but  sometimes  really  maj- 
estic, which  corresponds  well  to  the  generally  received 
idea  of  this  personage,  whether  he  is  regarded  as  a 
clever  impostor  or  as  a  wonderful  genius. 

Speech  is  the  apogee  of  the  incarnations  of  Leopold  ; 
often  interrupted  by  fits  of  hiccoughs  and  spasms, 
it  seems  to  be  injurious  to  Helene's  organism,  and 
there  are  some  seances  at  which  attempts  to  produce 
it  fail  to  succeed.  Leopold,  on  these  occasions,  indi- 
cates his  impotence  and  the  fatigue  of  the  medium 
by  his  gestures,  and  is  then  reduced  to  the  necessity 
of  expressing  himself  by  digital  dictations  or  hand- 
writing, or  else  to  giving  Helene  verbo-auditive  hal- 
lucinations, the  content  of  which  she  repeats  in  her 
natural  voice. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  ease  and  mobility  of  the 
entire  organism,  there  is  a  notable  difference  between 
Leopold  and  the  other  incarnations  of  Helene  :  these 
last  seem  to  be  effected  with  much  more  facility  than 
in  the  case  of  that  of  her  guide  par  excellence.  In 
the  case  of  the  Hindoo  princess  and  that  of  Marie 
Antoinette,  the  perfection  of  the  play,  the  suppleness 
and  freedom  of  movement,  are  always  admirable.  It 
is  true  there  is  no  question  here,  according  to  the 
spiritistic  doctrine  and  the  subconscious  ideas  of  Mile. 
Smith,  of  incarnations  properly  so  called,   since  it 

duced.     Mile.  Smith  has  hanging  over  her  fireplace  a  fine  copy 
of  this  portrait. 

io6 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

is  she  herself  who  simply  returns  to  that  which  she 
formerly  was,  by  a  sort  of  reversion  or  prenatal 
ecmnesia  ;  she  does  not  undergo,  in  consequence, 
any  foreign  possession,  and  can  in  these  roles  pre- 
serve her  natural  identity  and  the  entire  disposition 
of  her  faculties.  But  still  the  occasional  incarna- 
tion of  different  personalities,  such  as  those  of  de- 
ceased parents  or  friends  of  the  spectators,  are  often 
more  easily  and  quickly  effected  than  that  of  Leopold. 
Helene  moves  in  these  cases  with  more  vivacity  and 
changes  of  attitude.  In  the  role  of  Cagliostro,  on  the 
other  hand,  with  the  exception  of  the  grandiose  and 
not  very  frequent  movements  of  the  arms,  once  stand- 
ing, she  remains  motionless,  or  only  with  difficulty 
advancing  a  little  way  towards  the  person  to  whom 
she  addresses  her  discourse. 

The  content  of  the  oral  conversations  of  Leopold, 
as  well  as  of  his  other  messages  by  the  various  sen- 
sory and  motor  processes,  is  too  varied  for  me  to 
describe  here  :  the  numerous  examples  scattered 
through  this  work  only  can  give  an  idea  of  it. 

IIL  Leopold   and    the    True    Joseph 
Balsamo 

It  would  naturally  be  supposed  that  Leopold  would 
have  given  us,  by  means  of  the  psychological  per- 
fection of  his  partial  or  total  incarnations  and  by  the 
content  of  his  messages,  such  a  living  likeness  of 
Cagliostro  that  there  would  have  been  occasion  to 
ask  whether  it  is  *not  really  the  latter  who  actually 
''returns,"  in  the  same  way  that  Dr.  Hodgson  and  his 

107 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

colleagues  ask  themselves  whether  it  is  not  actually 
George  Pelham  who  manifests  himself  through  Mrs. 
Piper.  Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  Leopold 
possessed  a  handwriting,  an  orthography,  a  style 
identical  with  that  which  is  found  here  and  there  in 
the  manuscripts  of  Joseph  Balsamo  ;  that  he  spoke 
French,  Italian,  or  German,  as  that  cosmopolitan  ad- 
venturer did,  and  with  all  the  same  peculiarities ; 
that  his  conversations  and  messages  were  full  of 
precise  allusions  to  actual  events  in  his  life,  and 
also  of  unpublished  but  verifiable  facts,  etc.  In  that 
case  the  difficult  and  delicate  task  of  proving  that 
Mile.  Smith  had  no  knowledge  through  normal 
methods  of  these  thousand  exact  features  would  still 
remain,  and  we  should  not  be  forced  to  ask  whether 
this  soi-disant  authentic  revenant  is  simply  a  very 
well-gotten-up  simulacrum,  an  admirable  reconstruc- 
tion, a  marvellous  imitation,  such  as  the  subliminal 
faculties  are  only  too  glad  to  produce  for  the  diver- 
sion of  psychologists  and  the  mystification  of  the 
simple. 

This  problem  is  not  given  to  us.  I  regret  it,  but 
it  is  true,  nevertheless — to  my  mind,  at  least,  for 
in  these  matters  it  is  prudent  to  speak  only  for  one's 
self — that  there  is  no  reason  to  suspect  the  real  pres- 
ence of  Joseph  Balsamo  behind  the  automatisms 
of  Mile.  Smith. 

That  there  are  very  curious  analogies  between 
what  is  known  to  us  of  Cagliostro  and  certain  charac- 
teristic traits  of  Leopold,  I  do  not  deny,  but  they  are 
precisely  such  as  accord  very  well  with  the  suppo- 
sition of  the  subliminal  medley. 

1 08 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

S.2. 

^  55     C    ^ 

fV 

109 

l-^ 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Let  us  consider  first  the  handwriting.  To  faciU- 
tate  the  comparison,  I  have  reproduced  here  (see  pp. 
109  and  III)  some  fragments  of  letters  of  Caghostro 
and  of  Leopold  and  of  Helene.  Let  us  suppose — 
which  is,  perhaps,  open  to  discussion — that  the 
handwriting  of  Leopold,  by  its  regularity,  its  firm- 
ness, resembles  that  of  Balsamo  more  than  that 
of  Mile.  Smith  ;  the  degree  of  resemblance  does  not, 
I  think,  go  beyond  that  which  might  be  expected 
considering  the  notorious  fact  that  handwriting 
reflects  the  psychological  temperament  and  modifies 
itself  in  accordance  with  the  state  of  the  personality.'" 

It  is  well  known  how  the  calligraphy  of  a  hyno 
tized  subject  varies  according  to  the  suggestion 
that  he  shall  personate  Napoleon,  Harpagon,  a  lit- 
tle girl,  or  an  old  man  ;  there  is  nothing  surprising 
in  the  fact  that  the  hypnoid  secondary  personality 
of  Helene,  which  imagines  itself  to  be  the  powerful 
and  manly  Count  of  Cagliostro,  should  be  accom- 
panied by  muscular  tensions  communicating  to  the 
handwriting  itself  a  little  of  that  solidity  and  breadth 
which  are  found  in  the  autograph  of  Balsamo.  To 
this,  however,  the  analogy  is  limited.  The  dissimi- 
larities in  the  detail  and  the  formation  of  the  letters 
are  such  that  the  only  conclusion  which  they  war- 
rant is  that  Mile.  Smith,  or  her  subconsciousness, 
has  never  laid  eyes  on  the  manuscripts  of  Cagliostro. 
They  are,  indeed,  rare,  but  the  facilities  she  might 
have  had,  of  which  she  has  not  thought  of  taking 

*  See,  e.g.^  Ferrari,  Hericourt,  and  Richet,  "  Personality  and 
\iz.Vidiyjx\\\vigy''  Revue  philo sop hique,  vol,  xxi.  p.  414. 

1 10 

THE  PERSONALITY  OP  LEOPOLD 

^f  ^^i> ' 

3  o  5) 
03  o   -^ 

§§^ 

B  o  5* 

3  n  pS 

Ill 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

advantage,  for  consulting  in  the  Geneva  public  li- 
brary the  same  volume  from  which  I  took  Fig.  5, 
would  prove,  at  least,  her  good  faith  and  her  hon- 
esty, if  it  were  in  the  least  necessary.  The  extrav- 
agant signature  of  Leopold  with  which  all  his  mes- 
sages are  subscribed  (see  Fig.  7)  recalls  in  no  wise  that 
of  Alessandro  di  Cagliostro  at  the  bottom  of  Fig.  5. 

The  archaic  forms  of  orthography,  faurois  for 
j'aurais,  etc.,  which  appear  above  the  first  auto- 
graph of  Leopold  (see  p.  99),  and  which  occur  again 
in  the  messages  of  Marie  Antoinette,  constitute  a 
very  pretty  hit,  of  which  the  ordinary  self  would 
probably  never  dream  by  way  of  voluntary  imita- 
tion, but  by  which  the  subconscious  imagination 
has  seen  fit  to  profit.  It  is  undoubtedly  a  matter 
for  wonderment  that  Mile.  Smith,  who  has  not  gone 
very  deep  into  literary  studies,  should,  neverthe- 
less, have  retained  these  orthographic  peculiarities 
of  the  eighteenth  century;  but  we  must  not  over- 
look the  fineness  of  choice,  the  refined  sensibility, 
the  consummate,  albeit  instinctive,  art  which  pre- 
sides over  the  sorting  and  storing  away  of  the  subcon- 
scious memories.  By  some  natural  affinity,  the  idea 
of  a  personage  of  a  certain  epoch  attracts  and  gath- 
ers into  its  net  everything  that  the  subject  can  pos- 
sibly learn  or  hear  spoken  concerning  the  fashion 
of  writing,  of  speaking,  or  acting,  peculiar  to  that 
epoch.  I  do  not  know  whether  Balsamo  ever  used 
the  French  language  and  the  orthography  that  Leo- 
pold employs.  Even  if  he  did,  it  would  not  weaken 
the  hypothesis  of  the  subliminal  imitation,  but  if, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  should  be  ascertained  that  he 

112 

THE   PERSONALITY  OP  LEOPOLD 

did  not,  the  hypothesis  would  be  greatly  strength- 
ened thereby. 

As  for  the  speech,  I  am  ignorant  as  to  how,  with 
what  accent  and  what  peculiarities  of  pronuncia- 
tion, Balsamo  spoke  the  French  tongue,  and  to  what 
degree,  in  consequence,  his  reconstruction  by  He- 
lene's  subliminal  fantasy  correctly  hits  it.  If  this 
point  could  be  cleared  up,  it  would  probably  be 
found  to  be  just  like  that  of  the  handwriting. 
Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  to  ascribe  to 
the  chevalier  d' Industrie  of  Palermo  a  very  mascu- 
line, deep-bass  voice,  and,  it  goes  without  saying, 
as  Italian  as  possible.  It  must  be  noted,  too,  that 
Mile.  Smith  often  heard  her  father  speak  that  lan- 
guage, which  he  knew  very  well,  with  several  of  his 
friends  ;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  she  does  not 
speak  it,  and  has  never  learned  it.  Leopold,  how- 
ever, does  not  know  Italian,  and  turns  a  deaf  ear 
when  any  one  addresses  him  in  that  language. 
The  intonation,  the  attitude,  the  whole  physiog- 
nomy, in  short,  accord  with  these  remarks.  As  to 
the  extremely  varied  content  of  the  conversations 
and  messages  of  Leopold,  we  are  not  obliged  to 
consider  Balsamo  as  their  necessary  author.  When 
everything  relating  to  Mile.  Smith  and  the  sitters, 
but  which  has  nothing  to  do  wi  h  the  last  century, 
has  been  swept  aside,  together  with  the  spiritistic 
dissertations  in  regard  to  the  ''  fluid  "  manner  in 
which  Leopold  exists,  perceives,  and  moves,  the 
three  subjects  or  categories  of  communications  still 
remain,  which  merit  a  rapid  examination. 

In  the  first  place,  there  are  the  answers  of  Leopold 

H  113 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

to  the  questions  put  to  him  concerning  his  terres- 
trial Hfe.     These  answers  are    remarkably  evasive 
or  vague.     Not  a  name,  not  a  date,  not  a  precise 
fact  does  he  furnish.     We  only  learn   that  he  has 
travelled  extensively,  suffered  greatly,  studied  deep- 
ly, done  much  good,  and  healed  a  great  many  sick 
folk  ;  but  now  he  sees  things  too  lofty  to  think  any 
more  about   historic    details   of  the  past,  and  it  is 
with    unconcealed   disgust   or    direct   words   of  re- 
proach for  the  idle  curiosity  of  his  carnal  questioners 
that  he  hastens  to  turn  the  conversation,  like  Soc- 
rates, to  moral  subjects  and  those  of  a  lofty  philos- 
ophy, where  he  feels  evidently  more  at  ease.     When 
he  is  further  pressed  he  becomes  angry  sometimes, 
and  sometimes  ingenuously  avows  his  ignorance, 
enveloping  it  meanwhile  in  an  air  of  profound  mys- 
tery.    "  They  are  asking  the  secret  of  my  life,  of  my 
acts,  of  my  thoughts.     I  cannot  answer."    This  does 
not  facilitate  investigation  of  the  question  of  identity. 
In  the  second  place  come  the  consultations  and 
medical  prescriptions.     Leopold  affects  a  lofty  dis- 
dain for  modern  medicine  and  phenic  acid.     He  is 
as  archaic  in  his  therapeutics  as  in  his  orthography, 
and  treats  all  maladies  after  the  ancient  mode.   Baths 
of  pressed  grape-skins  for '  rheumatism,  an  infusion 
of    coltsfoot  and  juniper  -  berry  in  white  wine  for 
inflammations  of  the  chest,  the  bark  of   the  horse- 
chestnut  in  red  wine  and  douches  of  salt  water  as 
tonics,  tisanes  of  hops  and  other  flowers,  camomile, 
oil  of  lavender,  the  leaves  of  the  ash,  etc. ;  all  these 
do   not    accord    badlj^  with   what    Balsamo    might 
have  prescribed   a  century  or  more  ago.     The  mis- 

114 

THE   PERSONALITY  OF   LEOPOLD 

fortune,  from  the  evidential  point  of  view,  is  that 
Mile.  Smith's  mother  is  extremely  well  versed  in  all 
the  resources  of  popular  medicine  where  old  recipes 
are  perpetuated.  She  has  had  occasion  to  nurse 
many  sick  people  in  her  life,  knows  the  virtues  of 
different  medicinal  plants,  and  constantly  employs, 
with  a  sagacity  which  I  have  often  admired,  a  num- 
ber of  those  remedies  spoken  of  as ''  old-women's," 
which  make  the  young  doctors  fresh  from  the  clinic 
smile,  but  to  which  they  will  more  than  once  resort 
in  secret  after  a  few  years  of  medical  experience. 

Finally,  there  still  remain  the  sentiments  of  Leo- 
pold for  Helene,  which  he  claims  are  only  the  con- 
tinuation of  those  of  Cagliostro  for  Marie  Antoinette. 
My  ignorance  of  history  does  not  permit  me  to  pro- 
nounce categorically  on  this  point.  That  the  Queen 
of  France  did  have  some  secret  interviews  with  the 
famous  ''  gold-maker,"  due  to  simple  curiosity  or  to 
questions  of  material  interest,  there  is  no  doubt,  I 
believe ;  but  that  his  feelings  for  his  sovereign  were 
a  curious  combination  of  the  despairing  passion  of 
Cardinal  Rohan  for  the  queen,  with  the  absolute  re- 
spect which  Alexandre  Dumas,  pere,  ascribes  to  Jo- 
seph Balsamo  towards  Lorenza  Feliciani,  appears  to 
me  less  evident. 

In  short,  if  the  revelations  of  Leopold  have  truly 
unveiled  to  us  shades  of  feeling  of  Count  Cagliostro 
hitherto  unsuspected,  and  of  which  later  documen- 
tary researches  shall  confirm  the  historic  correctness 
— why,  so  much  the  better,  for  that  will  finally  estab- 
lish a  trace  of  the  supernormal  in  the  mediumship  of 
Helene  ! 

115 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

IV.  Leopold  and  Mlle.  Smith 

The  connection  between  these  two  personalities 
is  too  complex  for  a  precise  description.  There  is 
neither  a  mutual  exclusion,  as  between  Mrs.  Piper 
and  Phinuit,  who  appear  reciprocally  to  be  ignorant 
of  each  other  and  to  be  separated  by  the  tightest 
of  partitions;  nor  a  simple  jointing,  as  in  the  case  of 
Felida  X.,  whose  secondary  state  envelops  and  over- 
flows the  whole  primary  state.  This  is  more  of  a 
crossing  of  lines,  but  of  which  the  limits  are  vague 
and  with  difficulty  assignable.  Leopold  knows,  fore- 
sees, and  recalls  very  many  things  of  which  the  nor- 
mal personality  of  Mlle.  Smith  knows  absolutely 
nothing,  not  only  of  those  which  she  may  simply 
have  forgotten,  but  of  those  of  which  she  never  had 
any  consciousness.  On  the  other  hand,  he  is  far 
from  possessing  all  the  memories  of  Helene  ;  he  is 
ignorant  of  a  very  great  part  of  her  daily  life  ;  even 
some  very  notable  incidents  escape  him  entirely, 
which  explains  his  way  of  saying  that,  to  his  great 
regret,  he  cannot  remain  constantly  by  her,  being 
obliged  to  occupy  himself  with  other  missions  (con- 
cerning which  he  has  never  enlightened  us)  which 
oblige  him  often  to  leave  her  for  a  time. 

These  two  personalities  are,  therefore,  not  co-ex- 
tensive ;  each  one  passes  beyond  the  other  at  certain 
points,  without  its  being  possible  for  us  to  say  which 
is,  on  the  whole,  the  more  extended.  As  to  their 
common  domain,  if  it  cannot  be  defined  by  one  word 
with  entire  certainty,  it  appears,  nevertheless,  to  be 

ii6 

THE   PERSONALITY   OF  LEOPOLD 

chiefly  constituted  by  its  connection  with  the  inner- 
most ranges  of  the  being,  both  physiological  and 
psychological,  as  might  be  suspected  from  what  I 
remarked  above  concerning  the  real  origin  of  Leo- 
pold. Physician  of  the  soul  and  of  the  body,  di- 
rector of  conscience,  and  at  the  same  time  hygienic 
counsellor,  he  does  not  always  manifest  himself  im- 
mediatelj^  but  he  is  always  present  when  Helene's 
vital  interests  are  involved.  This  will  be  made 
clearer  by  two  or  three  concrete  examples,  which 
will  at  the  same  time  illustrate  some  of  the  psy- 
chological processes  by  which  Leopold  manifests 
himself  to  Helene. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  there  is  a  disagreement 
and  opposition  as  complete  as  possible  (but  how  far 
does  this  "possible"  go?)  when  Helene,  in  at  least 
an  apparently  waking  state,  converses  with  her 
guide,  manifestly  by  a  partial  sensory  or  motor  au- 
tomatism ;  for  example,  in  the  case  cited  on  page  64, 
where  Leopold,  not  sharing  the  allochiria  of  Helene, 
declared  by  the  table  that  she  was  wrong,  so  emphati- 
cally that  she  protested  and  became  angry  ;  also, 
when  in  verbo-auditive  hallucinations,  or  by  auto- 
matic handwriting,  he  enters  into  discussion  with 
her,  and  she  holds  her  own  with  him  ;  or,  again, 
when  the  organism  seems  to  be  divided  up  between 
two  different  persons, Leopold  speaking  by  Helene' s 
mouth,  with  his  accent,  and  uttering  his  own  ideas 
to  her,  and  she  complaining,  in  writing,  of  pains  in 
her  head  and  throat,  without  understanding  their 
cause.  Nevertheless,  in  these  cases  of  division  of  the 
consciousness,  which  appear  to  amount  to  its  cutting 

117 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

in  two,  it  is  doubtful  whether  this  plurahty  is  more 
than  apparent.  I  am  not  positive  of  having  ever 
estabhshed  with  Helene  a  veritable  simultaneity  of 
different  consciousnesses.  At  the  very  moment 
at  which  Leopold  writes  by  her  hand,  speaks  by  her 
mouth,  dictates  to  the  table,  upon  observing  her  at- 
tentively I  have  always  found  her  absorbed,  pre- 
occupied, as  though  absent  ;  but  she  instantaneous- 
ly recovers  her  presence  of  mind  and  the  use  of  her 
waking  faculties  at  the  end  of  the  motor  automa- 
tism. In  short,  that  which  from  the  outside  is  taken 
for  the  coexistence  of  distinct  simultaneous  person- 
alities seems  to  me  to  be  only  an  alternation,  a  rapid 
succession  between  the  state  of  Helene- conscious- 
ness and  the  state  of  Leopold -consciousness;  and, 
in  the  case  where  the  body  seems  to  be  jointly  oc- 
cupied by  two  independent  beings — the  right  side, 
for  instance,  being  occupied  by  Leopold,  and  the 
left  by  Helene,  or  the  Hindoo  princess — the  psychical 
division  has  never  seemed  to  me  to  be  radical,  but 
many  indications  have  combined  to  make  me  of  the 
opinion  that  behind  all  was  an  individuality  per- 
fectly self-conscious,  and  enjoying  thoroughly,  along 
with  the  spectators,  the  comedy  of  the  plural  exist- 
ences. 

A  single  fundamental  personality,  putting  the 
questions  and  giving  the  answers,  quarrelling  with 
itself  in  its  own  interior — in  a  word,  enacting  all  the 
various  roles  of  Mile.  Smith — is  a  fitting  interpreta- 
tion, which  accords  very  well  with  the  facts  as  I  have 
observed  them  in  Helene,  and  very  much  better  than 
the  theory  of  a  plurality  of  separate  consciousness- 

ii8 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

es,  of  a  psychological  polyzoism^  so  to  speak.  This 
last  theory  is  doubtless  more  convenient  for  a  clear 
and  superficial  description  of  the  facts,  but  I  am  not 
at  all  convinced  that  it  conforms  to  the  actual  con- 
dition of  affairs. 

It  is  a  state  of  consciousness  sui  generis,  which  it 
is  impossible  adequately  to  describe,  and  which  can 
only  be  represented  by  the  analogy  of  those  curious 
states,  exceptional  in  the  normal  waking  life,  but 
less  rare  in  dreams,  when  one  seems  to  change  his 
identity  and  become  some  one  else. 

Helene  has  more  than  once  told  me  of  having  had 
the  impression  of  becoming  or  being  momentarily 
Leopold.  This  happens  most  frequently  at  night, 
or  upon  awakening  in  the  morning.  She  has  first 
a  fugitive  vision  of  her  protector ;  then  it  seems  that 
little  by  little  he  is  submerged  in  her ;  she  feels  him 
overcoming  and  penetrating  her  entire  organism,  as 
if  he  really  became  her  or  she  him.  These  mixed 
states  are  extremely  interesting  to  the  psychologist; 
unhappily,  because  they  generallj^  take  place  in  a 
condition  of  consecutive  amnesia,  or  because  the 
mediums  do  not  know  how,  or  do  not  wish,  to  give  a 
complete  account  of  them,  it  is  very  rare  that  detailed 
descriptions  are  obtained. 

Between  the  two  extremes  of  complete  duality  and 
complete  unity  numerous  intermediate  states  are  to 
be  observed ;  or,  at  least,  since  the  consciousness  of 
another  cannot  be  directly  penetrated,  these  mixed 
states  may  be  inferred  from  the  consequences  which 
spring  from  them. 

It  has  happened,  for  example,  that,  believing  they 
119 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

were  dealing  with  Leopold  alone,  thoroughly  incar- 
nated and  duly  substituted  for  the  personality  of 
Mile.  Smith,  the  sitters  have  allowed  to  escape  them 
on  that  account  some  ill-timed  pleasantry,  some  in- 
discreet question  or  too  free  criticisms,  all  innocent 
enough  and  without  evil  intention,  but  still  of  a  nat- 
ure to  wound  Helene  if  she  had  heard  them,  and  from 
which  the  authors  would  certainly  have  abstained  in 
her  presence  in  a  waking  state. 

Leopold  has  not  stood  upon  ceremony  in  putting 
down  these  imprudent  babblers,  and  the  incident, 
generally,  has  had  no  further  consequences.  But 
sometimes  the  words  and  bearing  of  Mile.  Smith  for 
days  or  weeks  afterwards  show  that  she  was  aware 
of  the  imprudent  remarks,  which  proves  that  the  con- 
sciousness of  Leopold  and  her  own  are  not  separated 
by  an  impenetrable  barrier,  but  that  osmotic  changes 
are  effected  from  the  one  to  the  other.  It  is  ordinar- 
ily pointed  and  irritating  remarks  which  cause  the 
trouble,  which  goes  to  prove  that  it  is  the  feelings  of 
self-love  or  personal  susceptibility  that  form  in  each 
one  of  us  the  inmost  fortifications  of  the  social  self, 
and  are  the  last  to  be  destroyed  by  somnambulism,  or 
that  they  constitute  the  fundamental  substratum,  the 
common  base  by  which  Leopold  and  Mile.  Smith  form 
a  whole  and  mingle  themselves  in  the  same  indi- 
viduality. 

The  psj^chological  process  of  this  transmission  is 
varied  from  another  cause.  Sometimes  it  appears 
that  the  consecutive  amnesia  of  the  trance  has  been 
broken  as  to  the  most  piquant  details,  and  that  Helene 
clearly  remembers  that  which  has  been  said^  in  the 

12Q 

THE   PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

presence  of  Leopold,  disagreeable  to  herself.  Some 
times  it  is  Leopold  himself  who  repeats  to  her  the  un- 
pleasant expressions  which  have  been  used,  with  com- 
mentaries calculated  to  lessen  their  effect  and  to  ex- 
cuse the  culprits :  for  it  is  an  interesting  trait  of  his 
character  that  he  undertakes  with  Helene  the  defence 
of  those  same  persons  whom  he  reprimands  and 
blames,  a  contradiction  not  at  all  surprising  when 
it  is  psychologically  interpreted,  considering  the 
habitual  conflict  of  emotional  motives  or  tendencies, 
the  warfare  which  opposite  points  of  view  is  inces- 
santly carrying  on  in  our  inmost  being.  Sometimes, 
again,  it  is  in  a  dream  that  the  junction  is  effected 
between  the  somnambulistic  consciousness  of  Leo- 
pold and  the  normal  consciousness  of  Helene. 

Apropos  of  the  last  case,  here  is  an  example  con- 
taining nothing  disagreeable,  in  which  Helene  re- 
membered in  her  waking  state  a  nocturnal  dream, 
which  was  itself  a  repetition  or  echo,  in  natural 
sleep,  of  a  somnambulistic  scene  of  the  previous  even- 
ing. 

In  a  seance  at  which  I  assisted,  shortly  after  my 
recovery  from  an  attack  of  congestion  of  the  lungs, 
Helene,  completely  entranced,  has  a  vision  of  Leopold- 
Cagliostro,  who,  in  the  role  of  sympathetic  physician, 
comes  to  hold  a  consultation  with  me.  After  some 
preliminaries  she  kneels  down  by  my  chair,  and,  look- 
ing alternately  at  my  chest  and  at  the  fictitious  doctor 
standing  between  us,  she  holds  a  long  conversation 
with  him,  in  which  she  explains  the  condition  of  my 
lungs,  which  she  sees  in  imagination,  and  the  treat- 
ijient  which  Leopold  prescribes,  somewhat  as  follows : 

12? 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

" .  .  .  It  is  the  lungs  ...  it  is  darker  ...  it  is  one 
side  which  has  been  affected  .  .  .  You  say  that  it 
is  a  severe  inflammation — and  can  that  be  healed? 
.  .  .  Tell  me,  what  must  be  done  .  .  .  Oh,  where  have 
I  seen  any  of  these  plants  ?  .  .  .  I  don't  know  what 
they  are  called  .  .  .  those  ...  I  don't  understand 
very  well  .  .  .  those  synantherous  ?  .  .  .  Oh,  what 
a  queer  name  .  .  .  Where  are  they  to  be  found  ? 
.  .  .  You  say  it  belongs  to  the  family  of  .  .  .  then 
it  has  another  name  ?  Tell  me  what  it  is  .  .  .  some 
tissulages  [sic]  .  .  .  Then  you  think  this  plant  is  good 
for  him  ?  .  .  .  Ah  !  but  explain  this  to  me  .  .  .  the 
fresh  leaves  or  the  dried  flowers  ?  Three  times  a  day, 
a  large  handful  in  a  pint  .  .  .  and  then  honey  and 
milk.  ...  I  will  tell  him  that  he  must  drink  three 
cups  a  day  .  .  ."  etc.  Then  followed  very  detailed 
directions  as  to  treatment,  various  infusions,  blis- 
ters, etc.  The  whole  scene  lasted  more  than  an 
hour,  followed  by  complete  amnesia,  and  nothing 
was  said  to  Helene  about  it,  as  it  was  half-past  six 
in  the  evening,  and  she  was  in  haste  to  return  home. 
The  next  day  she  wrote  me  a  seven-page  letter  :n 
which  she  described  a  very  strik  ng  dream  she  had 
had  during  the  night.  "...  I  fell  asleep  about  two 
o'clock  in  the  morning  and  awaked  at  about  five. 
Was  it  a  vision  ?  Was  it  a  dream  I  had  ?  I  don't 
reaUy  know  what  to  consider  it  and  dare  not  say  ; 
but  this  I  do  know,  I  saw  my  dear  friend  Leopold, 
who  spoke  to  me  a  long  time  about  you,  and  I  think 
I  saw  you  also.      I  asked  him  what  he  thought  of 

your  state    of  health He  replied  that  in  his 

opinion  it  was  far  from  re-established.     That  the  pain 

122 

THE    PERSONALITY  OF   LEOPOLD 

you  feel  in  the  right  side  came  from  an  inflamma- 
tion of  the  lung  which  has  been  seriously  affected 
.  .  .  You  will  doubtless  laugh  when  I  tell  you  that 
he  also  described  the  remedies  you  ought  to  take. 
.  .  .  One  of  them  is  a  simple  plant,  which  is  called, 
as  nearly  as  I  can  remember,  Tissulage  or  Tussilache, 
but  has  also  another  name,  which  1  cannot  recollect, 
but  the  first  name  wil  doubtless  suffice,  since  he  says 
you  are  familiar  with  the  plant  .   .  ."etc. 

What  I  have  said  concerning  Leopold  is  also  ap- 
plicable to  the  other  personifications  of  Mile.  Smith. 
The  normal  consciousness  of  Helene  mingles  and 
fuses  itself  in  every  way  with  the  somnambulistic 
consciousness  of  Simandini,  of  Marie  Antoinette,  or 
some  other  incarnation,  as  we  shall  soon  see.  I  pass 
now  to  the  examination  of  some  detailed  examples, 
destined  to  throw  light  upon  the  role  which  Leopold 
plays  in  Helene's  existence. 

Let  us  begin  by  listening  to  Leopold  himself. 
Among  his  numerous  messages,  the  following  letter, 
written  in  his  fine  handwriting  by  the  hand  of  Mile. 
Smith — in  response  to  a  note  in  which  I  had  begged 
him  (as  a  spiritual  being  and  distinct  from  her)  to 
aid  me  in  my  "  psychic  researches " — contains  in- 
formation for  which  I  had  not  asked,  but  which  was 
none  the  less  interesting.  It  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  it  is  the  disincarnate  adorer  of  Marie  Antoinette 
who  is  writing : 

"  Friend, — I  am  pleased  and  touched  by  the  mark 
of  confidence  you  have  deigned  to  accord  me.  The 
spiritual  guide  of  Mademoiselle  [Smith],  whom  the 

123 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Supreme  Being  in  his  infinite  goodness  has  per- 
mitted me  to  find  again  with  ease,  I  do  all  I  can  to 
appear  to  her  on  every  occasion  when  I  deem  it  nec- 
essary ;  but  my  body,  or,  if  you  prefer,  the  matter  of 
little  solidity  of  which  I  am  composed,  does  not  always 
afford  me  the  facility  of  showing  myself  to  her  in  a 
positive  human  manner.  [He,  in  fact,  appeared  to 
her  often  under  the  form  of  elementary  visual  hal- 
lucinations, a  luminous  trail,  whitish  column,  vapor- 
ous streamer,  etc.] 

"  That  which  I  seek  above  all  to  inculcate  in  her 
is  a  consoling  and  true  philosophy,  which  is  neces- 
sary to  her  by  reason  of  the  profound,  unhappy  im- 
pressions, which  even  now  still  remain  to  her,  of 
the  whole  drama  of  her  past  life.  I  have  often  sown 
bitterness  in  her  heart  [when  she  was  Marie  Antoin- 
ette],  desiring  only  her  welfare.  Also,  laying  aside 
everything  superfluous,  I  penetrate  into  the  most 
hidden  recesses  of  her  soul,  and  with  an  extreme 
care  and  incessant  activity  I  seek  to  implant  there 
those  truths  which  I  trust  will  aid  her  in  attaining 
the  lofty  summit  of  the  ladder  of  perfection. 

''  Abandoned  by  my  parents  from  my  cradle,  I  have, 
indeed,  known  sorrow  early  in  life.  Like  all,  I  have 
had  many  weaknesses,  which  1  have  expiated,  and 
God  knows  that  I  bow  to  His  will  ! 

''  Moral  suffering  has  been  my  principal  lot.  I  have 
been  full  of  bitterness,  of  envy,  of  hatred,  of  jealousy. 
Jealousy,  my  brother!  what  a  poison,  what  a  cor- 
ruption of  the  soul  I 

"  Nevertheless,,  one  ray  has  shone  brightly  into 
my  life,  and  that  ray  so  pure,  so  full  of  everything 

124 

THE    PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

that  might  pour  balm  on  my  wounded  soul,  has  given 
me  a  glimpse  of  heaven  ! 

"  Herald  of  eternal  felicity  !  ray  without  spot  I 
God  deemed  best  to  take  it  before  me  !  But  to-day 
it  is  given  back  to  me  !  May  His  holy  name  be 
blessed  ! 

"  Friend,  in  what  manner  shall  I  reply  to  you  ? 
I  am  ignorant  myself,  not  knowing  what  it  will 
please  God  to  reveal  to  you,  but  through  her  whom 
you  call  Mademoiselle  [Smith],  God  willing,  perhaps 
we  shall  be  able  to  satisfy  you. 

'^  Thy  friend, 

''Leopold." 

We  can  see,  under  the  flowing  details  of  the  spiri- 
tistic ideas  and  his  role  as  the  repentant  Caglios- 
tro,  that  the  dominant  characteristic  of  Leopold  is 
his  deep  platonic  attachment  for  Mile.  Smith,  and 
an  ardent  moral  solicitude  for  her  and  her  advance 
towards  perfection.  This  corresponds  perfectly  with 
the  character  of  the  numerous  messages  which  he  ad- 
dresses to  her  in  the  course  of  her  daily  existence, 
as  may  be  seen  from  the  following  specimen.  He  is 
referring  to  a  case  where,  after  having  warned  her  on 
two  occasions  during  the  day  by  auditive  hallucina- 
tions that  he  would  manifest  himself  in  the  evening, 
he  gives  her,  in  fact,  by  automatic  writing  in  his 
own  hand,  the  encouragement  she  was  actually  in 
need  of  under  the  circumstances  in  which  she  found 
herself. 

One  morning,  at  her  desk,  Helene  heard  an  un- 
known voice,  stronger  and  nearer  to  her  than  is  usual 

125 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

with  Leopold,  say  to  her  :  "Until  this  evening";  a 
Httle  later  the  same  voice,  which  she  now  recognized 
as  that  of  Leopold,  but  of  a  quality  rougher  and 
nearer  to  her  than  was  his  habit,  said  to  her :  "  You 
understand  me  ivell,  until  this  evening."  In  the  even- 
ing, having  returned  home,  she  was  excited  at  supper, 
left  the  table  in  haste  towards  the  end  of  the  meal,  and 
shut  herself  up  in  her  room  with  the  idea  that  she 
would  learn  something ;  but,  presently,  the  instinc- 
tive agitation  of  her  hand  indicated  to  her  that  she 
should  take  her  pencil,  and  having  done  so,  she  ob- 
tained in  the  beautiful  calligraphy  of  Leopold  the  fol- 
lowing epistle.  (She  says  that  she  remained  wide 
awake  and  self-conscious  while  writing  it,  and  it  is 
the  only  occasion  of  a  similar  character  when  she 
had  knowledge  of  the  content.) 

''My  beloved  Friend,— Why  do  you  vex  your- 
self, torment  yourself  so  ?  Why  are  you  indignant, 
because,  as  you  advance  in  life,  you  are  obliged  to 
acknowledge  that  all  things  are  not  as  you  had  wished 
and  hoped  they  might  be  ?  Is  not  the  route  we  follow 
on  this  earth  always  and  for  all  of  us  strewn  with 
rocks?  is  it  not  an  endless  chain  of  deceptions,  of 
miseries  ?  Do  me  the  kindness,  my  dear  sister,  I  beg 
of  you,  to  tell  me  that  from  this  time  forth  you  will 
cease  from  endeavoring  to  probe  too  deeply  the  hu- 
man heart.  In  what  will  such  discoveries  aid  you? 
What  remains  to  you  of  these  things,  except  tears 
and  regrets  ?  And  then  this  God  of  love,  of  justice, 
and  of  life — is  not  He  the  one  to  read  our  hearts?  It 
is  for  Him,  not  for  thee,  to  see  into  them. 

126 

THE  PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

"  Would  you  change  the  hearts  ?  Would  you  give 
them  that  which  they  have  not,  a  live,  ardent  soul, 
never  departing  from  what  is  right,  just,  and  true  ? 
Be  calm,  then,  in  the  face  of  all  these  little  troubles. 
Be  worthy,  and,  above  all,  always  good  !  In  thee 
I  have  found  again  that  heart  and  that  soul,  both  of 
which  will  always  be  for  me  all  my  life,  all  my  joy, 
and  my  only  dream  here  below. 

''  Believe  me :  be  calm :  reflect :  that  is  my  wish. 
"  Thy  friend, 

''Leopold." 

I  have  chosen  this  example  for  the  sake  of  its  brev- 
ity. Helene  has  received  a  number  of  communica- 
tions of  the  same  kind,  sometimes  in  verse,  in  which 
the  moral  and  religious  note  is  often  still  more  ac- 
centuated. In  the  greater  part  we  meet  with,  as 
in  the  next  to  the  last  phrase  of  the  foregoing  let- 
ter, an  allusion  to  the  presumed  affection  of  Cagli- 
ostro  for  Marie  Antoinette.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that 
there  is  nothing  in  these  excellent  admonitions  that 
a  high  and  serious  soul  like  that  of  Mile.  Smith  could 
not  have  drawn  from  its  own  depths  in  a  moment 
of  contemplation  and  meditation. 

Is  it  a  benefit  or  an  injury  to  the  moral  and  truly 
religious  life  to  formulate  itself  thus  clearly  in  verbal 
hallucinations  rather  than  to  remain  in  the  con- 
fused but  more  personal  state  of  experienced  aspira- 
tions and  strongly  expressed  emotions  ?  Do  these 
inspirations  gain  or  lose  in  inward  authority  and 
subjective  power  by  assuming  this  exterior  garb 
and  this  aspect  of  objectivity  ?     This  is  a  delicate 

127 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

question,  probably  not  susceptible  of  a  uniform  so- 
lution. 

In  the  following  incident^  which  I  relate  as  an  ex- 
ample among  many  other  similar  ones,  it  is  no  long- 
er, properly  speaking,  the  moral  and  religious  senti- 
ments personified  in  Leopold,  but  rather  the  instinct 
of  reserve  and  of  defence  peculiar  to  the  weaker  sex, 
the  sense  of  the  proprieties,  the  self-respect,  tinctured 
with  a  shade  of  exaggeration  almost  amounting  to 
prudery. 

In  a  visit  to  Mile.  Smith,  during  which  I  inquired 
whether  she  had  received  any  recent  communica- 
tions from  Leopold,  she  told  me  she  had  only  seen 
him  two  or  three  times  in  the  last  few  days,  and  had 
been  struck  by  his  "  restless  and  unhappy  "  air,  in- 
stead of  the  air  "so  pleasant,  so  sweet,  so  admirable," 
which  he  generally  has.  As  she  did  not  know  to 
what  to  attribute  this  change  of  countenance,  I  ad- 
vised her  to  take  her  pencil  and  to  wrap  herself  in 
meditation,  with  the  hope  of  obtaining  some  auto- 
matic message. 

In  about  a  minute  her  expression  indicated  that 
she  was  being  taken  possession  of;  her  eyes  were 
fixed  on  the  paper,  upon  which  her  left  hand  rested, 
the  thumb  and  little  finger  being  agitated  and  con- 
tinually tapping  (about  once  a  second),  the  right 
hand  having  tried  to  take  the  pencil  between  the 
index  and  middle  finger  (the  manner  of  Helene), 
ended  by  seizing  it  between  the  thumb  and  the  in- 
dex finger,  and  traced  slowly  in  the  handwriting 
of  Leopold  : 

"  Yes,  I  am  restless  |  pained,  even  in  anguish.  | 
128 

THE  PERSONALITY  OP  LEOPOLD 

Believest  thou,  friend,  that  it  is  with  satisfaction  | 
that  I  see  you  every  day  accepting  the  attentions, 
the  flatteries;  |  I  do  not  call  them  insincere,  but  of 
little  worth,  and  little  praiseworthy  |  on  the  part  of 
those  from  whom  they  come/'  | 

This  text  was  written  at  six  separate  times  (mark- 
ed by  the  vertical  bars),  separated  by  brief  moments 
of  full  wakefulness,  when  the  tappings  of  the  left 
hand  ceased,  and  when  Helene,  repeating  in  a  loud 
voice  what  she  was  about  to  write,  is  very  much 
astonished,  does  not  know  to  what  Leopold  alludes, 
then  at  my  request  takes  her  pencil  to  obtain  an  ex- 
planation, and  falls  asleep  again  during  the  follow- 
ing fragment.  At  the  end  of  this  bit,  as  she  persists 
in  saying  that  she  is  ignorant  of  what  he  refers  to, 
I  proceed  to  question  Leopold,  who  replies  that  for 
several  days  Helene  has  permitted  herself  to  be 
courted  by  a  M.  V.  (perfectly  honorably),  who  often 
found  himself  on  the  same  street-car  with  her,  had 
made  a  place  for  her  beside  him  the  last  few  mornings, 
and  had  paid  her  some  compliments  on  her  appear- 
ance. 

These  revelations  excited  the  laughter  and  protes- 
tations of  Helene,  who  commenced  to  deny  that  it 
could  have  come  from  Leopold,  and  accused  me  of 
having  suggested  it  to  her  little  finger ;  but  the  right 
hand  took  the  pencil  and  traced  these  words  in  the 
handwriting  and  with  the  signature  of  Leopold :  "  I 
only  say  what  I  think,  and  I  desire  that  you  refuse 
henceforth  all  the  flowers  that  he  may  offer  you. — 
Leopold."  This  time  Helene  remembered  the  inci- 
dent, and  recollected  that  yesterday  morning  he  had 
I  129 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

offered  her  a  rose  which  he  was  wearing  as  a  bou- 
tonniere. 

Eight  daj^s  later  I  paid  another  visit  to  Helene, 
and  after  an  effort  to  secure  some  handwriting,  which 
was  not  successful,  but  resulted  in  a  Martian  vision 
(see  Martian  text  No.  14),  she  had  a  visual  halluci- 
nation of  Leopold,  and  losing  consciousness  of  the 
actual  environment  and  of  my  presence  also,  as  well 
as  that  of  her  mother,  she  flung  herself  into  a  run- 
ning conversation  with  him  in  regard  to  the  incident 
of  eight  days  previously :  "  Leopold  .  .  .  Leopold  .  .  . 
don't  come  near  me  [repulsing  him].  You  are  too 
severe,  Leopold  !  .  .  .  Will  you  corne  on  Sunday?  I 
am  going  to  be  at  M.  Flournoy's  next  Sunday.  You 
will  be  there  .  .  .  but  take  good  care  that  you  do 
not  .  .  .  No,  it  is  not  kind  of  you  always  to  disclose 
secrets.  .  .  .  What  must  he  have  thought  ?  .  .  . 
You  seem  to  make  a  mountain  out  of  a  mole-hill.  .  .  . 
And  who  would  think  of  refusing  a  flower?  You 
don't  understand  at  all.  .  .  .  Why,  then?  It  was 
a  very  simple  thing  to  accept  it,  a  matter  of  no  im- 
portance whatever  ...  to  refuse  it  would  have  been 
impolite.  .  .  .  You  pretend  to  read  the  heart.  .  .  . 
Why  give  importance  to  a  thing  that  amounts  to 
nothing  ?  ...  It  is  only  a  simple  act  of  friendship, 
a  little  token  of  sympathy  ...  to  make  me  write 
such  things  on  paper  before  everybody!  not  nice  of 
you  !"  In  this  somnambulistic  dialogue,  in  which 
we  can  divine  Leopold's  replies,  Helene  took  for 
the  moment  the  accent  of  Marie  Antoinette  (see  be- 
low, in  the  "Roj^al  cycle  ").  To  awaken  her,  Leo- 
pold, who  had  possession  of  Helene's  arms,  made 

130 

THE    PERSONALITY   OF   LEOPOLD 

some  passes  over  her  forehead,  then  pressed  the  front- 
al and  suborbital  nerves  of  the  left  side,  and  made 
me  a  sign  to  do  the  same  with  those  of  the  right. 
The  seance  of  the  next  day  but  one,  at  my  house, 
passed  without  any  allusion  by  Leopold  to  the  inci- 
dent of  the  street-car,  evidently  on  account  of  the 
presence  of  certain  sitters  to  whom  he  did  not  wish 
to  reveal  Helene's  secrets.  But,  three  days  after, 
in  a  new  visit,  during  which  she  told  me  of  having 
had  a  waking  discussion  concerning  the  future  life 
(without  telling  me  with  whom),  she  again  wrote,  it? 
the  hand  of  Leopold  :  "  It  is  not  in  such  society  as 
this  that  you  ought  so  seriously  to  discuss  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul."  She  then  confessed  that 
it  was  again  on  the  street-car,  and  with  M.  V. ,  that 
she  had  held  that  conversation  while  a  funeral  pro- 
cession was  passing.  There  was  never  anything 
that  might  have  been  of  a  compromising  character 
in  the  exchange  of  courtesies  and  the  occasional  con- 
versations of  Mile.  Smith  with  her  neighbor  of  the 
street-car.  The  trouble  that  it  caused  poor  Leopold 
was  very  characteristic  of  him,  and  w^ell  indicated 
the  severe  and  jealous  censor  who  formerly  had  wor- 
ried the  N.  group  ;  there  can  be  heard  again  the 
echo  of  that  voice,  "  which  has  absolutely  nothing 
to  do  with  the  conscience  "  (see  pp.  27  and  82),  and 
which  has  hitherto  prevented  Helene  from  accepting 
any  of  the  suitors  whom  she  has  encountered  in  the 
course  of  her  journey  through  life.  This  austere 
and  rigorous  mentor,  always  wide  awake,  and  tak- 
ing offence  at  the  least  freedom  which  Mile.  Smith 
allows  herself  in  the  exchange  of  trifling  courtesies. 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

represents,  in  fact,  a  very  common  psychological  at- 
tribute ;  it  is  not  every  well-bred  feminine  soul  that 
carries  stored  in  one  of  its  recesses,  where  it  mani- 
fests its  presence  by  scruples  more  or  less  vaguely 
felt,  certain  hesitations  or  apprehensions,  inhibiting 
feelings  or  tendencies  of  a  shade  of  intensity  varying 
according  to  the  age  and  the  temperament. 

It  is  not  my  part  to  describe  this  delicate  phenom- 
enon. It  suffices  me  to  remark  that  here,  as  in  the 
ethico-religious  messages,  the  personality  of  Leo- 
pold has  in  no  way  aided  the  essential  content  of  those 
inward  experiences  of  which  Mile.  Smith  is  perfectly 
capable  by  herself ;  the  form  only  of  their  mani- 
festation has  gained  in  picturesque  and  dramatic 
expression  in  the  mise  -  en- scene  of  the  automatic 
handwritings  and  of  the  somnambulistic  dialogue. 
It  seems  as  though  the  suggestive  approach  of  my 
presence  and  my  questions  had  been  necessary  to  ex- 
cite these  phenomena ;  it  is,  however,  very  probable, 
to  judge  from  other  examples,  that  my  influence  only 
hastened  the  explosion  of  Leopold  in  formulated  re- 
proaches, and  that  his  latent  discontent,  hitherto 
noticed  in  the  ''  r^tless  and  suffering  air  "  of  his 
fugitive  visual  apparitions,  would  have  terminated, 
after  a  period  of  incubation  more  or  less  prolonged,  in 
breaking  out  into  spontaneous  admonitions,  auditive 
or  written. 

It  can  be  divined  that  in  this  role  of  vigilant  guar- 
dian, of  an  almost  excessive  zealousness  for  the  hon- 
or or  the  dignity  of  Mile.  Smith,  Leopold  is  again, 
to  my  mind,  only  a  product  of  psychological  duplica- 
tion.    He  represents  a  certain  grouping  of  inward 

132 

THE   PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

desires  and  secret  instincts,  which  the  hypnoid  pre- 
disposition, encouraged  by  spiritism,  has  brought 
into  a  pecuhar  prominence  and  given  an  aspect  of 
foreign  personahty ;  in  the  same  way,  in  the  phan- 
tasmagoria of  the  dream,  certain  after-thoughts, 
almost  unperceived  while  awake,  rise  to  the  first 
plane  and  become  transformed  into  contradictory  fic- 
titious personages,  whose  cutting  reproaches  aston- 
ish us  sometimes  on  awakening  by  their  disturbing 
truthfulness. 

A  final  example  will  show  us  Leopold,  in  his  role 
of  watcher  over  the  health  of  Mile.  Smith  and  ad- 
viser of  precautions  which  she  ought  to  take.  He 
is  not  troubled  about  her  general  health  ;  when  she 
had  la  grippe,  for  instance,  or  when  she  is  simply 
worn  out  with  fatigue,  he  scarcely  shows  himself. 
His  attention  is  concentrated  upon  certain  special 
physiological  functions,  of  the  normal  exercise  of 
which  he  takes  care  to  be  assured.  He  does  not 
otherwise  seem  to  exercise  a  positive  action  upon 
them,  and  cannot  modify  them  in  any  way  ;  his  of- 
fice seems  to  be  confined  to  knowing  beforehand 
their  exact  course,  and  to  see  that  Helene  is  not 
guilty  of  any  imprudence  which  may  impede  them. 

Leopold  here  shows  a  knowledge  and  prevision 
of  the  most  intimate  phenomena  of  the  organism 
which  has  been  observed  in  the  case  of  secondary 
personalities,  and  which  confers  upon  them,  in  that 
respect  at  least,  an  unquestionable  advantage  over 
the  ordinary  personality.  In  the  case  of  Mile. 
Smith,  the  indications  of  her  guide  are  always  of  a 
prohibitive  nature,   calculated  to  prevent  her  from 

133 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

taking  part  in  spiritistic  reunions  at  a  time  at  which 
she  beheves  herself  able  to  do  so  with  impunity,  but 
which  he,  endowed  with  a  more  refined  coenaesthetic 
sensibility,  thinks  she  ought  not  to  undertake.  He 
has  for  several  years  formally  laid  his  ban  upon 
every  kind  of  mediumistic  exercises  at  certain  verj^ 
regular  periods. 

He  has  also  on  numerous  occasions  compelled 
her  by  various  messages,  categorical  auditive  hal- 
lucinations, diverse  impulses,  contractures  of  the 
arms,  forcing  her  to  write,  etc.,  to  modify  her  plans 
and  to  abandon  seances  already  arranged.  This 
is  a  very  clear  form  of  Ideological  automatism. 

As  a  specimen  of  this  spontaneous  and  hygienic 
intervention  of  Leopold  in  the  life  of  Helene,  I  have 
selected  the  letter  given  below,  because  it  combines 
several  interesting  traits.  It  well  depicts  the  en- 
ergy with  which  Mile.  Smith  is  compelled  to  obey 
her  guide. 

The  passage  from  the  auditive  to  the  graphic 
form  of  automatism  is  also  to  be  noticed  in  it.  Apro- 
pos of  this,  in  the  page  of  this  letter  reproduced  in 
Fig.  8  (see  p.  137),  it  is  made  clear  that  the  transition 
of  the  hand  of  Helene  to  that  of  Leopold  is  accom- 
plished brusquely  and  in  a  decided  manner.  The 
handwriting  is  not  metamorphosed  gradually,  slow- 
ly, but  continues  to  be  that  of  Mile.  Smith,  becom- 
ing more  and  more  agitated,  it  is  true,  and  rendered 
almost  illegible  by  the  shocks  to  the  arm  of  which 
Leopold  takes  hold  up  to  the  moment  when,  suddenlj^ 
and  by  a  bound,  it  becomes  the  well -formed  calli- 
graphy of  Cagliostro. 

134 

THE   PERSONALITY  OF  LEOPOLD 

"'January  29,  6,15  A.M. 

"'Monsieur, — I  awoke  about  ten  minutes  ago, 
and  heard  the  voice  of  Leopold  telling  me  in  a  very 
imperious  manner,  'Get  up  out  of  your  bed,  and  quick- 
ly, very  quickly,  write  to  your  dear  friend,  M.  Flour- 
noy,  that  you  will  not  hold  a  seance  to-morrow,  and 
that  you  will  not  be  able  to  go  to  his  house  for 
two  weeks,  and  that  you  will  not  hold  any  seance 
within  that  period.'  I  have  executed  his  order, 
having  felt  myself  forced,  compelled  in  spite  of 
myself,  to  obey.  I  was  so  comfortable  in  bed  and 
so  vexed  at  being  obliged  to  write  you  such  a  mes- 
sage ;  but  I  feel  myself  forced  to  do  what  he  bids  me. 

"  At  this  moment  I  am  looking  at  my  watch  ;  it 
is  6.25  o'clock.  I  feel  a  very  strong  shock  in  my 
right  arm — I  might  better  speak  of  it  as  an  electric 
disturbance — and  which  I  perceive  has  made  me 
write  crooked.  I  hear  also  at  this  instant  the  voice 
of  Leopold.  I  have  much  difficulty  in  writing  what 
he  tells  me  :  '  6.42^^.  Say  to  him  this :  I  am,  sir, 
always  your  very  devoted  servant,  in  body  and  mind, 
healthy  and  not  unbalanced.' 

"  I  stopped  for  some  moments  after  writing  these 
words,  which  I  saw  very  well,  after  having  written 
them,  were  in  the  handwriting  of  Leopold.  Immedi- 
ately afterwards,  a  second  disturbance,  similar  to  the 
first,  gave  me  a  fresh  shock,  this  time  from  my  feet  to 
my  head.  It  all  passed  so  quickly  that  I  am  disturbed 
and  confused  by  it.  It  is  true  that  I  am  not  yet  quite 
well.  Is  this  the  reason  why  Leopold  prevents  my 
going  to  Florissant  to-morrow  ?  I  do  not  know,  but, 
nevertheless,  arn  anxious  to  follow  his  advice.  ,  ,  ," 

135 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Mile.  Smith  always  submits  obediently  to  the  com- 
mands of  her  guide,  since,  whenever  she  has  trans- 
gressed them,  through  forgetfulness  or  neglect, 
she  has  had  cause  to  repent  it. 

It  is  clear  that  in  this  role  of  special  physician  of 
Mile.  Smith,  always  au  courant  of  her  state  of  health, 
Leopold  could  easily  be  interpreted  as  personifying 
those  vague  impressions  which  spring  forth  con- 
tinually from  the  depths  of  our  physical  being,  in- 
forming us  as  to  what  is  passing  there. 

A  neuralgic  toothache  is  felt  in  a  dream  hours  be- 
fore it  makes  itself  felt  in  our  waking  consciousness, 
while  some  maladies  are  often  thus  foreshadowed 
several  days  before  they  actually  declare  themselves. 
All  literature  is  full  of  anecdotes  of  this  kind  ;  and 
the  psychiatrists  have  observed  that  in  the  form  of 
circular  alienation,  where  phases  of  melancholic  de- 
pression and  maniacal  excitation  alternately  suc- 
ceed one  another  more  or  less  regularly  with  intervals 
of  normal  equilibrum,  it  is  frequently  in  sleep  that 
the  first  symptoms  of  the  change  of  humor  can  be 
detected  which  has  already  begun  in  the  depths  of 
the  individuality,  but  will  only  break  forth  on  the 
outside  a  little  later.  But  all  the  hypnoid  states  are 
connected,  and  it  is  not  at  all  surprising  that,  in  the 
case  of  a  subject  inclined  to  automatism,  these  con- 
fused presentiments  should  arise  with  the  appearance 
of  a  foreign  personality  which  is  only  a  degree  higher 
than  the  process  of  dramatization  already  so  brill- 
iantly at  work  in  our  ordinary   dreams. 

It  will  be  useless  to  lengthen  or  further  multiply 
examples  of  the  intervention  of  Leopold  in  the  life 

-36 

^oJt  Q^iJi  •%a2Jjcc'^ mid  Oft  ^Ki. 

'Hon  de'4e'{}4ufi^'e 

Fig.  8.  A  page  from  a  letter  of  Mile.  Smith,  showing  the  spontaneous  irruption 
of  the  personality  and  the  handwriting  of  Leopold  during  the  waking  state  ot 
H^lene. 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

of  Mile.  Smith.  Those  which  I  have  given  show 
him  under  his  essential  aspects,  and  suf6.ce  to  justify 
Helene's  confidence  in  a  guide  who  has  never  de- 
ceived her,  who  has  always  given  her  the  best  coun- 
sel, delivered  discourses  of  the  highest  ethical  tone, 
and  manifested  the  most  touching  solicitude  for  her 
physical  and  moral  health.  It  is  easy  to  understand 
that  nothing  can  shake  her  faith  in  the  real,  objective 
existence  of  this  precious  counsellor. 

It  is  really  vexatious  that  the  phenomena  of  dreams 
should  be  so  little  observed  or  so  badly  understood 
(I  do  not  say  by  psychologists,  but  by  the  general 
public,  which  prides  itself  on  its  psychology),  since 
the  dream  is  the  prototype  of  spiritistic  messages,  and 
holds  the  key  to  the  explanation  of  mediumistic  phe- 
nomena. If  it  is  regrettable  to  see  such  noble,  sym- 
pathetic, pure,  and  in  all  respects  remarkable  per- 
sonalities as  Leopold  reduced  to  the  rank  of  a  dream 
creation,  it  must  be  remembered,  however,  that 
dreams  are  not  always,  as  idle  folk  think,  things  to  be 
despised  or  of  no  value  in  themselves :  the  majority 
are  insignificant  and  deserve  only  the  oblivion  to 
which  they  are  promptly  consigned.  A  very  large 
number  are  bad  and  sometimes  even  worse  than  re- 
ality; but  there  are  others  of  a  better  sort,  and  "dream  " 
is  often  a  synonym  for  "ideal." 

To  sum  up,  Leopold  certainly  expresses  in  his  cen- 
tral nucleus  a  very  honorable  and  attractive  side  of 
the  character  of  Mile.  Smith,  and  in  taking  him  as 
her  "  guide  "  she  only  follows  inspirations  which  are 
probably  among  the  best  of  her  nature. 

CHAPTER  V 

THE   MARTIAN    CYCLE 

THE  title  of  this  book  would  naturally  commit 
me  to  a  review  of  the  Hindoo  romance  before 
investigating  the  Martian  cycle.  Considera- 
tions of  method  have  caused  me  to  reverse  this  or- 
der. It  is  better  to  advance  from  the  simple  to  the 
complex,  and  while  we  certainly  know  less  concern- 
ing the  planet  Mars  than  of  India,  the  romance  which 
it  has  inspired  in  the  subliminal  genius  of  Mile.  Smith 
is  relatively  less  difficult  to  explain  than  the  Oriental 
cycle.  In  fact,  the  former  seems  to  spring  from  pure 
imagination,  while  in  the  latter  we  meet  with  certain 
actual  historical  elements,  and  whence  Helene's  mem- 
ory and  intelligence  have  gained  a  knowledge  of 
them  is  an  extremely  difficult  problem  for  us  to  solve. 
There  is,  then,  only  one  faculty  at  work  in  the  Mar- 
tian romance,  as  a  professional  psychologist  would 
say,  while  the  Oriental  cycle  calls  several  into  play, 
making  it  necessary  to  treat  of  it  later,  on  account  of 
its  greater  psychological  complexity. 

While  the  unknown  language  which  forms  the 
vehicle  of  many  of  the  Martian  messages  cannot 
naturally  be  dissociated  from  the  rest  of  the  cycle, 
it  merits,  nevertheless,  a  special  consideration,  and 

139 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  following  chapter  will  be  entirely  devoted  to  it. 
It  does  not  figure  in  the  present  chapter,  in  which 
I  shall  treat  of  the  origin  and  the  content  only  of  the 
Martian  romance. 

I.  Origin  and  Birth  of  the  Martian 

Cycle 

"  We  dare  to  hope,"  says  M.  Camille  Flammarion, 
at  the  beginning  of  his  excellent  work  on  the  planet 
Mars,  ''  that  the  day  will  come  when  scientific  meth- 
ods yet  unknown  to  us  will  give  us  direct  evidences 
of  the  existence  of  the  inhabitants  of  other  worlds, 
and  at  the  same  time,  also,  will  put  us  in  communi- 
cation with  our  brothers  in  space."*  And  on  the 
last  page  of  his  book  he  recurs  to  the  same  idea,  and 
says  :  "  What  marvels  does  not  the  science  of  the 
future  reserve  for  our  successors,  and  who  would  dare 
to  say  that  Martian  humanity  and  terrestrial  hu- 
manity will  not  some  day  enter  into  communication 
with  each  other  ?" 

This  splendid  prospect  seems  still  far  off,  along 
with  that  of  wireless  telegraphy,  and  almost  an  Uto- 
pian dream,  so  long  as  one  holds  strictly  to  the  cur- 
rent conceptions  of  our  positive  sciences.  But  break 
these  narrow  limits ;  fly,  for  example,  towards  the  il- 
limitable horizon  which  spiritism  opens  up  to  its 
happy  followers,  and  as  soon  as  this  vague  hope 
takes  shape,  nothing  seems  to  prevent  its  immedi- 

*  C.  Flammarion,  LaPlanke  Mars  et  ses  conditions  d'habiiabilit/, 
p.  3.      Paris,  1892. 

140 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

ate  realization ;  and  the  only  cause  for  wonder  is 
found  in  the  fact  that  no  privileged  medium  has 
yet  arisen  to  have  the  glory,  unique  in  the  world, 
of  being  the  first  intermediary  between  ourselves 
and  the  human  inhabitants  of  other  planets;  for 
spiritism  takes  no  more  account  of  the  barrier  of 
space  than  of  time.  The  "gates  of  distance"'  are 
wide  open  before  it.  With  it  the  question  of  means 
is  a  secondary  matter  ;  one  has  only  the  embar- 
rassment of  making  a  choice.  It  matters  not  wheth- 
er it  be  by  intuition,  by  clairvoyance,  by  telepathy, 
or  by  double  personality  that  the  soul  is  permitted 
to  leave  momentarily  its  terrestrial  prison  and  make 
the  voyage  between  this  world  and  others  in  an  in- 
stant of  time,  or  whether  the  feat  is  accomplished 
by  means  of  the  astral  body,  by  the  reincarnation 
of  disincarnate  omnisciences,  by  "  fluid  beings," 
or,  in  a  word,  by  any  other  process  whatever.  The 
essential  point  is,  according  to  spiritism,  that  no 
serious  objection  would  be  offered  to  the  possibility 
of  such  communication.  The  only  difficulty  would 
be  to  find  a  mediumistic  subject  possessing  sufficient 
psychical  faculties.  It  is  a  simple  question  of  fact; 
if  such  a  one  has  not  yet  been  found,  it  is  apparent- 
ly only  because  the  time  is  not  yet  ripe.  But  now 
that  astronomers  themselves  appeal  to  those  "  un- 
known methods  of  actual  science  "  to  put  us  en  rap- 
port with  other  worlds,  no  doubt  spiritism — which 
is  the  science  of  to-morrow,  as  definite  as  absolute  re- 
ligion— will  soon  respond  to  these  legitimate  aspira- 
tions. We  may,  therefore,  expect  at  any  moment 
the  revelation  so  impatiently  looked  for,  and  every 

141 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

good  medium  has  the  right  to  ask  herself  whether 
she  is  not  the  being  predestined  to  accomphsh  this 
unrivalled  mission. 

These  are  the  considerations  which,  to  my  mind, 
in  their  essential  content  inspired  in  the  subliminal 
part  of  Mile.  Smith  the  first  idea  of  her  Martian  ro- 
mance. I  would  not  assert  that  the  passages  from 
M.  Flammarion  which  I  have  quoted  came  directly 
to  the  notice  of  Helene,  but  they  express  and  reca- 
pitulate wonderfully  well  one  of  the  elements  of  the 
atmosphere  in  which  she  found  herself  at  the  be- 
ginning of  her  mediumship.  For  if  there  are  no 
certain  indications  of  her  ever  having  read  any  work 
on  the  "  heavenly  worlds"  and  their  inhabitants, 
either  that  of  M.  Flammarion  or  of  any  other  au- 
thor, she  has,  nevertheless,  heard  such  subjects  dis- 
cussed. She  is  perfectly  familiar  with  the  name  of 
the  celebrated  astronomical  writer  Juvisy,  and  knows 
something  of  his  philosophical  ideas^  which,  by-the- 
way,  is  not  at  all  surprising  when  we  consider  the 
popularity  he  enjoys  among  spiritists,  who  find  in 
him  a  very  strong  scientific  support  for  their  doctrine 
of  reincarnation  on  other  planets. 

I  also  have  evidence  that  in  the  circle  of  Mme.  N., 
of  which  Helene  was  a  member  in  1892,  the  conver- 
sation more  than  once  turned  in  the  direction  of 
the  habitability  of  Mars,  to  which  the  discovery 
of  the  famous  "  canals  "  has  for  some  years  special- 
ly directed  the  attention  of  the  general  public.  This 
circumstance  appears  to  me  to  explain  sufficiently 
the  fact  that  Helene^s  subliminal  astronomy  should 
be  concerned  with  this  planet.     It  is,  moreover^  quite 

142 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

possible  that  the  first  germs  of  the  Martian  Romance 
date  still  further  back  than  the  beginning  of  Helene's 
mediumship.  The  Oriental  role  shows  indications  of 
concerning  itself  with  that  planet,  and  the  very  clear 
impression  which  she  has  of  having  in  her  child- 
hood and  youth  experienced  many  visions  of  a  similar 
kind '"  without  her  noticing  them  particularly/'  gives 
rise  to  the  supposition  that  the  ingredients  of  which 
this  cycle  is  composed  date  from  many  years  back. 
Possibly  they  may  have  one  and  the  same  primitive 
source  in  the  exotic  memories^  descriptions,  or  pict- 
ures of  tropical  countries  which  later  branched  out 
under  the  vigorous  impulsion  of  spiritistic  ideas  in 
two  distinct  currents,  the  Hindoo  romance  on  the 
one  side  and  the  Martian  on  the  other,  whose  waters 
are  mingled  on  more  than  one  occasion  afterwards. 

While,  on  the  whole,  therefore,  it  is  probable  that 
its  roots  extend  back  as  far  as  the  childhood  of  Mile. 
Smith,  it  is  nevertheless  with  the  Martian  romance, 
as  well  as  with  the  others,  not  a  mere  question  of  the 
simple  cryptomnesiac  return  of  facts  of  a  remote  past, 
or  of  an  exhumation  of  fossil  residua  brought  to  light 
again  by  the  aid  of  somnambulism.  It  is  a  very  active 
process,  and  one  in  full  course  of  evolution,  nour- 
ished, undoubtedly,  by  elements  belonging  to  the 
past,  but  which  have  been  recombined  and  moulded 
in  a  very  original  fashion,  until  it  amounts  finally, 
among  other  things,  to  the  creation  of  an  unknown 
language.  It  will  be  interesting  to  follow  step  by  step 
the  phases  of  this  elaboration :  but  since  it  always, 
unfortunately,  hides  itself  in  the  obscurity  of  the  sub- 
consciousness, we  are  only  cognizant  of  it  by  its  occa- 

143 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

sional  appearances,  and  all  the  revSt  of  that  subter- 
ranean work  must  be  inferred,  in  a  manner  somewhat 
hypothetical,  from  those  supraliminal  eruptions  and 
the  scanty  data  which  we  have  concerning  the  out- 
ward influences  which  have  exerted  a  stimulating  in- 
fluence upon  the  subliminal  part  of  Helene.  It  was 
in  1892,  then,  that  the  conversations  took  place  which 
were  to  prepare  the  soil  for  this  work  of  lofty  subli- 
minal fantasy,  and  planted  in  Helene's  mind  the 
double  idea,  of  enormous  scientific  interest,  that  she 
could  enter  into  direct  relation  with  the  inhabitants 
of  Mars,  and  of  the  possibility,  unsuspected  by  sci- 
entists, but  which  spiritism  furnishes  us,  of  reaching 
there  by  a  mediumistic  route.  I  doubt,  however, 
whether  that  vague  suggestion  on  the  part  of  the  en- 
vironment would  have  sufficed  to  engender  the  Mar- 
tian dream — since  for  more  than  two  years  no  sign  of 
its  eruption  mainfested  itself — without  the  interven- 
tion of  some  fillip  more  concrete,  capable  of  giving  a 
start  to  the  whole  movement.  It  is  not  easy,  unfort- 
unately, for  want  of  records  of  the  facts,  to  assign 
with  precision  the  circumstances  under  which  and  the 
moment  when  Helene's  subconscious  imagination  re- 
ceived that  effective  impulsion,  but  an  unequivocal 
trace  is  discovered,  as  I  am  about  to  show  in  the  con- 
temporaneous report  oi  the  proceedings  of  the  first 
distinctly  Martian  seance  of  Mile.  Smith. 

In  March,  1894,  Helene  made  the  acquaintance  o! 
M.  Lemaitre,  who,  being  exceedingly  interested  in 
the  phenomena  of  abnormal  psychology,  was  present 
with  others  at  some  of  her  seances,  and  finally  begged 
her  to  hold  some  at  his  house.     At  the  first  of  these 

144 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

(October  2S,  1894),  Helene  met  a  lady,  a  widow,  who 
was  greatly  to  be  pitied.  Besides  suffering  from 
a  very  serious  affection  of  the  eyes,  Mme.  Mirbel 
had  been  terribly  afflicted  by  the  loss  of  her  only 
son,  Alexis,  seventeen  years  old,  and  a  pupil  of  M. 
Lemaitre.  While  not  yet  fully  convinced  of  the  truth 
of  spiritism,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  Mme.  Mir- 
bel was  very  anxious  to  believe  in  that  consolatory 
doctrine,  and  ready  to  accept  it,  if  only  some  proofs 
could  be  fLirnished  her ;  and  what  more  convincing 
testimony  could  she  ask  or  receive  than  that  of  a 
message  .from  her  beloved  child?  Moreover,  it  was 
probably  not  without  a  secret  hope  of  procuring  a 
communication  of  this  nature  that  she  accepted  the 
invitation  which  M.  Lemaitre  had  sent  her  with  the 
idea  of  procuring  some  moments  of  distraction  for 
the  unhappy  mother  As  happens  frequently  in 
Helene's  case,  this  first  seance  fully  satisfied  the 
desires  of  the  sitters  and  surpassed  their  expectations. 
Speaking  only  of  that  which  concerns  Mme.  Mirbel, 
Helene  had  the  vision,  first,  of  a  young  man,  in  the 
very  detailed  description  of  whom  there  was  no  dif- 
ficulty in  recognizing  the  deceased  Alexis  Mirbel; 
then  of  an  old  man  whom  the  table  called  Raspail, 
brought  by  the  young  man  that  he  might  treat  his 
mother's  eyes,  who  thus  had  the  double  privilege  of 
receiving  through  the  table  words  of  tenderness  from 
her  son,  and  from  Raspail  directions  for  the  treat- 
ment of  the  affection  of  her  eyes.  Nothing  in  that 
seance  recalled  in  any  way  the  planet  Mars,  and  it 
could  not  be  foreseen  from  anything  that  occurred 
there  that  Alexis  Mirbel,  disincarnated,  would  return 
K  145 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

later  under  the  name  of  Esenale  as  official  interpreter 
of  the  Martian  language. 

It  was  altogether  different  a  month  later  (Novem- 
ber 25),  at  the  second  reunion  at  M.  Lemaitre's,  at 
which  Mme.  Mirbel  was  again  present.  On  this  oc- 
casion the  astronomical  dream  appeared  at  once  and 
dominated  the  entire  seance. 

From  the  beginning,  says  the  report  of  the  se- 
ance. Mile.  Smith  perceived,  in  the  distance  and  at 
a  great  height,  a  bright  light.  Then  she  felt  a  tre- 
mor which  almost  caused  her  heart  to  cease  beating, 
after  which  it  seemed  to  her  as  though  her  head  were 
empty  and  as  if  she  were  no  longer  in  the  body.  She 
found  herself  in  a  dense  fog,  which  changed  suc- 
cessively from  blue  to  a  vivid  rose  color,  to  gray,  and 
then  to  black  :  she  is  floating,  she  says  ;  and  the 
table,  supporting  itself  on  one  leg,  seemed  to  express 
a  very  curious  floating  movement.  Then  she  sees 
a  star,  growing  larger,  always  larger,  and  becomes, 
finally,  ''as  large  as  our  house."  Helene  feels  that 
she  is  ascending  ;  then  the  table  gives,  by  raps  : 
"  Lemaitre,  that  which  you  have  so  long  desired  ! " 
Mile.  Smith,  who  had  been  ill  at  ease,  finds  herself 
feeling  better  ;  she  distinguishes  three  enormous 
globes,  one  of  them  very  beautiful.  "  On  what  am 
I  walking  ?"  she  asks.  And  the  table  replies  :  "  On 
a  world — Mars."  Helene  then  began  a  description  of 
all  the  strange  things  which  presented  themselves 
to  her  view,  and  caused  her  as  much  surprise  as 
amusement.  Carriages  without  horses  or  wheels, 
emitting  sparks  as  they  glided  by  ;  houses  with 
fountains  on  the  roof  ;  a  cradle  having  for  curtains 

146 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE 

an  angel  made  of  iron  with  outstretched  wings, 
etc.  What  seemed  less  strange,  were  people  ex- 
actly like  the  inhabitants  of  our  earth,  save  that 
both  sexes  wore  the  same  costume,  formed  of  trousers 
very  ample,  and  a  long  blouse,  drawn  tight  about 
the  waist  and  decorated  with  various  designs.  The 
child  in  the  cradle  was  exactly  like  our  children, 
according  to  the  sketch  which  Helene  made  from 
memory  after  the  seance. 

Finally,  she  saw  upon  Mars  a  sort  of  vast  assembly 
hall,  in  which  was  Professor  Raspail,  having  in  the 
first  row  of  his  hearers  the  young  Alexis  Mirbel,  who, 
by  a  typtological  dictation,  reproached  his  mother 
for  not  having  followed  the  medical  prescription 
whi  h  he  gave  her  a  month  previously  :  "  Dear 
mamma,  have  you,  then,  so  little  confidence  in  us  ? 
You  have  no  idea  how  much  pain  you  have  caused 
me  \"  Then  followed  a  conversation  of  a  private 
nature  between  Mme.  Mirbel  and  her  son,  the  latter 
replying  by  means  of  the  table  ;  then  everything 
becomes  quiet,  the  vision  of  Mars  effaces  itself  little 
by  little ;  the  table  takes  the  same  rotary  movement 
on  one  foot  which  it  had  at  the  commencement  of  the 
seance;  Mile.  Smith  finds  herself  again  in  the  fogs 
and  goes  through  the  same  process  as  before  in  an 
inverse  order.  Then  she  exclaims  :  "Ah  !  here  I 
am  back  again  !"  and  several  loud  raps  on  the  table 
mark  the  end  of  the  seance. 

I  have  related  in  its  principal  elements  this  first 
Martian  seance,  for  the  sake  of  its  importance  in  dif- 
ferent respects. 

The  initial  series  of  ccenaesthetic  hallucinations, 
147 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

corresponding  to  a  voyage  from  the  earth  to  Mars, 
reflects  well  the  childish  character  of  an  imagination 
which  scientific  problems  or  the  exigenc  es  of  logic 
trouble  very  little.  Without  doubt  spiritism  can  ex- 
plain how  the  material  difficulties  of  an  interplan- 
etary journey  may  be  avoided  in  a  purely  medium- 
istic,  fluid  connection  ;  but  why,  then,  this  persist- 
ence of  physical  sensations,  trouble  with  the  heart, 
tremor,  floating  sensation,  etc.  ?  However  it  may 
be,  this  series  of  sensations  is  from  this  time  on  the 
customary  prelude,  and,  as  it  were,  the  premoni- 
tory aura  of  the  Martian  dream,  with  certain  modi- 
fications, throughout  all  the  seances  ;  sometimes 
it  is  complicated  with  auditive  hallucinations  (rum- 
bling, noise  of  rushing  water,  etc.),  or  sometimes 
olfactory  (disagreeable  odors  of  burn  ng,  of  sulphur, 
of  a  coming  storm),  oftener  it  tends  to  shorten  and 
simplify  itself,  until  it  is  either  reduced  to  a  brief 
feeling  of  malaise,  or  to  the  initial  visual  hallucina- 
tion of  the  light,  generally  very  brilliant  and  red, 
in  which  the  Martian  visions  usually  appear. 

But  the  point  to  which  1  wish  to  call  special  at- 
tention is  that  singular  speech  of  the  table,  on  the 
instant  at  which  Mile.  Smith  arrives  on  the  dis- 
tant star,  and  before  it  is  known  what  star  is  con- 
cerned :  ''  Lemaitre,  that  which  you  have  so  much 
wished  for  !"  This  declaration,  which  may  be  con- 
sidered as  a  dedication,  so  to  speak,  inscribed  on  the 
frontispiece  of  the  Martian  romance,  authorizes  us, 
in  my  opinion,  in  considering  it  and  interpreting  it 
in  its  origin,  as  a  direct  answer  to  a  wish  of  M. 
Lemaitre,  a  desire  which  came  at  a  recent  period  to 

148 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE 

H^l^ne^s   knowledge,  and  which  has  enacted  with 
her  the  initiatory  role  of  her  astronomical  dream. 

It  is  true  that  M.  Lemaitre  himself  did  not  under- 
stand at  the  moment  to  what  this  preliminary  warn- 
ing referred,  but  the  note  which  he  inserted  at  the 
end  of  his  report  of  that  seance  is  instructive  in  this 
regard  :  "  I  do  not  know  how  to  explain  the  first 
words  dictated  by  the  table :  '  Lemaitre,  that  which 
you  have  so  much  wished  fori'  M.  S.  reminds  me 
that  in  a  conversation  which  I  had  with  him  last  sum- 
mer I  said  to  him :  '  It  would  be  very  interesting  to 
know  what  is  happening  upon  other  planets/  If 
this  is  an  answer  to  the  wish  of  last  3^ear,  very  well." 

It  must  be  added  that  M.  S.,  who  had  been  sufficient- 
ly struck  by  this  wish  of  M.  Lemaitre  to  remember  it 
for  several  months,  was,  during  all  of  the  time  re- 
ferred to,  one  of  the  most  regular  attendants  upon 
the  seances  of  Mile.  Smith ;  and,  to  one  who  knows 
by  experience  all  that  happens  at  the  spiritistic  re- 
unions, before,  after,  and  during  the  seance  itself, 
there  could  hardly  be  any  doubt  but  that  it  w^as 
through  M.  S.,  as  intermediary,  that  Mile.  Smith 
had  heard  mentioned  M.  Lemaitre' s  regret  at  our 
relative  ignorance  of  the  inhabitants  of  other  planets. 
This  idea,  probably  caught  on  the  wing  during  the 
state  of  suggestibility  which  accompanies  the  seances, 
returned  with  renewed  force  when  Helene  was  invited 
to  hold  a  seance  at  the  house  of  M.  Lemaitre,  and 
made  more  vivid  also  by  the  desire,  which  is  always 
latent  in  her,  of  making  the  visions  as  interesting  as 
possible  to  the  persons  among  whom  she  finds  herself. 
Such  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  seed  which,  falling  into 

149 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  ground  and  fertilized  by  former  conversations  con- 
cerning the  inhabitants  of  Mars  and  the  possibihty 
of  spiritistic  relations  with  them,  has  served  as  the 
germ  of  the  romance,  the  further  development  of 
which  it  remains  for  me  to  trace. 

One  point  which  still  remains  to  be  cleared  up  in 
the  seance,  as  I  come  to  sum  up,  is  the  singularly  arti- 
ficial character  and  the  slight  connection  between  the 
Martian  vision,  properly  so  called,  and  the  reappear- 
ance of  Raspail  and  Alexis  Mirbel.  We  do  not  alto- 
gether understand  what  these  personages  have  to 
do  with  it.  What  need  is  there  of  their  being  to-day 
found  on  the  planet  Mars  simply  for  the  purpose  of 
continuing  their  interview  with  Mme.  Mirbel,  begun 
at  a  previous  seance,  without  the  intervention  of  any 
planet  ?  The  assembly-hall  at  which  they  are  found, 
while  it  is  located  on  Mars,  is  a  bond  of  union  all 
the  more  artificial  between  them  and  that  planet  in 
that  there  is  nothing  specifically  Martian  in  its  de- 
scription and  appears  to  have  been  borrow^ed  from 
our  globe.  This  incident  is  at  bottom  a  matter  out 
of  the  regular  course,  full  of  interest  undoubtedly  for 
Mme.  Mirbel,  whom  it  directly  concerns,  but  without 
intimate  connection  with  the  Martian  world.  It  was 
evidently  the  astronomical  revelation,  intended  for  M. 
Lemaitre,  and  ripened  by  a  period  of  incubation,  which 
should  have  furnished  the  material  for  this  seance  ; 
but  the  presence  of  Mme.  Mirbel  awoke  anew  the  mem- 
ory of  her  son  and  of  Raspail,  which  had  occupied 
the  preceding  seance,  and  these  memories,  interfering 
with  the  Martian  vision,  become,  for  good  or  ill,  in- 
corporated as  a  strange  episode  in  it  without  having 

150 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE 

any  direct  connection  with  it.  The  work  of  unifica- 
tion, of  dramatization,  by  which  these  two  unequal 
chains  of  ideas  are  harmonized  and  fused  the  one 
with  the  other  through  the  intermediation  of  an  as- 
sembly-hall, is  no  more  or  no  less  extraordinary  than 
that  which  displays  itself  in  all  our  nocturnal  phan- 
tasmagoria, where  certain  absolutely  heterogeneous 
memories  often  ally  themselves  after  an  unexpected 
fashion,  and  afford  opportunity  for  confusions  of  the 
most  bizarre  character. 

But  mediumistic  communications  differ  from  ordi- 
nary dreams  in  this — namely,  the  incoherence  of  the 
latter  does  not  cause  them  to  have  any  consequences. 
We  are  astonished  and  diverted  for  a  moment  as  we 
reflect  upon  a  dream.  Sometimes  a  dream  holds  a 
little  longer  the  attention  of  the  psychologist,  who 
endeavors  to  unravel  the  intricate  plot  of  his  dreams 
and  to  discover,  amid  the  caprices  of  association  or 
the  events  of  the  waking  state,  the  origin  of  their 
tangled  threads.  But,  on  the  whole,  this  incoher- 
ence has  no  influence  on  the  ultimate  course  of  our 
thoughts,  because  we  see  in  our  dreams  only  the 
results  of  chance,  without  value  in  themselves  and 
without  objective  signification. 

It  is  otherwise  with  spiritistic  communications,  by 
reason  of  the  importance  and  the  credit  accorded 
them. 

The  medium  who  partially  recollects  her  automa- 
tisms, or  to  whom  the  sitters  have  detailed  them  after 
the  close  of  the  seance,  adding  also  their  comments, 
becomes  preoccupied  with  these  mysterious  revela- 
tions ;  like  the  paranoiac,  who  perceives  hidden  mean- 

FROM  INDIA  TO   THE    PLANET   MARS 

ings  or  a  profound  significance  in  the  most  trifling 
coincidences,  she  seeks  to  fathom  the  content  of  her 
strange  visions,  reflects  on  them,  examines  them  in 
the  Hght  of  spiritistic  notions ;  if  she  encounters  dif- 
ficuhies  in  them,  or  contradictions,  her  conscious  or 
unconscious  thought  (the  two  are  not  always  in  ac- 
cord) will  undertake  the  task  of  removing  them,  and 
solving  as  well  as  possible  the  problems  which  these 
dream-creations,  considered  as  realities,  impose  upon 
her,  and  the  later  somnambulisms  will  bear  the  im- 
print of  this  labor  of  interpretation  or  correction. 

It  is  to  this  point  we  have  come  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  astronomical  romance  of  Mile.  Smith. 
The  purely  accidental  and  fortuitous  conjunction 
of  the  planet  Mars  and  Alexis  Mirbel  in  the  seance 
of  the  25th  of  November  determined  their  definitive 
welding  together.  Association  by  fortuitous  contig- 
uity is  transformed  into  a  logical  connection. 

II.  Later  Development  of  the  Martian 
Cycle 

This  development  was  not  effected  in  a  regular 
manner ;  but  for  the  most  part  by  leaps  and  bounds, 
separating  stoppages  more  or  less  prolonged.  After 
its  inauguration  in  the  seance  of  November  25,  1894,  it 
suffered  a  first  eclipse  of  nearly  fifteen  months,  attrib- 
utable to  new  preoccupations  which  had  installed 
themselves  on  the  highest  plane  of  Mile.  Smith's 
subconsciousness  and  held  that  position  throughout 
the  whole  of  the  year  1895. 

Compared  with  the  seance  of  November,  1894,  that 
152 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE 

of  February,  1896  (of  which  a  resume  follows),  shows 
interesting  innovations.     Raspail  does  not  figure  in 
it    and   henceforth  does   not  appear    again,  which 
was  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  Mme.  Mirbel  had 
failed  to  make  use  of  the  method  of  treatment  which 
he  had  prescribed  for  her  eyes.     Young  Mirbel,  on 
the  contrary,  sole  object  of  the  desires  and  longings 
of  his  poor  mother,  occupies  the  highest  plane,  and  is 
the  central  figure  of  the  vision.     He  now  speaks  Mar- 
tian and  no  longer  understands  French,  which  com- 
plicates the  conversation  somewhat.     Further,  not 
possessing  the  power  of  moving  tables  upon  our  globe, 
it  is  through  the  intervention  of  the  medium,  by  in- 
carnating himself  momentarily  in  Mile.  Smith,  that 
he  henceforth  communicates  with  his  mother.     These 
two  latter  points  in  their  turn  cause  certain  difficuUies 
to  arise,  which,  acting  as  a  ferment  or  a  suggestion, 
will  later  usher  in  a  new  step  in  the  progress  of  the 
romance  :  Alexis  Mirbel  cannot  return  to  incarnate 
himself  in  a  terrestrial  medium  if  he  is  imprisoned 
in  his  Martian  existence  ;  he  must  first  terminate 
that  and  return  to  the  condition  in  which  he  again 
floats  in  interplanetary  space ;  which  ''fluid"  or  wan- 
dering state  permits  him  at  the  same  time  to  give  us 
the  French  translation  of  the  Martian  tongue;  since, 
according  to  spiritism,  a  complete  memory  of  pre- 
vious existences,  and  consequently  of  the  various 
languages  pertaining    to   them,   is   temporarily  re- 
covered during  the  phases  of  disincarnation. 

These  anticipatory  hints  will  assist  the  reader  in 
following  more  easily  the  thread  of  the  somnambulis- 
tic romance  in  the  resume  of  its  principal  stages, 

153 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

February  2,  1896. — I  sum  up,  by  enumerating 
them,  the  principal  somnambuHstic  phases  of  this 
seance,  which  lasted  more  than  two  hours  and  a  half, 
and  at  which  Mme.  Mirbel  assisted. 

I.  Increasing  hemisomnambulism,  with  gradual 
loss  of  consciousness  of  the  real  environment — at  the 
beginning  the  table  bows  several  times  to  Mme.  Mir- 
bel, announcing  that  the  coming  scene  is  intended 
for  her.  After  a  series  of  elementary  visual  hallu- 
cinations (rainbow  colors,  etc.),  meaning  for  Mme. 
Mirbel  that  she  would  finally  become  blind,  Helene 
arose,  left  the  table,  and  held  a  long  conversation  with 
an  imaginary  woman  who  wished  her  to  enter  a  cu- 
rious little  car  without  wheels  or  horses.  She  became 
impatient  towards  this  woman,  who,  after  having  at 
first  spoken  to  her  in  French,  now  persisted  in  speak- 
ing in  an  unintelligible  tongue,  like  Chinese.  Leo- 
pold revealed  to  us  by  the  little  finger  that  it  was  the 
language  of  the  planet  Mars,  that  this  woman  is  the 
mother  of  Alexis  Mirbel,  reincarnated  on  that  planet, 
and  that  Helene  herself  will  speak  Martian.  Pres- 
ently Helene  begins  to  recite  with  increasing  volu- 
bihty  an  incomprehensible  jargon,  the  beginning  of 
which  is  as  follows  (according  to  notes  taken  by 
M.  Lemaitre  at  the  time,  as  accurately  as  possible)  : 
"Mitchma  mitchmon  mimini  tchouainem  mimat- 
chineg  masichinof  mezavi  patelki  abresinad  na- 
vette  naven  navette  mitchichenid  naken  chinou- 
toufiche"  .  .  .  From  this  point  the  rapidity  prevented 
the  recognition  of  anything  else,  except  such  scraps 
as  "teke.  .  .  katechivist.  .  .  meguetch,".  . .  or  "me- 
ketch  ,  ,  .  kete  .  .  .  chimeke."    After  a  few  minutes, 

154 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

Helene  interrupts  herself,  crying  out,  "  Oh,  I  have  had 
enough  of  it ;  you  say  such  words  to  me  I  will  never 
be  able  to  repeat  them. "  Then,  with  some  reluctance, 
she  consents  to  follow  her  interlocutrix  into  the  car 
which  was  to  carry  her  to  Mars. 

2.  The  trance  is  now  complete.  Helene  thereupon 
mimics  the  voyage  to  Mars  in  three  phases,  the 
meaning  of  which  is  indicated  by  Leopold  :  a  reg- 
ular rocking  motion  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body 
(passing  through  the  terrestrial  atmosphere),  abso- 
lute immobility  and  rigidity  (interplanetary  space), 
again  oscillations  of  the  shoulders  and  the  bust  (at- 
mosphere of  Mars) .  Arrived  upon  Mars,  she  descends 
from  the  car,  and  performs  a  complicated  pantomime 
expressing  the  manners  of  Martian  politeness  :  un- 
couth gestures  with  the  hands  and  fingers,  slapping 
of  the  hands,  taps  of  the  fingers  upon  the  nose,  the 
lips,  the  chin,  etc.,  twisted  courtesies,  glidings,  and 
rotation  on  the  floor,  etc.  It  seems  that  is  the  way 
people  approach  and  salute  each  other  up  there. 

3.  This  sort  of  dance  having  suggested  to  one  of 
the  sitters  the  idea  of  performing  upon  the  piano, 
Helene  suddenly  fell  upon  the  floor  in  an  evidently 
hypnotic  state,  which  had  no  longer  a  Martian  char- 
acter. At  the  cessation  of  the  music  she  entered  into 
a  mixed  state,  in  which  the  memory  of  the  Martian 
visions  continually  mingle  themselves  with  some  idea 
of  her  terrestrial  existence.  She  talks  to  herself. 
"  Those  dreams  are  droll,  all  the  same.  ...  I  must 
tell  that  to  M.  Lemaitre.  When  he  [the  Martian 
Alexis  Mirbel]  said  '  Good-day  '  to  me,  he  tapped 
himself  upon  the  nose.  .  .  .  He  spoke  to  me  in  a 

155 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

queer  language,  but  I  understood  it  perfectly,  all  the 
same,"  etc.  Seated  on  the  ground,  leaning  against 
a  piece  of  furniture,  she  continues,  soliloquizing  in 
French,  in  a  low  voice,  to  review  the  dream,  min- 
gling with  it  some  wandering  reflections.  She 
finds,  for  example,  that  the  young  Martian  (Alexis) 
was  a  remarkably  big  boy  for  one  only  five  or  six 
years  old,  as  he  claimed  to  be,  and  that  the  woman 
seemed  very  young  to  be  his  mother. 

4.  After  a  transitory  phase  of  sighs  and  hiccoughs, 
followed  by  profound  sleep  with  muscular  relaxation, 
she  enters  into  Martian  somnambulism  and  mur- 
murs some  confused  words:  "  Kesin  ouitidje"  .  .  . 
etc.  I  command  her  to  speak  French  to  me  ;  she 
seems  to  understand,  and  replies  in  Martian,  with 
an  irritated  and  imperious  tone,  I  ask  her  to  tell 
me  her  name ;  she  replies,  '*  Vasimini  Meteche." 
With  the  idea  that,  perhaps,  she  ''is  incarnating" 
the  young  Alexis,  of  whom  she  has  spoken  so  much 
in  the  preceding  phase,  I  urge  Mme.  Mirbel  to  ap- 
proach her,  and  thereupon  begins  a  scene  of  incar- 
nation really  very  affecting ;  Mme.  Mirbel  is  on  her 
knees,  sobbing  bitterly,  in  the  presence  of  her  re- 
covered son,  who  shows  her  marks  of  the  most 
profound  affection  and  caresses  her  hands  "  exactly 
as  he  was  accustomed  to  do  during  his  last  illness," 
all  the  time  carrying  on  a  discourse  in  Martian 
(tin  is  toutch),  which  the  poor  mother  cannot  un- 
derstand, but  to  which  an  accent  of  extreme  sweet- 
ness and  a  tender  intonation  impart  an  evident 
meaning  of  words  of  consolation  and  filial  tender- 
ness.    This  pathetic  duet  lavsted  about  ten  minutes, 

156 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE 

and  was  brought  to  an  end  by  a  return  to  lethargic 
sleep,  from  which  Helene  awakened  at  the  end  of  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  pronouncing  a  short  Martian 
word,  after  which  she  instantly  recovered  the  use 
of  her  French  and  her  normal  waking  state. 

5.  Questioned  as  to  what  had  passed,  Helene, 
while  drinking  tea,  narrates  the  dream  which  she 
has  had.  She  has  a  sufficiently  clear  memory  of  her 
journey  and  of  what  she  has  seen  on  Mars,  with  the 
exception  of  the  young  man,  of  whom  she  has  re- 
tained only  a  recollection  of  the  scene  of  incarna- 
tion. 

But  suddenly,  in  the  midst  of  the  conversation, 
she  begins  to  speak  in  Martian,  without  appearing 
to  be  aware  of  it,  and  while  continuing  to  chat  with 
us  in  the  most  natural  manner  ;  she  appeared  to 
understand  all  our  words,  and  answered  in  her 
strange  idiom,  in  the  most  normal  tone,  and  seemed 
very  much  astonished  when  we  told  her  that  we  did 
not  understand  her  language  ;  she  evidently  be- 
lieves she  is  speaking  French.*  By  questioning 
her  concerning  a  visit  which  she  had  made  a  few 
days  before  to  M.  C,  and  asking  her  the  number 
and  the  names  of  the  persons  whom  she  met  there, 
we  succeed  in  identifying  the  four  following  Martian 
words  :  Metiche  S.,  Monsieur  S.  ;  Medache  C,  Ma- 
dame C;  Metaganiche  Smith,  Mademoiselle  Smith; 
kin't'che,  four.  After  which  she  resumes  defini- 
tively her  French.     Interrogated  as  to  the  incident 

*  Compare  the  case  of  Mile.  Anna  O.    Brener  et  Frend,  Studien 
fiber  Hysteric,  p.  19.     Vienna,  1895. 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

which  has  transpired,  she  is  astounded,  has  only 
a  hesitating  and  confused  memory  of  her  having 
spoken  at  all  this  evening  of  her  visit  to  M.  C,  and 
does  not  recognize  nor  understand  the  four  Martian 
words  given  above  when  they  are  repeated  to  her. 
On  several  occasions  during  this  seance  I  had  made 
the  suggestion  to  Helene  that  at  a  given  signal, 
after  her  awaking,  she  would  recover  the  memory 
of  the  Martian  words  pronounced  by  her  and  of  their 
meaning.  But  Leopold,  who  was  present,  declared 
that  this  command  would  not  be  obeyed,  and  that 
a  translation  could  not  be  obtained  this  evening. 
The  signal,  though  often  repeated,  was,  in  fact, 
without  result. 

It  has  seemed  to  me  necessary  to  describe  with 
some  detail  this  seance,  at  which  the  Martian  lan- 
guage made  its  first  appearance,  in  order  to  place 
before  the  reader  all  the  fragments  which,  we  have 
been  able  to  gather,  without,  of  course,  any  guaran- 
tee of  absolute  accuracy,  since  every  one  knows  how 
difficult  it  is  to  note  the  sounds  of  unknown  words. 
A  curious  difference  is  to  be  noticed  between  the 
words  picked  up  in  the  course  of  the  seance  and  the 
four  words  several  times  repeated  by  Helene,  the 
meaning  and  pronunciation  of  which  have  been  deter- 
mined with  complete  accuracy  in  the  posthypnotic  re- 
turn of  the  somnambulistic  dream.  Judged  by  these 
latter,  the  Martian  language  is  only  a  puerile  counter- 
feit of  French,  of  which  she  preserves  in  each  word  a 
number  of  syllables  and  certain  conspicuous  letters. 
In  the  other  phrases,  on  the  contrary,  also  making 
use  of  later  texts  which  have  been  translated,  as 

158 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

we  shall  see  hereafter,  it  cannot  be  discovered  what 
it  is.  We  are  constrained  to  believe  that  these  first 
outbreaks  of  Martian,  characterized  by  a  volubility 
which  we  have  rarely  met  with  since  then,  was  only 
a  pseudo-Martian,  a  continuation  of  sounds  uttered 
at  random  and  without  any  real  meaning,  •  analo- 
gous to  the  gibberish  which  children  use  sometimes 
in  their  games  of  "  pretending  "  to  speak  Chinese 
or  Indian,  and  that  the  real  Martian  was  only  cre- 
ated by  an  unskilful  distortion  of  French,  in  a  post- 
hypnotic access  of  hemisomnambulism,  in  order  to 
respond  to  the  manifest  desire  of  the  sitters  to  obtain 
the  precise  significance  of  some  isolated  Martian 
words. 

The  impossibility,  announced  by  Leopold,  of  pro- 
curing a  translation  that  same  evening  of  the  pre- 
tended Martian  spoken  for  the  first  time  during  that 
seance,  and  the  fact  that  it  could  not  again  be  ob- 
tained, give  some  support  to  the  preceding  theory. 

The  circumstance  that  Helene,  in  remembering 
her  dream  in  phase  No.  3,  had  the  sentiment  of  hav- 
ing ivell  understood  this  unknown  jargon,  is  not  an 
objection,  vsince  the  children  who  amuse  themselves 
by  simulating  an  imcouth  idiom — to  recur  to  that 
example — do  not  retain  the  least  consciousness  of  the 
ideas  which  their  gibberish  is  assumed  to  express. 
It  seems,  in  short,  that  if  this  new  language  was 
already  really  established  at  that  time  in  Helene' s 
subliminal  consciousness  to  the  point  of  sustaining 
fluently  discourses  of  several  minutes'  duration, 
some  phrases  at  least  would  not  have  failed  to  gush 
forth,  spontaneously  sometimes,  in  the  course  of  or- 

159 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

dinary  life,  and  in  order  to  throw  light  upon  visions 
of  Martian  people  or  landscapes.  More  than  seven 
months  had  to  elapse  before  that  phenomenon,  which 
was  so  frequent  afterwards,  began  to  appear. 

May  we  not  see  in  this  half-year  a  period  of  in- 
cubation, employed  in  the  subliminal  fabrication  of  a 
language,  properly  so  called — that  is  to  say,  formed 
of  precise  words  and  with  a  definite  signification,  in 
imitation  of  the  four  terms  just  referred  to — to  replace 
the  disordered  nonsense  of  the  beginning  ? 

However  it  may  be,  and  to  return  to  our  story, 
one  can  imagine  the  interest  which  that  sudden  and 
unexpected  apparition  of  mysterious  speech  aroused, 
and  which  the  authority  of  Leopold  would  not  allow 
to  be  taken  for  anything  other  than  the  language 
of  Mars.  The  natural  curiosity  of  Helene  herself, 
as  well  as  that  of  her  friends,  to  know  more  about 
our  neighbors  of  other  worlds  and  their  way  of  ex- 
pressing themselves  should  naturally  have  contrib- 
uted to  the  development  of  the  subliminal  dream. 
The  following  seance,  unhappily,  did  not  justify 
the  promise  with  which  it  began. 

February  1 6,  1896. — "  At  the  beginning  of  this 
seance,  Helene  has  a  vision  of  Alexis  Mirbel,  who 
announces,  by  means  of  the  table,  that  he  has  not 
forgotten  his  French,  and  that  he  will  give  a  trans- 
lation of  the  Martian  words  another  day.  But  this 
prediction  is  not  fulfilled.  Whether  Helene,  for 
the  reason  that  she  is  not  feeling  well  to-day,  or  that 
the  presence  of  some  one  antipathetic  to  her  has  hin- 
dered the  production  of  the  phenomena,  the  Martian 
somnambulism,  which  seemed  on  the  point  of  break- 

160 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

ing  forth,  did  not  make  its  appearance.  Helene 
remains  in  a  crepuscular  state,  in  which  the  feehng 
of  present  reahty  and  the  Martian  ideas  on  the  level 
of  consciousness  interfere  with  and  mutually  obscure 
each  other.  She  speaks  in  French  with  the  sitters, 
but  mingling  with  it  here  and  there  a  strange  word 
(such  as  meche,  chinit,  cheque,  which,  according 
to  the  context,  seem  to  signify  pencil,  ring,  paper), 
and  appears  far  away  from  her  actual  surround- 
ings. She  is  astonished,  in  particular,  at  the  sight 
of  M.  R.  occupied  in  taking  notes  hy  the  proces  ver- 
bal, and  seems  to  find  that  manner  of  writing  with 
a  pen  or  pencil  strange  and  absurd,  but  without  ex- 
plaining clearly  how  it  was  to  be  otherwise  accom- 
plished. The  importance  of  this  seance  is  in  the 
fact  that  the  idea  stands  out  clearly  (which  was  not 
to  be  realized  until  a  year  and  a  half  later)  of  a  mode 
of  handwriting  peculiar  to  the  planet  Mars." 

This  seance,  which  was  almost  a  failure,  was  the 
last  of  that  period.  Helene's  health,  which  became 
more  and  more  impaired  by  standing  too  long  on 
her  feet  and  overwork  at  her  desk,  necessitated  her 
taking  a  complete  rest.  I  have  mentioned  the  fact 
that  during  these  six  months,  without  any  regular 
seances,  she  was  subject  to  a  superabundance  of 
spontaneous  visions  and  somnambulisms  ;  but  these 
automatisms  belonged  to  the  Hindoo  or  other  cycles, 
and  I  do  not  believe  that  she  experienced  during  that 
time  any  phenomena  which  were  clearly  related  to 
the  Martian  romance.  On  the  other  hand,  as  soon 
as  she  was  re-established  in  and  had  returned  to  her 
normal  mode  of  life,  the  latter  appeared  again  with 
L  i6i 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

all  the  more  intensity,  dating  from  the  following  noc- 
turnal vision.     (See  Fig.  9.) 

September  5,  1896. — Helene  narrates  that  having 
arisen  at  a  quarter-past  three  in  the  morning  to  take 
in  some  flowers  that  stood  upon  the  window-sill  and 
were  threatened  by  the  wind,  instead  of  going  back 
to  bed  immediately  she  sat  down  upon  her  bed  and 
saw  before  her  a  landscape  and  some  peculiar  people. 
She  was  on  the  border  of  a  beautiful  blue-pink  lake, 
with  a  bridge  the  sides  of  which  were  transparent 
and  formed  of  yellow  tubes  like  the  pipes  of  an  organ, 
of  which  one  end  seemed  to  be  plunged  into  the  water. 
The  earth  was  peach-colored ;  some  of  the  trees  had 
trunks  widening  as  they  ascended,  while  those  of 
others  were  twisted.  Later  a  crowd  approached  the 
bridge,  in  which  one  woman  was  especially  prominent. 
The  women  wore  hats  which  were  fiat,  like  plates. 
Helene  does  not  know  who  these  people  are,  but  has 
the  feeling  of  having  conversed  with  them.  On  the 
bridge  there  was  a  man  of  dark  complexion  (Astane), 
carrying  in  his  hands  an  instrument  somewhat 
resembling  a  carriage-lantern  in  appearance,  which, 
being  pressed,  emitted  flames,  and  which  seemed  to 
be  a  flying-machine.  By  means  of  this  instrument 
the  man  left  the  bridge,  touched  the  surface  of  the 
water,  and  returned  again  to  the  bridge.  This  tableau 
lasted  twenty-five  minutes,  since  Helene,  upon  re- 
turning to  consciousness,  observed  that  her  candle 
was  still  burning  and  ascertained  that  it  was  then 
3.40  o'clock.  She  is  convinced  that  she  did  not  fall 
asleep,  but  was  wide  awake  during  all  of  this  vision. 
(See  Figs.  10  and  11.) 

162 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE     • 

From  that  time  the  spontaneous  Martian  visions 
are  repeated  and  multiphed.  Mile.  Smith  experiences 
them  usually  in  the  morning,  after  awaking  and  be- 
fore rising  from  her  bed  :  sometimes  in  the  evening, 
or  occasionally  at  other  times  during  the  day.  It  is  in 
the  course  of  these  visual  hallucinations  that  the  Mar- 
tian language  appears  again  under  an  auditive  form. 

September  22,  1896.  —  During  these  last  days  He- 
lene  has  seen  again  on  different  occasions  the  Mar- 
tian man,  with  or  without  his  flying-machine ;  for 
example,  he  appeared  to  her  while  she  was  taking  a 
bath,  at  the  edge  of  the  bath-tub.  She  has  had  sev- 
eral times  visions  of  a  strange  house  the  picture  of 
which  followed  her  with  so  much  persistency  that 
she  finally  painted  it  (see  Fig.  12).  At  the  same 
time  she  heard  on  three  different  occa^sions  a  sentence 
the  meaning  of  which  she  does  not  know,  but  which 
she  was  able  to  take  down  with  her  pencil  as  follows  : 
"  Dode  ne  ci  haudan  te  meche  metiche  Astane  ke 
de  me  veche."  (As  was  ascertained  six  weeks  after, 
by  the  translation  given  in  the  seance  of  the  2d  of 
November,  this  phrase  indicates  that  the  strange 
house  is  that  of  the  Martian  man,  who  is  called 
Astane.) 

This  phrase  was  undoubtedly  Martian,  but  what 
was  the  meaning  of  it  ?  After  having  hoped  in  vain 
for  nearly  a  month  that  the  meaning  would  be  re- 
vealed in  some  way  or  other,  I  decided  to  try  a  dis- 
guised suggestion.  I  wrote  to  Leopold  himself  a 
letter,  in  which  I  appealed  to  his  omniscience  as  well 
as  to  his  kindness  to  give  me  some  enlightenment 
in  regard  to  the  strange  language  which  piqued  our 

163 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

curiositj^  and,  in  particular,  as  to  the  meaning  of  the 
phrase  Helene  had  heard.  I  asked  him  to  answer  me 
in  writing,  b}^  means  of  Helene's  hand.  We  did  not 
have  to  wait  long  for  a  reply.  Helene  received  my 
letter  the  20th  of  October,  and  on  the  evening  of  the 
22d,  seized  with  a  vague  desire  to  write,  she  took  a 
pencil,  which  placed  itself  in  the  regular  position, 
between  the  thumb  and  the  index -finger  (whereas 
she  always  held  her  pen  between  the  middle  and  in- 
dex-finger), and  traced  rapidly,  in  the  characteristic 
handwriting  of  Leopold  and  with  his  signature,  a 
beautiful  epistle  of  eighteen  Alexandrine  lines  ad- 
dressed to  me,  of  which  the  ten  last  are  as  follows, 
being  an  answer  to  my  request  that  the  secrets  of 
Martian  be  revealed  to  me  : 

"  Ne  crois  pas  qu'en  t'aimant  comme  un  bien  tendre  frere 
Je  te  diroi  des  cieux  tout  le  profond  mystere  ; 
Je  t'aideroi  beaucoup,  je  t'ouvriroi  la  voie, 
Mais  a  toi  de  saisir  et  chercher  avec  joie ; 
Et  quand  tu  la  verras  d'ici-bas  detachee, 
Quand  son  ame  mobile  aura  pris  la  volee 
Et  planera  sur  Mars  aux  superbes  couleurs  ; 
Si  tu  veux  obtenir  d'elle  quelques  lueurs, 
Pose  bien  doucement,  ta  main  sur  son  front  pale 
Et  prononce  bien  bas  le  doux  nom  d'Esenale!"* 

X- 

Do  not  think  that  in  loving  you  as  a  tender  brother 
I  shall  tell  you  all  the  profound  mysteries  of  heaven  ; 
I  shall  help  you  much,   I  shall  open  for  you  the  way, 
But  it  is  for  you  to  seize  and  seek  with  joy ; 
And  when  you  shall  see  her  released  from  here  below, 
When  her  mobile  soul  shall  have  taken  flight 
And  shall  soar  over  Mars  with  its  brilliant  tints  ; 
If  you  would  obtain  from  her  some  light, 
Place  your  hand  very  gently  on  her  pale  forehead 
And  pronounce  very  softly  the  sweet  name  of  Esenale  !" 
164 

THE  MARTIAN  CYClE 

I  have  been  very  sensible  to  the  pledges  of  fraternal 
affection  that  Leopold  has  accorded  me,  but  this 
time  I  was  especially  moved,  and  although  the  very 
uncommon  name  of  Esenale  meant  absolutely  noth- 
ing to  me,  I  took  care  not  to  forget  the  singular  rule 
which  had  been  furnished  me.  At  the  following 
seance  an  opportunity  for  using  it  presented  itself, 
and  Leopold  went  so  far  as  to  direct  himself  the  ap- 
plication of  his  method  by  giving  us  his  instructions, 
sometimes  with  one  finger,  sometimes  with  another, 
during  Helene's  Martian  trance. 

Monday,  November  2,  1896. — After  various  char- 
acteristic symptoms  of  the  departure  for  Mars  (verti- 
go, affection  of  the  heart,  etc.),  Helene  went  in  a  deep 
sleep.  I  had  recourse  to  the  prescribed  method,  but 
Leopold,  by  the  fingers  of  the  right  hand,  indicated 
that  the  proper  moment  had  not  yet  arrived,  and  said  : 
"  When  the  soul  shall  again  have  regained  posses- 
sion of  itself  thou  shalt  execute  my  order  ;  she  will 
then  describe  to  you,  while  still  asleep,  that  which 
she  shall  have  seen  on  Mars."  Shortly  after  he 
adds,  ''Make  her  sit  down  in  an  easy -chair"  (in- 
stead of  the  uncomfortable  one  which  she  had  taken, 
as  was  her  wont) ;  then,  as  her  peaceful  sleep  still 
continued,  he  informs  us  again  that  she  is  en  route 
towards  Mars ;  that  once  arrived  up  there  she  under- 
stands the  Martian  spoken  around  her,  although 
she  has  never  learned  it  ;  that  it  is  not  he,  Leopold, 
who  will  translate  the  Martian  for  us — not  because 
he  does  not  wish  to  do  so,  but  because  he  cannot  ; 
that  this  translation  is  the  performance  of  Esenale, 
who  is  actually  disincarnate  in   space,  but  who  has 

165 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MAR§ 

recently  lived  upon  Mars,  and   also  upon  the  earth, 
wliich  permits  him  to  act  as  interpreter,  etc. 

After  half  an  hour  of  waiting,  Helene's  calm  sleep 
gave  way  to  agitation,  and  she  passed  into  another 
f  onn  of  somnambulism,  with  sighs,  rhythmic  movements 
of  the  head  and  hands,  then  grotesque  Martian  gest- 
ures and  French  words  murmured  softly  to  the  hear- 
ing of  Leopold,  who  seems  to  accompany  her  on  Mars, 
and  to  whom  she  confides  some  of  her  impressions  in 
regard  to  that  which  she  perceives.  In  the  midst  of 
this  soliloquy  a  vertical  movement  of  the  arm,  peculiar 
to  Leopold,  indicates  that  the  moment  has  arrived  for 
carrying  out  his  directions.  I  place  my  hand  on 
Helene's  forehead,  and  utter  the  name  of  Esenale, 
to  which  Helene  replies  in  a  soft,  feeble,  somewhat 
melancholy,  voice  :  "  Esenale  has  gone  away  .  .  . 
he  has  left  me  alone  .  .  .  but  he  will  return,  .  .  . 
he  will  soon  return.  ...  He  has  taken  me  by  the 
hand  and  made  me  enter  the  house  [that  which  she 
saw  in  her  vision,  and  of  which  she  made  the  drawing 
a  month  ago — see  Fig.  12].  .  .  .  I  do  not  know  where 
Esenale  is  leading  me,  but  he  has  said  to  me,  *  Dode 
ne  ci  haudan  te  meche  metiche  Astane  ke  de  me 
veche,'  but  I  did  not  understand ;  .  .  .  dode,  this ; 
ne,  is ;  ci,  the ;  haudan,  house ;  te,  of  the ;  meche, 
great ;  metiche,  man  ;  Astane,  Astane;  ke,  whom  ; 
de,  thou ;  me,  hast ;  veche,  seen.  .  .  .  This  is  the 
house  of  the  great  man  Astane,  whom  thou  hast 
seen.  .  .  .  Esenale  has  told  me  that.  .  .  .  Esenale 
has  gone  away.  ...  He  will  return  ...  he  will 
soon  return  ...  he  will  teach  me  to  speak  .  .  . 
and  Astane  will  teach  me  to  write." 

166 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

I  have  abridged  this  long  monologue,  constantly 
interrupted  by  silences,  and  the  continuation  of  which 
I  only  obtained  by  having  constant  recourse  to  the 
name  of  Esenale  as  the  magic  word,  alone  capable  of 
extracting  each  time  a  few  words  from  Helene's  con- 
fused brain.  After  the  last  sentence  or  phrase,  in  which 
one  can  see  a  categorical  prediction  of  the  Martian 
writing,  her  weak,  slow  voice  w^as  finally  hushed,  and 
Leopold  directs  by  means  of  his  left  middle  finger  the 
removal  of  the  hand  from  the  forehead.  Then  follow 
the  customary  alternations  of  lethargic  sleep,  sighs, 
catalepsy,  momentary  relapses  into  somnambulism, 
etc.  Then  she  opens  her  eyes  permanently,  very 
much  surprised  to  find  herself  in  the  easy-chair.  Her 
brain  is  greatly  confused.  "  It  seems  to  me  as  though 
I  had  a  great  many  things  on  my  mind,  but  I  cannot 
fix  upon  anything."  By  degrees  she  regains  a  clear 
consciousness,  but  of  the  entire  seance,  which  has 
lasted  an  hour  and  a  half,  there  only  remain  some 
fragments  of  Martian  visions  and  no  recollection 
whatever  of  the  scene  with  Esenale  and  that  of  the 
translation. 

This  process  of  translation,  the  first  application  of 
which  is  here  presented,  becomes  from  this  time  the 
standard  method. 

For  more  than  two  years  and  a  half,  the  imposition 
of  the  hand  upon  Helene's  forehead  and  the  uttering 
of  the  name  of  Esenale  at  the  proper  moment  during 
the  trance  constitute  the  "  open  sesame  "  of  the  Mar- 
tian-French dictionary  buried  in  the  subliminal  strata 
of  H^^ne's  consciousness.  The  idea  of  this  cere- 
monial is  evidently  to  awaken  by  suggestion — in  a 

167 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

certain  favorable  somnambulistic  phase,  which  Leo- 
pold recognizes  and  himself  announces  by  a  gesture 
of  the  arm — the  secondary  personality  which  has 
amused  itself  by  composing  the  phrases  of  this  extra- 
terrestrial language. 

In  spiritistic  terms,  it  amounts  to  invoking  the 
disincarnate  Esenale,  otherwise  called  Alexis  Mir- 
bel,  who,  having  lived  on  both  planets,  can  easily 
devote  himself  to  the  functions  of  an  interpreter. 

The  only  difference  between  this  scene  of  trans- 
lation and  other  seances  is  in  the  ease  and  rapidity 
with  which  it  is  performed.  Esenale  seems  some- 
times to  be  thoroughly  asleep  and  difficult  to  awaken; 
Helene  persists  in  replying  by  the  stereotyped  refrain, 
and  incessantly  repeats,  in  her  soft  and  melancholy 
voice,  "  Esenale  has  gone  away — he  will  soon  re- 
turn—  he  has  gone  away — he  will  soon  return." 
Then  some  more  energetic  passes  or  friction  on  the 
forehead  are  necessary,  instead  of  the  simple  press- 
ure of  the  hand,  in  order  to  break  up  this  mechan- 
ical repetition,  which  threatens  to  go  on  forever,  and 
in  order  to  obtain,  finally,  the  repetition  and  trans- 
lation, word  by  word,  of  the  Martian  texts.  Other- 
wise the  voice  continues  identical  with  that  of  the  re- 
frain, soft  and  feeble,  and  one  can  never  know  wheth- 
er it  is  Esenale  himself  who  is  making  use  of  He- 
lene's  phonetic  apparatus  without  modifying  it, 
or  whether  it  is  she  herself,  repeating  in  her  sleep 
what  Esenale  has  told  her  ;  the  categorical  dis- 
tinctness and  absence  of  all  hesitation  in  pronun- 
ciation of  the  Martian  are  in  favor  of  the  former  sup- 
position, which  is  also  corroborated  by  the  fact  that 

i68 

Fig  n.  Martian  landscape.  Greenish-yellow  sky.  A  man  witli  a  yellow  com- 
plexion, dressed  in  white,  in  a  boat  of  brown,  yellow,  black,  and  red  colors  on  a 
blue-green  lake ;  rose-tinted  rock,  with  white  and  yellow  spots  ;  dark  green  vege- 
tation ;  buildings  of  brown,  red,  and  rose-lilac  tints,  with  white  window-panes  and 
curtains  of  bright  blue. 

THE  MARTIAN   CYCLE 

it  was  also  in  this  same  voice  that  Alexis  Mirbel 
(Esenale)  spoke  to  his  mother  in  the  scenes  of  in- 
carnation.    (See  Fig.  13.) 

It  would  be  wearisome  to  recount  in  detail  all  the 
further  manifestations  of  the  Martian  cycle,  which 
occur  frequently  in  numerous  seances  and  also  un- 
der the  form  of  spontaneous  visions  in  the  daily  life 
of  Mile.  Smith.  The  reader  can  gain  an  idea  of 
them  both  from  the  remarks  of  the  following  para- 
graph, as  well  as  from  the  explanatory  resumes 
added  to  the  Martian  texts,  which  will  be  collected 
in  the  following  chapter.  It  merely  remains  for 
me  to  say  a  word  here  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the 
pictures  of  Helene  relative  to  Mars^  and  reproduced 
in  autotype  in  the  Figs.  9  to  20,  have  been  made. 

None  of  these  pictures  has  been  executed  in  com- 
plete somnambulism,  and  they  have  not,  consequent- 
ly, like  the  drawings  of  certain  mediums,  the  interest 
of  a  graphic  product,  absolutely  automatic,  engendered 
outside  of  and  unknown  to  the  ordinary  conscious- 
ness. They  are  nothing  more  than  simple  com- 
positions of  the  normal  consciousness  of  Mile.  Smith. 
They  represent  a  type  of  intermediary  activity,  and 
correspond  to  a  state  of  hemisomnambulism.  We 
have  seen  above  (p.  20)  that  already  in  her  child- 
hood Helene  seems  to  have  executed  various  pieces 
of  work  in  a  semi-automatic  manner.  The  same 
performance  is  often  reproduced  on  the  occasion 
of  the  Martian  visions,  which  sometimes  pursue  her 
so  persistently  that  she  decides  to  execute  them  with 
pencil  and  brush  ;  work  which,  in  anticipation, 
often  frightens  her  by  its  difficulty,  but  which,  when 

.69 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  time  comes,  accomplishes  itself,  to  her  great  as- 
tonishment, with  an  ease  and  perfection  almost  me- 
chanical.    Here  is  an  example  : 

One  Tuesday  evening,  having  already  retired, 
Helene  saw  on  her  bed  some  magnificent  flowers, 
very  different  from  ours,  but  without  perfume,  and 
which  she  did  not  touch,  for  during  her  visions  she 
has  no  idea  of  moving,  and  remains  inert  and  pas- 
sive. The  afternoon  of  the  following  day,  at  her 
desk,  she  found  herself  enveloped  in  a  red  light,  and 
at  the  same  time  felt  an  indefinable  but  violent  af- 
fection of  the  heart  (aura  of  the  voyage  to  Mars). 
"  The  red  light  continues  about  me,  and  I  find  my- 
self surrounded  by  extraordinary  flowers  of  the  kind 
which  I  saw  on  my  bed,  but  they  had  no  perfume. 
I  will  bring  you  some  sketches  of  them  on  Sunday." 
She  sent  them  to  me,  in  fact,  on  Monday,  with  the 
following  note :  '*  I  am  very  well  satisfied  with  my 
plants.  They  are  the  exact  reproduction  of  those 
which  it  afforded  me  so  much  pleasure  to  behold 
[No.  3,  in  Fig.  i6,  which,  beforehand,  Helene  de- 
spaired of  being  able  to  render  well],  which  ap- 
peared to  me  on  the  latter  occasion,  and  I  greatly 
regret  that  you  were  not  here  to  see  me  execute  the 
drawing  :  the  pencil  glided  so  quickly  that  I  did  not 
have  time  to  notice  what  contours  it  was  making. 
I  can  assert  without  any  exaggeration  that  it  was 
not  my  hand  alone  that  made  the  drawing,  but  that 
truly  an  invisible  force  guided  the  pencil  in  spite  of 
me.  The  various  tints  appeared  to  me  upon  the 
paper,  and  my  brush  was  directed  in  spite  of  me  tow- 
ards the  color  which  I  ought  to  use.     This  seems*  in- 

170 

Fig.  9.  Martian  landscape.  Pink  bridge,  with  )'ellow  railings  plunging  down  into  a 
pale-blue  and  purple-tinted  lake.  The  shores  and  hills  ot  a  red  color,  no  green  being 
visible.  All  the  trees  are  of  a  brick-red,  purple,  or  violet  tint.  |From  the  collection 
of  M    Lemaitre  ] 

Fig.  15.  Light-brown  and  yellow  trunk  and  leaves;  double-lobed  flowers  of  a  vivid 
red,  out  of  which  proceed  yellow  stamens  like  black  threads  Fig.  16.  Large 
leaves,  light  yellowish  brown;  flowers  with  purple  petals  with  black  stamens  and 
black  stems  covered  with  little  purple  leaves  like  petals.  Fig,  17.  Large  violet 
fruit  with  black  spots,  surmounted  by  a  yellow  and  violet  plume.  The  trunk  of 
brown  color  with  black  veins,  with  six  branches  of  the  same  character  ending  in 
a  yellow  hook.     Red-brick  soil. 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

credible,  but  it  is,  notwithstanding,  the  exact  truth. 
The  whole  was  done  so  quickly  that  I  marvelled 
at  it." 

The  house  of  Astane  (Fig.  12),  and  the  extensive 
landscapes  of  Figs.  13  and  14,  are  also  the  prod- 
ucts of  a  quasi-automatic  activity,  which  always 
gives  great  satisfaction  to  Mile.  Smith.  It  is,  in  a 
way,  her  subliminal  self  which  holds  the  brush  and 
executes,  at  its  pleasure,  its  own  tableaux,  which  also 
have  the  value  of  veritable  originals.  Other  draw- 
ings, on  the  contrary  (for  example,  the  portrait  of 
Astane,  Fig.  11),  which  have  given  Helene  much 
trouble  without  having  satisfied  her  very  well,  should 
be  regarded  as  simple  copies  from  memory,  by  the 
ordinary  personality,  of  past  visions,  the  memory  of 
which  is  graven  upon  her  mind  in  a  manner  suffi- 
ciently persistent  to  serve  as  a  model  several  days 
afterwards.  In  both  cases,  but  especially  in  the  first, 
H61ene's  paintings  may  be  considered  as  faithful  re- 
productions of  the  tableaux  which  unfold  themselves 
before  her,  and  consequently  give  us  better  than  most 
verbal  descriptions  an  idea  of  the  general  character 
of  her  Martian  visions. 

Let  us  see  now  what  kind  of  information  the  mes- 
sages and  somnambulisms  of  Helene  furnish  us  in 
regard  to  the  brilliant  planet  whose  complicated 
revolutions  formerly  revealed  to  a  Kepler  the  funda- 
mental secrets  of  modern  astronomy. 

171 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

III.  The  Personages  of  the  Martian 
Romance 

In  using  the  word  '"romance"  to  designate  the  Mar- 
tian communications,  taken  as  a  whole,  I  wish  to 
state  that  they  are,  to  my  mind,  a  work  of  pure  im- 
agination, but  not  that  there  are  to  be  found  in  them 
characteristics  of  unity  and  of  internal  co-ordination, 
of  sustained  action,  of  increasing  interest  to  the  final 
denouement.  The  Martian  romance  is  only  a  succes- 
sion of  detached  scenes  and  tableaux,  without  order 
or  intimate  connection,  and  showing  no  other  com- 
mon traits  beyond  the  uriknown  language  spoken  in 
it,  the  quite  frequent  presence  of  the  same  personages, 
and  a  certain  fashion  oi  originality,  a  color  or  quality 
badly  defined  as  "  exotic  "  or  "  bizarre  "  in  the  land- 
scapes, the  edifices,  the  costumes,  etc. 

Of  a  consecutive  plot  or  intrigue,  properly  so  called, 
there  is  no  trace.  I  naturally  speak  only  of  that 
which  we  have  learned  from  the  seances  of  Mile. 
Smith,  or  from  the  spontaneous  visions  which  she 
recollects  sufficiently  to  narrate  afterwards.  But 
this  fails  to  shadow  forth  the  hidden  source  whence 
they  all  spring. 

Without  determining  the  question,  I  am  inclined, 
nevertheless,  to  accord  to  the  Martian  romance,  in 
some  profound  stratum  of  Helene's  being,  a  much 
greater  continuity  and  extent  than  would  appear 
from  judging  it  solely  by  the  fragments  known  to 
us.  We  have  only,  in  my  opinion,  a  few  pages,  taken 
at  hazard  from  different  chapters;   th-e  bulk  of  the 

172 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE 

volume  Is  wanting,  and  the  little  we  possess  does  not 
enable  us  to  reconstruct  it  in  a  satisfactory  manner. 
We  must,  therefore,  be  content  with  sorting  this  debris 
of  unequal  importance,  according  to  their  content,  in- 
dependently of  their  chronological  order,  and  group- 
ing them  around  the  principal  personages  which 
figure  in  them. 

The  anonymous  and  mixed  crowd  which  forms 
the  base  of  some  of  the  Martian  visions  only  differs 
from  that  of  our  own  country  by  the  large  robe  com- 
mon to  both  sexes,  the  fiat  hats,  and  the  sandals 
bound  to  the  feet  by  straps.  The  interest  is  confined 
to  a  small  number  of  more  distinct  personages  hav- 
ing each  his  own  name,  always  terminating  in  an 
e  with  the  men  and  in  an  i  with  the  women,  except 
only  in  the  case  of  Esenale,  who  occupies,  however, 
a  place  by  himself  in  his  quality  of  disincarnated 
Martian,  fulfilling  the  function  of  interpreter.  Let 
us  begin  by  saying  a  few  words  about  him. 

Esenale 

We  have  seen  (p.  164)  that  this  name  was  hinted 
at  by  Leopold  on  the  22d  of  October,  1896,  without 
any  other  explanation  as  a  means  of  obtaining  the 
signification  of  the  Martian  words.  Then  at  the 
first  recurrence  to  this  talisman  (November  2d,  see  p. 
166)  we  learn  only  that  he  was  a  deceased  inhabitant 
of  Mars,  whose  acquaintance  Leopold  had  recently 
made  in  interplanetary  space.  It  was  only  at  the 
following  seance  (November  8th),  where  we  findMme. 
Mirbel,  that,  after  an  incarnation  of  her  son  Alexis, 
followed  by  the  scene  of  translation  (see  text  3)  and 

173 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

in  response  to  questions  of  the  sitters — which  an- 
swered very  well  the  purpose  of  suggestion — Leo- 
pold af&rmed  by  the  left  index-finger  that  Esenale 
was  Alexis  Mirbel.  It  cannot  be  determined  wheth- 
er that  identification  constituted  a  primitive  fact 
which  it  pleased  Leopold  to  keep  secret, .  only  reveal- 
ing it  at  the  end  of  a  seance  at  which  Mme.  Mirbel 
was  present,  or  whether,  as  I  am  inclined  to  regard 
it,  it  was  only  established  at  that  same  seance,  un- 
der the  domination  of  the  circumstances  of  the  mo- 
ment. As  a  translator  of  Martian,  Esenale  did  not 
show  great  talent.  He  had  to  be  entreated,  and  it 
was  necessary  often  to  repeat  his  name  while  press- 
ing or  rubbing  Helene's  forehead,  in  order  to  ob- 
tain the  exact  meaning  of  the  last  texts  which  had 
been  given.  He  possessed,  it  is  true,  an  excellent 
memory,  and  faithfully  reproduced,  before  giving 
it  word  by  word,  the  French  for  the  Martian  phrases 
which  Helene  had  heard  several  weeks  before  and  only 
seen  again  five  or  six  months  afterwards  (text  24), 
and  of  which  there  had  been  no  previous  opportu- 
nity to  obtain  a  translation.  But  it  was  to  these  lat- 
ter texts,  not  yet  interpreted,  that  he  confined  his 
willingness  ;  on  two  occasions  only  did  he  add,  of 
his  own  accord,  some  words  of  no  importance  (texts 
15  and  36.  Text  No.  19,  for  instance,  has  always 
remained  untranslated,  and  my  later  efforts  (June 
4,  1899)  to  obtain  the  meaning  of  the  unknown 
words  mile  piri  have  been  in  vain  ;  moreover,  Ese- 
nale has  not  been  able  to  fill  up  the  gaps  in  text 
No.  24. 

Alexis  Mirbel,  after  the  two  first  Martian  seances, 
174 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE 

reported  on  pp.  146  and  154,  called  Esenale,  often 
accorded  his  mother,  in  scenes  of  incarnation, 
somewhat  pathetic,  touching  messages  of  filial  ten- 
derness and  consolation  (texts  3,  4,  1 1,  15,  and  18). 
It  is  to  be  noted  that,  although  opportunities  for  con- 
tinuing this  role  were  not  wanting,  he  appears  to 
have  completely  abandoned  it  for  the  last  two  years. 
His  last  message  of  this  kind  (October  10,  1897,  text 
18)  followed  a  month  after  a  curious  seance  in  which 
Leopold  sought  to  explain  to  us  spontaneously — 
no  one  had  mentioned  the  subject — certain  flagrant 
contradictions  in  the  first  manifestations  of  Alexis- 
Esenale.  Here  is  a  resume  of  that  scene,  with  the 
text  of  Leopold's  communication  : 

September  12,  1897.  —  After  sundry  waking  vi- 
sions. Mile.  Smith  hears  Leopold  speaking ;  her  eyes 
are  closed,  and,  appearing  to  be  asleep,  she  repeats, 
mechanically  and  in  a  slow  and  feeble  voice,  the 
following  words,  which  her  guide  addresses  to  her  : 
"  Thou  art  going  to  pay  close  attention.  Tell 
them  now  [the  sitters]  to  keep  as  quiet  as  possible, 
that  is  what  often  mars  the  phenomena,  the  com- 
ings and  goings,  and  the  idle  chatter  of  which  you 
are  never  weary.  You  recollect  there  was,  several 
months  ago,  a  yoiing  man,  that  young  man  Alexis 
Mirbel,  who  came  to  give  counsel  to  his  mother  at 
a  reunion  you  held  with  M.  (I  do  not  understand 
the  name  he  gave)  .  „  .  at  Carouge"  .  .  .  Well, 
at  that  moment  he  happened — that  is  to  say,  two 
days  before — to  die  on   ...    (I  could  not  under- 

*  Allusion  to  the  seance  of  November  25,  1894,  at  M.  Le- 
maitre's.     See  p.  146. 

175 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

stand  the  name)  .  .  .  where  he  had  been  .  .  . 
or  he  had  regained  hfe."  This  is  why  I  have  come  to 
tell  you  to-day  he  was  in  that  phase  of  separation  of 
the  material  part  from  the  soul  which  permitted  him 
to  recollect  his  previous  existence — that  is  to  say, 
his  life  here  below  in  this  state  ;  he  not  only  recol- 
lects his  first  mother,  but  can  speak  once  more  the 
language  he  used  to  speak  with  her.  Some  time  af- 
ter, when  the  soul  was  finally  at  rest,  he  no  longer 
recollected  that  first  language  ;  he  returns,  he  hovers 
about  (his  mother),  sees  her  with  joy,  but  is  incapa- 
ble of  speaking  to  her  in  your  language. t  Whether 
it  will  return  to  him  I  do  not  know  and  cannot  say, 
but  I  believe  that  it  will.  And  now  listen."  Here 
Mile.  Smith  seems  to  awake,  opens  her  eyes,  and 
has  a  long  Martian  vision,  which  she  describes  in 
detail.  She  now  sees  a  little  girl  in  a  yellow  robe, 
whose  name  she  hears  as  Anini  Nikaine,  occupied 
with  various  childish  games — e.  g.,  with  a  small  wand 
she  makes  a  number  of  grotesque  little  figures  dance 
in  a  white  tub,  large  and  shallow,  full  of  sky-blue 
water.  Then  come  other  persons,  and,  finally,  As- 
tane,  who  has  a  pen  in  his  fingers,  and,  little  by  lit- 
tle, takes  hold  of  Helene's  arm  and  throws  her  into 
a  deep  trance  for  the  purpose  of  causing  her  to  write 
text  No.  17. 

These  spontaneous  explanations  of  Leopold  are 
interesting  in  that  they  betray  clearly  the  sublimi- 
nal desire  to  introduce  some  order  and  logic  into  the 

*  That  is  to  say,  he  died  on  Mars,  where  he  had  been  rein- 
carnated. 

f  Allusion  to  seance  of  February  2,  1896.     See  p.  154. 

176 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE 

incoherences  of  the  mediumistic  reveries.  It  is  a 
form  of  the  process  of  justification  and  retrospective 
interpretation  intended  to  make  the  incidents  of  the 
past  accord  with  the  dominant  ideas  of  the  present 
(see  p.  95).  In  appearance,  the  theory  upon  which 
Leopold  rested,  after  having  doubtless  meditated 
long,  is  quite  awkward ;  but  perhaps  it  was  difficult 
for  him  to  do  better,  since  no  one  can  accomplish  the 
impossible. 

ASTANE 

"  The  great  man  Astane"  is  the  reincarnation  on 
Mars  of  the  Hindoo  fakir  Kanga,  who  was  a  devoted 
companion  and  friend  of  Simandini.  He  has  pre- 
served in  his  new  existence  the  special  character  of 
savant  or  of  sorcerer,  which  he  formerly  possessed 
in  India,  and  he  has  equally  retained  all  his  affec- 
tion for  his  princess  of  old,  who  has  been  restored  to 
him  in  Mile.  Smith ;  he  frequently  utilizes  his  magic 
powers  to  evoke  her — that  is  to  say,  to  re-enter  into 
spiritual  communication  with  her,  notwithstanding 
the  distances  between  their  actual  places  of  habita- 
tion. The  ways  and  means  of  that  evocation  re- 
main, however,  enveloped  in  mystery.  We  cannot 
say  whether  it  was  Helene  that  rejoined  Astane  on 
Mars  during  her  somnambulism,  or  whether  it  was 
he  who  descended  "  fluidly  "  towards  her  and  brought 
to  her  the  odors  of  the  far-distant  planet. 

When  Astane  says  to  Helene,  during  a  seance: 

"  Come  to  me  an  instant.    Come  and  admire  these 

flowers,"  etc.  (text  8),  or  shows  her  the  curiosities  of 

his  Martian  abode,  it  seems  as  though  he  had  really 

M  177 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

called  her  to  him  through  space ;  but  when  he  ap- 
pears to  her,  while  awake,  at  the  edge  of  her  bath- 
tub, and  expresses  his  chagrin  at  finding  her  still 
on  this  miserable  earth  (text  7),  it  must  be  admitted 
that  it  is  he  who  has  descended  to  her  and  inspires 
her  with  these  visions  of  an  upper  world.  It  is  of 
no  importance,  on  the  whole.  It  is  here  to  be  noted 
that,  in  these  evocations,  Astane  only  manifests  him- 
self in  visual  and  auditive  hallucinations,  never  in 
tactile  impressions  or  those  of  general  sensibility  ;  in 
the  sphere  of  emotion  his  presence  is  accompanied 
by  a  great  calm  on  the  part  of  Helene,  a  profound 
bliss,  and  an  ecstatic  disposition,  which  is  the  cor- 
relative and  pendant  of  the  happiness  experienced  by 
Astane  himself  (texts  10,  17,  etc.)  at  finding  him- 
self in  the  presence  of  his  idol  of  the  past.  The  so- 
cial state  of  Astane— I  should  rather  say  his  name, 
his  quality  of  sorcerer,  and  his  previous  terrestrial 
existence  in  the  body  of  Kanga — was  not  immediate- 
ly revealed. 

Nevertheless,  at  his  first  apparition  (September  5, 
1896,  see  p.  162),  he  rises  superior  to  the  crowd,  inas- 
much as  he  alone  possesses  a  flying-machine  incom- 
prehensible to  us.  In  the  following  weeks  Mile.  Smith 
hears  his  name,  and  sees  him  again  on  many  occa- 
sions, as  well  as  his  house  (Fig.  12),  but  it  is  only  at 
the  end  of  two  months  and  a  half  that  his  identity  and 
his  "evocative"  powers  become  known,  at  a  seance 
at  which  I  was  not  present,  and  during  which  Helene 
did  not,  contrary  to  her  usual  custom,  fall  completely 
asleep.  The  following  is  a  resume  of  the  notes,  which 
I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  M.  Cuendet : 

178 

THE  MARTIAN   CYCLE 

November  19,  1896. — Contrary  to  the  experience 
of  the  preceding  seances.  Mile.  Smith  remained  con- 
stantly awake,  her  arms  free  on  the  table,  conversing 
and  even  laughing  all  the  while  with  the  sitters.  The 
messages  were  obtained  by  means  of  visions  and 
typtological  dictations.  Helene  having  asked  Leo- 
pold how  it  happens  that  she  had  been  able  to  com- 
municate with  a  being  living  on  Mars,  she  has  a  vision 
in  which  Astane  appears  to  her  in  a  costume  more 
Oriental  than  Martian.  ''  Where  have  I  seen  that 
costume?"  asks  she;  and  the  table  replies,"7n  India" 
which  indicates  that  Astane  is  an  ex-Hindoo  reincar- 
nated on  Mars.  At  the  same  time  Helene  has  a 
vision  of  an  Oriental  landscape  which  she  believes 
she  has  already  seen  before,  but  without  knowing 
where.  She  sees  Astane  there,  carrying  under  his 
arm  rolls  of  paper  of  a  dirty  white  color,  and  bowing 
in  Oriental  fashion  before  a  woman,  also  clothed  in 
Oriental  garments,  whom  she  also  believes  she  has 
seen  before.  These  personages  appear  to  her  to  be 
"  inanimate,  like  statues."  The  sitters  ask  whether 
the  vision  was  not  a  simple  tableau  (of  the  past)  pre- 
sented by  Leopold;  the  table  replies  in  the  affirmative, 
then  inclines  itself  significantly  towards  Mile.  Smith, 
when  some  one  asked  who  that  Oriental  woman  might 
be,  and  the  idea  is  put  forth  that  possibly  she  repre- 
sents Simandini.  Finally,  to  further  questions  of 
the  sitters,  the  table  (Leopold)  dictates  again  that 
Astane  in  his  Hindoo  existence  was  called  Kanga, 
who  was  a  "sorcerer  of  the  period";  then  that  "Astane 
on  the  planet  Mars  possesses  the  same  faculty  of  evoca- 
tion which  he  had  possessed  in  India."  Leopold  is  then 

179 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

asked  if  the  power  of  Astane  is  greater  than  his.  "A 
different  poiver,  of  equal  strength"  repHes  the  table. 
Finally,  Helene  desiring  to  know  whether  Astane 
when  he  evokes  her  sees  her  in  her  real  character  or 
that  of  her  Hindoo  incarnation,  the  table  affirms  that 
he  sees  her  in  her  Hindoo  character,  and  adds  :  ''  and, 
in  consequence,  under  those  characteristics  which  she 
[Helene]  possesses  to-day  and  which  are  in  such  strik- 
ing harmony  with  those  of  SimalSidini,"  insisting  on 
the  N  in  the  middle  of  the  name. 

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  at  this  sitting  it  was  Leo- 
pold who  gave  all  the  information  in  regard  to  the 
past  of  Astane,  and  that  he  recognizes  in  him  a  power 
over  Helene  almost  equal  to  his  own.  It  is  strange 
that  the  accredited  guide  of  Mile.  Smith,  ordinarily 
so  jealous  of  his  rights  over  her  and  ready  to  take 
offence  at  all  rival  pretensions,  so  freely  accords  such 
prerogatives  to  Astane.  This  unexpected  mildness 
is  still  more  surprising  when  the  singular  similarity 
of  position  of  these  two  personages  in  regard  to  Helene 
is  considered.  Kanga,  the  Hindoo  fakir,  holds  in 
the  life  of  Simandini  exactly  the  same  place  as  Cag- 
liostro  in  the  life  of  Marie  Antoinette,  the  place  of  a 
sorcerer  giving  beneficial  counsel,  and  at  the  same 
time  of  a  platonic  adorer,  and  both  of  them  in  their 
actual  roles  of  Astane  and  of  Leopold  preserve  for 
Mile.  Smith  the  respectful  attachment  which  they  had 
for  her  illustrious  former  existences.  How  is  it  these 
two  extra-terrestrial  pretenders  do  not  hate  each  other 
the  more  cordially  since  their  rival  claims  upon  H61ene 
have  identical  foundations  ?  But,  far  from  in  the 
least  disputing  her  possession,  they  assist  each  other 

1 80 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE 

in  the  most  touching  fashion..  When  Astan^  writes 
in  Martian  by  Mile.  Smith's  right  hand  that  the 
noise  of  the  sitters  threatens  to  make  him  insane  (see 
text  20)  it  is  Leopold  who  comes  to  his  rescue  in  mak- 
ing them  keep  silent  by  his  gestures  with  the  left  arm. 
When  Leopold  indicates  to  me  that  the  moment  for 
pressing  Helene's  forehead  has  arrived,  it  is  Astane 
who  lends  him  his  pencil  in  order  that  the  message 
may  be  written  (see  below,  seance  of  September  12, 
1897,  9.nd  Fig.  2^,),  and  the  exchange  of  powers  takes 
place  between  them  without  the  medium  experiencing 
the  least  shock,  and  without  its  betraying  itself  out- 
wardly otherwise  than  by  the  difference  of  their  hand- 
writing. It  is  true  that  Leopold's  apparitions  to 
Helene  are  infinitely  more  frequent  and  his  incarna- 
tions much  more  complete  than  those  of  Astane,  who 
shows  himself  to  her  at  increasing  intervals,  and  has 
never  attained  to  speaking  by  her  mouth.  It  makes 
no  difference  :  these  two  personages  resemble  each 
other  too  much  for  mutual  toleration — if  they  are 
really  two. 

My  conclusion  presses.  Astane  is,  at  bottom, 
only  a  copy,  a  double,  a  transposition  in  the  Hindoo- 
Martian  manner  of  Leopold.  They  are  two  varia- 
tions of  one  primitive  theme.  In  regarding  these 
two  beings,  as  I  do,  in  the  absence  of  proof  to  the 
contrary,  not  as  real  and  objective  individualities, 
but  as  pseudo-personalities,  dream  fictions,  fantas- 
tic subdivisions  of  the  hypnoid  consciousness  of 
Mile.  Smith,  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  the  same  funda- 
mental emotion  which  has  inspired  these  twin  roles, 
the  details  of  which  have  been  adapted  by  the  subH- 

181 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLAnET  MARg 

minal  imagination  to  correspond  to  the  diversity  of 
the  circumstances.  The  contradiction  painfully  felt 
between  the  proud  aspirations  of  the  grande  dame 
and  the  vexing  ironies  of  reality  has  caused  the  two 
tragic  previous  existences  to  gush  forth — intrinsical- 
ly identical,  in  spite  of  the  differences  of  place  and 
epoch — of  the  noble  girl  of  Arabia,  having  become 
Hindoo  princess,  burned  alive  on  the  tomb  of  her 
despot  of  a  husband,  and  of  her  Austrian  highness, 
having  become  Queen  of  France  and  sharing  the 
martyrdom  of  her  spouse. 

On  parallel  lines,  in  these  two  dreams  issuing  from 
the  same  emotional  source,  it  is  the  universal  and 
constant  taste  of  the  human  imagination  for  the 
marvellous,  allied  to  the  very  feminine  need  of  a  re- 
spectful and  slightly  idolatrous  protector,  which  on 
the  one  side  has  created  out  of  whole  cloth  the  per- 
sonage of  Kanga-Astane,  and  on  the  other  hand 
has  absorbed,  without  being  careful  in  modifying 
authentic  history,  that  of  Cagliostro-Leopold.  Both 
are  idealistic  sorcerers,  of  profound  sagacity,  ten- 
der-hearted, who  have  placed  their  great  wisdom  at 
the  service  of  the  unfortunate  sovereign  and  made 
for  her,  of  their  devotion,  amounting  almost  to  ado- 
ration, a  tower  of  strength,  a  supreme  consolation  in 
the  midst  of  all  the  bitternesses  of  real  life.  And  as 
Leopold  acts  as  guide  for  Hel^ne  Smith  in  the  gen- 
eral course  of  her  actual  earthly  existence,  so  Astane 
seemingly  plays  the  same  role  in  the  moments  of 
that  life  in  which  Helene  leaves  our  sublunar  world 
to  fly  away  to  the  orb  of  Mars. 

If,  then,  Astan^  is  only  a  reflection,  a  projection 

182 

Fig.  12.  House  of  Astane.  Blue  sky;  soil,  mountains,  and  walls  of  a  red  color. 
The  two  plants,  with  twisted  trunks,  have  purple  leaves  ;  the  others  have  long 
green  lower  leaves  and  small  purple  higher  leaves.  The  frame-work  of  the  doors, 
windows,  and  decorations  are  in  the  shape  of  trumpets,  and  are  of  a  brownish-red 
color.  White  glass  (?)  and  curtains  or  shades  of  a  turquoise-blue.  The  railings  of 
the  roof  are  yellow,  with  blue  tips. 

Fig.  14  Martian  landscape.  Sky  of  yellow  ;  green  lake  ;  gray  shores  bordered  by  a 
brown  fence  ;  bell-towers  on  the  shore,  in  yellow-brown  tones,  with  corners  and  pin- 
nacles ornamented  with  pink  and  blue  balls ;  hill  of  red  rocks,  with  vegetation  of 
a  rather  dark  green  interspersed  with  rose,  purple,  and  white  spots  (flowers) ; 
buildings  at  the  base  constructed  of  brick -red  lattice  -  work ;  edges  and  corners 
terminating  in  brown-red  trumpets  ;  immense  white  window-panes,  with  turquoise- 
blue  curtains ;  roofs  furnished  with  yellow-brown  bell-turrets,  brick-red  battle- 
ments, or  with  green  and  red  plants  (like  those  of  Astane's  house,  Fig.  12).  Per- 
sons with  large  white  head-dresses  and  red  or  brown  robes. 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

of  Leopold  in  the  Martian  sphere,  he  has  there  as- 
sumed a  special  coloring,  and  has  outwardly  har- 
monized himself  with  this  new  situation. 

He  is  clothed  in  a  voluminous,  embroidered  robe ; 
he  has  long  hair,  no  beard,  a  yellow  complexion, 
and  carries  in  his  hand  a  white  roll,  on  which  he 
writes  with  a  point  fastened  to  the  end  of  the  index- 
finger. 

His  house  (Fig.  12)  is  quadrangular,  with  gates 
and  windows,  and  reminds  one  by  its  exterior  aspect 
of  some  Oriental  structure,  with  a  flat  roof  embel- 
lished with  plants. 

The  inside  is  also  appropriate.  The  furniture  re- 
calls ours  by  force  of  contrast.  We  have  few  details; 
with  the  exception  of  a  musical  instrument  with  ver- 
tical cylinders,  closely  related  to  our  organs,  upon 
which  Helene  sometimes  sees  and  hears  Astane  play- 
ing, seated  on  a  stool  with  one  foot,  resembling  a 
milking-stool. 

When  we  pass  to  the  garden  the  same  amalgam 
of  analogies  and  unlikenesses  to  our  flora  are  dis- 
covered. We  have  seen  that  Helene  has  been  often 
haunted  in  the  waking  state  by  visions  of  Martian 
plants  and  flowers,  which  she  finally  draws  or  paints 
with  a  facility  approaching  automatism  ;  these 
specimens,  as  also  the  trees  scattered  over  the  land- 
scapes, show  that  Martian  vegetation  does  not  dif- 
fer essentially  from  ours.  Of  the  animals  we  do  not 
know  much.  Astane  has  often  with  him  an  ugly 
beast,  which  caused  H61^ne  much  fright  on  account 
of  its  grotesque  form — about  two  feet  long,  with  a 
flat  tail ;  it  has  the  ''head  of  a  cabbage,"  with  a  big 

«83 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

green  eye  in  the  middle  (like  the  eye  of  a  peacock 
feather),  and  five  or  six  pairs  of  paws,  or  ears  all 
about  (see  Fig.  i8).  This  animal  unites  the  intelli- 
gence of  the  dog  with  the  stupidity  of  the  par- 
rot, since  on  the  one  hand  it  obeys  Astane  and 
fetches  objects  at  his  command  (we  do  not  know 
how),  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  knows  how  to 
write,  but  in  a  manner  purely  mechanical.  (We 
have  never  had  a  specimen  of  this  handwriting). 
(See  Fig.  i8.) 

In  fact,  as  to  other  animals,  beyond  the  little  black 
bird  cited,  without  description  (text  20),  and  a  spe- 
cies of  female  deer  for  the  purpose  of  nursing  in- 
fants (text  ^6),  Helene  saw  only  horrid  aquatic 
beasts  like  big  snails,  which  Astane  caught  by 
means  of  iron  nets  stretched  over  the  surface  of  the 
water. 

Astane's  property  is  enclosed  by  large  red  stones, 
on  the  border  of  the  water,  where  Helene  loves  to  re- 
tire with  her  guide  to  converse  in  peace  and  to  recall 
to  mind  with  him  the  ancient  and  melancholy  mem- 
ories of  their  Hindoo  existence ;  the  general  tone  of 
these  conversations  is  entirely  the  same  as  that  of 
her  conversations  with  Leopold. 

There  is  a  mountain  also  of  red  rocks,  where  As- 
tane possesses  some  excavated  dwelling-places,  a 
kind  of  grotto  appropriate  to  the  sorcerer  -  savant 
which  he  is. 

The  corpse  of  Esenale,  admirably  preserved,  is  also 
to  be  seen  there,  among  other  things,  about  which 
the  disincarnate  Esenale  sometimes  floats  in  ''fluid" 
form,  and  which  Helene  still  finds  soft  to  the  touch, 

Fig.  i8.  Astane's  ugly  beast.  The  body  and  tail  are  rose-colored;  the 
eye  is  green  with  a  black  centre  ;  the  head  is  blackish ;  the  lateral  ap- 
pendices are  brownish-yellow,  covered,  like  the  whole  body,  with  pink 
hair. 

Fig.  II.  Astane.  Yellow  complexion,  brown  hair,  brown  sandals,  roll 
of  white  paper  in  his  hand  ;  variegated  costume,  or  red  and  white  ;  brick- 
red  belt  and  border.  Fig.  19.  Martian  lamp,  standing  against  a  rose  and 
blue-colored  tapestry. 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

when,  after  much  hesitation,  and  not  without  fright, 
she  gained  courage  to  touch  it  with  the  end  of  her 
finger,  at  the  invitation  of  Astane.  It  is  also  in  this 
house^  excavated  in  the  rock,  that  Astane  has  his 
observatory,  a  pit  traversing  the  mountain,  by  means 
of  which  he  contemplates  the  heavens  (text  9),  our 
earth  included,  by  means  of  a  telescope,  which  the 
beast  with  the  head  of  a  cabbage  brings  him. 

To  these  qualities  of  savant  Astane  joins  those  of 
wise  counsellor  and  of  patriarchal  governor.  We 
also  see  a  young  girl  named  Matemi  coming  to 
consult  him  frequently  (texts  22  and  2*^),  perhaps 
on  matrimonial  affairs,  since  Matemi  reappears 
on  several  occasions  with  her  lover  or  her  fiance, 
Sike,  and,  among  others,  at  a  great  family  ^ete,  pre- 
sided over  by  Astane.     (See  Fig.  19.) 

The  following  are  some  details  concerning  that 
vision,  which  occupied  the  greater  part  of  a  seance 
(November  28, 1897).  Helene  sees,  in  a  vast,  red,  ini- 
tial light,  a  Martian  street  appear,  lighted  neither  by 
lamps  nor  electricity,  but  by  lights  shining  through 
small  wind  ws  in  the  walls  of  the  houses.  The 
interior  of  one  of  these  houses  becomes  visible  to 
her  :  a  superb,  square  hall,  lighted  at  each  angle  by 
a  kind  of  lamp,  formed  of  four  superposed  globes, 
— two  blue  and  two  white — not  of  glass  (Fig.  19)  ; 
under  each  lamp  a  small  basin,  over  which  was  a 
kind  of  cornucopia  pouring  forth  water.  There 
were  many  ornamental  plants.  In  the  middle  of 
the  hall,  a  grove,  around  which  are  placed  a  num- 
ber of  small  tables  with  a  polished  surface  like  nickel. 
There  are  young  people  in  Martian  robes;  young 

185 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

girls  with  long  hair  hanging  down  their  backs,  and 
wearing  at  the  back  of  the  head  a  head-dress  of  roses; 
colored  blue  or  green  butterflies  attached  to  the  neck. 

There  were  at  least  thirty  speaking  Martian  (but 
Helene  did  not  hear  them  distinctly).  Astane  ap- 
peared "in  a  very  ugly  robe  to-day,"  and  showed  him- 
self full  of  friendly  gallantry  towards  the  young  girls. 
He  seats  himself  alone  at  one  of  the  tables  while 
the  young  people  take  their  places  at  others,  two 
couples  at  each.  These  tables  are  adorned  with 
flowers  different  from  ours :  some  blue,  with  leaves 
in  the  shape  of  almonds  ;  others  starry,  and  as  white 
as  milk,  scented  like  musk  ;  others,  again,  the  most 
beautiful,  have  the  form  of  trumpets,  either  blue  or 
fire  colored,  with  large  rounded  leaves,  with  black 
figures.     (See  Fig.  20.) 

Helene  hears  Astane  pronounce  the  name  "  Pouze." 
Then  come  two  men  in  long  white  trousers  with  a 
black  sash  ;  one  wears  a  coat  of  rose  color,  the  other 
a  white  one.  They  carry  ornamented  trays,  and,  pass- 
ing in  front  of  each  table,  they  place  square  plates 
upon  them,  with  forks  without  handles,  formed  of 
three  teeth  an  inch  in  length  :  for  glasses  they  had 
goblets  like  tea-cups,  bordered  with  a  silver  thread. 
Then  they  brought  in  a  kind  of  basin  a  cooked  animal 
resembling  a  cat,  which  is  placed  before  Astane,  who 
twists  it  and  cuts  it  rapidly  with  his  fingers,  tipped  with 
sharp  silver  tips ;  square  pieces  are  distributed,  among 
the  guests,  on  square  plates  with  furrows  around  the 
edges  for  the  juice.  Every  one  is  filled  with  a  wild 
gayety.  Astane  sits  at  each  table  in  succession,  and 
the  girls  pass  their  hands  through  his  hair.     New 

186 

ft- 

Fig.  lo  Flying-machine  held  by  Astane,  emitting 
yellow  and  red  flames.  [From  the  collection  of 
M.  Lemaitre.l 

Fig.  20.     Plant  of  Martian  design.     Fire-red  flowers  : 
violet-gray  leaves. 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

plates  are  brought,  and  pink,  white,  and  blue  basins 
tipped  with  flowers.  These  basins  melt,  and  are  eaten 
like  the  flowers.  Then  the  guests  wash  their  hands 
at  little  fountains  in  the  corners  of  the  room. 

Now  one  of  the  walls  is  raised,  like  the  curtain  of 
a  theatre,  and  Helene  sees  a  magnificent  hall  adorned 
with  luminous  globes,  flowers,  and  plants,  with  the 
ceiling  painted  in  pink  clouds  on  a  pink  sky,  with 
couches  and  pillows  suspended  along  the  walls.  Then 
an  orchestra  of  ten  musicians  arrive,  carrying  a  kind 
of  gilded  funnel  about  five  feet  in  height,  with  a 
round  cover  to  the  large  opening,  and  at  the  neck  a 
kind  of  rake,  on  which  they  placed  their  fingers.  He- 
lene hears  music  like  that  made  by  flutes  and  sees 
every  one  moving  ;  they  arrange  themselves  by  fours, 
make  passes  and  gestures,  then  reunite  in  groups  of 
eight.  They  glide  about  gently,  for  it  could  not  be 
called  dancing.  They  do  not  clasp  each  other's 
waists,  but  place  their  hands  on  each  other's 
shoulders,  standing  some  distance  apart.  It  is  ter- 
ribly warm.  It  is  ''boiling  hot."  They  stop,  walk, 
talk,  and  it  is  then  that  Helene  hears  a  tall  young 
brunette  (Matemi)  and  a  short  young  man  (Sike)  ex- 
change the  first  words  of  text  No.  20.  Then  they 
depart  in  the  direction  of  a  large  bush  wdth  red 
flowers  (tamiche)  and  are  soon  followed  by  Ramie 
and  his  companion. 

At  this  moment  the  vision,  which  has  lasted  an 
hour  and  a  quarter,  passes  away.  Helene,  who  had 
remained  standing  during  the  whole  description,  now 
enters  into  complete  somnambulism,  and  Astane 
causes  her  to  write  Martian  phrases  which  she  had 

187 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

heard  and  repeated  a  short  time  before.  During  the 
entire  vision  Leopold  occupied  her  left  hand,  which 
was  hanging  ansesthetically  down  her  body,  and  re- 
plied by  his  index -finger  to  the  questions  which  I 
asked  in  a  low  voice.  I  thus  learned  that  this  Martian 
scene  was  not  a  wedding,  or  any  special  ceremony, 
but  a  simple  family  fete ;  that  it  was  no  recollection 
or  product  of  Helene's  imagination  but  a  reality  act- 
ually passing  on  Mars  :  that  it  was  not  Leopold  but 
Astane  who  furnished  this  vision  and  caused  her  to 
hear  the  music  :  that  Leopold  himself  neither  saw 
nor  heard  anything  of  it  all,  yet  knows  all  that  Mile. 
Smith  sees  and  hears,  etc. 

This  resume  of  a  family  fete,  presided  over  by  As- 
tane, gives  the  measure  of  the  originahty  of  the  peo- 
ple of  Mars.  The  visions  relating  to  other  incidents 
are  of  the  same  order  :  read  the  description  of  the 
Martian  nursery  (text  36),  of  the  voyage  in  a  miza 
a  sort  of  automobile,  the  mechanism  of  which  is  en- 
tirely unknown  to  us  (text  22,),  of  the  operation  of 
chirurgery  (text  29),  of  the  games  of  the  little  Anini 
(p.  176,  etc.).  We  see  always  the  same  general  mixt- 
ure of  imitation  of  things  which  transpire  among 
us,  and  of  infantile  modifications  of  them  in  the  mi- 
nute details. 

PouzE  Ramie— Various  Personages 

Of  the  other  personages  who  traverse  the  Martian 
visions  we  know  too  little  to  waste  much  time  upon 
them.  The  name  of  the  one  who  appears  most  fre^ 
quently  is  Pouze.     He  is  present  at  the  banquet,  and 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE 

we  meet  him  also  in  the  company  of  a  poor  Httle  with- 
ered old  man  with  a  trembling  voice,  in  connection 
with  whom  he  occupies  himself  with  gardening  or 
botany,  in  an  evening  promenade  by  the  shore  of 
the  lake  (text  14).  He  also  figures  again  by  the 
side  of  an  unknown  person  named  Panine,  and  he 
has  a  son,  Saine,  who  had  met  with  some  accident 
to  his  head  and  had  been  cured  of  it,  to  the  great  joy 
of  his  parents  (texts  2^  and  24). 

Finally,  we  must  devote  a  few  words  to  Ramie, 
who  manifests  himself  for  the  first  time  in  October, 
1898,  as  the  revealer  of  the  ultra-Martian  world,  of 
which  we  shall  soon  take  cognizance.  Ramie  seems 
to  be  a  relative  of  Astane,  an  astronomer,  not  so  brill- 
iant as  Astane,  but  possessing  the  same  privilege, 
which  the  ordinary  Martians  do  not  seem  to  enjoy, 
of  being  able  to  take  hold  of  Helene's  arm,  and  of 
writing  with  her  hand.  There  is,  to  my  mind,  no 
fundamental  difference  between  Leopold,  Astane, 
and  Ramie,  in  their  relation  to  Helene  ;  they  are 
only  a  reproduction  in  triplicate  of  one  identical  emo- 
tional relation,  and  I  do  not  think  I  am  mistaken 
in  regarding  these  three  figures  as  three  very  trans- 
parent disguises  of  the  same  fundamental  personality, 
which  is  only  a  hypnoid  subdivision  of  the  real  being 
of  Mile.  Smith. 

It  is  much  wiser  to  leave  to  the-  future— if  the  Mar- 
tian and  ultra-Martian  romances  continue  to  de- 
velop—  the  task  of  enlightening  ourselves  more 
completely  as  to  the  true  character  of  Ramie.  Pos- 
sibly some  day  we  shall  also  know  more  concerning 
the  couple  called  Matemi  and  Sike,  as  well  as  many 

189 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

others,  such  as  Sazeni,  Panine,  the  httle  BulHe, 
Rome,  Fedie,  etc.,  of  whom  we  now  know  scarcely 
more  than  their  names,  and  understand  nothing 
in  regard  to  their  possible  relationships  to  the  cen- 
tral figures  of  Astane  and  Esenale. 

IV.  Concerning  the  Author  of  the  Mar- 
tian Romance 

The  general  ideas  which  the  Martian  cycle 
suggests  will  most  assuredly  differ,  according  to 
whether  it  is  considered  as  an  authentic  revelation 
of  affairs  on  the  planet  Mars,  or  only  as  a  simple 
fantasy  of  the  imagination  of  the  medium;  and 
meanwhile,  holding,  myself,  to  the  second  suppo- 
sition, I  demand  from  the  Martian  romance  infor- 
mation in  regard  to  its  author  rather  than  its  sub- 
ject-matter. 

There  are  two  or  three  points  concerning  this  un- 
known author  which  strike  me  forcibly : 

First :  He  shows  a  singular  indifference — pos- 
sibly it  may  be  due  to  ignorance — in  regard  to  all 
those  questions  which  are  most  prominent  at  the 
present  time.  I  will  not  say  among  astronomers,  but 
among  people  of  the  world  somewhat  fond  of  popular 
science  and  curious  concerning  the  mysteries  of 
our  universe.  The  canals  of  Mars,  in  the  first  place — 
those  famous  canals  with  reduplication — tempora- 
rily more  enigmatical  than  those  of  the  Ego  of  the 
mediums  ;  then  the  strips  of  supposed  cultivation 
along  their  borders,  the  mass  of  snow  around  the 

190 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE 

poles,  the  nature  of  the  soil,  and  the  conditions  of 
life  on  those  worlds,  in  turn  inundated  and  burn- 
ing, the  thousand  and  one  questions  of  hydrography, 
of  geology,  of  biology,  which  the  amateur  naturalist 
inevitably  asks  himself  on  the  subject  of  the  planet 
nearest  to  us — of  all  this  the  author  of  the  Martian 
romance  knows  nothing  and  cares  nothing.  Ques- 
tions of  sociology  do  not  trouble  him  to  a  much  great- 
er extent,  since  the  people  occupying  the  most  promi- 
nent place  in  the  Martian  visions,  and  making  the 
conversation,  in  no  wise  enlighten  us  as  to  the  civil 
and  political  organization  of  their  globe,  as  to  the 
fine  arts  and  religion,  commerce  and  industry,  etc. 
Have  the  barriers  of  the  nations  fallen,  and  is  there 
no  longer  a  standing  army  up  there,  except  that  of 
the  laborer  occupied  in  the  construction  and  main- 
tenance of  that  gigantic  net-work  of  canals  for  com- 
munication or  irrigation  ?  Esenale  and  Astane 
have  not  deigned  to  inform  us.  It  seems  probable 
from  certain  episodes  that  the  family  is,  as  with  us, 
at  the  foundation  of  Martian  civilization  ;  never- 
theless, we  have  no  direct  or  detailed  information  in 
regard  to  this  subject.  It  is  useless  to  speculate. 
It  IS  evident  that  the  author  of  this  romance  did  not 
care  much  for  science,  and  that,  in  spite  of  her  de- 
sire to  comply  with  the  wishes  of  M.  Lemaitre  (see 
p.  149),  she  had  not  the  least  conception  of  the  ques- 
tions which  arise  in  our  day,  in  every  cultivated 
mind,  as  to  the  planet  Mars  and  its  probable  inhabi- 
tants. 

Secondly  :  If,  instead  of  quarrelHng  with  the  Mar- 
tian romance  about  that  which  it  fails  to  furnish  us, 

191 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

we  endeavor  to  appreciate  the  full  value  of  what  it 
does  give  us,  we  are  struck  by  two  points,  which  I  have 
alread}^  touched  upon  more  than  once  in  passing — 
viz.,  the  complete  identity  of  the  Martian  world,  taken 
in  its  chief  points,  with  the  world  "n  which  we  live, 
and  its  puerile  originality  in  a  host  of  minor  details. 
Take,  for  example,  the  family  fcHe  (p.  i88).  To  be 
sure,  the  venerable  Astane  is  there  saluted  by  a  caress 
of  the  hair  instead  of  a  hand-shake  ;  the  young  cou- 
ples while  dancing  grasp  each  other  not  by  the  waist 
but  by  the  shoulder  ;  the  ornamental  plants  do  not 
belong  to  any  species  known  to  us :  but,  save  for  these 
insignificant  divergences  from  our  costumes  and 
habits,  as  a  whole,  and  in  general  tone,  it  is  exactly 
as  with  us. 

The  imagination  which  forged  these  scenes,  with 
all  their  decoration,  is  remarkably  calm,  thoughtful, 
devoted  to  the  real  and  the  probable.  The  fniza, 
which  runs  without  a  visible  motor  power,  is  neither 
more  nor  less  extraordinary  to  the  uninitiated  spec- 
tator than  many  of  the  vehicles  which  traverse  our 
roads.  The  colored  globes  placed  in  an  aperture  of 
the  walls  of  the  houses  to  light  the  streets  recall 
strongly  our  electric  lamps.  Astane's  flying-ma- 
chine will  probably  soon  be  realized  in  some  form  or 
other.  The  bridges  which  disappear  under  the 
water  in  order  to  allow  boats  to  pass  (text  25)  are, 
save  for  a  technical  person,  as  natural  as  ours  which 
accomplivsh  the  same  result  by  lifting  themselves  in 
the  air.  With  the  exception  of  the  "  evocative  "  pow- 
ers of  Astane,  which  only  concern  Mile.  Smith  per- 
sonally and  do  not  figure  in  any  Martian  scene,  there 

192 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE 

is  nothing  on  Mars  which  goes  beyond  what  has  been 
attained  or  might  be  expected  to  be  accomphshed  bj^ 
ingenious  inventors  here  below. 

A  wise  Httle  imagination  of  ten  or  twelve  years  old 
would  have  deemed  it  quite  droll  and  original  to  make 
people  up  there  eat  on  square  plates  with  a  furrow  for 
the  gravy,  of  making  an  ugly  beast  with  a  single  eye 
carry  the  telescope  of  Astane  to  him,  of  making 
babies  to  be  fed  by  tubes  running  directly  to  the 
breasts  of  animals  like  the  female  deer,  etc.  There 
is  nothing  of  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights,  the 
Metamorphoses  of  Ovid,  fairy  stories,  or  the  advent- 
ures of  Gulliver,  no  trace  of  ogres  nor  of  giants  nor 
of  veritable  sorcerers  in  this  whole  cycle.  One  would 
say  that  it  was  the  work  of  a  young  scholar  to  whom 
had  been  given  the  task  of  trying  to  invent  a  world 
as  different  as  possible  from  ours,  but  real,  and  who 
had  conscientiously  applied  himself  to  it,  loosening 
the  reins  of  his  childish  fancy  in  regard  to  a  multitude 
of  minor  points  in  the  limits  of  what  appeared  admis- 
sible according  to  his  short  and  narrow  experience. 

Thirdly :  By  the  side  of  these  arbitrary  and  use- 
less innovations  the  Martian  romance  bears  in  a 
multitude  of  its  characteristics  a  clearly  Oriental 
stamp,  upon  which  I  have  already  often  insisted. 
The  yellow  complexion  and  long  black  hair  of 
Astane;  the  costume  of  all  the  personages — robes  em- 
broidered or  of  brilliant  hues,  sandals  with  thongs, 
flat  white  hats,  etc.,  the  long  hair  of  the  women  and 
the  ornaments  in  the  form  of  butterflies  for  their  coif- 
fures ;  the  houses  of  grotesque  shapes,  recalling  the 
pagoda,  kiosk,  and  minaret,  the  warm  and  glowing 
N  193 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

colors  of  the  skies,  the  water,  the  rocks,  and  the 
vegetation  (see  Figs.  13  and  14),  etc.  :  all'  tliis  has  a 
sham  air  of  Japanese,  Chinese,  Hindoo.  It  is  to  be 
noted  that  this  imprint  of  the  extreme  East  is  purely 
exterior,  not  in  any  wise  penetrating  to  the  charac- 
ters or  manners  of  the  personages. 

All  the  traits  that  I  discover  in  the  author  of  the 
Martian  romance  can  be  summed  up  in  a  single  phrase, 
its  profoundly  infantile  character.  The  candor  and 
imperturbable  naivete  of  childhood,  which  doubts 
nothing  because  ignorant  of  everything,  is  necessary 
in  order  for  one  to  launch  himself  seriously  upon  an 
enterprise  such  as  the  pretended  exact  and  authentic 
depictions  of  an  unknown  world.  An  adult,  in  the 
least  cultivated  and  having  some  experience  of  life, 
would  never  waste  time  in  elaborating  similar  non- 
sense— Mile.  Smith  less  than  any  one,  intelligent  and 
cultivated  as  she  is  in  her  normal  state. 

This  provisional  view  of  the  author  of  the  Martian 
cycle  will  find  its  confirmation  and  its  complement  in 
the  following  chapters,  in  which  we  shall  examine 
the  Martian  language,  from  which  I  have  until  now 
refrained. 

CHAPTER  VI 

THE    MARTIAN    CYCLE  (CONTINUED)— THE  MARTIAN 
LANGUAGE 

OF  the  various  automatic  phenomena,  the 
"  speaking  in  tongues  "  is  one  which  at  all 
times  has  most  aroused  curiosity,  while  at 
the  same  time  little  accurate  knowledge  concerning 
it  has  been  obtainable,  on  account  of  the  difficulty 
of  collecting  correctly  the  confused  and  unintelli- 
gible words  as  they  gush  forth. 

The  phonograph,  which  has  already  been  em- 
ployed in  some  exceptional  cases,  like  that  of  Le 
Baron,  will  doubtless  some  day  render  inestimable 
service  to  this  kind  of  study,  but  it  leaves  much  still 
to  be  desired  at  the  present  moment,  from  the  point 
of  view  of  its  practical  utilization  in  the  case  of  sub- 
jects not  in  their  right  mind,  who  are  not  easily  man- 
ageable, and  who  will  not  remain  quiet  long  enough 
while  uttering  their  unusual  words  to  allow  the  in- 
strument to  be  adjusted  and  made  ready. 

There  are  different  species  of  glossolalia.  Sim- 
ple, incoherent  utterances,  in  a  state  of  ecstasy,  in- 
terspersed with  emotional  exclamations,  which  are 
sometimes  produced  in  certain  surcharged  religious 
environments,  is  another  matter  altogether  from  the 
creation  of  neologisms,  which  are  met  with  in  the 

195 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

dream,  in  somnambulism,  mental  alienation,  or  in 
children.  At  the  same  time  this  fabrication  of  ar- 
bitrary words  raises  other  problems — as,  for  example, 
the  occasional  use  of  foreign  idioms  unknown  to  the 
subject  (at  least,  apparently),  but  which  really  exist. 
In  each  of  these  cases  it  is  necessary  to  examine  fur- 
ther whether,  and  in  what  measure,  the  individual 
attributes  a  fixed  meaning  to  the  sounds  which  he 
utters,  whether  he  understands  (or  has,  at  least,  the 
impression  of  understanding)  his  own  words,  or 
whether  it  is  only  a  question  of  a  mechanical  and 
meaningless  derangement  of  the  phonetic  apparatus, 
or,  again,  whether  this  jargon,  unintelligible  to  the 
ordinary  personality,  expresses  the  ideas  of  some 
secondary  personality.  All  these  forms,  moreover, 
vary  in  shades  and  degrees,  and  there  are,  in  ad- 
dition, those  mixed  cases,  possibly  the  more  fre- 
quent, where  all  the  forms  are  mingled  and  com- 
bined. The  same  individual,  and  sometimes  in  the 
course  of  the  same  spasm,  also  exhibits  a  series  of 
neologisms,  comprehended  or  uncomprehended,  giv- 
ing way  to  a  simple,  incoherent  verbiage  in  com- 
mon language,  or  vice  versa,  etc. 

A  good  description  and  rational  classification  of 
all  these  categories  and  varieties  of  glossolalia  would 
be  of  very  great  interest.  I  cannot  think  of  attempt- 
ing such  a  study  here,  having  enough  already  to 
fully  occupy  my  attention,  by  reason  of  having 
involved  myself  with  the  Martian  of  Mile.  Smith. 
This  somnambulistic  language  does  not  consist, 
as  we  have  already  discovered,  either  in  speaking 
ecstatically  or  in  religious  enthusiasm,  nor  yet  in 

196 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

the  use  of  a  foreign  language  which  really  exists  ; 
it  represents  rather  neologism  carried  to  its  highest 
expression  and  practised  in  a  systematic  fashion, 
with  a  very  precise  signification,  by  a  secondary 
personality  unknown  to  the  normal  self.  It  is  a 
typical  case  of  ''  glosso-poesy/'  of  complete  fabri- 
cation of  all  the  parts  of  a  new  language  by  a  sub- 
conscious activity.  I  have  many  times  regretted 
that  those  who  have  witnessed  analogous  phenom- 
ena —  as,  for  example,  Kerner,  with  the  Seeress  of 
Prevost — have  not  gathered  together  and  published 
in  their  entirety  all  the  products  of  this  singular 
method  of  performing  their  functions  on  the  part  of 
the  verbal  faculties.  Undoubtedly  each  case  taken 
by  itself  seems  a  simple  anomaly,  a  pure  arbitrary 
curiosity,  and  without  any  bearing  ;  but  who  knows 
whether  the  collection  of  a  large  number  of  these 
psychological  bibelots,  as  yet  few  enough  in  their 
total,  would  not  end  in  some  unexpected  light  ?  Ex- 
ceptional facts  are  often  the  most  instructive. 

In  order  to  avoid  falling  into  the  same  errors  of 
negligence,  not  knowing  where  to  stop,  in  case  I 
wished  to  make  a  choice,  I  have  taken  the  course  of 
setting  forth  here  in  full  all  the  Martian  texts  which 
we  have  been  able  to  gather.  I  will  have  them  fol- 
low a  paragraph  containing  certain  remarks  which 
that  unknown  language  has  suggested  to  me ;  but, 
very  far  from  flattering  myself  that  I  have  exhausted 
the  subject,  I  earnestly  hope  that  it  will  find  read- 
ers more  competent  than  myself  to  correct  and  com- 
plete my  observations,  since  I  must  acknowledge 
that  as  a  linguist  and  philologist  I  am  very  much 

197 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

like  an  ass  playing  the  flute.  It  is  expedient,  in 
beginning,  to  give  some  further  details  regarding 
the  various  psychological  methods  of  manifestation 
of  that  unknown  tongue. 

I.  Verbal  Martian  Automatisms 

I  have  described  in  the  preceding  chapter,  and  will 
not  now  return  to  it,  the  birth  of  the  Martian  lan- 
guage, indissolubly  bound  up  with  that  of  the  ro- 
mance itself,  from  the  2d  of  February,  1896,  up  to  the 
inauguration  of  the  process  of  translation  by  the  en- 
trance of  Esenale  upon  the  scene  on  the  2d  of  Novem- 
ber following  (see  pp.  154-165).  During  several 
months  thereafter  the  Martian  language  is  confined 
to  the  two  psychological  forms  of  apparition  in  which 
it  seems  to  have  been  clothed  during  the  course  of 
that  first  year. 

First :  Verbo-auditive  automatism,  hallucinations 
of  hearing,  accompanying  visions  in  the  waking 
state.  In  the  case  of  spontaneous'visions,  Helene  notes 
in  pencil,  either  during  the  vision  itself  or  immediately 
afterwards,  the  unintelligible  sounds  which  strike  her 
ear  ;  but  to  her  great  regret  many  of  them  escape  her, 
since  she  is  sometimes  only  able  to  gather  the  first  or 
the  last  phrase  of  the  sentences  which  her  imaginar3^ 
personages  address  to  her,  or  scattered  fragments  of 
conversations  which  she  holds  with  herself;  these 
fragments  themselves  often  contain  inaccuracies, 
which  are  ultimately  rectified  at  the  moment  of  trans- 
lation, Esenale  having  the  good  habit  of  articulating 
very  clearly  each  Martian  word  before   giving  its 

198 

THE    MARTIAN   CYCLE   AND   LANGUAGE 

French  equivalent.  In  the  case  of  the  visions  which 
she  has  at  the  seances,  Helene  slowly  repeats  the 
words  she  hears  without  understanding  them,  and 
the  sitters  make  note  of  them  more  or  less  cor- 
rectly. 

Secondly  :  Vocal  automatism  (''  verbo-motor  hallu- 
cinations of  articulation,"  in  the  cumbersome  of&cial 
terminology).  Here  again  it  is  the  sitters  who  gath- 
er as  much  as  they  can  of  the  strange  words  pro- 
nounced in  a  state  of  trance,  but  that  is  very  little, 
since  Helene,  in  her  Martian  state,  often  speaks  with 
a  tremendous  volubility.  Moreover,  a  distinction 
must  be  made  between  the  relatively  clear  and  brief 
phrases  which  are  later  translated  by  Esenale,  and 
the  rapid  and  confused  gibberish  the  signification 
of  which  can  never  be  obtained,  probably  because 
it  really  has  none,  but  is  only  a  pseudo-language 
(see  pp.  154-159)- 

A  new  process  of  communication,  the  handwrit- 
ing, made  its  appearance  in  August,  1897,  with  a 
delay  of  perhaps  eighteen  months  as  to  the  speech 
(the  reverse  of  Leopold's  case,  who  wrote  a  long  time 
before  speaking).  It  is  produced,  also,  under  two 
forms,  which  constitute  a  pendant  to  the  two  cases 
given  above,  and  also  complete  the  standard  quar- 
tette of  the  psychological  modalities  of  language. 

Thirdly  :  Verbo-visual  automatism — that  is,  appa- 
ritions of  exotic  characters  before  Helene' s  eyes  when 
awake,  who  copies  them  as  faithfully  as  possible 
in  a  drawing,  without  knowing  the  meaning  of  the 
mysterious  hieroglyphics. 

Fourthly:  Graphic  automatism — ^'.e.,  writing  traced 
199 

FROM  INDIA  TO   THE  PLANET  MARS 

by  the  hand  of  Helene  while  completely  entranced 
and  incarnating  a  Martian  personage.  In  this  case 
the  characters  are  generally  smaller,  more  regular, 
better  formed  than  in  the  drawings  of  the  preceding 
case.  A  certain  number  of  occasions,  when  the 
name  has  been  pronounced  by  Helene  before  being 
written,  and  especially  the  articulation  of  Esenale 
at  the  moment  of  translation,  have  permitted  the 
relations  between  her  vocal  sounds  and  the  graphic 
signs  of  the  Martian  language  to  be  established. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  these  four  automatic  mani- 
festations do  not  infl'ct  an  equal  injury  upon  the 
normal  personality  of  Mile.  Smith.  As  a  rule,  the 
verbo-auditive  and  verbo-visual  hallucinations  only 
suppress  her  consciousness  of  present  reality  ;  they 
leave  her  a  freedom  of  mind  which,  if  not  complete, 
is  at  least  sufficient  to  permit  her  to  observe  in 
a  reflective  manner  these  sensorial  automatisms, 
to  engrave  them  on  her  memory,  and  to  describe 
them  or  make  a  copy  of  them,  while  she  often  adds 
remarks  testifying  to  a  certain  critical  sense.  On 
the  contrary,  the  verbo-motor  hallucinations  of  artic- 
ulation or  of  writing  seem  to  be  incompatible  with 
her  preservation  of  the  waking  state,  and  are  fol- 
lowed by  amnesia.  Helene  is  always  totally  absent 
or  entranced  while  her  hand  writes  mechanically, 
and  if,  as  seldom  happens,  she  speaks  Martian  auto- 
matically, outside  of  the  moments  of  complete  in- 
carnation, she  is  not  aware  of  it,  and  does  not  recol- 
lect it.  This  incapacity  of  the  normal  personality 
of  Mile.  Smith  to  observe  at  the  time  or  remember 
afterwards    her  verbo  -  motor   automatisms   denotes 

THE    MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

a  more  profound  perturbation  than  that  she  experi- 
ences during  her  sensory  automatisms. 

The  Martian  handwriting  only  appeared  at  the 
end  of  a  prolonged  period  of  incubation,  which  be- 
trayed itself  in  several  incidents,  and  was  certainly 
stimulated  by  various  exterior  suggestions  during 
a  year  and  a  half  at  least.  The  following  are  the 
principal  dates  of  this  development. 

February  i6,  1896. — The  idea  of  a  special  hand- 
writing belonging  to  the  planet  Mars  occurs  for  the 
first  time  to  Helene's  astonishment  in  a  Martian 
semi-trance  (see  p.  161). 

November  2. — Handwriting  is  clearly  predicted 
in  the  phrase,  ''Astane  will  teach  me  to  write,"  ut- 
tered by  Helene  in  a  Martian  trance,  after  the  scene 
of  the  translation  by  Esenale  (see  p.  166). 

November  8. — After  the  translation  of  text  No.  3, 
Leopold,  being  questioned,  replies  that  Astane  will 
write  this  text  for  Mile.  Smith,  but  the  prediction  is 
not  fulfilled. 

May  2;^,  1897. — The  announcement  of  Martian 
handwriting  becomes  more  precise.  "  Presently," 
says  Astane  to  Helene,  "  thou  wilt  be  able  to  trace 
our  handwriting,  and  thou  wilt  possess  in  thy  hands 
the  characters  of  our  language"  (text  12). 

June  20. — At  the  beginning  of  a  seance,  a  Martian 
vision,  she  demands  of  an  imaginary  interlocutor 
"  a  large  ring  which  comes  to  a  point,  and  with  which 
one  can  write."  This  description  applies  to  M.  R., 
who  has  with  him  some  small  pocket-pens  of  this 
kind,  capable  of  being  adjusted  to  the  end  of  the  in- 
dex-finger. 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

June  2^. — I  hand  H^lene  the  two  small  pocket- 
pens  which  M.  R.  has  brought  for  her,  but  they  do 
not  please  her.  After  trying  to  use  one,  she  throws 
it  away  and  takes  up  a  pencil,  saying  that  if  she  must 
write  Martian,  the  ordinary  means  will  suffice  as 
well  as  those  peculiar  pocket-pens.  In  about  a  min- 
ute she  falls  asleep,  and  her  hand  begins  automati- 
cally to  trace  a  message  in  Leopold's  handwriting. 
I  then  ask  that  individual  whether  the  pocket-pens 
of  M.  R.  do  not  meet  the  exigencies  of  Martian,  and 
whether  Mile.  Smith  will  some  day  write  that  lan- 
guage, as  has  already  been  announced.  Helene's 
hand  thereupon  responds  in  the  beautiful  callig- 
raphy of  Leopold:  ''I  have  not  yet  seen  the  instru- 
ment which  the  inhabitants  of  the  planet  Mars  use 
in  writing  their  language,  but  I  can  and  do  affirm 
that  the  thing  will  happen,  as  has  been  announced 
to  you.— Leopold.'' 

June  27. — In  the  scene  of  the  translation  of  text  15, 
Helene  adds  to  her  usual  refrain,  "  Esenale  has  gone 
away  ;  he  will  soon  return  ;  he  will  soon  write." 

August  3. — Between  four  and  five  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon  Helene  had  a  vision  at  her  desk,  lasting 
ten  or  fifteen  minutes,  of  a  broad,  horizontal  bar, 
flame-colored,  then  changing  to  brick-red,  and  which 
by  degrees  became  rose-tinted,  on  which  were  a  mul- 
titude of  strange  characters,  which  she  supposes 
to  be  the  Martian  letters  of  the  alphabet,  on  account 
of  the  color.  These  characters  floated  in  space  be- 
fore and  round  about  her.  Analogous  visions  oc- 
cur in  the  course  of  the  weeks  immediately  follow- 
ing. 

303 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

August  22. — Helene  for  the  first  time  writes  in 
Martian.  After  various  non-Martian  visions  Mile. 
Smith  turns  away  from  the  window  (it  rained  hard, 
and  the  sky  was  very  gray)  and  exclaims,  "  Oh, 
look,  it  is  all  red  !  Is  it  already  time  to  go  to  bed  ? 
M.  Lemaitre,  are  you  there  ?  Do  you  see  how  red 
it  is  ?  I  see  Astane,  who  is  there,  in  that  red  ;  I 
only  see  his  head  and  the  ends  of  his  fingers  ;  he 
has  no  robe  ;  and  here  is  the  other  (Esenale)  with 
him.  They  both  have  some  letters  at  the  ends  of 
their  fingers  on  a  bit  of  paper.  Quick,  give  me  some 
paper  !"  A  blank  sheet  and  the  pocket-pen  are  hand- 
ed to  her,  which  latter  she  disdainfully  throws  down. 
She  accepts  an  ordinary  pencil,  which  she  holds  in 
her  customary  fashion,  between  her  middle  and  in- 
dex-finger, then  writes  from  left  to  right  the  three 
first  lines  of  Fig.  21,  looking  attentively  towards  the 
window  at  her  fictitious  model  before  tracing  each 
letter,  and  adding  certain  oral  notes,  according  to 
which  there  are  some  words  which  she  sees  written 
in  black  characters  on  the  three  papers — or,  more 
correctly,  on  three  white  wands,  a  sort  of  narrow 
cylinder,  somewhat  flattened  out  —  which  Astane, 
Esenale,  and  a  third  personage  whose  name  she 
does  not  know  but  whose  description  corresponds 
with  that  of  Pouze,  hold  in  their  right  hands.  After 
which  she  again  sees  another  paper  or  cylinder, 
which  Astane  holds  above  his  head,  and  which  bears 
also  some  words  which  she  undertakes  to  copy  (the 
three  last  lines  of  Fig.  21,  p.  205).  ''  Oh,  it  is  a  pity," 
says  she,  on  coming  to  the  end  of  the  fourth  line, 
"it  is  all  on  one  line,  and  I  have  no  more  room."    She 

203 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

then  writes  underneath  the  three  letters  of  Hne  5,  and 
without  saying  anything  adds  hne  6.  Then  she 
resumes  :  "  How  dark  it  is  with  you  .  .  .  the  sun 
has  entirely  gone  down  "  (it  still  rains  very  hard). 
"No  one  more!  nothing  morel"  She  remains  in 
contemplation  before  that  which  she  has  written, 
then  sees  Astane  again  near  the  table,  who  again 
shows  her  a  paper,  the  same,  she  thinks,  as  the  for- 
mer one.  "  But  no,  it  is  not  altogether  the  same  '> 
there  is  one  mistake,  it  is  there  [she  points  to  the 
fourth  line  towards  the  end]  .  .  .  Ah,  I  do  not  see 
more  \"  Then,  presently  she  adds  :  "  He  showed 
me  something  else  ;  there  was  a  mistake,  but  I  was 
not  able  to  see  it.  It  is  very  difficult.  While  I  was 
writing,  it  was  not  I  myself,  I  could  not  feel  my 
arms.  It  was  difficult,  because  when  I  raised  my 
head  I  no  longer  saw  the  letters  well.  It  was  like  a 
Greek  design.'' 

At  this  moment  Helene  recovered  from  the  state  of 
obscuration,  from  which  she  emerged  with  difficulty, 
which  had  accompanied  the  Martian  vision  and  the 
automatic  copy  of  the  verbo-visual  text.  But  a  little 
later  in  the  evening  she  only  vaguely  remembered 
having  seen  strange  letters,  and  was  altogether  igno- 
rant of  having  written  anything. 

The  very  natural  supposition  that  the  three  first 
words  written  were  the  names  of  the  known  person- 
ages (Astane,  Esenale,  Pouze),  who  bore  them  on 
their  wands,  led  to  the  discovery  of  the  meaning  of 
many  of  the  Martian  characters  and  permitted  the 
divining  of  the  sense  of  the  three  last  words. 

The  new  alphabet  was  enriched  by  certain  other 
204 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

zr2y  ^o%?ir 

astane 
Fig.  21.    Text  No.  i6 ;  seance  of  August  22,  1897.— First  Martian  esenale 

text  written  by  Mile.  Smith  (according  to  a  visual  hallucination).  pouze 

Natural   size.      [Collection  of   M.  Lemaitre.]  —  Herewith   its  mene  simand 

French  notation.  i^ii- 

mira. 

205 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

signs  on  the  following  days,  thanks  to  the  echoes 
of  that  seance  in  the  ordinary  life  of  Helene,  who 
happened  on  several  occasions  to  write  not  the  true 
Martian  as  yet,  but  French  in  Martian  letters,  to 
her  great  stupefaction  when  she  found  herself  after 
a  while  in  the  presence  of  these  unknown  hiero- 
glyphics. 

y^w^ij^t i^iti^r- cri\s...ut 

Fig.  22.  Examples  of  isolated  French  words  [frangaise,  lumih'e,  prairie)  automati- 
cally traced  in  Martian  characters  by  Mile.  Smith  in  her  normal  handwriting.  See 
also  Fig.  I,  p.  56. 

The  first  manifestation  of  that  graphic  automa- 
tism, being  as  yet  concerned  only  with  the  form  of 
the  letters  and  not  the  vocabulary,  dates  from  the 
day  after  the  following  seance  : 

August  23. — ''Here,"  wrote  Helene  to  me  at  noon, 
sending  me  some  memoranda  from  which  I  have 
taken  the  three  examples  of  Fig.  22 — ''  here  are  some 
labels  which  I  made  it  my  business  to  make  this 
morning  at  ten  o'clock,  and  which  I  have  not  been 
able  to  finish  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  I  have  only 
just  now  emerged  from  the  rose-colored  fog  in  which 
I  have  been  continuously  enwrapped  for  almost  two 
hours." 

Three  weeks  later  a  complete  automatic  Martian 
handwriting  was  produced  in  a  seance  at  my  house, 
of  which  the  following  is  a  summary, 

September  12,  1897. — At  the  end  of  a  quite  long 
Martian  vision,  Mile.  Smith  sees  Astane,  who  has 
something  at  the  end  of  his  fmger  and  who  signs  to 

206 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

her  to  write.  I  offer  her  a  pencil,  and  after  various 
tergiversations  she  slowly  begins  to  trace  some  Mar- 
tian characters  (Fig.  2;^).  Astan.e  has  possession  of 
her  arm,  and  she  is,  during  this  time,  altogether  an- 
aesthetic and  absent.  Leopold,  on  the  contrary,  is  at 
hand,  and  gives  various  indications  of  his  presence. 

-Ar/jrci-r  lov  5./'/^  sr/^  ^cj^cft  fit^^zf  f^u4^i  21^^ 
^r  If  t^y  irc*^cZy 

Fig.  23.  Martian  text  No.  17;  seance  of  September  12,  1897.  Written  by  Mile. 
Smith  incarnating  Astane  (then  Leopold  for  the  French  words  at  the  end).  See 
the  translation,  p.  222.  Too  many  /'s  at  the  end  of  the  first  line  immediately  pro- 
duced the  scrawls  intended  to  strike  them  out.  (Reproduction  one-half  natural 
size.) 

At  the  end  of  the  sixth  line  she  seems  to  half  awaken, 
and  murmurs, "  I  am  not  afraid ;  no,  I  am  not  afraid." 
Then  she  again  falls  into  a  dream  in  order  to  write 
the  four  last  words  (which  signify  "  Then  do  not  fear" 
and  which  are  the  response  of  Astane  to  her  excla- 
mation) . 

207 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Almost  immediately  Leopold  substitutes  himself 
for  Astane  and  traces  on  the  same  sheet,  in  his  char- 
acteristic handwriting  (considerably  distorted  tow- 
ards the  end)  :  "  Place  ihy  hand  on  her  forehead" 
by  means  of  which  he  indicates  to  me  that  the  time 
has  arrived  to  pass  on  to  the  scene  of  translation  by 
Esenale. 

We  may  conclude  from  these  successive  stages 
that  the  Martian  handwriting  is  the  result  of  a  slow 

CL     ir     c     d    e    ^    ^     L    i/   J,     k    I    m    70 
^   P'    <f     t'     <f     ^     a    ir    w   x>    a    t     •    ch 

Fig  24.     Martian  alphabet,  summary  of  the  signs  obtained.     (Never  has  been  given 
as  such  by  Mile.  Smith.) 

autosuggestion,  in  which  the  idea  of  a  special  writing 
instrument,  and  its  handling,  for  a  long  time  played 
the  dominant  role,  then  was  abandoned,  without 
doubt,  as  impracticable  to  realize.  The  characters 
themselves  then  haunted  for  several  weeks  Helene's 
visual  imagination  before  they  appeared  to  her  on 
the  cylinders  of  the  three  Martians  in  a  manner  suf- 
ficiently clear  and  stable  to  enable  her  to  copy 
them  and  afterwards  to  be  capable  of  subduing  her 
graphomotor    mechanism.     Once    manifested    out- 

208 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

wardly,  these  signs,  which  I  have  assembled  under 
the  form  of  an  alphabet  in  Fig.  24,  have  not  varied  for 
two  years. 

Moreover,  some  trifling  confusion,  of  which  I  shall 
speak  a  little  later,  shows  well  that  the  personality 
which  employs  them  is  not  absolutely  separated  from 
that  of  Helene,  although  the  latter,  in  a  waking  state, 
might  hold  the  same  relation  to  Martian  which  she 
holds  to  Chinese — that  is,  she  knows  its  general  very 
characteristic  aspect,  but  is  ignorant  of  the  significa- 
tion of  the  characters,  and  would  be  incapable  of  read- 
ing it. 

Helene's  Martian  handwriting  is  not  stereotyped, 
but  presents,  according  to  circumstances,  some  va- 
riations in  form,  especially  in  the  size  of  the  let- 
ters. 

This  may  be  established  by  Figs.  21  to  s^^  ^^ 
which  I  have  reproduced  the  greater  part  of  the  texts 
obtained  by  writing.  When  the  Martian  gushes 
forth  in  verbo- visual  hallucinations,  Helene  tran- 
scribes it  in  strokes  of  large  dimensions,,  lacking 
firmness,  full  of  repetitions  (Figs.  21,  26,  31),  and 
she  always  remarks  that  the  original,  which  is  before 
her  eyes,  is  much  smaller  and  clearer  than  her  copy. 
In  the  texts  which  have  come  automatically  from 
her  hand — i.e.,  supposedly  traced  by  the  Martians 
themselves — the  handwriting  is  really  smaller  and 
more  precise.  Here  again  are  some  curious  differ- 
ences. Astane  has  a  calligraphy  less  voluminous 
than  that  of  Esenale,  and  Ramie  has  a  much  finer 
one  than  Esenale  (Figs.  28  and  29). 

It  would  be  altogether  premature  for  me  to  launch 
o  209 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

myself  upon  the  study  of  Martian  graphology,  and, 
therefore,  leaving  that  line  to  my  successors,  I  take 
up  the  texts  which  have  been  collected  in  their  chron- 
ological order. 

11.  The  Martian  Texts 

It  is  not  always  easy  to  represent  a  language  and 
its  pronunciation  by  means  of  the  typographical 
characters  of  another.  Happily  the  Martian,  in  spite 
of  its  strange  appearance  and  the  fifty  millions  of 
leagues  which  separate  us  from  the  red  planet,  is 
in  reality  so  near  neighbor  to  French  that  there  is 
scarcely  any  difficulty  in  this  case. 

The  dozen  written  texts'"  which  we  possess,  and 
which  Mile.  Smith  either  copied  from  a  verbo-visual 
hallucination,  or  which  were  traced  by  her  hand  in 
an  access  of  graphomotor  automatism,  are  readily 
translated  into  French,  since  each  Martian  letter 
has  its  exact  equivalent  in  the  French  alphabet. 
I  have  confined  myself  to  placing  accents  on  the 
vowels  (there  are  none  in  the  Martian  writing),  con- 
formably to  the  pronunciation  of  Esenale  at  the 
moment  of  translation.  It  is  only  necessary  to  read 
the  following  texts  aloud,  articulating  them  as 
though  they  were  French,  in  order  to  secure  the 
Martian  words  almost  exactly  as  they  proceed  from 
the  mouth  of  M  le.  Smith  ;  I  say  almost,  because 
there  still  remains,  naturally,  in  the  speech  of  Ese- 
nale, as  in  that  of  every  one,  a  special  mannerism 

*  These  are  texts  16-20,  26,  28,  31  34,  37-39.    They  are  further 
distinguished  by  an  asterisk. 

210 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

of  strengthening  certain  syllables  and  slurring  oth- 
ers—  in  short,  that  of  delicate  shades  of  accentua- 
tion, which  cannot  be  adequately  represented,  and 
which  the  hearers  did  not  attempt  to  take  note  of 
at  the  seances. 

In  the  auditive  or  vocal  texts,  those  which  have 
not  been  obtained  by  writing,  I  have  adopted  the 
more  probable  orthography,  according  to  the  pro- 
nunciation of  Esenale,  but  (with  the  exception 
of  words  known  by  means  of  the  written  texts)  I 
naturally  cannot  guarantee  their  absolute  correct- 
ness. 

The  manner  in  which  Helene  takes  down  in  pen- 
cil the  Martian  phrases  which  strike  her  ear  is  not  of 
great  assistance  to  us  in  that  respect,  because,  as 
I  have  said  above  (p.  158),  she  finds  herself  at  the 
time  of  these  verbo-auditive  hallucinations  in  the 
situation  of  a  person  who  hears  some  unknown 
words,  and  spells  them  as  well  as  she  is  able,  after 
a  quite  arbitrary  and  often  faulty  fashion.  She 
writes,  for  example,  "hezi  darri  ne  cike  taisse," 
which,  according  to  the  pronunciation  of  Esenale 
and  other  written  texts,  should  be  "  ezi  darie  sike 
tes ";  or,  again,  "  misse  messe  as  si  le,"  instead  of 
"  mis  mess  ass  lie."  We  cannot,  therefore,  depend 
upon  the  orthography  of  Helene,  but  I  have  naturally 
followed  it  in  every  case  in  which  there  seemed  to 
be  no  good  reason  to  depart  from  it.  In  stating  that 
the  following  texts  should  be  articulated  like  French, 
two  remarks  must  be  added  :  First,  the  final  con- 
sonant, very  rare  in  Martian,  is  always  aspirated  ; 
the  word  ten  is  pronounced  as  in  the  French  gluten ; 

21 1 

FROM  INDIA   TO   THE   PLANET  MARS 

ess  at,  like  fat ;  ames,  like  aloes  ;  mis  and  mess,  like 
lis  (flower),  and  mess  (of  an  officer),  etc.  In  the  sec- 
ond place,  for  the  different  values  of  the  e  I  have 
adopted  the  following  rule  :  the  e  broad  is  always 
indicated  by  the  accent  grave  e;  the  e  medium, 
which  is  only  found  at  the  beginning  and  in  the  mid- 
dle of  a  word,  is  marked  with  the  acute  accent  e; 
the  e  short,  by  the  acute  accent  at  the  end  of  a  word 
(or  before  a  final  e  mute),  and  by  the  circumflex  at 
the  beginning  or  in  the  middle  ;  the  e  mute,  or  demi- 
mute,  remains  without  accent. 

The  pronunciation,  therefore,  will  be,  for  exam- 
ple, the  e's  of  the  Martian  words  mete,  benezee,  like 
those  of  the  French  words  ete,  repetee;  eve,  like 
reve,  tes,  as  in  Lutece,  etc. 

There  will  be  found  in  italics,  underneath  the 
Martian  texts,  their  French  equivalents,  word  for 
word,  as  given  by  Esenale  in  the  manner  described 
above  (see  pp.  166-168).*  I  have  also  indicated  the 
kind  of  automatism  —  auditive,  visual,  vocal,  or 
graphic — by  means  of  which  each  text  was  obtained, 
also  the  date  of  its  appearance,  and  (in  parentheses) 
that  of  the  seance,  often  quite  remote,  at  which  it 
was  translated.  I  have  also  added  such  explana- 
tions as  seemed  to  me  to  be  necessary. 

I.  m6tiche    C.      m^dache    C.     m6taganiche    S.      kin't'che 

Monsieur    C.       Madame       C.       Mademoiselle      S.         quatre. 
Mr.  C.  Mrs.  C.  Miss  C.  Four. 

Vocal.     February  2,  1896.     See  above,  p.  157. 

*  A  literal  English  translation  of  each  text  will  be  found  im- 
mediately beneath  the  French  equivalents  of  the  Martian  words. 

212 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

2.  dod6    n6    ci    haudan    t€    mess    m^tiche    astane    k6    de 
Cect     est     la    maison     du  grand     homme      Astane    que    tu 

me  v6che. 

as       vu. 
This  is  the  house  of  the  great  man  Astane,  whom  thou  hast  seen. 

Auditive.  About  September  20,  1896  (translated 
November  2). — Heard  by  Helene  at  the  same  time  at 
which  she  had  the  vision  of  Fig.  12  (see  p.  166). 

3.  mode    ine    ce    di    cevouitche    ni    eve    ch6    kine     lin6 

Mere  adore'e,  je      te       reconnais      et    suis     ton     petit    Linet. 
Adored  mother,  I  recognize  thee,  and  am  thy  little  Linet. 

Words  addressed  to  Mme.  Mirbel  by  her  son  Alexis 
(Esenale)  in  a  scene  of  incarnation  altogether  analo- 
gous to  that  described  on  p.  156. 

4.  i      mode       mete       mode      mod6         ine       palette       is 

O      m^re,        tendre        7nere,        mere   bien-aime'e,    calme      tout 
che  p61iche  che  chire  ne  ci  ten  ti    vi 
ton      souci,     ton    fits      est       pres  de  toi. 

Oh,  mother,  tender  mother,  dearly  loved  mother,  calm  all  thy 
care,  thy  son  is  near  thee. 

Vocal.  November  29^  1896  (translated  same  se- 
ance).— Spoken  by  Esenale  and  addressed  to  Mme. 
Mirbel,  in  a  scene  of  incarnation  analogous  to  the 
preceding.  At  the  moment  of  translation,  Esenale 
repeated,  very  distinctly,  the  last  words,  as  follows : 
"ne  ci,  est  pres  ["is  near"],  ten  ti  vi,  de  toi  C'thee"). 
This  was  evidently  an  error,  since  it  appears  from  nu- 
merous later  texts  that  est  pres  de  toi  corresponds  to 
ne  ten  ti  vi;  it  follows  that  it  would  be  natural  to 
translate  the  word  ci  by  /^,  ici,  or  tout,  if  these  words 
had  not  been  differently  rendered  in  other  texts.  (A 
confusion  of  the  adverb  /^  with  the  article  la,  trans- 
lated by  ci  in  text  2,  might  also  be  suspected.) 

213 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

5.  i         kiche     ten    ti    si    k€    di    ev6    de    ^t^che    mene 

0/z !   pou7'quoi  pres    de  moi    ne     te      tiens-tu     toujours,    amie 
ize      b6nezee 
enfiji    retrouvee ! 

Oh  !  Why  dost  thou  not  keep  thyself  always  near  me,  friend, 
at  last  found  again  ? 

Auditive.  December  4,  1896  (translated  Decem- 
ber 13).  Fragment  of  a  long  discourse  by  Astane 
to  Helene,  during  an  apparition  which  she  had  of 
him  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  as  she  was 
about  to  go  to  bed.  This  sentence,  which  he  uttered 
twice,  is  the  only  one  which  she  has  been  able  to  re- 
call with  sufficient  precision  to  note  down  immedi- 
ately after  the  vision.  She  has  the  feeling  of  hav- 
ing understood  Astane's  whole  discourse  while  he 
was  delivering  it,  and  thinks  she  would  have  been 
able  to  translate  it  into  French,  perhaps  not  word  for 
word,  but  in  its  general  sense.  She  expected  to 
transcribe  it  the  following  day,  but  in  the  morning 
when  she  awoke  she  was  unable  to  recall  either 
the  words  of  Astane  or  their  meaning,  not  even  that 
of  this  sentence,  written  on  the  previous  evening. 
Heard  again,  as  the  second  part  of  the  following 
text,  in  the  seance  of  the  13th  of  December. 

6.  ti     iche    cen6     6speni6     ni    ti     ezi     at^v    astan6     ezi 

De    notre     belle  '' Espeni^''    et     de    mon      etre      Astan^,     mon 
6rie      viz6      6     vi...      i         kiche      ten    ti     si    k6    di      ev6 
dme    descend    a     toi. . .    oh !    pourquoi    pres  de   moi    ne      te     tiens- 
d6    6t6che    men6     iz6      b6nez6e 
tu    toujours,     amie     enfin    retrouvSe ! 

From  our  beautiful  "  Espenie"  and  from  my  being  Astan6,  my 
soul  descends  to  thee — Oh  !  why  dost  thou  not  keep  thyself  al- 
ways near  to  me,  friend,  at  last  found  again  ? 

Auditive.      December   13,    1896    (translated   same 
214 

THE  MARTIAN   CYCLE  AND   LANGUAGE 

seance). — Heard  in  the  far-away  voice  of  Astane, 
Helene  having  all  the  while  a  painful  sensation,  as 
though  the  skin  of  her  face  around  her  eyes,  on  the 
back  of  her  wrists  and  hands,  was  being  torn  off. 
In  the  translation  the  word  Espenie  remains  as  it  is, 
being  a  proper  name  ;  the  left  index-finger  (Leopold) 
points  heavenward,  and  says  that  it  might  be  ren- 
dered by  terre,  planete,  demeure. 

7.  c6    ev6     pleva     ti    di     h€nhz      ^ssat     riz    t^s    mid6e 

y<f    suis    chagrin    de     te    retrouver   vivant    sur    cette      laide 
dur6e  zk,  t6nass6  riz  iche  espenie  veteche  ie  che  atev  hene 
terre ;  je  voudrais  sur  notre  Espe'ni^    voir    tout    ton      etre  s'e'lever 
ni  pov6    ten    ti     si      6ni  zee  metiche  on6  gude  ni  z6e  darie 
et  r ester   pres    de  moi ;  ici     les     hommes   sont    bons  et    les   coeurs 
grev6 
larges. 

I  am  sorry  to  find  you  again  living  on  this  wretched  earth ;  I 
would  on  our  Espenie  see  all  thy  being  raise  itself  and  remain 
near  me  ;  here  men  are  good  and  hearts  large. 

Auditive.  December  15,  1896  (translated  Jan- 
uary 17,  1897). — Words  spoken  by  Astane  to  He- 
lene in  a  morning  vision.  The  following  fragment 
of  the  letter  in  which  she  sent  me  this  text  merits 
being  cited  as  an  example  of  those  quite  frequent 
cases  in  which  Mile.  Smith,  without  knowing  the 
exact  translation  of  the  foreign  words,  nevertheless 
divines  their  general  signification  and  comprehends 
them  by  their  emotional  equivalent.  '"  This  morn- 
ing, at  a  quarter  before  six,  I  saw  Astane  at  the  foot 
of  my  bed.  The  general  sense  of  his  language  was 
at  that  moment  quite  clear  to  my  mind,  and  I  give 
it  to  you  as  I  understood  it — that  is,  in  as  clear  a 
manner  as  possible,  having  noted  it  down  afterwards  ; 

215 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

'  How  much  I  regret  your  not  having  been  born  in 
our  world  ;  you  would  be  much  happier  there,  since 
everything  is  much  better  with  us,  people  as  well  as 
things,  and  I  would  be  so  happy  to  have  you  near 
me/  That  is  about  what  it  seemed  to  me  to  mean; 
perhaps  some  day  we  may  be  able  to  be  sure  of  it." 

8.  amhs     mis     tensee     lade     si  —  am^s     ten     tiv6     av6 

Viens       un       instant      vers     moi,      viens      prh    d'un     vieil 
men  —  koume       i6       ch6       pelesse  —  am^s       som6       tes6 
ami        fo7idre      tout       ton        chagrin :        viens     admirer        ces 
misaim6  —  k6      d6      sur^s      pit      chami  —  iza       meta       ii 
fieurs,  que       tu        crois       sans    parfum,     mais   pourtant     si 

bores6    ti     finaim^  —  ia     izi    d6        seimir6 

pleines     de     senteurs !.  .  .     Mais     si     tu     comprendras  ! 

Come  towards  me  a  moment,  come  near  an  old  friend  to  melt 
away  all  thy  sorrow ;  come  to  admire  these  flowers,  which  you 
believe  without  perfume,  but  yet  so  full  of  fragrance  !  But  if 
thou  couldst  understand. 

Auditive  and  vocal.  January  31,  1897  (trans- 
lated same  seance). — Helene,  in  hemisomnambu- 
lism,  sees  Astane,  who  tells  her  to  repeat  his  words  ; 
she  replies  to  him  :  ''  But  speak  plainly  ...  I  will 
gladly  repeat  them  .  .  .  but  I  do  not  understand 
very  well  ..."  Then  she  pronounces  slowly  and 
very  distinctly  the  foregoing  text,  in  groups  of 
words,  separated  by  a  moment  of  silence  (marked 
in  the  text  by  the  sign  —  ).  It  is  remarked  that 
these  groups,  with  the  exception  of  the  sixth,  corre- 
spond to  the  hemistiches  of  the  French  translation 
obtained  in  the  same  seance.  After  the  sixth  group 
Hel^ne  remains  silent  for  a  long  time,  and  finally 
says  :  "  I  cannot  understand  ; "  then  utters  the  four  last 
words,  which  are  the  reply  of  Astane  to  her  objection, 

?i6 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE   AND  LANGUAGE 

9.  ane      €m      k6      er6dut6      c€      ilassun6      t€     ima      ni 

C'est      id       que,     solitaire,       ie     nCapproche    du       del       et 
betin6    chee  dur^e 
regarde       ta       terre. 

It  is  here  that,  alone,  I  bring  myself  near  to  heaven  and  look 
upon  the  earth. 

Auditive.  February  24,  1897  (translated  March 
14). — Reclining  in  her  easy-chair,  after  the  noon- 
day meal,  Helene  hears  this  sentence,  while  at  the 
same  time  she  has  the  vision  of  a  house,  construct- 
ed by  digging  into  a  Martian  mountain,  and  tra- 
versed by  a  sort  of  air-shafts,  and  which  represents 
Astan^'s  observatory. 

ID.  simandini     Ie     lami     men6     kiz6    pavi    kiz       atimi    , 

Simandini,    me    void !    amie !     quelle    joie,    quel    bonheur ! 
Simandini,  here  I  am  !  friend  !  what  joy  !  what  happiness  ! 

Auditive.  March  14, 1897  (translated  same  seance). 
— See  following  text. 

II.  i     mod6     dum6in6     mod6     kevi     c6     mache     povini 

0  mere,  andenne  mere,  quand  je  peux  arriver 
po6nez6  mun6  6  vi  saline  6zin6  mima  nikain6  mode 
quelques    instants  vers  toi  j^oublie     mes     parents    Nikatni,    mere! 

—  i   men 

—  6  ami  ! 

Oh,  mother,  former  mother,  when  I  can  arrive  a  few  in- 
stants near  thee,  I  forget  my  parents  Nikaine,  mother  !  —  Oh 
friend  ! 

Vocal.  March  14,  1897  (translated  same  se- 
ance).— From  the  beginning  of  this  seance  H61ene 
complained  of  cold  hands,  then  a  great  desire  to 
weep,  and  of  a  buzzing  in  the  ears,  which  kept  in- 
creasing and  in  which  she  finally  heard  Astane 
address  to  her  the  Martian  words  of  text  10.     Im- 

317 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

mediately  after  she  passes  into  full  somnambu- 
lism ;  her  respirations,  very  short  and  panting,  rise 
to  three  per  second,  accompanied  by  synchronous 
movements  of  the  left  index-finger;  then  she  stops 
suddenly  with  a  long  expiration,  immediately  fol- 
lowed by  a  deep  inspiration :  then  her  breast  heaves, 
her  face  assumes  an  expression  of  suffering,  and  the 
left  index-finger  announces  that  it  is  Esenale  (Alexis 
Mirbel)  who  is  incarnated.  After  a  series  of  spasms 
and  hiccoughs,  Helene  arises,  and,  placing  herself 
behind  Mme.  Mirbel,  takes  her  neck  in  her  hands, 
bows  her  head  upon  hers,  tenderly  pats  her  cheek, 
and  addresses  to  her  the  words  of  text  No.  1 1  (except 
the  two  last  words).  Then  she  raises  her  head,  and 
again,  with  panting  respiration  (accelerated  to  thirty 
inspirations  in  sixteen  seconds),  walks  towards  M. 
Lemaitre  (whose  pupil  Alexis  Mirbel  had  been  at 
the  time  of  his  death).  She  places  her  hands  upon 
his  shoulders,  affectionately  grasps  his  right  hand, 
and  with  emotion  and  continued  sobbing  addresses 
to  him  the  two  words  i  men !  After  which  she  goes 
through  the  pantomime  of  extending  her  hand  to  Leo- 
pold and  of  allowing  him  to  conduct  her  to  a  couch, 
where  the  translation  of  texts  Nos.  lO,  1 1,  and  9  is  ob- 
tained by  the  customary  process,  but  not  without 
difficulty. 

12.    Iassun6    k6    nipun6    ani        tis        d€    machir    niiriv6 

Approche,    ne      crains    pas;     bientot      tu     pourras      tracer 
iche     manir    s6   d6     6venir      tou6    chi   amich6  z6     forim6 
notre    ecriture,   et    tu  possMeras    dans     tes      mains     les    marques 
ti  viche  tarvin6 
de    notre   langage. 

Approach,  fear  not ;  soon  thou  wilt  be  able  to  trace  our  writ- 

218 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

ing,  and  thou  wilt   possess  in  thy  hands  the  signs  of  our  lan- 
guage. 

Auditive.  May  2^,  1897  (translated  same  se- 
ance).— Shortly  after  the  beginning  of  the  seance, 
H61ene,  still  being  awake,  has  a  vision  of  Astane, 
who  addresses  her  in  these  words,  which  she  repeats 
slowly  and  in  a  feeble  voice.  I  give  the  text  as  it 
was  heard  and  uniformly  noted  by  several  sitters, 
both  at  the  moment  of  its  utterance  and  at  its  sub- 
sequent translation.  Many  corrections,  however, 
would  be  necessary,  in  order  to  make  it  correspond 
with  the  later  written  texts :  ke  nipune  ani,  et  ne 
crains  pas  (''and  I  am  not  afraid,"  or,  ''and  I  do  not 
fear")  should  be  changed  to  kie  nipune  ani,  ne  crains 
pas  (see  text  17);  se  or  ce  only  stands  here  for  et, 
which  everywhere  else  is  given  as  ni ;  viche  is  used 
in  error  for  iche  (unless  the  v  was  added  for  the  sake 
of  euphony,  of  which  there  is  no  other  example)  and 
tis  for  tiche. 

13.  (adel)  an6  sini  (yestad)  i  astan6  ce    fimes    astan6     mira 

Cestvous,  6  Astane,  je    meurs  !  Astane,   adieu! 

It  is  you,  oh  Astane,  I  am  dying  !     Astane,  farewell  ! 

Vocal.  Same  seance  as  the  preceding  text,  after 
which  Helene  passes  into  full  somnambulism,  be- 
gins to  weep,  pants,  holds  her  hand  on  her  heart, 
and  pronounces  this  sentence,  mingling  with  it  the 
two  words  Adel  and  yestad,  which  are  not  Martian, 
but  belong  to  the  Oriental  cycle  ;  they  also  do  not 
appear  in  the  text  as  it  was  repeated  at  the  time  of 
its  translation.  This  intrusion  of  terms  foreign  to 
the  Martian  dream  is  explained  by  the  imminence 
of  a  Hindoo  scene  ready  to  appear,  which  occupied 

219 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  latter  half  of  the  seance  in  which  the  Arab  ser- 
vant, Adel,  plays  a  leading  role.  The  mingling  of 
the  two  romances  is  greatly  accentuated  a  few  mo- 
ments later,  in  a  long  discourse,  devoid  of  r's  and 
verj^  rich  in  sibilants,  and  spoken  with  so  great  volu- 
bility that  it  was  impossible  to  gather  a  single  word. 
At  the  time  of  the  translation,  at  the  close  of  the 
seance,  this  tirade  was  repeated  with  the  same  ra- 
pidity, preventing  any  notation ;  according  to  the 
French  translation  which  followed,  it  concerned 
memories  of  the  life  of  Simandini  which  H^lene  re- 
called to  Astane  and  in  which  there  is  much  men- 
tion of  the  aforesaid  Adel  (see  Hindoo  Cycle,  Chap. 
VII.). 

14.  eupi6     z6    palir      n€      ame     arva     nini    pedrin6    6vaii 

Eupie,      le     temps      est     venu ;   Arva     nous     quitte ;       sois 
divine      lamee    ine    vina      t6    lune  —  pouz6    men    hantin6 
heureux    jusque      au    retour    du    jour.  — Pouzd,     ami        Jidele, 
ezi    vraini    n6     touz6    med    vi    ni     ch6    chire     sain6  — ke 
mon      de'sir      est     me?ne     pour    toi     et      ton       Jils       Sa'ind. — Que 
zalis6      t6ass6      mianine      ni     di    dazin6  —  eupi6  —  pouze 
Te'lement     entier     fenveloppe      et      te     garde  !  —  Eupie  !  —  Pouzi ! 
Eupie,  the  time  has  come ;  Arva  leaves  us  ;  be  happy  till  the 
return  of  the  day.     Pouze,  faithful  friend,  my  wish  is  even  for 
thee,  and  thy  son  Same. — May  the  entire  element  envelop  thee 
and  guard  thee  ! — Eupie  ! — Pouze  ! 

Auditive.     June    18,    1897    (translated  June   20). 

— During  a  visit  I  made  to  Mile.  Smith  she  has  a 

vision  of  two  Martian  personages  walking  on  the 

shore  of  a  lake,  and  she  repeats  this  fragment  of 

their  conversation  which  she  has  heard.     According 

to  another  text  (No.  20),  Arva  is  the  Martian  name 

of  the  sun. 

220 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE   AND  LANGUAGE 

15.  mod6    tatinee    ce    k€    mache    radzir6    z€    tarvini    va 

M^re  cMrie,  je  ne  puis  prononcer  le  langage  ok 
nini  nini  trim^neni  ii  adzi  c6  z6  seimir6  v^tiche  i 
nous  nous  comprenicns  si  bien !  Je  le  comprends  cependant ;  6 
mod6  in6e  kevi  b6rimir  m  hed  k6vi  machiri  c6  di  trin6 
mere  adorde,  quand  reviendra-t-il?  Quand  pourrai-je  te  parler 
ti  ^stotin6  ni  baz6e  animina  i  mod^  c6  m^'i  adzi 
de  ma  dernier e  et  courte  existence  ?  O  mere,  je  fai  bien 
ilinee  i  mode  inee  c6  k^  16  nazere  ani  —  mira 
reconnue,  6  mere  adoree^  je  ne  me  trompe  pas! — Adieu 
mod6  itatin^e  mira  mira  mira 
mere     ch^rie,    adieu,  adieu,  adieu  ! 

My  dearest,  I  cannot  pronounce  the  language  in  which  we 
understood  each  other  so  well !  I  understand  it,  however ;  oh  ! 
adored  mother,  when  will  it  return?  When  shall  I  be  able  to 
speak  to  thee  of  my  last  and  short  existence?  Oh!  mother,  I 
have  well  recognized  thee,  oh  !  adored  mother,  I  am  not 
mistaken  ! — Farewell,  dearest  mother,  farewell,  farewell,  fare- 
well ! 

Auditive.  June  2"],  1897  (translated  same  seance). 
— Mme.  Mirbel  being  present,  Helene  perceives  Ese- 
nale,  who  remains  in  the  vicinity  of  his  mother  and 
addresses  these  words  to  her.  The  ''  adieux  "  at  the 
close  were  not  spoken  at  that  time,  but  were  uttered 
by  Esenale  immediately  following  and  as  a  comple- 
ment of  the  translation ;  this  is  the  only  case  (out- 
side of  text  36)  in  which  he  did  not  confine  himself 
strictly  to  the  texts  already  gathered  and  in  which  he 
permitted  himself  to  introduce  a  new  phrase,  which 
otherwise  does  not  contain  a  single  unknown  word  ; 
itatinee,  cherie,  is  evidently  a  slip  which  should  be 
corrected  either  to  tatinee,  cherie,  or  to  it  atinee,  6 
cherie.  The  precise  French  equivalent  of  trimeneni 
is  probably  entretenions. 

221 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

*  i6.  astan6     esenale     pouz6      men6      simandini       mira 

{Astane.      Esenale.      Pouz^.       Amie       Simandini,     adieu!') 
Astane.     Esenale.     Pouzee.     Friend  Simandini,  farewell  ! 

Visual.  August  22,  1897. — This  text,  for  which 
there  is  no  need  of  a  translation,  constitutes  the  first 
appearance  of  the  Martian  handwriting.  See  above. 
Fig.  21,  and  the  resum6  of  that  seance,  pp.  203-205. 

*  17.  tanir6    mis    m6ch     med    miriv6    ^zine    brima|    ti    t^s 

Prends  un  crayon  pour  tracer  mes  paroles  de  cet 
tens6e  —  azini  d6  ameir  mazi  si  som6  iche  nazina 
instant.  Alors  tu  viendras  avec  nioi  admirer  notre  nouveau 
tran6i. — Simandini  c6  kie  mache  di  p^drini  t^s  lun6  k6  c6 
passage.  Sima7tdini,  je  ne  puis  te  quitter  ce  jour.  Que  je 
eve  diving  —  patrin^z  ki6  nipune  ani 
suis  heureux ! —     Alors       ne      crains  pas! 

Take  a  pencil  to  trace  my  words  of  this  moment.  Then  thou 
wilt  come  with  me  to  admire  our  new  passage,  Simandini,  I 
cannot  leave  thee  this  day.     How  happy  I  am  ! — Then  fear  not ! 

Graphic.  September  12,  1897  (translated  same  se- 
ance).— See  p.  207  and  Fig.  2^^. 

^18.  mode     tatin6e     lami     mis    mira     ti    ch6      biga     ka 

Mere        ch^rie,       void       un     adieu     de     ton      enfant    qui 
6brini^  sana  €    vi     id6  di  z6    r6nir  —  z€  mess    m6tich    ka    6 
pense      tant    a    toi.     On   te    le  portera,    le  grand    homme     qui    a 
z€  valini  imin6  —  ni  z  [€]  grani  sidine 
le    visage  mince       et      le       corps  maigre. 

My  dearest,  this  is  a  farewell  from  thy  child,  who  thinks  so 
much  of  thee.  The  big  man,  who  has  a  thin  face  and  a  slender 
body,  will  bear  it  to  thee. 

Auditive,  then  Graphic.  October  10,  1897  (trans- 
lated same  seance). — Helene  has  a  vision  of  a  Mar- 
tian landscape,  in  which  Esenale  floats  discarnate 
around  the  plants  and  speaks  these  words,  which  she 
repeats.     (It  is  understood  from  the  translation  that 

222 

Fig  25.     Text  No.  18  (October  10.  1897),  written  in  pencil  by  Mile.  Smith,  incarnat- 
ing Esenale.     Reproduction  m  autotype  two-thirds  of  the  natural  size. 

Fig.  26.     Text  No.  26  (August  21,   1898),  which  appeared  in  visual  hallucination,  and 
was  copied  by  JMlle.  Smith.     Reproductions  in  autotype. 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE   AND  LANGUAGE 

this  text  was  intended  for  Mme.  Mirbel,  who  was 
then  in  the  country,  but  to  whom  the  person  verj^ 
clearly  indicated  by  the  final  characteristic  was 
about  to  pay  a  visit  and  could  carry  the  message.) 
1  then  offer  Helene  a  pencil  in  the  hope  of  obtaining 
this  same  text  in  writing  ;  after  various  tergiver- 
sations and  grimaces,  denoting  a  state  of  increasing 
somnambulism,  she  finally  takes  the  pencil  between 
her  index  and  middle  fingers,  tells  Esenale  that  she 
still  sees  him  and  makes  him  sit  down  by  her  side, 
and  then  begins  to  write,  completely  absent  and  fas- 
cinated by  the  paper.  The  left  index-finger  (Leopold) 
informs  us  that  it  is  Esenale  himself  who  is  writing 
by  means  of  Helene' s  arm.  Twice  she  interrupts 
herself  in  order  to  say  to  Esenale,  ''  Oh  !  do  not  go 
yet,  stay  a  little  while  longer  !"  She  appears  ner- 
vous and  agitated,  and  often  stops  writing  to  stab 
her  paper  with  her  pencil  or  to  make  erasures  or 
scribble  on  it  (see  Fig.  25) ;  in  the  ze  of  the  last  line, 
she  forgets  the  e  (this  did  not  prevent  Esenale  from 
pronouncing  the  word  correctly  at  the  time  of  its 
translation). 

*  19,  m  [en]     c€     kie    mache     di      trin6      sanding        teri 

(Amie,      je       ne        puis         te     parler     longtemps     comme 
n6    ezi    vraini    zou  rech  mira  mile  piri    mira 

est    mon    dhir ;  phis  tar d,  adieu  adieu ^ 

(Friend,  I  cannot  speak  to  thee  a  long  time,  as  is  my  desire  ; 
later,  farewell,  farewell  !) 

Graphic,  then  Auditive.  October  24,  1897  (there 
has  never  been  any  translation  of  this  text,  two 
words  of  which  are  still  unknown) .  —  Helene  first 
sees  the  table  illumined  by  a  green  light  in  which 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

some  designs  appear  which  she  copies,  and  which 
give  this  text,  except  the  two  last  letters  of  the  first 
word,  the  place  of  which  remains  blank.  Immedi- 
ately after  she  hears  Martian  spoken,  which  she  re- 
peats. It  is  the  same  text ;  then  she  has  a  vision  of 
Astane,  Esenale,  and  a  little  girl  whose  name  she 
hears  as  Nike  ;  but  this  soon  gives  way  to  other  non- 
Martian  somnambulisms.      (See  Fig.  25.) 

*  20.  Sik.€    6vai      divine      z€   nik6     crizi    capri    n6    am6 

Sik/,      sots     heureux !    Le    petit     oiseau     noir      est     venu 
ori6    antech    6   kz€  carimi  ni   ezi   6ri6   6  ni6  pavinee   hed 
f rapper     hier       a    ma    fenetre,  et  7Hon  dnie    a    et^    joyeuse ;     il 
16      sadri     de   2.€   vdchir      tizin6      Matemi  misaime    ka    le 
7ne   chanta :   tu     le     verras     demain. —  Matemi,       Jieur       qui    me 
am^z    essat6    Arva    ti     6zin6    udani|    ames    tes    uri    ames 
fais        vivre,     soleil    de      vies       songes,      viens       oe    soir,    viens 
sandin6    ten    ti    si     evai    divin^e      Rom6   va    n6    Sike 
longtemps  pres   de  mot ;    sois  heureuse  ! — Rom^,    ok     est     Sikd? — 
atrizi    ten    t6      tam^ch     6pizi 
La-bas,  prh    du  ''  tame'cke"    rose. 

Sik6,  be  happy  !  The  little  black  bird  came  yesterday  rap- 
ping at  my  window,  and  my  soul  was  joyful;  he  sang  to  me: 
Thou  wilt  see  him  to-morrow.  Matemi,  flower  which  makes  me 
live,  sun  of  my  dreams,  come  this  evening;  come  for  a  long 
time  to  me ;  be  happy  ! — Rome,  where  is  Sik6  ? — Yonder,  neai 
the  "tam6che"  rose. 

Auditive,  then  Graphic.  November  28, 1897  (trans- 
lated same  seance). — Fragments  of  conversation 
heard  during  the  vision  of  the  Martian  fete  described 
on  p.  185.  Sike  (a  young  man)  and  Matemi  (a 
young  girl)  form  the  first  couple  who  pass  by  and 
walk  off  in  the  direction  of  a  large  bush  with  red 
flowers  (tam^che);  then  a  second  couple  exchange 
the  last  words  of  the  text  while  going  to  rejoin  the 

224 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE   AND   LANGUAGE 

first.  After  this  vision,  which  she  contemplated 
standing  and  described  with  much  animation,  He- 
lene  seated  herself  and  began  to  write  the  same 
Martian  phrases.  It  is  ascertained  from  Leopold 
that  it  was  Astane  who  held  her  hand  (in  holding 
the  pencil  between  the  thumb  and  the  index-finger — - 
that  is,  after  the  manner  of  Leopold  and  not  that  of 
Helene  as  she  had  held  it  in  writing  text  No.  17). 
The  writing  being  finished,  Leopold  directs  that  He- 
lene shall  be  made  to  seat  herself  on  the  couch  for  the 
scene  of  translation. 

21.  v^chesi      tesee      polluni      ave      m6tiche      €      vi       ti 

Voyons  cette       qtcestion,    vieux      homnie ;        a      toi       de 

bounie         seimire        ni    trin6 
chercher^     comprendre       et  parler. 

Now  this  question,  old  man  ;  it  is  for  thee  to  seek,  to  under- 
stand and  speak. 

Auditive.  January  15,  1898  (translated  February 
13). — Fragment  of  conversation  between  two  Martian 
personages  seen  in  a  waking  vision. 

22.  astan6    ce    ames     e     vi      chee    brimi      messe      teri 

Asian/,     je      viens      a     toi;       ta       sagesse    grande     coinme 
ch6     pocrime    16 .  . . 
ton        savoir      me.  .  . 

Astane,  I  come  to  thee ;  thy  great  wisdom  as  well  as  thy 
knowledge  to  me.  .  .  . 

Auditive.  About  January  25,  1898  (translated 
February  13). — Vision,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morn- 
ing, of  a  young  Martian  girl  (Matemi  ?)  traversing 
a  tunnel  through  a  mountain  and  arriving  at  the 
house  of  Astane,  to  whom  she  addresses  this  utter- 
ance, followed  by  many  others  which  Helene  could 
not  grasp  with  sufficient  distinctness  to  note  them 
down. 

p  225 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

23.  [A]  panin6      6vai      kirim6      z€      miza      ami      grini 

Panine,        sots      prudent,       le     '' jniza"     va     soulever ; 
k6  ch6e    6meche    xhs    paz6  —  [B]    pouze    t^s    lun6    soumini 

que     ta  main        se    retire ! —  Pouz^,       ce      jour     riant.  .  . 

arva  ii  cen  z6  primi  ti  ch6  chire  kiz  pavi  lun6  — 
Arva  si  beau.  .  .  le  revoir  de  ton  Jils.  .  .  quel  heureux  jour  — 
[C]  sain6     kz\     chir6   iz6       linei       kize      pavi        ezi    man6 

Same',  man  Jils,  enfin  debout !  quelle  joie ! .  .  .  Mon  pere 
ni  ez6  mode  tizine  ezi  chire  ezi  man6  c6  ev6  adi 
et    ma  mere. .  .  Demain,   ?non  Jils.  .  .  Mon    pere,     je      suis     bien 

ana 
maintenant. 

Panine,  be  prudent,  the  "miza"  is  about  to  arise;  remove 
thy  hand  !  Pouze,  this  laughing  day.  .  .  Arva  so  beautiful.  .  . 
The  return  of  thy  son.  .  .  What  happy  day —  Saln6,  my  son, 
finally  standing  !  What  joy  !.  .  .  My  father  and  my  mother.  .  . 
To-morrow,  my  son.  .  .  my  father,  I  am  well  now. 

Auditive.  February  20,  1898  (translated  same 
seance). — Very  complicated  Martian  vision.  First, 
three  small,  movable  houses,  like  pavilions  or  Chi- 
nese kiosks,  going  about  on  little  balls ;  in  one  of 
these,  two  unknown  personages,  one  of  whom  puts 
her  hand  out  of  a  small  oval  window,  which  oc- 
casions, on  the  part  of  her  companion,  the  obser- 
vation of  the  first  sentence  (A)  of  the  text  ;  at  this 
instant,  in  fact,  these  rolling  pavilions  (miza)  as- 
sume an  oscillatory  movement,  which  makes  a  noise 
like  "  tick-tack,"  and  then  glide  like  a  train  upon 
rails.  They  go  around  a  high  red  mountain  and 
come  into  a  sort  of  magnificent  gorge  or  ravine,  with 
slopes  covered  with  extraordinary  plants,  and  where 
they  find  white  houses  on  an  iron  framework  re- 
sembling piles.  The  two  men  then  alight  from  their 
"  miza,"  chatting  together,  but  Helene  can  only  hear 

226 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

fragments  (B)  of  their  conversation.  A  young  man 
of  sixteen  to  eighteen  years  of  age  comes  to  meet 
them,  who  has  his  head  tied  up  in  a  kind  of  nightcap, 
and  having  no  hair  on  the  left  side.  Martian  saluta- 
tions are  exchanged ;  they  mutually  strike  their  heads 
with  their  hands,  etc.  Helene  complains  of  hearing 
very  confusedly  that  which  they  are  saying,  and  can 
only  repeat  ends  of  sentences  (C).  She  has  pain  in 
her  heart,  and  Leopold  dictates  to  me  by  the  left  in- 
dex-finger, "Put  her  to  sleep," which  presently  leads 
to  the  customary  scene  of  translation  of  the  text. 

24.  saine    ezi    chire    i€e    eze    pavi    ch6    vina    ine    ruzzi 

Sain/^   mon     Jils,    toute     ma     joie,      ton    retour    au    milieu 
ti      nini      n6      mis      mess        assil6         atimi.  .  .       it6che.  .  . 
de    nous      est       un      grand,      immense      bonheur.  .  .  toujours.  .  . 
furimir.  .  ,       nori 
aimera.  .  .    jamais. 

Saine,  my  son,  all  my  joy ;  thy  return  to  our  circle  is  a  great, 
an  immense  happiness.  .  .  always  will  love.  .  .  ever. 

Auditive.  March  11,  1898  (translated  August  21). 
— ''Yesterday  morning,  on  jumping  out  of  bed," 
wrote  Helene  to  me,  when  sending  me  this  text,  "  I 
had  a  vision  of  Mars,  almost  the  same  as  that  which 
I  had  before  (at  the  seance  of  February  20).  I  saw 
again  the  rolling  pavilions,  the  houses  on  piling, 
several  personages,  among  them  a  young  man  who 
had  no  hair  on  one  side  of  his  head.  I  was  able  to 
note  some  words.  It  was  very  confused,  and  the 
last  words  were  caught  on  the  wing,  when  here  and 
there  something  a  little  clear  came  to  me  .  .  ." 

25.  de  v6chi  ke  ti     efi      merve    eni 

Tu     vois    que  de  choses  superbes    ici. 
Thou  seest  what  superb  things  (are)  here. 
227 

FROM  INDIA   TO   THE    PLANET   MARS 

Auditive.  August  21,  1898  (translated  same  se- 
ance).— Waking  vision  of  a  river  between  two  rose- 
colored  mountains,  with  a  bridge  (like  that  in  Fig. 
9)  which  lowered  itself  into  the  water  and  disap- 
peared in  order  to  allow  five  or  six  boats  to  pass 
(like  that  in  Fig.  13),  then  reappeared  and  was  re- 
stored to  its  place.  As  Helene  describes  all  this, 
she  hears  a  voice  speaking  to  her  the  above  Martian 
words  of  the  text. 

*26.  Astane  ne  ze  ten    ti    vi 

A  stand    est    la  pres    de   toi. 
Astane  is  there,  near  to  thee. 

Visual.  August  21,  1898  (translated  same  se- 
ance).— Following  the  preceding  scene  :  Helene  per- 
ceives "  in  the  air  "  (illumined  and  red — that  of  her 
Martian  vision)  some  characters  unknown  to  her, 
which  she  copies  (see  Fig.  26).  1  ask  her,  showing 
her  the  word  ze  (which  elsewhere  always  stands 
for  le),  if  she  is  not  mistaken.  She  verifies  it  by 
comparing  it  with  the  imaginary  model  before  her 
and  affirms  it  to  be  correct. 

27.  sik6    kiz    crizi   hantin6    hed    6    6brini6    rhs    amer6    6 

Sikd,    quel  oiseau    fidele !         il      a       pensd       se      rdunir    a 
nini    6ssat6     ti    iche      atimi  matemi    hantin6    hed    n6 

nous,      vivre      de   notre    bonheur !  —  Matinii       JidHe,  il       est 

hantin6  ezi  dari^  sike  t^s  ousti  k€  z6  badeni  lassun6 
fidele  mon  coeur  I  ■ —  Sik/,  ce  bateau  que  le  vent  approche 
mazi  trimazi  hed  6  ti  zi  mazet^  6  povin6  €  nini  z6  priani 
avec  force !  il  a  de  la  peine  h  arriver  a  nous ;  le  fiat 
€  foumin6  ivraini  id6  €  ti  zi  mazet6  €  vizen6  ;.6 
est  puissant  aujourd^hui;   on  a    de  la     peine     a    distinguer     le 

chod6 
'■'■  chod^y 

228 

Fig.  27.  Text  No.  28  (October  8,  1898),  written  by  Mile.  Smith,  copying  a  text  of 
Matemi,  seen  in  a  visual  hallucination.  [The  slight  tremor  of  some  of  the  lines  is 
not  in  the  original,  but  occurred  in  the  copying  of  the  text  in  the  ink,  which  was 
written  in  pencil  and  too  pale  for  reproduction.] 

229 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Sike,  what  (a)  faithful  bird !  he  has  thought  to  reunite  hinir 
self  to  us,  to  live  of  our  happiness  ! — Matemi  faithful,  my  heart 
is  faithful!  —  Sike,  this  boat  which  the  wind  brings  near  with 
force  !  it  has  some  difficulty  in  reaching  us  ;  the  current  is  strong 
to-day  ;  one  has  some  difficulty  in  distinguishing  the  "  chode." 

Auditive.  About  the  4th  of  September,  1898 
(translated  October  16). — Helene  heard  and  noted 
this  phrase  at  the  same  time  at  which  she  had  the  vi- 
sion of  the  two  young  Martian  people  who  were  walk- 
ing in  a  kind  of  flower-garden,  and  saw  a  boat  arrive, 
like  that  in  Fig.  13.  The  meaning  of  chode  has 
not  been  ascertained. 

*  28.  men  mess  Astane     c6    ames    6    vi       itech       li    t^s 

A7?it  grand   Astane,     je      viens     a     toi     toujour s  par      cet 
aliz6  neumi         assil6       ka        ianine     ezi    atev    ni    16 

Element  ffiysteriezcx,  i??i??iense,  qui  enveloppe  mon  e'tre  et  me 
tazi€  6  vi  med  iee|  ezin6  rabri|  ni  tibra|.  men  ames  di 
/ance  a  toi  pour  toutes  mes  pense'es  et  besoins.  Ami,  viens  te 
ourade  k6  Matemi  uzenir  chee  kida  ni  ke  chee  brizi  pi 
souvenir  que  Matemi  attetidra  ta  faveur,  et  que  ta  sagesse  lui 
dezanir.  evai  divine  tes  lune 
r^pondra.     Sois    heureux     ce     jour. 

Friend  great  Astane,  I  come  to  thee  always  by  this  ele- 
ment, mysterious,  immense,  which  envelops  my  being  and 
launches  me  to  thee  by  all  my  thoughts  and  desires.  Friend, 
come  thou  to  remember  that  Matemi  will  await  thy  favor,  and 
that  thy  wisdom  will  answer  him.     Be  happy  to-day. 

Visual.  October  3,  1898  (translated  October  16). 
— At  a  quarter  before  nine  in  the  evening  Mile. 
Smith,  desiring  to  obtain  a  communication  from 
Leopold  for  herself  and  her  mother,  sat  down  in  an 
easy-chair  and  gave  herself  up  to  meditation.  Pres- 
ently she  hears  the  voice  of  Leopold  telling  her  that 
he  cannot  manifest  himself  that  evening,  but  that 
something   much   more   interesting   and   important 

230 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE   AND  LANGUAGE 

is  being  made  ready.  The  room  seems  to  her  to  be- 
come completely  obscured,  except  the  end  of  the 
table  at  which  she  is  sitting,  which  is  illumined  with 
a  golden  light.  A  young  Martian  girl  in  a  yellow 
robe  and  with  long  tresses  then  comes  and  seats 
herself  beside  her  and  begins  to  trace,  without  ink 
or  paper,  but  with  a  point  on  the  end  of  her  index- 
finger,  black  figures  on  a  white  cylinder,  at  first 
placed  on  the  table,  afterwards  on  her  knees,  and 
which  is  unrolled  as  she  writes.  Helene  is  near 
enough  to  see  the  characters  clearly,  and  copies  them 
in  pencil  on  a  sheet  of  paper  (see  Fig.  27),  after  which 
the  vision  vanishes  and  her  mother  and  the  room  re- 
appear. 

29.  sazeni     kich6     nipunez6  dod6     n€     pit       lezire      hhz 

Sazeni  pourquoi  craindre  ?  Ceci  est  sans  souffrance  ni 
neura  6vai  dastree  firezi  ze  bodri  n6  dorim6  z6 
danger,     sois     paisible ;   certainement    le  os       est       sain,        le 

pastri    tubr6    ne    tux6 
sang       seul      est  malade. 

Sazeni,  why  fear?  This  is  without  suffering  or  danger,  be 
peaceful ;  certainly  the  flesh  is  well,  the  blood  alone  is  ill. 

Auditive.  October  14,  1898  (translated  October 
16). —  Morning  vision  of  an  unknown  gentleman 
and  lady,  the  latter  having  her  arm,  spotted  with 
red,  applied  to  an  instrument  with  three  tubes  placed 
on  a  shelf  fastened  to  the  wall.  These  words  were 
spoken  by  the  man  ;  the  lady  said  nothing. 

30.  mode    k6    hed    on6    chandene    tes6      mune      ten     ti 

Mere,     que      Us      sont      delicieux       ces      ?noments    prhs     de 
tI  biga    va  bindie  ide  ti      zam6       tensee     zou  r6che 

toi  !  —  Enfant,  ou    trouve     on   de   meilleurs   instants  ?  plus     tard 
med  ch6  atev  kiz    foumin6      zati 
^our    ton     etre    quel  puissant  souvenir, 

231 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Mother,  how  delightful  they  are,  these  moments  near  to 
thee  ! — Child,  where  finds  one  better  moments  ?  later  for  thy 
being  what  (a)  powerful  remembrance. 

Auditive.  October  22,  1898  (translated  Decem- 
ber 18). — "At  a  quarter -past  six  in  the  morning; 
vision  of  a  pebbly  shore ;  earth  of  a  red  tint ;  im- 
mense sheet  of  water,  of  a  bluish  green.  Two 
women  are  walking  side  by  side.  This  was  all  I 
could  gather  of  their  conversation.'' 

4^i^     i<Jl^>    ^   i^ScK   ire    '^2c2ci<rcf 

Fig.  28.     Text  No.  31  (October  27,  1898),  written  by  Mile.  Smith, 
incarnating  Ramid.     Natural  size. 

*3i.  Rami6       bisti       ti      Espeni6      che       dim6        uni    z\ 

Ramid     habitant    de       Esp^ni^,       ton      semblable    par     la 

trimazi  ti6  vadaza|  di  anizi6  bana  mira|.  Rami6  di 
force  des  ''  vadazas,''  te  envoie  trois  adieux.  Rami^  te 
trinir  tie   touma|    ti  b6  animina  ni  tiche    di    uzir      nami 

parlera  des  charmes    de    sa    existence    et  bientdt   te    dira   beaucoup 

ti   Espeni6.     6vai     divin6e 

de    Esp^ni^.      Sois   heureuse ! 

Ramie,  dweller  in  Espeni6,  thy  like,  by  the  force  of  the  "  va- 

dazas,"  sends  thee  three  adieux.     Ramie  will  speak  to  thee  of 

the  charms  of  his  existence,  and  presently  will  tell  thee  much  of 

Esp6nie.     Be  happy  ! 

Graphic.  October  27,  1898  (translated  December 
18). — "Ten  minutes  to  one  in  the  afternoon.     No 

233 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND   LANGUAGE 

vision,  but  a  severe  cramp  in  the  right  arm  and  a 
strong  impulse  to  take  pencil  and  paper.  I  write,  I 
know  not  why."  (It  is  seen  by  the  translation  given 
two  months  later  that  the  text  refers  to  the  first  man- 
ifestation of  Ramie  and  is  an  annoLincement  of  the 
ultra-Martian  vision  which  came  a  few  days  later.) 
See  Fig.  28>.  The  term  vadazas,  which  has  never 
been  explained,  has  not  a  Martian  appearance,  and 
appears  to  have  been  borrowed  from  the  Hindoo  cycle. 
As  to  Espenie,  see  text  No.  6. 

32.        ana        €vai     manik^     6     b6tine      mis    tie      attana 

Maintenant  sois  attentive  a  regarder  un  des  mondes 
ka  di  m^dinie  b6tinie  tes  tapie  ni  bee  atev  kavive 
qui  te  entourent.  Regarde  ce  ''•  tapie'"  et  ses  etres  etranges. 
danda  ana 

Silence   maintenant ! 

Now  be  attentive  to  behold  one  of  the  worlds  which  sur- 
round thee.  Look  at  that  "tapie"  and  its  strange  beings.  Si- 
lence now  ! 

Auditive.  November  2,  1898  (translated  Decem- 
ber 18). — Helene  has  a  morning  vision  of  a  Martian 
(Ramie)  who  encircles  her  waist  with  one  arm  and 
with  the  other  shows  her,  while  speaking  these  words, 
a  strange  tableau  (tapie)  containing  extraordinary 
beings  speaking  the  unknown  language  of  the  follow- 
ing text.  At  the  moment  the  vision  is  effaced  Helene 
writes,  without  perceiving  that  she  has  done  so,  text 
No.  34.  (For  fLirther  details,  see  the  following  chap- 
ter on  the  Ultra-Martian.) 

33- 

BAK 

SANAK 

TOP 

ANOK 

SIK 

sirima 

neb6 

vinia-ti-mis-m6tiche 

ivr6 

tone 

ramean 

vert 

nom  de  un  homme 
233 

sacre 

dam 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

ETIP  VANE  SANIM  BATAM        ISSEM       TANAK 

vinia-ti-mis6-biga      azani      maprinie      imizi      krama     zin6 

noi7i  de  une  enfa^it  mal  entre  sous        panier       bleu 

VANEM  SEBIM        MAZAK     TATAK      SAKAM 

vinia-ti-mis-zaki   datrinie    tuz6      vame      gami6 

nom  de  un  animal       cache     malade      triste      pleure. 

Branch  green — name  of  a  man — sacred — in — name  of  a  child 
— bad — entered — under — basket — blue — name  of  an  animal — hid- 
den— ill — sad — weeps. 

Auditive,  as  to  the  non-Martian  text  (see  follow- 
ing chapter)  which  Helene  heard  spoken  on  the 
2d  of  November  by  the  strange  beings  of  the  tableau 
of  the  preceding  vision.  Vocal,  as  to  the  Martian 
translation  of  this  text,  which  was  given  by  Astane 
(incarnated  in  Helene  and  speaking  the  unknown  lan- 
guage by  her  mouth,  followed  by  its  Martian  equiva- 

Fig.  29.     Text  No.  34  (November  2,  1898),  written  by  Mile.  Smith, 
incarnating  Ramie.      Natural  size. 

lent  for  each  word),  in  the  seance  of  the  i8th  of  De- 
cember, 1898.  Immediately  after,  Astane  yielded  his 
place  to  Esenaie,  who  in  turn  repeated  the  Martian 
phrase,  translating  it  word  for  word  into  French  by 
the  customary  process. 
*34.  Ramie    di    p6drini6        ana  n€       €rin6        divin6 

RamU      te       quitte     maintenant,     est     satisfait,     heureux 

234 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND   LANGUAGE 

t6     Hiune      ten     ti    vi.     hed    dassinie    mis    abada    ti    che 

du    moment    pres     de    toi.      II         garde         tin        pett        de     ton 
atev  ni  di  parezie  bana  mira|.  —  evai  divinee 
ttre     et     te      laisse      trois    adieux.       Sois  heureuse ! 

Ramie  leaves  thee  now,  is  satisfied,  happy  for  the  moment 
near  to  thee.  He  retains  a  little  of  thy  being  and  leaves  thee 
three  adieux.     Be  happy. 

Graphic.  November  2,  1898  (translated  December 
18). — Helene  only  perceived  after  its  accomplish- 
ment that  her  hand,  which  she  felt  "  firmly  held/'  had 
written  this  text  at  the  close  of  the  preceding  vision 
(see  Fig.  29). 

35.  [A]  attana    zabin6    pi     ten    t6    iche    tarvini    mabure 

Monde    arrie're,    tres  pres    du    notre,    langage     grossier, 
nub6        teri    zee    atev    [B]  Astane   ezi     dabe    foumine    ni 
curieux   comme    les    etres ! —         Astane\    mon    maitre  puissant     et 
i6    ti      taka    tubre  n6    bibe     ti  ze  umeze 
tout  de  pouvoir,  seul      est  capable   de    le    /aire. 

Hidden  world,  very  near  to  ours,  coarse  language,  curious 
like  the  beings. — Astane,  my  powerful  master  and  all  powerful, 
alone  is  capable  of  doing  it. 

Auditive.  December  5,  1898  (translated  December 
18). —  Working  by  lamp-light  at  seven  o'clock  in 
the  morning,  Helene  again  had  a  vision  of  the  Mar- 
tian (Ramie)  who  had  clasped  her  waist  with  one  arm 
while  showing  her  something  with  a  gesture  of  the 
other  (probably  the  tableau  of  the  preceding  vision, 
though  Helene  did  not  see  it)  and  uttering  the  first 
phrase  of  it  (A) .  The  second  phrase  (B)  is  the  reply 
of  this  same  Martian  to  a  mental  question  of  He- 
lene asking  him  to  translate  the  strange  language 
of  the  other  day.  (She  must,  therefore,  have  un- 
derstood the  meaning  of  the  first  phrase  in  order  to 
have  replied  to  it  by  her  appropriate  mental  question.) 

235 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MAlRg 

(^v^^ir  {^ filet  If  (^tikc 

Fig.  30.  Text  No.  37  (March  24,  1899),  written  by  Mile.  Smith,  incarnating  Astan^. 
[Collection  of  M.  Lemaitre.]  Owing  to  a  defect  of  the  stereotype  plate  a  dot  is 
lacking  on  the  first  letter. 

36.  [A]  ae    a6    ae    ae      lassuni6     lami      reze     a6    a6    a6 

.(4/,  a/,  a;/,  ae ! — Approche ;  void  Reze.  .  .  ae',  a/,  a/, 
a6  nike  bulie  va  ne  ozamie  ziteni  primeni — [B]  ozami6 
a/,  petit  Bulie. .  .  ou  est  Ozami/.^  Ziteni,  Pri??ieni.  .  .  Ozami/, 
vinia  ti  mis    biga   kema  ziteni   vinia    ti    mise    biga     kemisi 

nom   de   tin   enfajtt  male ;    Ziteni,    nojn     de     une   enfant  fetnelle ; 

primeni    vinia  ti   mise    biga     kemisi 
Prime'ni,    nom    de    une    enfant  fefnelle. 

Ae,  ae,  ae,  a6  !  Approach,  here  is  Rez^.  .  ,  ae,  ae,  ae,  a6, 
little  Bulie.  .  .  where  is  Ozamie?  Ziteni,  Primeni.  .  .  Ozami6, 
name  of  a  male  child  ;  Ziteni,  name  of  a  female  child  ;  Primeni, 
name  of  a  female  child. 

Auditive.  March  8,  1899  (translated  June  4).— He- 
lene  heard  the  phrase  (A)  during  the  vision  of  which 
the  description  follows.  At  the  translation,  as  the 
sitters  did  not  at  once  understand  that  the  three  first 
words  are  proper  names,  Esenale  adds  the  phrase 
(B)  with  its  French  signification.  "  I  was  unable  to 
go  to  sleep  yesterday  evening.  At  half-past  eleven 
everything  around  me  was  suddenly  lighted  up,  and 
the  vivid  light  permitted  me  to  distinguish  surround- 

236 

THE    MARTIAN  CYCLE   AND  LANGUAGE 

ing  objects.  I  arose  this  morning  with  a  very  clear 
remembrance  of  that  which  I  then  saw.  A  tableau 
was  formed  in  that  light,  and  I  had  more  before  me 
than  the  interior  of  a  Martian  house — an  immense 
square  hall,  around  which  shelves  were  fastened, 
or  rather  little  tables  suspended  and  fastened  to 
the  wall.  Each  of  these  tables  contained  a  baby, 
but  not  at  all  bundled  up  ;  all  the  movements  of 
these  little  infants  were  free,  and  a  simple  linen 
cloth   was   thrown    round  the   body.     They  might 

irwcT  f)2rv  ifiSc? 
Wo  fiMticj.  irrv  &iiir 

Fig.  31.  Text  No.  38  (March  30,  1899),  written  by  Mile.  Smith  copying  a  text  of 
Ramie,  who  appeared  to  her  in  a  visual  hallucination.  [Collection  of  M. 
Lemaitre.] 

be  said  to  be  lying  on  yellow  moss.  I  could  not 
say  with  what  the  tables  were  covered.  Some  men 
with  strange  beasts  were  circulating  round  the  hall ; 
these  beasts  had  large  flat  heads,  almost  without 
hair,  and  large,  very  soft  eyes,  like  those  of  seals ; 
their  bodies,  slightly  hairy,  resembled  somewhat 
those  of  roes  in  our  country,  except  for  their  large 
and  fiat  tails  ;  they  had  large  udders,  to  which  the 
men  present  fitted  a  square  instrument  with  a  tube, 
which  was  offered  to  each  infant,  who  was  thus  fed 

237 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

with  the  milk  of  these  beasts.  I  heard  cries,  a  great 
hurly-burly,  and  it  was  with  difficulty  that  I  could 
note  these  few  words  [of  this  text].  This  vision 
lasted  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;  then  everything 
gradually  disappeared,  and  in  a  minute  after  I  was 
in  a  sound  sleep." 

*37.  Astane    bounie    z€    buzi      ti    di     trin6       nami      ni 

Asian/     cherche     le    moyen      de     te     parler    beaticoup    ct 
ti    di    umez6      seimire      bi    tarvini 
de     te     faire     comprendre   son    langage. 

Astane  searches  for  the  means  to  speak  to  thee  much  and  to 
make  thee  understand  his  language. 

Graphic.  March  24,  1899  (translated  June  4). — 
"  Half-past  six  in  the  morning.  Vision  of  Astane. 
I  was  standing,  about  to  put  on  my  slippers.  He 
spoke  to  me,  but  I  could  not  understand  him.  I 
took  this  sheet  of  paper  and  a  pencil  ;  he  spoke  to 
me  no  more,  but  seized  my  hand  which  held  the 
pencil.  I  wrote  under  this  pressure  ;  I  understood 
nothing,  for  this  is  as  Hebrew  to  me.  My  hand  was 
released;  I  raised  my  head  to  see  Astane,  but 'he  had 
disappeared"  (see  Fig.  30). 

*38.  f^die    ames    Rami6    di     uzenir     tes    Iun6    am^s    z6 

FedU^  viens ;    Ra77ii/    te     attendra      ce     jour ;     mens,     le 
boua    trinir 
frere  par  leva. 

Fedie,  come  ;  Ramie  will  await  thee  to-day ;  come,  the  brother 
will  speak. 

Visual.  March  30,  1899  (translated  June  4). — 
Seated  at  her  toilet-table,  at  half-past  nine  o'clock 
in  the  evening,  Helene  found  herself  suddenly  en- 
veloped in  a  rose-colored  fog,  which  hid  one  part 
of  the  furniture  from  her,  then  was  dissipated,  al- 

238 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

lowing  her  to  see,  at  the  farther  end  of  her  room, 
"  Si  strange  hall,  lighted  with  rose-colored  globes 
fastened  to  the  wall/'  Nearer  to  her  appeared  a 
table  suspended  in  the  air,  and  a  man  in  Martian 
costume,  who  wrote  with  a  kind  of  nail  fastened  to 
his  right  index-finger.  ''  I  lean  towards  this  man  ; 
I  wish  to  place  my  left  hand  on  this  imaginary  table, 
but  my  hand  falls  into  empty  space,  and  I  have  great 
difficulty  in  restoring  it  to  its  normal  position.  It 
was  stiff,  and  for  some  moments  felt  very  weak.'' 
Happily  the  idea  occurred  to  her  to  take  pencil  and 
paper  and  copy  "  the  characters  which  the  Martian, 
whom  I  had  seen  several  times  before  [Ramie],  traced; 
and  with  extreme  difficulty — since  they  were  much 
smaller  than  mine — I  succeeded  in  reproducing  them" 
(the  Martian  text  of  Fig.  31).  All  this  lasted  about  a 
quarter  of  an  hour.  I  went  immediately  to  bed,  and  saw 
nothing  more  that  evening,  nor  on  the  following  day." 

i$£;c^   oii2Vf  ^($Jc  ^pK-r^ci:  (rr^o 

Fig.  32.     Text  No.  39  (April  i,  1899),  written  by  Mile.  Smith,  incarnating 
Ramie.     [Colrection  of  M.  Lemaitre.]    Natural  size. 

*39.  Ramie      pond6        acami         andelir         teri      ant^ch 

J^ami/,       savant     astronome,    ap^arattra      comme        hier 
iri      6    vi         ana.         riz    vi    bana    mira|     ti    Ramie  ni 
souvent  a    toi  maintenant.   Sur    toi     trois     adieux    de     RamiS     et 
Astane.     6vaii    divinee 

Asians.       Sots    heureuse ! 

239 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Ramie,  learned  astronomer,  will  appear  as  yesterday  often  to 
thee  now.  Upon  thee  three  adieux  from  Ramie  and  Astane. 
Be  happy  ! 

Graphic.  April  i,  1899  (translated  June  4). — 
"Again,  on  going  to  bed  at  five  minutes  past  ten,  a 
new  vision  of  the  personage  seen  day  before  yes- 
terday [Ramie].  I  thought  he  was  about  to  speak, 
but  no  sound  issued  from  his  lips.  I  quickly  take 
pencil  and  paper,  and  feel  my  right  arm  seized  by 
him,  and  1  begin  to  trace  the  strange  handwriting 
attached  hereto  (see  Fig.  1,2).  He  is  very  affection- 
ate ;  his  bearing,  his  look,  everything  breathes 
both  goodness  and  strangeness.  He  leaves  me 
really  charmed." 

40.  ramie        ebana  dizena         ziveni6     ni     bi    vraini 

Ramie\      lentement,     profond/ment,     et-udie,        et     son      dhir 
assile    ne    ten    ti  res    kalam6     astane     ezi     dab6    n6    zi 
immense  est    fres     de     se    accomplu'.    A  stand     mon    viaitre   est     Ih 
med   le  godane  ni    ankone  evai  bane  zizSizi   divin^e 
pour  7ne     aider      et     rejouir.     Sois    trois      fois     heureuse ! 

Ramie,  slowly,  deeply  studies,  and  his  great  desire  is  near  to 
being  accomplished,  Astane,  my  master,  is  there  to  aid  me  and 
to  rejoice.     Mayst  thou  be  thrice  happy  ! 

Auditive.  June  4,  1899  (translated  same  seance). — 
Hemisomnambulism,  in  which  Helene,  without  hav- 
ing a  vision,  hears  a  voice  addressing  words  to  her, 
from  which,  with  some  difficulty,  she  collected  the 
preceding  sentences. 

41.  To  these  texts,  forming  sentences,  in  order 
to  complete  the  whole,  some  isolated  words  must  be 
added,  gathered  on  various  occasions,  the  meaning 
of  which  is  obtained  with  sufficient  certainty,  either 
from  the  French  context  in  which  they  were  framed, 

240 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

or  from  Helene's  description  of  the  objects  which  they 
designated.  These  words  are  cheke,  papier  ("  pa- 
per '')  :  chinit,  bague  ("  ring ")  ;  asnete,  espece  de 
paravent  (''kind  of  screen").  Anini  Nikaine,  proper 
name  of  a  httle  girl  (see  p.  176),  probably  the  Mar- 
tian sister  of  Esenale,  who  floats  beside  her,  invis- 
ible to  her,  and  watches  over  her  during  an  illness, 
after  the  fashion  of  spirit  protectors.  Beniel, 
proper  name  of  our  earth,  as  seen  from  Mars  (which 
is  called  Duree  in  texts  7  and  9). 

in.  Remarks  on  the  Martian  Language 

Provided  the  reader  has  given  some  attention  to 
the  foregoing  texts,  if  only  to  the  two  first,  he  un- 
doubtedly will  have  been  easily  satisfied  as  to  the 
pretended  language  of  the  planet  Mars,  and  perhaps 
will  be  astonished  that  I  have  spent  so  much  time 
upon  it.  But,  as  many  of  the  habitues  of  the  seances 
of  Mile.  Smith — and,  naturally.  Mile.  Smith  herself — 
hold  seriously  to  its  authenticity,  I  cannot  absolve 
myself  from  stating  why  the  "  Martian  "  is,  in  my 
opinion,  only  an  infantile  travesty  of  French.  Even 
in  default  of  the  astronomical  importance  which 
is  claimed  for  it  on  the  authority  of  Leopold,  this 
idiom  preserves  all  the  psychological  interest  which 
attaches  to  automatic  products  of  subconscious  activ- 
ities of  the  mind,  and  it  well  deserves  some  minutes 
of  examination. 

It  is  necessary  at  the  start  to  render  this  justice  to 
the  Martian  (I  continue  to  designate  it  by  that  name, 
for  the  sake  of  convenience) — namely,  that  it  is,  in- 
Q  241 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

deed,  a  language  and  not  a  simple  jargon  or  gibberish 
of  vocal  noises  produced  at  the  hazard  of  the  moment 
without  any  stability.  It  cannot  be  denied  the  follow- 
ing characteristics — First :  It  is  a  harmony  of  clearly 
articulated  sounds,  grouped  so  as  to  form  words.  Sec- 
ondly :  These  words  when  pronounced  express  def- 
inite ideas.  Thirdly,  and  finally  :  Connection  of  the 
words  with  the  ideas  is  continuous  ;  or,  to  put  it  dif- 
ferently, the  signification  of  the  Martian  terms  is 
permanent  and  is  maintained  (apart  from  slight  in- 
consistencies, to  which  I  will  return  later  on)  from  one 
end  to  the  other  of  the  texts  which  have  been  collected 
in  the  course  of  these  three  years.*  I  will  add  that  in 
speaking  fluently  and  somewhat  quickly,  as  Helene 
sometimes  does  in  somnambulism  (texts  4, 1 1, 15,  etc.), 
it  has  an  acoustic  quality  altogether  its  own,  due  to 
the  predominance  of  certain  sounds,  and  has  a  pecul- 
iar intonation  difficult  to  describe.  Just  as  one  dis- 
tinguishes by  ear  foreign  languages  which  one  does 
not  understand,  the  whole  dialect  possessing  a  pecul- 
iar accent  which  causes  it  to  be  recognized,  so  in  this 
case  one  perceives,  from  the  first  syllables  uttered, 

*  If  it  is  objected  that  the  Martian  lacks  the  essential  character 
of  a  language — that  is  to  say,  a  practical  sanction  by  use  ;  by  the 
fact  of  its  serving  as  a  means  of  communication  between  living 
beings — I  will  not  answer,  like  Mile.  Smith,  that  after  all  we  know 
nothing  about  that,  but  will  simply  say  that  the  social  side  of 
the  question  does  not  concern  us  here.  Even  if  Volapiik  and 
Esperanto  are  not  used,  they  are  none  the  less  languages,  and 
the  Martian  has,  in  regard  to  its  artificial  construction,  the  psy- 
chological superiority  of  being  a  natural  language,  spontaneous- 
ly created,  without  the  conscious  participation,  reflective  or  will- 
ing, of  a  normal  personality. 

242 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE   AND   LANGUAGE 

whether  Helene  is  speaking  Hindoo  or  Martian,  ac- 
cording to  the  musical  connection,  the  rhythm,  the 
choice  of  consonants  and  vowels  belonging  to  each 
of  the  two  idioms.  In  this  the  Martian,  indeed,  bears 
the  stamp  of  a  natural  language.  It  is  not  the  result 
of  a  purely  intellectual  calculation,  but  influences  of 
an  aesthetic  order,  emotional  factors,  have  combined 
in  its  creation  and  instinctively  directed  the  choice  of 
its  assonances  and  favorite  terminations.  The  Mar- 
tian language  has  certainly  not  been  fabricated  in 
cold  blood  during  the  normal,  habitual,  French  (so 
to  speak)  state  of  Mile.  Smith,  but  it  bears  in  its  char- 
acteristic tonalities  the  imprint  of  a  peculiar  emo- 
tional disposition,  of  a  fixed  humor  or  psychical  Orien- 
tation, of  a  special  condition  of  mind,  which  may  be 
called,  in  one  word,  the  Martian  state  of  Helene.  The 
secondary  personality,  which  takes  pleasure  in  lin- 
guistic games,  seems,  indeed,  to  be  the  same,  at  its 
source,  as  that  which  delights  in  the  exotic  and  highly 
colored  visual  images  of  the  planet  of  red  rocks,  and 
which  animates  the  personages  of  the  Martian  ro- 
mance. 

A  glance  at  the  ensemble  of  the  foregoing  texts 
shows  that  Martian,  as  compared  with  French,  is 
characterized  by  a  superabundance  of  e,  e,  and  is, 
and  a  scarcity  of  diphthongs  and  the  nasal  sounds. 
A  more  accurate  statistical  table  of  sounded  vowels 
which  strike  the  ear  in  reading  aloud  the  Martian 
texts  on  the  one  hand,  and  their  translation  into 
French  on  the  other,  gives  me  the  percentages  of  Table 
L,  which  follows.  But  it  is  well  known  that  the 
vowels  are  distinguished,  from  the  acoustic  point 

243 

Martian 

French 

i 

16.3 

13-7 

" 

3.6 

20.8 

36.9 

14-3 

2.1 

4.6 

34-3 

13.4 

2.3 

5-7 

2.3 

3-1 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

of  view,  by  certain  fixed  characteristic  sounds,  and 
that  they  are  distributed  at  different  heights  in  the 
musical  scale. 

Table  I. — Statistics  of  Vowel  Sounds 

a 

e  mute  (like  those  of  casemate).     .     . 
e  closed  or  half -closed  (like  those  of 

h3e'te\  rev^) 

e  open  (like  that  of  aloes) 

i 

o 

u 

Diphthongs  and  nasals  {ou,  oi,  eu,  an, 

in,  on,  un) "  2.1  24.5 

Table  II. — Grouping  from  Point  of  View  of  Height 

Martian  French 
Vowels,  high  (i  and  ^  sounded)    ...       %            73.3  32.3 

Vowels,  middle  {a  and  0) "  18.6  19.4 

Vowels,  low  or  hollow  {u;  diphthongs 

and  nasals;  ^  mute) "  8.0  48.4 

i  and  e  are  the  highest,  a  and  o  occupy  the  middle 
place,  u  and  ou  are  found  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
scale.  In  adding  to  the  latter,  therefore,  the  nasals, 
which  are  always  hollow,  and  also  e  mute.  Table  I. 
divides  itself  into  the  three  groups  of  Table  II.  from 
the  point  of  view  of  height  and  sonorousness.  It 
is,  therefore,  clear  that  the  Martian  is  of  a  general 
tonahty  much  higher  than  the  French  ;  since,  while 
the  two  languages  have  almost  the  same  proportion 
of  middle  vowels,  the  low,  hollow,  or  mute  sounds, 
which  constitute  almost  one-half  of  the  French  vow- 
els,   amount    to    scarcely    one-twelfth   in    Martian, 

244 

THE  MARTIAN   CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

in  which  the  high  sounds,  on  the  contrary,  represent 
in  bulk  three-quarters  of  the  vowels,  against  one- 
third  only  in  the  French.  On  the  other  hand,  re- 
searches in  the  field  of  colored  audition  have  de- 
monstrated that  a  close  psychological  connection 
exists,  based  on  certain  emotional  analogies  and  an 
equivalence  of  organic  reactions,  between  the  high 
sounds  and  the  bright  or  vivid  colors,  and  the  low  or 
hollow  sounds  and  the  sombre  colors.  But  this  same 
correlation  is  found  in  the  somnambulistic  life  of  Mile. 
Smith,  between  the  brilliant,  luminous,  highly  color- 
ed visions  which  characterize  her  Martian  cycle  and 
the  language  of  the  high  and  sonorous  vowels  which 
gushes  forth  in  the  same  cycle.  It  is  allowable  to 
conclude  from  this  that  it  is  really  the  same  emo- 
tional atmosphere  which  bathes  and  envelops  these 
varied  psychological  products,  the  same  personal- 
ity which  gives  birth  to  these  visual  and  phonetic 
automatisms.  The  imagination  cannot,  however, 
as  is  easily  understood,  create  its  fiction  out  of  noth- 
ing ;  it  is  obliged  to  borrow  its  materials  from  in- 
dividual experience.  The  Martian  tableaux  are, 
therefore,  only  a  reflection,  of  the  terrestrial  world, 
but  of  that  part  of  it  which  possesses  the  most  warmth 
and  brilliancy — the  Orient;  in  the  same  way,  the 
Martian  language  is  only  French  metamorphosed 
and  carried  to  a  higher  diapason. 

I  admit,  then,  that  Martian  is  a  language,  and  a 
natural  language,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  automati- 
cally brought  forth  in  the  emotional  state,  or  by  the 
secondary  personality,  which  is  the  source  of  all  the 
remainder    of  the  cycle  without  the  conscious  par- 

245 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

ticipation  of  Mile.  Smith.  It  remains  for  me  now  to 
mention  some  of  the  characteristics  which  seem  to 
indicate  that  the  inventor  of  this  subliminal  lingu- 
istic work  had  never  known  any  idiom  other  than 
French,  that  it  is  much  more  sensible  to  verbal  ex- 
pression than  to  logical  connection  of  ideas,  and 
that  it  possesses  in  an  eminent  degree  that  infantile 
and  puerile  character  which  I  have  already  pointed 
out  in  the  author  of  the  Martian  romance.  It  now 
becomes  necessary  to  examine  rapidly  this  unknown 
language,  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  phonetics  and 
its  writing,  its  grammatical  form,  its  syntax,  and  its 
vocabulary. 

I.  Martian  Phonetics  and  Handwriting.  —  Mar- 
tian is  composed  of  articulate  sounds,  all  of  which, 
consonants  as  well  as  vowels,  exist  in  French. 
While  on  this  globe  languages  geographically  our 
neighbors  (not  to  mention  those  farther  away)  differ 
each  from  the  other  by  certain  special  sounds — ch, 
German,  th,  English,  etc. — the  language  of  the  plan- 
et Mars  does  not  permit  of  similar  phonetic  original- 
ities. It  seems,  on  the  contrary,  poorer  in  this  re- 
spect than  the  French.  As  yet  I  have  not  found  in 
it  the  hissing  j  or  ge  (as  in  juger),  nor  the  double 
sound  X.  Martian  phonetics,  in  a  word,  are  only  an 
incomplete  reproduction  of  French  phonetics. 

The  Martian  alphabet,  compared  with  ours,  sug- 
gests a  remarkable  analogy.  The  graphic  form  of 
the  characters  is  certainly  novel,  and  no  one  would 
divine  our  letters  in  these  designs  of  exotic  aspect. 
Nevertheless,  each  Martian  sign  (with  the  single 
exception  of  that  of  the  plural)   corresponds  to   a 

246 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE   AND  LANGUAGE 

French  sign,  although  the  inverse  is  not  the  case, 
which  indicates  that  here  again  we  are  in  the  pres- 
ence of  a  feeble  imitation  of  our  system  of  hand- 
writing. 

The  twelve  written  texts  upon  which  I  base  my 
comparison  comprise  about  300  words  (of  which  160 
are  different)  and  1200  signs.  There  are  altogether 
twenty-one  different  letters,  all  of  which  have  their 
exact  equivalents  in  the  French  alphabet,  which  also 
has  five  others  which  Martian  lacks  ;  j  and  x,  of 
which  the  sounds  themselves  have  not  been  ob- 
served, and  q,  w,  and  y,  of  which  there  is  a  double 
use,  wdth  k,  V,  and  i.  This  reduction  of  graphic  ma- 
terial manifests  itself  in  two  other  details.  First, 
there  are  neither  accents  nor  punctuation  marks, 
with  the  exception  of  a  certain  sign,  resembling  the 
French  circumflex,  used  sometimes  in  the  shape  of 
a  point  at  the  end  of  phrases.  In  the  second  place, 
each  letter  has  only  one  form,  the  diversity  of  cap- 
itals and  small  letters  not  seeming  to  exist  in  Mar- 
tian.    Of  ciphers  we  know  nothing. 

There  are  still  three  small  peculiarities  to  notice : 

1.  In  default  of  capitals,  the  initials  of  proper  names 
are  often  distinguished  by  a  point  placed  above  the 
ordinary  character. 

2.  In  the  case  of  double  letters  the  second  is  re- 
placed by  a  point  situated  at  the  right  of  the  first. 

3.  Finally,  there  exists,  in  order  to  designate  the 
plural  of  substantives  and  of  some  adjectives,  a  special 
graphic  sign,  answering  to  nothing  in  the  pronuncia- 
tion and  having  the  form  of  a  small  vertical  undula- 
tion, which  reminds  one  a  little  of  an  amplification  of 

247 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  French  s,  the  usual  mark  of  the  plural  in  French. 
These  peculiarities,  outside  the  ordinary  form  of  the 
letters,  constitute  the  sum  total  of  ingenuity  dis- 
played in  Martian  handwriting. 

It  must  be  added  that  this  handwriting,  which  is 
not  ordinarily  inclined,  goes  from  left  to  right,  like 
the  French.  All  the  letters  are  of  nearly  the  same 
height,  except  that  the  i  is  much  smaller,  and  that 
they  remain  isolated  from  each  other  ;  their  assembly 
into  words  and  phrases  offers  to  the  eye  a  certain 
aspect  of  Oriental  hieroglyphic  inscriptions. 

The  Martian  alphabet  never  having  been  revealed 
as  such,  we  are  ignorant  of  the  order  in  which  the 
letters  follow  each  other.  It  would  seem  as  though 
the  letters  had  been  invented  by  following  the  French 
alphabet,  at  least  in  great  part,  if  one  may  judge 
according  to  the  analogies  of  form  of  the  Martian 
characters  corresponding  to  certain  series  of  French 
letters  :  compare  a  and  b ;  g  and  h ;  s  and  t ;  and 
also  the  succession  k,  I,  m,  n. 

It  is  in  the  phonetic  value  of  the  letters — that  is  to 
say,  in  the  correspondence  of  the  articulated  sounds 
with  the  graphic  signs — that  the  essentially  French 
nature  of  the  Martian  may  be  seen.  The  only  notable 
difference  to  be  pointed  out  here  between  the  two  lan- 
guages is  the  much  greater  simplicity  of  the  Martian 
orthography,  resulting  in  the  employment  of  no  use- 
'ess  letters.  All  are  pronounced,  even  the  final  con- 
sonants, such  as  s,  n,  z,  etc.,  which  are  generally  silent 
in  French.  This  gives  the  impression  that  the  Mar- 
tian handwriting  is  moulded  on  the  spoken  language, 
and  is  only  the  notation  of  the  articulated  sounds 

248 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE   AND   LANGUAGE 

of  the  latter  by  the  most  economical  means.  In  so 
far  it  realizes  the  type  of  a  handwriting  truly  pho- 
netic—that is  to  say,  where  each  sign  corresponds 
to  a  certain  elementary  articulation,  constant  and  in- 
variable, and  vice  versa.  It  is  full,  on  the  other  hand, 
of  equivocations,  of  exceptions,  of  irregularities,  which 
make  one  and  the  same  letter  to  have  very  different 
pronunciations,  according  to  circumstances,  and,  re- 
ciprocally, which  causes  the  same  sound  to  be  written 
in  different  ways  without  our  being  able  to  perceive 
any  rational  explanation  for  all  these  ambiguities — 
were  it  not  for  the  fact  that  the  very  same  thing  is  to 
be  found  in  French  ! 

Martian  is  only  disguised  French.  I  will  men- 
tion only  the  most  curious  and  striking  coincidences, 
all  the  more  striking  from  the  fact  that  the  field  from 
which  I  have  collected  them  is  very  limited,  being  con- 
fined to  the  dozen  texts  written  and  pronounced,  which 
contain  only  1 60  different  words. 

The  simple  vowels  of  the  Martian  alphabet  corre- 
spond exactly  to  the  five  French  vowels,  a,  e,  i,  0,  u, 
and  have  the  same  shades  of  pronunciation. 

The  Martian  c  plays  the  triple  part  which  it  also 
fulfils  in  French.  The  5  has  the  same  capricious 
character  as  in  our  language.  It  is  generally  hard, 
but  between  two  vowels  it  becomes  soft,  like  z. 

2.  Grammatical  Forms. — The  ensemble  of  the  texts 
which  we  possess  does  not  as  yet  permit  us  to  make 
a  Martian  grammar.  Certain  indications,  however, 
warrant  the  prediction  that  the  rules  of  that  gram- 
mar, if  it  ever  sees  the  light  of  day,  will  be  only  the 
counterpart  of,  or  a  parody  upon,  those  of  French, 

249 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE    PLANET  MARS 

/.  ce 

w^  16,  nioi 

si 

ton  che 

tu  de 

te  di,  /i?/  vi 

i 

/d^  chee 

il  hed 

se  res,  //«■ 

pi 

/d'j  chi 

nous  nini 

7;^(?«  ezi 

son  bi 

votes  sini 

wa  eze 

j«  be 

Us  hed 

?//^j-  ezine 

ses  b6e 

on  ide 

not?'e  iche 

Here,  for  example,  is  a  list  of  personal  pronouns, 
articles,  possessive  adjectives,  etc.,  which  have  ap- 
peared hitherto  : 

ce  tes,  ces  tese        de  ti 
cette  tes,  tesee        des  ti6 
/^  (pron.)  ze  du  t6 

^z^x  ka,  ^z^^  ke       au  ine 
^z^^/  kiz,  quelle 

kize 
2^/2  mis,  2<^<?  mis6 
le,  la    les  (art.)  ze, 

zi,  zee. 

There  are  some  texts  where  the  feminine  is  derived 
from  the  masculine  by  the  addition  of  an  e  mute, 
and  the  plural  by  the  small,  unpronounced  sign, 
which  has  all  the  appearance  of  being  a  reminiscence 
of  French  5. 

Between  these  two  languages  there  is  another  order 
of  points  of  contact,  of  a  more  special  interest,  because 
it  shows  the  preponderating  role  which  verbal  images 
have  often  played  in  the  making  of  Martian  to  the 
prejudice  of  the  intrinsic,  logical  nature  of  the  ideas. 
1  should  say  that  at  all  times  the  Martian  translates 
the  French  word,  allowing  itself  to  be  guided  by  audi- 
tive analogies  without  regard  to  the  real  meaning,  in 
such  a  way  that  we  are  surprised  to  discover  in  the 
idiom  of  the  planet  Mars  the  same  peculiarities  of 
homonyms  as  in  French.  It  is  also  the  case  that  two 
vocables  identical  as  to  pronunciation,  but  of  entirely 
heterogeneous  signification,  as  the  preposition  a  and 
the  a  of  the  verb  avoir,  are  rendered  in  Martian  by 
the  same  word,  e. 

Other  curious  coincidences  are  to  be  noted,  In 
250 

THE    MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

French  the  conjunction  et  only  sHghtly  differs,  from 
the  point  of  view  of  phonic  images,  from  the  verb  est ; 
in  Martian  also  there  is  a  great  analogy  between  ni 
and  ne,  which  translate  these  two  words.  Between 
the  past  participle  nie  of  the  verb  to  he  and  the  con- 
junction ni  there  is  only  the  difference  of  an  e,  just 
as  between  their  French  equivalents  ete  and  et. 

It  must  be  admitted  that  all  these  coincidences 
would  be  very  extraordinary  if  they  were  purely 
fortuitous. 

3.  Construction  and  Syntax.  —  The  order  of  the 
words  is  absolutely  the  same  in  Martian  as  in 
French.  This  identity  of  construction  of  phrases  is 
pursued  sometimes  into  the  minutest  details,  such  as 
the  division  or  amputation  of  the  negation  ne  .  .  . 
pas  (texts  15  and  17),  and  also  the  introduction  of  a 
useless  letter  in  Martian  to  correspond  to  a  French 
euphemistic  t  (see  text  15),  Kevi  berimir  m  hed, 
quand  reviendra-t-il  ?  ("  when  will  he  return  ?") 

If  it  is  admitted  hypothetically  that  the  succession 
of  words,  such  as  is  given  us  in  these  texts,  is  not 
the  natural  ordering  of  the  Martian  language,  but 
an  artificial  arrangement,  like  that  of  juxtalinear 
translations  for  the  use  of  pupils,  the  very  possibility 
of  that  correspondence  absolutely  word  for  word 
would  remain  an  extraordinary  fact  without  a  par- 
allel, since  there  is  not  a  single  language  that  I  know 
of  in  which  each  term  of  the  French  phrase  is  always 
rendered  by  one  term,  neither  more  nor  less,  of  the 
foreign  phrase.  The  hypothesis  referred  to  is,  more- 
over, inadmissible,  since  the  Martian  texts,  of  which 
Esenale  gives  the  literal  translation,  were  not  pre- 

251 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

viously  arranged  by  him  with  that  end  in  view  ; 
they  are  the  identical  words  which  Mile.  Smith  heard 
and  noted  in  her  visions,  often  weeks  and  months 
before  Esenale  repeats  them  for  the  purpose  of  trans- 
lating them,  and  which  constitute  the  conversation, 
as  such,  taken  from  life,  of  the  Martian  personages. 
We  must  conclude  from  this  that  these  in  their  elo- 
cution follow  step  by  step  and  word  by  word  the 
order  of  the  French  language,  which  amounts  almost 
to  saying  that  they  speak  a  French  the  sounds  of 
which  have  simply  been  changed. 

4.  Vocabulary. — From  an  etymological  point  of 
view,  I  have  not  been  able  to  distinguish  any  rule  of 
derivation,  even  partial,  that  would  permit  the  suspi- 
cion that  the  Martian  words  had  come  from  French 
words,  according  to  some  law.  Apart  from  the  entire 
first  text,  where  it  is  difficult  to  deny  that  the  peo- 
ple of  Mars  have  stolen  French  terms  of  politeness, 
at  the  same  time  distorting  them,  no  clear  resem- 
blance is  to  be  seen  between  Martian  words  and  the 
French  equivalents;  at  most,  there  are  traces  of  bor- 
rowing, like  merve,  superhe,  which  might  have  been 
abridged  from  merveille  (text  25),  and  vechi,  an  im- 
itation of  voir. 

Still  less  does  the  Martian  lexicon  betray  the  in- 
fluence of  other  known  languages  (at  least  to  my 
knowledge).  A  term  which  suggests  such  similarity 
is  hardly  ever  met  with — e.g.,  mode,  mere  ("moth- 
er"), and  gude  bon  ("good"),  cause  us  to  think  of 
German  or  English  words  ;  animina  {"  existence  ") 
is  like  ani'tna  ;  various  forms  of  the  verbs  etre  and 
vivre  "to  be"  and  ''to   live"),   eve,  evai,  essat,  re- 

252 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

call  the  Latin  esse  or  the  Hebrew  eve,  and  that  pas- 
sage of  the  Biblical  story  of  the  Creation  where  Eve 
is  called  the  mother  of  all  Imng  beings.  A  linguist 
who  happened  to  be  at  the  same  time  a  savant  and 
a  humorist  would  doubtless  succeed  in  lengthening 
this  list  of  etymologies,  after  the  mode  of  the  eigh- 
teenth century.  But,  cui  bono  ?  In  that  rarity  of 
points  of  contact  between  the  idioms  of  our  terres- 
trial sphere  and  the  Martian  glossary,  an  argument 
might  be  found  in  favor  of  the  extra  -  terrestrial 
origin  of  the  latter,  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  did  not 
seem  to  betray  the  influence  of  the  French  language 
from  the  fact  that  a  notable  proportion  of  its  words 
reproduce  in  a  suspicious  manner  the  same  number 
of  syllables  or  letters  as  their  French  equivalents  ; 
note,  for  example,  besides  the  terms  of  politeness 
already  mentioned,  the  words  tarvine,  Ian  gage  ; 
haudan,  maison ;  dode,  ceci  ;  valini,  visage,  etc.,  and 
the  great  majority  of  the  little  words,  such  as  ce,  je ; 
ke,  que  ;  ti,  de ;  de,  tu ;  etc. 

With  the  exception  of  such  examples  as  these,  it 
must  be  acknowledged  that  there  is  no  trace  of  par- 
entage, filiation,  of  any  resemblance  whatever  be- 
tween the  Martian  and  French  vocabularies,  which 
forms  a  singular  contrast  to  the  close  identity  which 
we  have  established  between  the  two  languages  in 
the  preceding  paragraphs. 

This  apparent  contradiction  carries  its  explana- 
tion in  itself,  and  gives  us  the  key  to  Martian.  This 
fantastic  idiom  is  evidently  the  naive  and  some- 
what puerile  work  of  an  infantile  imagination,  to 
which  occurred  the  idea  of  creating  a  new  language, 

253 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

and  which^  while  giving  to  its  lucubrations  certain 
strange  and  unknown  appearances,  without  doubt 
caused  them  to  run  in  the  accustomed  moulds  of  the 
onlj^  real  language  of  which  it  had  cognizance.  The 
Martian  of  Mile.  Smith,  in  other  words,  is  the  product 
of  a  brain  or  a  personality  which  certainly  has  taste 
and  aptitude  for  linguistic  exercises,  but  which  never 
knew  that  French  takes  little  heed  of  the  logical  con- 
nection of  ideas,  and  did  not  take  the  troLible  to  make 
innovations  in  the  matter  of  phonetics,  of  grammar, 
or  of  syntax. 

The  process  of  creation  of  Martian  seems  to  have 
consisted  in  simply  taking  certain  French  phrases 
as  such  and  replacing  each  word  by  some  other 
chosen  at  random.  That  is  why,  especially  in  the 
texts  at  the  beginning,  the  structure  of  French 
words  is  recognized  under  the  Martian.  The  au- 
thor herself  was  undoubtedly  struck  by  it,  and  from 
that  time  exerted  herself  to  complicate  her  lexicon, 
to  render  her  words  more  and  more  unrecognizable. 

This  research  of"  originality  —  which,  however, 
she  has  never  extended  beyond  the  purely  material 
part  of  the  language,  never  having  an  idea  that 
there  might  be  other  differences  in  languages — 
represents  an  effort  of  imagination  with  which  she 
must  be  credited.  Homage  must  also  be  rendered 
to  the  labor  of  memorizing,  which  the  making  of  a 
dictionary  has  necessitated.  She  has  sometimes, 
indeed,  fallen  into  errors  ;  the  stability  of  her  vocab- 
ulary has  not  always  been  perfect.  But,  finally, 
after  the  first  hesitation  and  independently  of  some 
later  confusions,  it  gives  evidence  of  a  praiseworthy 

3i4 

THE  MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

terminological  consistency,  and  which  no  doubt 
in  time,  and  with  some  suggestive  encouragement, 
would  result  in  the  elaboration  of  a  very  complete 
language  —  perhaps  even  of  several  languages,  as 
we  may  augur  from  text  S3f  to  which  we  shall  re- 
turn in  the  following  chapter. 

5.  Style. — It  remains  to  investigate  the  style.  If 
it  is  true  that  ''  manners  make  the  man  " — that  is  to 
say,  not  the  impersonal  and  abstract  understanding, 
but  the  concrete  character,  the  individual  tempera- 
ment, the  humor  and  emotional  vibration — we  ought 
to  expect  to  find  in  the  style  of  the  Martian  texts  the 
same  special  stamp  which  distinguishes  the  visions, 
the  sound  of  the  language,  the  handwriting,  the  per- 
sonages— in  short,  the  entire  romance,  that  is  to  say, 
the  curious  mixture  of  Oriental  exoticism  and  of 
childish  puerility  of  which  the  secondary  person- 
ality of  Mile.  Smith,  at  work  in  this  cycle,  seems 
to  be  composed.  It  is  difficult  to  pronounce  upon 
these  matters  of  vague  aesthetic  impression  rather 
than  of  precise  observation  ;  but,  as  well  as  I  can 
judge,  there  seems  to  me  to  be  in  the  phraseology 
of  the  texts  collected  an  indefinable  something  which 
corresponds  well  with  the  general  character  of  the 
entire  dream.  As  these  words  are  evidently  first 
thought  in  French — then  travesties  in  Martian  by  a 
substitution  of  sounds,  the  choice  of  which,  as  has 
been  seen,  apropos  of  the  high  tonality  of  this  lan- 
guage, reflects  the  general  emotional  disposition — 
it  is,  naturally,  under  their  French  aspect  that  we 
ought  to  consider  them  in  judging  of  their  actual 
style.     Unfortunately^  we  do  not  know  how  far  the 

255 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

translation  given  by  Esenale  is  identical  with  the 
primitive  original  ;  certain  details  seem  to  hint  that 
there  are  divergences  sometimes.  However  that 
may  be,  it  is  clearly  to  be  perceived  that  the  literary 
form  of  the  majority  of  the  texts  (taken  in  French) 
is  more  akin  to  poetry  than  to  prose.  While  no  one 
of  them  is  in  verse,  properly  speaking,  the  large 
number  of  hemistiches  which  are  met  with,  the  fre- 
quency of  inversion,  the  choice  of  terms,  the  abun- 
dance of  exclamations  and  of  broken  phrases,  betray 
a  great  intensity  of  sentimental  and  poetic  emotion. 
The  same  character  is  found,  with  a  strong  shade 
of  exotic  and  archaic  originality,  in  the  formulas  of 
salutation  and  farewell  ("be  happy  to-day,"  ''three 
adieux  to  thee,"  etc.),  as  well  as  in  many  expressions 
and  terms  of  phrases  which  rather  recall  the  obscure 
and  metaphorical  parlance  of  the  Orient  than  the 
dry  precision  of  our  language  of  to-day  ("  il  garde 
un  peu  de  ton  etre;  cet  element  mysterieux,  immense" 
etc.) 

If,  now,  it  is  recollected  that  everywhere  in  literary 
history  poetry  precedes  prose,  imagination  comes  be- 
fore reason,  and  the  lyric  style  before  the  didactic,  a 
conclusion  according  with  that  of  the  preceding 
paragraphs  is  reached.  Which  is,  that,  by  its  figures 
and  its  style,  the  Martian  language  (or  the  French 
phrases  which  serve  it  for  a  skeleton)  seems  to  bring 
to  us  the  echo  of  a  past  age,  the  reflex  of  a  primitive 
state  of  mind,  from  which  Mile.  Smith  to-day  finds 
herself  very  far  removed  in  her  ordinary  and  normal 
states  of  mind. 

256 

THE   MARTIAN  CYCLE  AND  LANGUAGE 

IV.  Mlle.  Smith  and  the  Inventor  of  Mar- 
tian 

The  preceding  analysis  of  the  Martian  language 
furnishes  its  support  to  the  considerations  which  the 
content  of  the  romance  has  already  suggested  to  us 
in  regard  to  its  author  (p.  194).  To  imagine  that  by 
twisting  the  sounds  of  French  words  a  new  language 
capable  of  standing  examination  could  actually  be 
created,  and  to  wish  to  make  it  pass  for  that  of  the 
planet  Mars,  would  be  the  climax  of  silly  fatuity  or 
of  imbecility  were  it  not  simply  a  trait  of  naive  candor 
well  worthy  of  the  happy  age  of  childhood. 

The  whole  Martian  cycle  brings  us  into  the  pres- 
ence of  an  infantine  personality  exuberant  of  imagi- 
nation, sharing,  as  to  their  light,  color.  Oriental  exo- 
ticism, the  aesthetic  tendencies  of  the  actual  normal 
personality  of  Mlle.  Smith,  but  contrasting  with  it 
outside  its  puerile  character  in  two  points  to  be 
noted. 

First :  It  takes  a  special  pleasure  in  linguistic 
discussions  and  the  fabrication  of  unknown  idioms, 
while  Helene  has  neither  taste  nor  facility  for  the 
study  of  languages,  which  she  cordially  detests  and 
in  which  she  has  never  met  with  success. 

Secondly  :  Notwithstanding  this  aversion,  Helene 
possesses  a  certain  knowledge,  either  actual  or  poten- 
tial, of  German — in  which  her  parents  caused  her  to 
take  lessons  for  three  years — whereas  the  author  of 
Martian  evidently  knows  only  French.  It  is,  in  fact, 
difficult  to  believe  that,  if  that  author  had  only  a  very 

R  257 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

slight  knowledge  of  the  German  language  (so  dif- 
ferent from  the  French  by  the  construction  of  its 
sentences,  pronunciation,  its  three  genders,  etc.),  that 
some  reminiscences  of  it,  at  least,  would  not  have 
slipped  into  its  lucubrations.  I  infer  from  this  that 
the  Martian  secondary  personality  which  gives  evi- 
dence of  a  linguistic  activity  so  fecund,  but  so  com- 
pletely subject  to  the  structural  forms  of  the  mother- 
tongue,  represents  a  former  stage,  ulterior  to  the 
epoch  at  which  Helene  commenced  the  study  of 
German. 

If  one  reflects,  on  the  other  hand,  on  the  great  facil- 
ity which  Mile.  Smith's  father  seems  to  have  pos- 
sessed for  languages  (see  p.  17),  the  question  natu- 
rally arises  whether  in  the  Martian  we  are  not  in  the 
presence  of  an  awakening  and  momentary  display 
of  an  hereditary  faculty,  dormant  under  the  normal 
personality  of  Helene,  but  which  she  has  not  profited 
from  in  an  effective  manner.  It  is  a  fact  of  common 
observation  that  talents  and  aptitudes  often  skip  a 
generation  and  seem  to  pass  directly  from  the  grand- 
parents to  the  grandchildren,  forgetting  the  inter- 
mediate link.  Who  knows  whether  Mile.  Smith, 
some  day,  having  obtained  Leopold's  consent  to  her 
marriage,  may  not  cause  the  polygot  aptitudes  of  her 
father  to  bloom  again  with  greater  brilliancy,  for  the 
glory  of  science,  in  a  brilliant  line  of  philologists  and 
linguists  of  genius  ? 

Meanwhile,  and  without  even  invoking  a  special 
latent  talent  in  Helene's  case,  the  Martian  may  be 
attributed  to  a  survival  or  a  reawakening  under  the 
lash  of  mediumistic  hypnoses  of  that  general   func- 

258 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE   AND  LANGUAGE 

tion,  common  to  all  human  beings,  which  is  at  the 
root  of  language  and  manifests  itself  with  the  more 
spontaneity  and  vigor  as  we  mount  higher  towards 
the  birth  of  peoples  and  individuals. 

Ontogenesis,  say  the  biologists,  reproduces  in 
abridged  form  and  grosso-modo  phylogenesis ;  each 
being  passes  through  stages  analogous  to  those 
through  which  the  race  itself  passes  ;  and  it  is  known 
that  the  first  ages  of  ontogenic  evolution — the  em- 
bryonic period,  infancy,  early  youth — are  more  favor- 
able than  later  periods  and  adult  age  to  the  ephemeral 
reappearances  of  ancestral  tendencies,  which  would 
hardly  leave  any  trace  upon  a  being  who  had  already 
acquired  his  organic  development.  The  ''poet  who 
died  young  "  in  each  one  of  us  is  only  the  most  com- 
mon example  of  those  atavic  returns  of  tendencies 
and  of  emotions  which  accompanied  the  beginnings 
of  humanity,  and  remain  the  appanage  of  infant 
peoples,  and  which  cause  a  fount  of  variable  energy  in 
each  individual  in  the  spring-time  of  his  life,  to  con- 
geal or  disappear  sooner  or  later  with  the  majority  ; 
all  children  are  poets,  and  that  in  the  original,  the 
most  extended,  acceptation  of  the  term.  They  create, 
they  imagine,  they  construct — and  language  is  not 
the  least  of  their  creations. 

I  conclude  from  the  foregoing  that  the  very  fact  of 
the  reappearance  of  that  activity  in  the  Martian 
states  of  Helene  is  a  new  indication  of  the  infantile^ 
primitive  nature  left  behind  in  some  way  and  long 
since  passed  by  her  ordinary  personality,  of  the  sub- 
liminal strata  which  mediumistic  autohypnotiza- 
tion  with  her  puts  in  ebullition  and  causes  to  mount 

259 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

to  the  surface.  There  is  also  a  perfect  accord  be- 
tween the  puerile  character  of  the  Martian  romance, 
the  poetic  and  archaic  charms  of  its  style,  and  the 
audacious  and  naive  fabrication  of  its  unknown  lan- 
guage. 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE   MARTIAN   CYCLE  (concluded).— THE   ULTRA- 
MARTIAN 

A  LL  things  become  wearisome  at  last,  and  the 
/\  planet  Mars  is  no  exception  to  the  rule.  The 
^  ^  subliminal  imagination  of  Mile.  Smith,  how- 
ever, will  probably  never  tire  of  its  lofty  flights  in 
the  society  of  Astane,  Esenale,  and  their  associates. 
I  myself,  I  am  ashamed  to  acknowledge,  began,  in 
1898,  to  have  enough  of  the  Martian  romance. 

Once  having  satisfied  myself  as  to  the  essential 
nature  of  the  Martian  language,  I  did  not  desire  to 
make  a  profound  study  of  it,  and  since  the  texts  had 
made  their  appearance  so  slowly,  for  two  years,  as  to 
threaten  to  continue  during  the  remainder  of  my 
natural  existence,  as  well  as  that  of  the  medium, 
without  coming  to  an  end  ;  finding,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  the  texts,  considered  as  simple  psycho- 
logical curiosities,  varied  but  Uttle  and  were  at  length 
likely  to  become  burdensome,  I  decided  to  try  some 
experiment  which,  without  drying  up  their  source, 
might  at  least  break  through  this  monotony.  Up 
to  that  time,  without  giving  a  positive  opinion  as  to 
the  Martian,  I  had  always  manifested  a  very  real 
interest  in  these  communications,  as  well  as  in  Mile. 

261 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Smith  in  her  waking  state,  and  in  Leopold  in  his 
incarnations.  Both  of  these  showed  themselves 
fully  persuaded  of  the  objective  verity  of  this  lan- 
guage, and  of  the  visions  which  accompanied  it. 
Leopold  had  not  ceased,  from  the  first  daj^  to  affirm 
its  strictly  Martian  authenticit3^  Helene,  without 
maintaining  absolutely  that  it  came  from  Mars  rath- 
er than  from  any  other  planet,  shared  the  same 
faith  in  the  extra-terrestrial  origin  of  these  messages; 
and,  as  appeared  from  many  details  of  her  conver- 
sations and  conduct,  she  saw  in  it  a  revelation  of  the 
loftiest  import,  which  might  some  day  cause  ''  all 
the  discoveries  of  M.  Flammarion  "  to  sink  into  in- 
significance. What  would  happen  if  I  made  up  my 
mind  to  strike  this  strange  conviction  a  telling  blow, 
and  demonstrate  that  the  pretended  Martian  was  only 
a  chimera,  a  product,  pure  and  simple,  of  somnam- 
bulistic autosuggestion? 

My  first  tentative  experiment,  addressed  to  Leopold, 
had  no  appreciable  influence  on  the  course  of  the 
Martian  cycle.  It  was  at  the  seance  of  February  13, 
1898.  Helene  was  profoundly  asleep,  and  Leopold 
was  conversing  with  us  by  gestures  of  the  arm  and 
spelling  on  the  fingers.  I  categorically  informed  him 
of  my  certainty  that  the  Martian  was  of  terrestrial 
fabrication,  and  that  a  comparison  with  the  French 
proved  it  so  to  be.  As  Leopold  responded  by  em- 
phatic gestures  of  dissent,  I  detailed  to  him  some 
evidences,  among  others  the  accord  of  the  two  lan- 
guages as  to  their  pronunciation  of  ch,  as  to  the  ho- 
monym of  the  pronoun  and  article  le.  He  listened 
to  me,  and  seemed  to  understand    my  arguments, 

262 

MARTIAN   AND  ULTRA-MARTIAN 

but  he  refused  to  admit  the  force  of  these  character- 
istic coincidences,  and  said  :  ''  There  are  some  things 
more  extraordinary/'  and  was  unwilhng  to  give  up 
the  authenticity  of  the  Martian.  We  stood  by  our 
respective  opinions,  and  the  later  texts  do  not  show 
any  trace  of  our  interview.  It  seemed,  therefore, 
that  it  was  not  through  the  intervention  of  Leopold 
that  a  modification  of  the  Martian  romance  was  to 
be  suggested. 

I  allowed  some  months  to  pass,  then  tried  a  dis- 
cussion with  Helene  while  she  was  awake.  On  two 
occasions,  in  October,  1898,  I  expressed  to  her  my 
utter  skepticism  as  to  the  Martian.  The  first  time, 
on  the  6th  of  October,  in  a  visit  which  I  made  to  her 
outside  of  any  seance,  I  confined  myself  to  certain 
general  objections  to  it,  to  which  she  replied,  in  sub- 
stance, as  follows  :  First,  that  this  unknown  lan- 
guage, by  reason  of  its  intimate  union  with  the  vi- 
sions, and  in  spite  of  its  possible  resemblances  to  the 
French,  must  necessarily  be  Martian,  if  the  visions 
are.  Then  nothing  seriously  opposes  that  actual 
origin  of  the  visions,  and,  consequently,  of  the  lan- 
guage itself  ;  since  there  are  two  methods  of  explain- 
ing this  knowledge  of  a  far-off  world — namely,  com- 
munications properly  spiritistic  {i.  e.,  from  spirits  to 
spirits,  without  material  intermediary)  the  reality 
of  which  cannot  be  held  to  be  doubtful  ;  and  clair- 
voyance, that  faculty,  or  undeniable  sixth  sense,  of 
mediums  which  permits  them  both  to  see  and  hear 
at  any  distance.  Finally,  that  she  did  not  hold 
tenaciousl3^  to  the  distinctly  Martian  origin  of  that 
strange  dream,  provided  it  is  conceded  that  it  comes 

263 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

from  somewhere  outside  herself,  it  being  inadmis- 
sible to  regard  it  as  the  work  of  her  subconscious- 
ness, since  she  had  not,  during  her  ordinary  life, 
absolutely  any  perception  whatever,  any  sentiment, 
not  the  shadow  of  a  hint  of  that  alleged  interior 
work  of  elaboration  to  which  I  persisted  in  attribut- 
ing it  against  all  the  evidence  and  all  common-sense. 

Some  days  later  (October  1 6th),  as  Mile.  Smith, 
perfectly  awake  after  an  afternoon  seance,  passed 
the  evening  at  my  house,  and  seemed  to  be  in  the 
fulness  of  her  normal  state,  1  returned  to  the  charge 
with  more  of  insistence. 

1  had  until  then  always  avoided  showing  her  the 
full  translation  of  the  Martian  texts,  as  well  as  the 
alphabet,  and  she  only  knew  by  sight,  so  to  speak, 
the  Martian  handwriting,  and  was  ignorant  of  the 
value  of  the  letters. 

This  time  I  explained  to  her  in  detail  the  secrets  of 
the  language,  its  superficial  originalities  and  funda- 
mental resemblances  to  French ;  the  frequent  occur- 
rence of  i  and  e,  its  puerile  construction,  identical 
with  French,  even  to  the  slipping  in  of  a  super- 
fluous euphonic  m  between  the  words  bermier  and 
hed  in  order  to  imitate  the  expression  reviendra-t-il  ? 
its  numerous  caprices  of  phonetics  and  homonyms, 
evident  reflexes  of  those  to  which  we  are  accustomed, 
etc.  1  added  that  the  visions  seemed  to  me  to  be  also 
suspicious  through  their  improbable  analogies  with 
that  which  we  see  on  our  globe.  Supposing  that  the 
houses,  the  vegetation,  and  the  people  of  Mars  were 
constructed  on  the  same  fundamental  plan  as  those 
here  below,  it  was  nevertheless  very  doubtful  whether 

264 

MARTIAN  AND    ULTRA-MARTIAN 

they  had  the  same  proportions  and  typical  aspect ;  in 
short,  astronomy  teaches  us  that  on  Mars  the  physi- 
cal conditions — the  length  of  the  year,  the  intensity 
of  weight,  etc.- — are  all  other  than  with  us  :  the  last 
point,  in  particular,  should  act  on  all  the  products, 
natural  and  artificial,  in  such  a  way  as  to  alter 
greatly  the  dimensions  as  well  as  the  proportions  of 
height  and  size  which  are  familiar  to  us.  I  observed, 
again,  that  there  are  doubtless  on  Mars,  as  on  the 
earth,  a  great  variety  of  idioms,  and  the  singular 
chance  which  made  Esenale  speak  a  language  so 
similar  to  French  was  very  astonishing.  I  concluded, 
finally,  by  remarking  that  all  this  was  easily  ex- 
plicable, as  well  as  the  Oriental  aspect  of  the  Mar- 
tian landscapes  and  the  generally  infantile  char- 
acter of  that  romance,  if  it  were  regarded  as  a  work 
of  pure  imagination,  due  to  a  secondary  personality 
or  to  a  dream,  state  of  Mile.  Smith  herself,  who  recog- 
nized having  always  had  "  great  taste  for  that  which 
is  original  and  connected  with  the  Orient." 

For  more  than  an  hour  Helene  followed  my  de- 
monstration with  a  lively  interest.  But  to  each  new 
reason,  after  having  appeared  at  first  a  little  discon- 
certed by  it,  she  did  not  hesitate  to  repeat,  like  a  tri- 
umphal refrain  and  as  an  unanswerable  argument, 
that  science  is  not  infallible ;  that  no  scientist  has  yet 
been  on  Mars  ;  and  that  consequently  it  is  impossible 
to  affirm  with  any  certainty  that  affairs  there  are  not 
conformable  to  her  visions.  To  my  conclusion  she 
replied  that,  as  far  as  concerns  Mars  or  anything 
else,  her  revelations  did  not,  in  any  case,  spring  from 
sources  within  herself,  and  that  she  did  not  under- 

265 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

stand  why  I  was  so  implacable  against  that  which  is 
the  most  simple  supposition,  that  of  their  authen- 
ticity, or  why  I  should  prefer  to  it  this  silly  and  ab- 
surd hypothesis  of  an  underlying  self  plotting  in  her, 
unknown  to  her,  this  strange  mystification. 

Maintaining  all  the  while  that  my  deductions 
appeared  to  me  strictly  correct,  I  felt  bound  to  admit 
that  science  is  not  infallible,  and  that  a  voyage  to 
Mars  could  alone  solve  all  our  doubts  as  to  what  takes 
place  there.  We  parted  good  friends,  but  that  con- 
versation left  me  with  a  very  clear  impression  of  the 
complete  uselessness  of  my  efforts  to  make  Mile. 
Smith  share  my  conceptions  of  the  subliminal  con- 
sciousness. But  this,  however,  neither  surprises  nor 
grieves  me,  since  from  her  point  of  view  it  is  perhaps 
better  that  she  thus  believes. 

The  following  shows,  however,  that  my  reasonings 
on  that  evening,  sterile  in  appearance,  were  not  with- 
out effect.  If  they  have  not  modified  Mile.  Smith's 
conscious  manner  of  seeing,  and,  above  all,  the  opinion 
of  Leopold,  they  have  nevertheless  penetrated  to  the 
profound  strata  where  the  Martian  visions  are  elab- 
orated, and,  acting  there  as  a  leaven,  have  been  the 
source  of  new  and  unexpected  developments.  This 
result  brilliantly  corroborates  the  idea  that  the  whole 
Martian  cycle  is  only  a  product  of  suggCvStion  and 
autosuggestion.  Just  as  formerly  the  regret  of  M. 
Lemaitre  at  not  knowing  that  which  passes  on  other 
planets  had  furnished  the  first  germ  of  that  lucubra- 
tion, so  now  my  criticisms  and  remarks  on  the  lan- 
guage and  peoples  of  that  upper  world  served  as  a 
point  of  departure  for  new  circuits  of  Hel^ne's  sub- 

266 

MARTIAN  AND   ULrKA-ivmxvii^.N 

liminal  imagination.  If,  in  fact,  the  content  of  our 
discussion  of  the  i6th  of  October,  which  1  have  above 
briefly  summed  up,  is  compared  with  the  visions  of 
the  following  months  (see  beginning  with  text  30),  it 
is  clear  that  these  latter  contain  an  evident  begin- 
ning of  an  ansvv^er,  and  are  an  attempt  to  satisfy  the 
questions  which  I  raised.  A  very  curious  attempt 
is  there  made,  naive  and  infantine,  like  the  whole 
Martian  romance,  to  escape  the  defects  of  which  I 
complained  on  that  occasion,  not  by  modifying  and 
correcting  it — that  would  have  been  to  reverse  and  to 
contradict  herself — but  by  going  beyond  it  in  some 
sort,  and  by  superposing  upon  it  a  new  construction, 
an  ultra-Martian  cycle,  if  I  may  be  permitted  that 
expression,  hinting  at  the  same  time  that  it  unfolds 
itself  on  some  undetermined  planet  still  farther  away 
than  Mars,  and  that  it  does  not  constitute  an  abso- 
lutely independent  narrative,  but  that  it  is  grafted  on 
the  primitive  Martian  romance. 

The  suggestive  effect  of  my  objections  of  the  1 6th 
of  October  was  not  immediate,  but  became  a  work  of 
incubation.  Text  30,  coming  the  following  week, 
differed  but  slightly  from  the  preceding,  save  for  the 
absence  of  a  euphonic  letter,  which,  however,  had 
been  better  in  place  between  the  words  bin  die  ide, 
trouve-t-on,  than  in  the  berimir  m  hed  of  text  15,  to 
which  I  had  attracted  Helene's  attention  ;  possibly 
it  is  allowable  to  regard  this  little  detail  as  a  first 
result  of  my  criticisms.  The  apparition,  a  little 
later,  of  a  new  Martian  personage.  Ramie,  who 
promised  Helene  some  near  revelations  as  to  a 
planet  not  otherwise  specified  (text  31),  proves  that 

267 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  ultra-Martian  dream  was  in  process  of  subcon- 
scious ripening,  but  it  did  not  burst  forth  until  the 
2d  of  November  (seventeen  days  after  the  suggestion 
with  which  I  connect  it) ,  in  that  curious  scene  in  which 
Ramie  reveals  to  Mile.  Smith  an  unsuspected  and 
grotesque  world,  the  language  of  which  singularly 
differs  from  the  usual  Martian.  The  detailed  de- 
scription of  that  strange  vision,  which  Helene  sent 
me,  is  worth  the  trouble  of  citing  (see  also  texts  32 

to  35) : 

"  I  was  awakened,  and  arose  about  twenty  min- 
utes ago.  It  was  about  a  quarter-past  six  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  I  was  getting  ready  to  sew.  Then,  for  an 
instant,  I  noticed  that  my  lamp  was  going  out,  and 
I  ended  by  not  seeing  anything  more.  At  the  same 
moment  I  felt  my  waist  clasped,  strongly  held  by 
an  invisible  arm.  I  then  saw  myself  surrounded 
by  a  rose-colored  light,  which  generally  shows  itself 
when  a  Martian  vision  is  coming.  I  quickly  took 
paper  and  pencil,  which  are  always  within  reach  on 
my  toilet-table,  and  placed  these  two  things  on  my 
knees,  in  case  some  words  should  come  to  be  noted. 

''  Hardly  were  these  preparations  concluded  when 
I  saw  at  my  side  a  man  of  Martian  visage  and  cos- 
tume. It  was,  in  fact,  the  personage  [Ramie]  who 
had  clasped  my  waist  with  his  left  arm,  showing 
me  with  his  right  hand  a  tableau,  at  first  indistinct, 
but  which  finally  outlined  itself  quite  clearly.  He 
spoke  also  some  sentences,  which  I  can  note  very 
well,  it  seems  to  me  [text  2>^,  where  Ramie  attracts 
the  attention  of  Helene  to  one  of  the  worlds  which 
surround  him  and  makes  her  see  strange  beings.] 

268 

MARTIAN   AND  ULTRA-MARTIAN 

''I  saw  then  a  section  of  country  peopled  by  men 
altogether  different  from  those  which  inhabit  our 
globe.  The  tallest  of  all  were  three  feet  high,  and 
the  majority  were  an  inch  or  two  shorter.  Their 
hands  were  immense,  about  ten  inches  long  by  eight 
broad ;  they  were  ornamented  with  very  long  black 
nails.     Their  feet  also  were  of  great  size. 

"  I  did  not  see  any  tree,  any  bit  of  verdure.  I  saw 
a  medley  of  houses,  or  rather  cabins,  of  the  most 
simple  style,  all  low,  long, without  windows  or  doors  ; 
and  each  house  had  a  little  tunnel,  about  ten  feet 
long  [see  Fig.  ^s]  running  from  it  into  the  earth. 

Fig.  33.      Ultra -Martian    houses.      Drawn    by    Mile.    Smith   after   her   vision   of 
November  2,  1898. 

"  The  roofs  were  flat,  supplied  with  chimneys,  or 
tubes.  The  men,  with  arms  and  bodies  bare,  had 
for  all  clothing  only  a  sort  of  skirt  reaching  to  the 
waist  and  supported  by  a  kind  of  suspenders  thrown 
over  the  shoulders,  which  were  apparently  very 
strong.  Their  heads  were  very  short,  being  about 
three  inches  high  by  six  inches  broad,  and  were  close 
shaven.  They  had  very  small  eyes,  immense  mouths, 
noses  like  beans.  Everything  was  so  different  from 
what  we  are  accustomed  to  in  our  world  that  I  should 
have  almost  believed  it  to  be  an  animal  rather  than 
a  man  I  saw  there,  had  there  not  suddenly  issued 

269 

FROM  INDIA  TO  Txi^   . 

from  the  lips  of  one  of  them  some  words,  which, 
fortunately — I  hardly  know  how — I  was  able  to  note 
down.  This  vision  lasted  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Then 
I  found  my  waist  liberated,  but  my  right  hand  was 
still  firmly  held,  in  order  to  trace  strange  characters 
on  the  paper  "  (text  34,  adieux  of  Ramie  to  Helene). 

A  little  later  there  was  a  continuation,  or  an 
abortive  repetition,  of  the  same  vision  ;  the  table  did 
not  appear  distinctly,  and  Ramie  (text  35)  contented 
himself  with  teaching  Helene  things  concerning 
a  world  beyond,  a  near  neighbor  to  Mars,  and  a 
coarser  language,  of  which  Astane  alone  could  fur- 
nish a  translation.  This  is,  in  effect,  what  took 
place  two  weeks  later :  Astane  incarnated  himself 
with  gestures  and  peculiar  spasmodic  movements, 
and  repeated  (in  Helene's  ordinary  voice)  the  bar- 
baric text,  followed  word  by  word  by  its  Martian 
equivalents,  which  Esenale,  in  turn,  succeeding 
Astane,  interpreted  in  French,  in  his  customary 
manner.  Leopold  also  informed  us,  in  reply  to  a 
question  of  one  of  the  sitters,  that  this  uncouth  and 
primitive  world  was  one  of  the  smaller  planets  ;  but 
it  is  to  be  presumed  that  he  would  also  have  answered 
in  the  affirmative  if  he  had  been  asked  if  it  were  called 
Phobos  or  Deimos ;  and,  in  short,  one  of  the  satel- 
lites of  Mars  would  answer  better  than  the  asteroids 
to  the  globe  "very  near  to  ours,"  of  which  Ramie 
spoke. 

Up  to  this  point  the  ultra-Martian  messages  were 
confined  to  the  preceding.  The  last  texts  obtained 
(37  to  40)  seem  to  announce  that  the  end  has  not  been 
reached  on  that  side,  and  cause  us  to  hope  for  new 

270 

MARTIAN   AND    ULTRA-MARTIAN 

revelations,  when  the  astronomer  Ramie,  as  the  re- 
sult of  his  having  studied  under  the  skilful  direction 
of  his  master  Astane,  shall  be  in  a  position  to  make 
further  discoveries  in  the  Martian  sky.  Psycho- 
logically speaking,  this  amounts  to  saying  that  the 
process  of  latent  incubation  continues ;  a  new  ultra- 
Martian  language  is  in  a  state  of  development  in 
the  subliminal  depths.  If  it  bursts  forth  some  day, 
I  shall  hasten  to  bring  it  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
scientific  world  —  in  another  edition  of  this  book. 
For  the  present  I  limit  myself  to  remarking  how 
much  the  little  ultra-Martian  we  possess  already  in- 
dicates the  wish  to  answer  my  questions  of  the  1 6th 
of  October. 

I  had  accused  the  Martian  dream  of  being  a  mere 
imitation,  varnished  with  brilliant  Oriental  colors, 
of  the  civilized  environment  which  surrounds  us — 
and  here  is  a  world  of  terrifying  grotesqueness,  with 
black  soil,  from  which  all  vegetation  is  banished,  and 
the  coarser  people  of  which  are  more  like  beasts 
than  human  beings.  I  had  insinuated  that  the  peo- 
ple and  things  of  that  upper  world  ought  really  to 
have  other  dimensions  and  proportions  than  with 
us — and  here  are  the  inhabitants  of  that  farther 
world  veritable  dwarfs,  with  heads  twice  as  broad 
as  they  are  high,  and  houses  to  match.  I  had 
made  allusion  to  the  probable  existence  of  other  lan- 
guages, referred  to  the  superabundance  in  Martian 
of  i  and  e,  impeached  its  syntax  and  its  ch,  borrowed 
from  the  French,  etc. — and  here  is  a  language  abso- 
lutely new,  of  a  very  peculiar  rhythm,  extremely 
rich  in  a,  without  any  ch  at  all  up  to  the  present  mo- 

271 

FROM  INDIA  TO   THE  PLANET  MARS 

ment,  and  of  which  the  construction  is  so  different 
from  the  French  that  there  is  no  method  of  discov- 
ering it. 

This  latter  point,  above  all,  seems  to  me  to  present 
in  its  apogee  the  character  of  childishness  and  puer- 
ility which  clearly  shows  itself  in  that  unexpected 
appendix  to  the  Martian  cycle,  as  in  the  entire  cycle 
itself.  Evidently  the  naive  subliminal  philologist  of 
Mile.  Smith  has  been  struck  by  my  criticisms  on 
the  identical  order  of  the  words  in  Martian  and  in 
French,  and  has  endeavored  to  avoid  that  defect  in 
her  new  effort  at  an  unknown  language. 

But  not  knowing  in  just  what  syntax  and  con- 
struction consist,  she  has  found  nothing  better  to 
suit  her  purpose  than  the  substitution  of  chaos  for 
the  natural  arrangement  of  the  terms  in  her  thought, 
and  the  fabrication  of  an  idiom  which  had  decidedly 
nothing  in  common  with  the  French  in  this  respect. 
Here  is  where  the  most  beautiful  disorder  is  prac- 
tically a  work  of  art.  It  has,  moreover,  succeeded, 
since,  even  with  the  double  translation,  Martian  and 
French,  of  text  S3f  it  is  impossible  to  know  exactly 
what  IS  meant. 

It  is  possibly  the  little  girl  Etip  who  is  sad,  and 
who  weeps  because  the  man  Top  has  done  harm 
to  the  sacred  animal  Vanem  (which  had  hidden, 
sick,  under  some  green  branches) ,  wishing  to  enter  in 
to  a  blue  basket.  At  least  it  could  not  have  been  the 
branch,  the  man,  or  the  basket  which  was  sacred, 
the  child  sick,  etc. 

The  green  branch  is  out  of  harmony  with  a  world 
in  which,  according  to  Helene's  vision,  there  were 

272 

MARTIAN   AND   ULTRA-MARTIAN 

neither  trees  nor  verdure ;  but  Esenale  has  not  speci- 
fied whether  it  means  vert  or  ver,  vers,  etc.,  nor  wheth- 
er cache  and  entre  are  participles  or  infinitives.  I 
leave  this  rebus  to  the  reader  and  come  to  my  con- 
clusion, which  will  be  brief,  since  it  accords  with 
the  considerations  already  given  at  the  end  of  the 
two  preceding  chapters. 

The  whole  Martian  cycle,  with  its  special  language 
and  its  ultra-Martian  appendix,  is  only,  at  bottom, 
a  vast  product  of  occasional  suggestions  on  the  part 
of  the  environment,  and  of  autosuggestions  which 
have  germinated,  sprouted,  and  borne  abundant 
fruit,  under  the  influence  of  incitement  from  the  out- 
side, but  without  coming  to  amount  to  anything  but 
a  shapeless  and  confused  mass,  which  imposes  on 
one  by  its  extent  much  more  than  its  intrinsic  worth, 
since  it  is  supremely  childish,  puerile,  insignificant 
in  all  aspects,  save  as  a  ps3^chological  curiosity. 
The  author  of  this  lucubration  is  not  the  real  adult 
and  normal  personality  of  Mile.  Smith,  who  has  very 
different  characteristics,  and  who  feels  herself,  in 
the  face  of  these  automatic  messages,  as  though  in 
the  presence  of  something  foreign,  independent, 
exterior,  and  finds  herself  constrained  to  believe 
in  their  objective  reality  and  in  their  authenticity. 
It  seems,  indeed,  rather  a  former,  infantine,  less 
evolved  state  of  Helene's  individuality,  which  has 
again  come  to  light,  renewed  its  life,  and  once 
more  become  active  in  her  Martian  somnambulisms. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add,  in  conclusion,  that 
the  whole  spiritistic  or  occult  hypothesis  seems  to 
to  me  to  be  absolutely  superfluous  and  unjustified  in 
s  273 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  case  of  the  Martian  of  Mile.  Smith.  Autosug- 
gestibility  set  in  motion  by  certain  stimulating  influ- 
ences of  the  environment,  as  we  come  to  see  through 
the  history  of  the  ultra-Martian,  amply  suffices  to 
account  for  this  entire  cycle. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

THE    HINDOO    CYCLE 

WHILE  the  Martian  romance  is  purely  a 
work  of  fantasy,  in  which  the  creative 
imagination  was  able  to  allow  itself  free 
play  through  having  no  investigation  to  fear,  the 
Hindoo  cycle,  and  that  of  Marie  Antoinette,  having 
a  fixed  terrestrial  setting,  represent  a  labor  of  con- 
struction which  was  subjected  from  the  start  to  very 
complex  conditions  of  environments  and  epochs. 
To  keep  within  the  bounds  of  probability,  not  to  be 
guilty  of  too  many  anachronisms,  to  satisfy  the  mul- 
tiple demands  of  both  logic  and  eesthetics,  formed 
a  particularly  dangerous  undertaking,  and  one  ap- 
parently altogether  beyond  the  powers  of  a  person 
without  special  instruction  in  such  matters.  The 
subconscious  genius  of  Mile.  Smith  has  acquitted 
itself  of  the  task  in  a  remarkable  manner,  and  has 
displayed  in  it  a  truly  wonderful  and  delicate  sense 
of  historic  possibilities  and  of  local  color. 

The  Hindoo  romance,  in  particular,  remains  for 
those  who  have  taken  part  in  it  a  psychological  enig- 
ma, not  yet  solved  in  a  satisfactory  manner,  because 
it  reveals  and  implies  in  regard  to  Helene,  a  knowl- 
edge relative  to  the  costumes  and  languages  of  the 

275 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Orient,  the  actual  source  of  which  it  has  up  to  the 
present  time  not  been  possible  to  discover.  All  the 
witnesses  of  Mile.  Smith's  Hindoo  somnambulisms 
who  are  of  the  same  opinion  on  that  Subject  (several 
refrain  from  having  any)  unite  in  seeing  in  it  a  curi- 
ous phenomenon  of  cryptomnesia,  of  reappearances 
of  memories  profoundly  buried  beneath  the  normal 
waking  state,  together  with  an  indeterminate  amount 
of  imaginative  exaggeration  upon  the  canvas  of  act- 
ual facts.  But  by  this  name  of  cryptomnesia,  or  res- 
urrection of  latent  memories,  two  singularly  different 
things  are  understood.  For  me  it  is  only  a  question 
of  memories  of  her  present  life ;  and  I  see  nothing  of 
the  supernormal  in  that.  For  while  I  have  not  yet 
succeeded  in  finding  the  key  to  the  enigma,  I  do  not 
doubt  its  existence,  and  I  will  mention  later  certain 
indications  which  seem  to  me  to  support  my  idea 
that  the  Asiatic  notions  of  Mile.  Smith  have  a  wholly 
natural  origin. 

For  the  observer  inclined  towards  spiritism,  on  the 
contrary,  the  sleeping  memory  which  is  awakened 
in  somnambulism  is  nothing  less  than  that  of  a  pre- 
vious existence  of  Mile.  Smith,  and  that  piquant  ex- 
planation, which  was  first  given  by  Leopold,  profits 
in  their  eyes  from  the  impossibility  which  I  find  in 
proving  that  it  is  anything  else. 

Doubtless,  if  one  was  familiar  with  all  the  incidents 
of  lielene's  life  from  her  earliest  childhood,  and  if  it 
were  absolutely  certain  that  her  knowledge  of  India 
had  not  been  furnished  her  from  the  outside,  through 
the  normal  channel  of  the  organs  of  sense,  it  would 
be  necessary  to  seek  elsewhere  for  the  solution  of  the 

276 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

riddle,  and  to  choose  between  the  hypothesis  of  an 
atavic  memory,  hereditarily  transmitted  across  fif- 
teen generations,  and  actual  telepathic  communica- 
tion with  the  brain  of  some  Indian  savant,  or  a  spirit- 
istic reincarnation.  But  we  do  not  find  ourselves 
in  that  position.  There  is  nothing  less  known,  in  its 
details,  than  the  daily  life  of  Mile.  Smith  in  her  child- 
hood and  youth.  But,  when  all  the  feats  of  which 
the  subconscious  memory  of  our  present  life  is  capable 
are  considered,  it  is  not  scientifically  correct  to  have 
recourse  to  a  pretended  ''  anteriority,"  of  which  the 
only  guarantee  is  the  authority  of  Leopold,  in  order 
to  explain  the  somnambulistic  apparitions  of  facts 
of  which  Mile.  Smith  in  her  waking  state  has  no  re- 
membrance, I  admit,  but  the  origin  of  which  may 
well  have  been  hidden  in  the  unknown  recesses  of 
her  past  life  (reading,  conversation,  etc.). 

The  plot  of  the  Hindoo  romance,  which  I  have  al- 
ready briefly  hinted  at  on  divers  occasions,  is  as 
follows  : 

Helene  Smith  was,  at  the  end  of  the  fourteenth  cen- 
tury of  our  era,  the  daughter  of  an  Arab  sheik,  pos- 
sibly named  Pirux,  whom  she  left  in  order  to  become, 
under  the  name  of  Simandini,  the  eleventh  wife 
of  Prince  Sivrouka  Nayaka,  of  whom  I  have  the 
honor  to  be  the  actual  reincarnation.  (I  pray  the 
reader  once  for  all  to  pardon  me  the  immodest  role 
which  has  been  imposed  upon  me  in  this  affair 
against  my  will.) 

This  Sivrouka,  w^ho  reigned  over  Kanara,  and  built 
there,  in  1401,  the  fortress  of  Tchandraguiri,  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  a  very  accommodating  person  ; 

277 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

although  not  bad  at  heart,  and  quite  attached  to  his 
favorite  wife,  he  had  a  wild  humor  and  very  uncouth 
manners.  More  could  not  be  expected  of  an  Asi- 
atic potentate  of  that  epoch.  Simandini,  neverthe- 
less, passionately  loved  him,  and  at  his  death  she 
was  burned  alive  on  his  grave,  after  the  fashion  of 
Malabar. 

Around  these  two  principal  personages  are  grouped 
some  secondary  figures,  among  others  a  faithful 
domestic  named  Adel,  and  a  little  monkey,  Mitidja, 
which  Simandini  had  brought  to  India  with  her  from 
Arabia  ;  then  the  fakir  Kanga,  who  occupies  a  much 
more  important  place  in  the  Martian  romance,  in 
which  we  have  seen  him  reincarnated  as  Astane, 
than  in  the  Hindoo  cycle. 

Some  other  individuals,  all  masculine — Mougia, 
Miousa,  Kangia,  Kana — appear  in  obscure  roles, 
concerning  which  nothing  certain  can  be  said. 

The  hypnoid  states,  in  which  this  romance  has 
manifested  itself  with  Helene,  present  the  greatest 
variety  and  all  degrees,  from  the  perfect  waking 
state  (apparently),  momentarily  crossed  by  some 
visual  or  auditive  hallucination,  the  memory  of  which 
is  preserved  intact  and  allows  a  detailed  description, 
up  to  total  somnambulism,  with  amnesia  upon  awak- 
ening, in  which  the  most  striking  scenes  of  ecstasies 
or  incarnations  are  unfolded.  We  shall  see  divers 
examples  in  the  following  pages. 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

I.  Apparition  and  Development  of  the 
Oriental  Cycle 

Without  recurring  to  the  strange  and  httle-known 
visions  which  aheady  haunted  the  childhood  and 
youth  of  Mile.  Smith  (see  pp.  20-25),  I  will  retrace  the 
principal  stages  of  her  Asiatic  romance  from  the 
birth  of  her  mediumship. 

During  the  three  first  years  there  were  but  few 
manifestations  of  this  sort,  in  the  seances,  at  least, 
while  as  to  the  automatisms  which  developed  at 
other  times,  especially  at  night,  or  in  the  hypna- 
gogic state,  we  know  nothing. 

In  November,  1892,  two  seances  of  the  N.  group 
are  occupied  with  the  apparition  of  a  Chinese  city — 
Pekin,  according  to  the  table — in  which  a  disincar- 
nate  spirit,  a  parent  of  one  of  the  group,  is  found 
performing  a  mission  to  a  sick  child. 

In  her  seances  of  1894,  Helene  had  on  several  oc- 
casions detached  visions  belonging  to  the  Orient, 
as  appeared  from  their  content,  or  hints  dictated  by 
the  table.  She  also  saw  Teheran ;  then  the  cemetery 
of  the  missions  at  Tokat  (June  12th);  a  cavaher  with 
a  white  woollen  cloak  and  a  turban  bearing  the 
name  of  Abderrhaman  (September  2d) ;  and,  finally^ 
an  Oriental  landscape,  which  depicted  a  ceremony  of 
Buddhist  aspect  (October  i6th).  This  latter  vision, 
more  especially,  seemed  to  be  a  forerunner  of  the 
Hindoo  romance,  since  the  records  of  the  seances 
of  that  period  show  an  ensemble  of  characteristic 
traits  which  will  be  again  met  with  in  the  later  Hin- 

279 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

doo  scenes — e.g.,  an  immense  garden  of  exotic  plants, 
colonnades,  rows  of  palm-trees,  with  enormous  stone 
lions  at  the  head  ;  rugs  of  magnificent  design,  a 
temple  surrounded  by  trees,  with  a  statue,  apparent- 
ly that  of  Buddha ;  a  procession  of  twelve  women 
in  white,  who  kneel,  holding  lighted  lamps  ;  in  the 
centre  another  woman,  with  very  black  hair,  detaches 
herself  from  the  procession,  balances  a  lamp,  and 
burns  a  powder  which  expands  into  a  white  stone 
(the  continuation  of  the  romance  shows  this  woman 
to  be  Simandini,  of  whom  this  was  the  first  appear- 
ance) . 

February  17,  1895. — At  the  end  of  a  rather  long 
seance,  the  table  dictates  Pirux  sheik,  and  replies  to 
our  questions  that  it  refers  to  an  Arab  sheik  of  the 
fifteenth  century.  At  this  moment  Helene  awakes, 
saying  that  she  had  seen  a  man  with  a  black  mustache 
and  curly  hair,  wearing  a  cloak  and  a  turban,  who 
seemed  to  be  laughing  at  and  mocking  her.  The 
spelling  out  of  Pirux  was  not  very  clear,  and  Leopold, 
w^hen  interrogated  later,  neither  af&rmed  categori- 
cally, nor  did  he  deny,  that  this  name  was  that  of 
the  sheik,  father  of  Simandini. 

March  3. — Seance  with  six  persons  present,  all 
having  their  hands  upon  the  table.  After  a  brief 
waiting,  Helene  is  surprised  at  no  longer  being  able 
to  see  my  left  middle  finger,  while  she  can  see  all  my 
other  fingers  quite  clearly.  My  bunch  of  keys, 
which  I  then  place  upon  my  middle  finger,  likewise 
disappears  from  her  view.  This  very  limited,  sys- 
tematic, visual  anaesthesia  authorizes  the  predic- 
tion, following  numerous  examples  of  former  seances, 

389 

THE    HINDOO   CYCLE 

that  the  phenomena  about  to  appear  will  concern 
me.  Presentlj^  begins  a  long  vision,  consisting  of 
scenes  which  Helene  believes  she  has  already  partial- 
ly seen  before. 

She  describes  a  pagoda,  which  she  draws  with  her 
left  hand,  with  a  few  strokes  of  her  pencil;  then  an 
avenue  of  palms  and  statues,  a  procession,  and  cere- 
monies before  an  altar,  etc. 

The  principal  roles  are  played  by  a  personage  in 
sandals,  a  great  yellow  robe,  a  helmet  of  gold,  orna- 
mented with  precious  stones  (first  appearance  of 
Sivrouka)  and  by  the  woman  with  black  hair  and 
white  robe,  already  seen  on  the  12th  of  October  (Si- 
mandini) . 

In  the  first  part  of  the  vision,  Helene,  who  follows 
that  woman  with  ecstatic  gaze,  describing  her  to  us^ 
sees  her  coming  towards  me,  but  .at  that  moment 
the  invisibility  of  my  finger  was  extended  to  my 
entire  person,  and  Helene  neither  sees  nor  hears  me. 
While  she  was  fully  conscious  of  the  other  sitters, 
she  was  astonished  at  seeing  this  woman  make  ''on 
the  empty  air  "  certain  gestures  of  laying- on  of  hands 
and  benediction,  which  were  made  upon  my  head- 
On  several  occasions  I  change  my  place,  and  seat 
myself  in  different  parts  of  the  room.  Each  time, 
after  a  few  seconds,  Helene  turns  towards  me,  and, 
without  perceiving  me,  sees  the  woman  with  black 
hair  place  herself  behind  my  seat  and  repeat  her 
gestures  of  benediction  in  space,  at  a  height  corre- 
sponding to  that  of  my  head. 

As  the  vision  continues,  I  do  not  play  any  further 
role,  but  it  has  to  do  with  a  ceremony  during  which 

2aj 

FROM  INDIA  TO   THE  PLANET  MARS 

the  Hindoo  woman  with  a  diadem  on  her  head  burns 
incense  in  the  midst  of  her  twelve  companions,  etc. 

During  all  this  time  the  table,  contrary  to  its  cus- 
tom, gave  no  explanation;  but  Helene,  having  her- 
self asked  some  questions,  remarks  that  the  imagi- 
nary woman  replies  to  her  by  certain  signs  of  her 
head  and  reveals  to  her  many  things  that  she  had 
known  in  a  former  existence.  At  the  moment  of  the 
disappearance  of  the  vision,  which  had  lasted  more 
than  an  hour.  Mile.  Smith  hears  the  words  {"  Until 
presently  ") .  The  continuation,  in  fact,  was  not  long 
delayed. 

March  6. — Repetition  and  continuation  of  the  pre- 
ceding seance,  with  this  degree  of  progress — viz.,  that 
the  visual  hallucination  of  the  woman  with  the  black 
hair  was  changed  into  a  total  coensesthetic  halluci- 
nation— i.  e.,  instead  of  a  simple  vision  an  incarna- 
tion was  produced.  After  a  very  impressive  scene  of 
benediction,  Helene  gave  herself  up  to  a  succession 
of  pantomimes  in  which  she  seemed  to  take  part  in 
a  fearful  spectacle  and  to  struggle  with  enemies 
(scene  of  the  funeral  pile).  She  ended  by  seating 
herself  on  the  divan  when  she  recovered  her  normal 
state,  after  a  series  of  psychical  oscillations,  various 
attitudes,  etc.  The  last  of  her  phases  of  mimicry 
was  to  tear  off  and  throw  away  all  the  ornaments 
which  an  Asiatic  princess  could  wear — rings  on  all 
her  fingers,  bracelets  on  her  arms  and  wrists,  a  neck- 
lace, diadem,  ear-rings,  girdle,  anklets.  Once  awake, 
she  had  no  recollection  of  the  scene  of  benediction, 
but  recalled  quite  distinctly  the  dreams  corresponding 
to  the  other  pantomimes.     She  saw  again  the  black- 

282 

THE  HINDOO   CYCLE  . 

haired  woman,  the  Oriental  landscape  of  the  preced- 
ing seance,  etc.  In  the  course  of  her  description  the 
passage  of  the  simple  vision  into  the  scene  of  incarna- 
tion was  reflected  in  a  change  of  the  form  of  her  narra- 
tive ;  she  spoke  to  us  of  the  woman  in  the  third  person, 
then  suddenly  adopted  the  first  person,  and  said  "I" 
in  recounting  among  other  things  that  she — or  the 
black-haired  woman — saw  a  corpse  on  the  funeral 
pile,  upon  which  four  men,  against  whom  she  strug- 
gled, endeavored  to  force  her  to  mount.  When  I 
drew  her  attention  to  this  change  of  style,  she  re- 
plied that,  in  fact,  it  seemed  as  though  she  herself 
was  that  woman. 

Independently  of  the  Hindoo  romance,  these  two 
seances  are  interesting  from  a  psychological  point  of 
view,  because  the  change  from  a  visual,  objective  hal- 
lucination into  total  coensesthetic  and  motor  halluci- 
nation occurs  in  it,  constituting  a  complete  trans- 
formation of  the  personality.  This  generalization 
of  partial  automatism  at  the  beginning,  this  subju- 
gation and  absorption  of  the  ordinary  personality 
by  the  subliminal  personality,  does  not  always  pro- 
duce amnesia  with  Helene,  that  unique  impression 
which  she  might  describe  on  awakening  as  being 
herself  and  some  one  else  at  the  same  time.  (Com- 
pare, p.  119.)  It  must  be  noted  that  in  the  partic- 
ular case  of  the  identification  of  the  black-haired 
Hindoo  woman  with  Mile.  Helene  Smith  of  Geneva, 
the  problem  of  the  causal  connection  is  susceptible  of 
two  opposite  solutions  (and  the  same  remark  will  be 
equally  appropriate  in  the  case  of  Marie  Antoinette) . 

For  the  believing  spiritist  it  is  because  Mile.  Smith 
283 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

is  the  reincarnation  of  Simandini — that  is  to  say, 
because  these  two  personages,  in  spite  of  the  separa- 
tion of  their  existences  in  time  and  space,  are  sub- 
stantiaUy  and  metaphysically  identical  —  that  she 
really  again  becomes  Simandini,  and  feels  herself  to 
be  a  Hindoo  princess  in  certain  favorable  somnam- 
bulistic states.  For  the  empirical  psychologist  it  is, 
on  the  contrary,  because  the  visual  memory  of  a 
Hindoo  woman  (her  origin  is  of  no  importance)  grows 
like  a  parasite  and  increases  in  surface  and  in  depth 
like  a  drop  of  oil,  until  it  invades  the  whole  impres- 
sionable and  suggestible  personality  of  the  medium 
— this  is  why  Mile.  Smith  feels  herself  becoming  this 
woman,  and  concludes  from  it  that  she  formerly 
actually  was  that  person  (see  p.  28—30).  But  we 
must  return  from  this  digression  to  the  Hindoo 
dream. 

March  10. — After  various  waking  visions  relating 
to  other  subjects,  Helene  enters  into  somnambulism. 
For  twenty  minutes  she  remains  seated  with  her 
hands  on  the  table,  by  means  of  raps  struck  upon 
which  Leopold  informs  us  that  a  scene  of  previous 
existence  concerning  me  is  being  prepared  ;  that  I 
was  formerly  a  Hindoo  prince,  and  that  Mile.  Smith, 
long  before  her  existence  as  Marie  Antoinette,  had 
then  been  my  wife,  and  had  been  burned  on  my 
tomb  ;  that  we  should  ultimately  know  the  name 
of  this  Hindoo  prince,  as  well  as  the  time  and  place 
of  these  events,  but  not  this  evening,  nor  at  the  next 
seance.  Then  Helene  leaves  the  table,  and  in  a  silent 
pantomime  of  an  hour's  duration,  the  meaning  of 
which,  already  quite  clear,  is  confirmed  by  Leopold, 

284 

THE   HINDOO  CYCLE 

she  plays,  this  time  to  the  very  close,  the  scene  of 
the  funeral  pile  as  outlined  in  the  preceding  se- 
ance. 

She  goes  slowly  around  the  room,  as  if  resisting 
and  carried  away  in  spite  of  herself,  by  turns  sup- 
plicating and  struggling  fiercely  with  these  fictitious 
men  who  are  bearing  her  to  her  death. 

All  at  once,  standing  on  tiptoe,  she  seems  to  as- 
cend the  pile,  hides,  with  affright,  her  face  in  her 
hands,  recoils  in  terror,  then  advances  anew  as  though 
pushed  from  behind.  Finally  she  falls  on  her  knees 
before  a  soft  couch,  in  which  she  buries  her  face  cov- 
ered by  her  clasped  hands.  She  sobs  violently.  By 
means  of  her  little  finger,  visible  between  her  cheek 
and  the  cushion  of  the  couch,  Leopold  continues  to 
reply  very  clearly  by  yes  and  no  to  my  questions. 
It  is  the  moment  at  which  she  again  passes  through 
her  agony  on  the  funeral  pile  :  her  cries  cease  little 
by  little;  her  respiration  becomes  more  and  more 
panting,  then  suddenly  stops  and  remains  suspended 
during  some  seconds  which  seem  interminable.  It 
is  the  end  !  Her  pulse  is  fortunately  strong,  though 
a  little  irregular.  While  I  am  feeling  it,  her  breath- 
ing is  re-established  by  means  of  a  deep  inspiration. 
After  repeated  sobs  she  becomes  calm,  and  slowly 
rises  and  seats  herself  on  a  neighboring  sofa.  This 
scene  of  fatal  denouement  lasted  eight  minutes.  She 
finally  awakens,  remembering  to  have  seen  in  a  dream 
the  dead  body  of  a  man  stretched  on  a  funeral  pile, 
and  a  woman  whom  some  men  were  forcing  to  as- 
cend the  pile  against  her  will. 

There  was  nothing  Oriental  in  the  succeeding  se- 
285 

~   FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

ances,  and  the  Hindoo  dream  did  not  appear  again 
until  four  weeks  later. 

April  7. — Mile.  Smith  went  quickly  into  a  mixed 
state,  in  which  the  Hindoo  dream  was  mingled  and 
substituted,  but  only  so  far  as  concerns  me,  for  the 
feeling  of  present  reality.  She  believes  me  absent, 
asks  other  sitters  why  I  have  gone  away,  then  rises 
and  begins  to  walk  around  me  and  look  at  me,  very 
much  surprised  at  seeing  my  place  occupied  by  a 
stranger  with  black  curly  hair  and  of  brown  com- 
plexion, clothed  in  a  robe  with  flowing  sleeves  of 
blue,  and  with  gold  ornaments.  When  I  speak  to 
her  she  turns  around  and  seems  to  hear  my  voice 
from  the  opposite  side,  whither  she  goes  to  look  for 
me  ;  when  I  go  towards  her  she  shuns  me ;  then, 
when  I  follow  her,  she  returns  to  the  place  I  had  just 
left.  After  some  time  occupied  in  these  manoeuvres 
she  ceases  to  be  preoccupied  with  me  and  my  sub- 
stitute in  the  blue  robe,  and  falls  into  a  deeper  state. 
She  takes  on  the  look  of  a  seeress,  and  describes  a 
kind  of  embattled  chateau  on  a  hill,  where  she  per- 
ceives and  recognizes  the  before-mentioned  person- 
age with  the  curly  hair,  but  in  another  costume  and 
surrounded  by  very  ugly  black  men,  and  women 
"  who  are  good  looking." 

Interrogated  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  vision,  Leo- 
pold replies :  "  The  city  of  Tchandraguiri  in  Kana- 
raau  "  {sic) ;  then  he  adds,  a  moment  later,  ''  There  is 
a  letter  too  many  in  the  last  word,"  and  ends  by  giving 
the  name  Kanara,  and  adding  the  explanation  "of 
the  fifteenth  century."  Upon  awaking  from  this  som- 
nambulistic state,  which  lasted  two  hours,  Helene  re- 

286 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

calls  having  had  a  dream  of  a  personage  with  curly 
hair,  in  a  blue  robe,  richly  ornamented  with  precious 
stones,  with  a  cutlass  of  gold,  bent  backward,  sus- 
pended from  a  hook.  She  recollects  having  held 
a  long  conversation  with  him  in  a  strange  language 
which  she  understood  and  spoke  very  well  herself, 
although  she  no  longer  knows  the  meaning  of  it. 

April  14. — Very  soon  passing  into  a  deep  sleep. 
Mile.  Smith  leaves  the  table  and  gives  herself  up  to 
a  silent  pantomime,  at  first  smiling,  then  finishing 
in  sadness  and  by  a  scene  of  tears. 

The  meaning  of  this  is  explained  by  Leopold  as 
follows  :  Helene  is  in  India,  in  her  palace  of  Tchan- 
draguiri,  in  Kanara,  in  1401,  and  she  receives  a 
declaration  of  love  from  the  personage  with  the  curly 
hair,  who  is  the  Prince  Sivrouka  Nayaka,  to  whom 
she  has  been  married  for  about  a  year.  The  prince 
has  flung  himself  upon  his  knees,  but  he  inspires 
in  her  a  certain  fright,  and  she  still  regrets  having 
left  her  native  country  in  order  to  follow  him.  Leo- 
pold affirms  that  she  will  remember,  on  awaking^ 
in  French,  all  that  the  prince  has  said  to  her  in  San- 
scrit, and  that  she  will  repeat  to  us  a  part  of  it,  but 
not  all,  because  it  is  too  private.  After  awaking 
she  seems  in  reality  to  recall  clearly  her  entire 
dream,  and  tells  us  that  she  found  herself  on  a  hill, 
where  they  were  building ;  that  it  was  not  exactly  a 
city,  nor  even  a  village,  since  there  were  no  streets ; 
that  it  was  rather  an  isolated  place  in  the  country, 
aib-d  that  which  was  being  built  was  not  in  the  form 
of  a  house;  it  had  holes  rather  than  windows  (a 
fortress  and  loop-holes). 

287 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

She  found  herself  in  a  fine  palace,  very  beautiful 
as  to  its  interior,  but  not  its  exterior.  There  was 
a  great  hall,  decorated  with  greens,  with  a  grand 
staircase  at  the  end,  flanked  by  statues  of  gold. 
She  held  a  long  conversation  there,  not  in  French, 
with  the  swarthy  personage  with  the  black  curly 
hair  and  magnificent  costume  ;  he  finally  ascended 
the  staircase,  but  she  did  not  follow  him. 

She  appeared  to  recall  well  the  meaning  of  all  that 
he  said  to  her  in  their  conversation  in  a  foreign  lan- 
guage, but  seemed  embarrassed  by  these  memories, 
and  would  not  consent  to  relate  them  to  us. 

May  26. — In  the  course  of  this  seance,  as  Helene, 
in  a  silent  somnambulism,  incarnates  the  Hindoo 
princess,  I  hand  her  a  sheet  of  paper  and  a  pencil 
in  the  hope  of  obtaining  some  text  or  drawing.  After 
divers  scribblings  she  traces  the  single  word  Sima- 
dini  in  letters  which  are  not  at  all  like  her  usual 
hand  (see  Fig.  34). 

Q)t/??zCidA/nt, 

Fig.  34. 

Then  taking  a  fresh  sheet,  she  seems  to  write  on 
it  with  a  happy  smile,  folds  it  carefully  and  thrusts 
it  in  her  corsage,  takes  it  out  again,  and  rereads  it 
with  rapture,  etc.  Leopold  informs  us  that  Simadini 
is  the  name  of  the  Hindoo  princess,  and  that  she  is 
reading  a  love-letter  from  Sivrouka.     On  awaking 

288 

THE    HINDOO  CYCLE 

she  remembers  having  been  "  in  such  a  beautiful 
palace/' and  of  having  received  there  a  very  interest- 
ing letter,  but  the  contents  of  which  she  refused  to 
disclose  to  us,  being  evidently  too  confidential. 

I  intercalate  here  two  remarks  apropos  of  the  name 
Simadini,  which  is  one  of  the  first  known  examples 
of  a  handwriting  of  Mile.  Smith  other  than  her  own 
normal  hand. 

First :  When,  four  months  later,  Leopold  began  to 
communicate  in  writing  (pp.  98-103),  a  certain  analogy 
in  the  formation  of  the  letters,  and  the  identical  way 
of  holding  the  pencil,  caused  us  to  believe  that  it  was 
he  who  had  already  traced  the  word  in  Fig.  34.  But 
he  has  always  denied  it,  and  we  have  never  been  able 
to  discover  the  author  of  it.  Secondly  :  I  said  above, 
(p.  204),  that  there  had  been  divergences  in  the 
orthography  of  this  name.  Here,  in  substance,  is  a 
fragment  of  a  letter  which  Mile.  Smith  wrote  me  in 
the  winter  following  (February  18,  1896),  depicting 
to  me  the  vexatious  impressions  which  she  still  had 
concerning  it. 

'' .  .  .1  am  very  sad,  and  I  cannot  tell  why.  I 
have  a  heavy  heart,  and  for  what  reason  I  do  not  know 
myself.  It  came  to  such  a  pass  to-day  (you  are  going 
to  laugh)  that  it  seemed  to  me  as  though  my  left 
cheek  had  grown  perceptibly  thinner.  I  am  sure 
that  at  this  moment  you  would  not  recognize  Sima- 
dini,  so  piteous  and  discouraged  is  her  countenance  ! 
Think,  that  at  the  very  moment  in  which  I  trace  these 
words,  I  hear  a  voice  speaking  to  me  in  my  right  ear  : 
"Not  Siniadini,  hut  Siniandini !  What  do  you 
think  that  can  be  ?  It  is  very  strange,  is  it  not  ? 
T  289 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Have  we  misunderstood  that  name  ?     Or,  perhaps, 
may  it  not  be  I  who  have  misunderstood  it  ?  .  .  .  " 

Mile.  Smith  here  forgets  that  the  name  did  not 
come  to  her  on  the  first  occasion  by  auditive  hallu- 
cination, in  which  case  it  might  be  that  she  had  mis- 
understood it,  but  by  writing  in  somnambulism, 
which  excludes  any  mistake  of  her  ordinary  con- 
sciousness. We  must  confine  ourselves  to  register- 
ing as  a  fact,  inexplicable  hitherto,  this  correction  of 
a  graphic  automatism  by  an  auditive  automatism  at 
the  end  of  several  months.  Between  the  two  orthog- 
raphies, I  have  adopted  the  second,  which  has  un- 
dergone no  further  changes,  and  figures  only  in  the 
Martian  texts  (lO,  i6). 

June  1 6. — Fuller  repetition  of  the  scene  of  the  letter 
of  the  Hindoo  prince.  Impossible  to  learn  the  con- 
tents of  it.  I  suggest  to  her  to  remember  and  to  relate 
them  to  us  upon  awakening,  but  Leopold  replies : 
"She  will  not  reveal  it.  Why  have  you  not  gained  her 
confidence  sufficiently,  that  she  may  tell  you  everything 
without  fear  ?"  and  the  suggestion  had  no  effect. 

June  30. — Somnambulism  with  silent  pantomime, 
the  meaning  of  which  is  given  by  Leopold  :  It  is  the 
scene  of  the  betrothal  of  Simandini  and  Sivrouka  at 
Tchandraguiri.  There  is  first  a  phase  of  oppres- 
sion, with  sighs  and  gestures  as  of  a  struggle  against 
various  pretenders  who  wish  to  seize  her ;  then 
laughter  and  ecstasy,  provoked  by  the  arrival  of 
Sivrouka,  who  delivers  her  and  drives  off  his  rivals ; 
finally,  joy  and  admiration  on  accepting  the  flowers 
and  jewels  which  he  offers  her. 

I   have  reported,   too   much   at   length   perhaps, 
290 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

though  still  greatly  abridged,  these  first  appearances 
of  the  Oriental  romance,  because  they  form  a  con- 
tinuous series,  in  the  reverse  of  the  chronological 
order,  conformably  to  a  spiritistic  theory  which  holds 
that  in  these  memories  of  previous  existences  the 
mediumistic  memory  goes  back  and  recovers  the 
''  images  "  of  the  more  recent  events  before  those 
which  are  more  remote.  During  this  first  period  of 
four  months,  the  Hindoo  cycle  made  irruption  into 
eight  seances  (about  one-twentieth  of  those  at  which 
I  have  been  present  since  I  have  had  knowledge  of 
them),  and  has  manifested  itself  somewhat  like  the 
panorama  of  a  magic  lantern,  unfolding  itself  in 
successive  tableaux. 

This  whole  history  can  be  summed  up  by  a  few 
principal  tableaux  :  there  was  the  scene  of  the  death 
on  the  funeral  pile,  prepared  in  vision  in  the  seance 
of  the  6th  of  March  and  executed  on  the  loth;  then 
the  scene  of  the  interior  of  the  palace  and  the  fortress 
in  process  of  construction  (yth  and  14th  of  April)  ; 
that  of  the  love-letter  (26th  of  May  and  1 6th  of 
June) ;  finally,  the  betrothal  (30th  of  June) .  There 
must  be  added  to  these  the  grand  tableau  at  the  be- 
ginning, first  presented  in  vision  the  3d  of  March, 
then  realized  three  days  later  with  the  astonishing 
exclamation  Atieya  Ganapatinama.  The  meaning 
of  this  scene  has  never  been  explained  by  Leopold, 
but  seems  to  be  quite  clear.  A  species  of  prologue 
can  be  seen  in  it,  or  even  apotheosis,  inaugurating 
the  entire  romance ;  it  is  the  Hindoo  princess  of  four 
centuries  ago  recognizing  her  lord  and  master  in  flesh 
and  blood,  under  the  unexpected  form  of  a  university 

291 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE    PLANET  MARS 

professor,  whom  she  greets  with  an  emphasis  whohy 
Oriental  in  blessing  him,  very  appropriately,  in  the 
name  of  the  divinity  of  science  and  of  wisdom — since 
Ganapati  is  an  equivalent  of  Ganesa,  the  god  with 
the  head  of  an  elephant,  patron  of  sages  and  savants. 
It  can  be  easily  conceived  that  these  two  words  of 
Oriental  resonance,  spoken  aloud  at  a  period  at  which 
the  Martian  was  not  yet  born — and  followed  by  all 
the  conversations  unfortunately  unheard  by  us, 
which  at  the  waking  at  the  subsequent  seances 
Helene  recalled  having  held  in  a  strange  language 
(in  Sanscrit,  according  to  Leopold)  with  the  Hindoo 
prince  of  her  dreams — would  excite  a  lively  curi- 
osity and  a  desire  to  obtain  longer  audible  fragments 
of  this  unknown  idiom.  It  was  only  in  September, 
1895,  that  this  satisfaction  was  afforded  us,  during 
a  seance  at  which  the  Oriental  romance,  which  had 
given  no  further  sign  of  life  since  the  month  of  June, 
made  a  new  outbreak.  Starting  from  that  moment, 
it  has  never  ceased  during  these  four  years  to  re- 
appear irregularly,  and,  suffering  some  eclipses, 
accompanied  on  each  occasion  by  words  of  a  San- 
scritoid  aspect.  But  the  plot  of  the  romance  has 
no  longer  the  same  clearness  that  it  showed  at  the 
beginning.  In  place  of  tableaux  linking  themselves 
in  a  regular  chronological  order,  they  are  often  no 
more  than  confused  reminiscences,  memories,  without 
precise  bonds  between  them,  which  gush  forth  from 
the  memory  of  Simandini.  As  the  fragments  of  our 
youthful  years  surge  up  incoherent  and  pell-mell 
in  our  dreams,  Mile.  Smith,  too,  finds  herself  easily 
assailed    in    her    somnambulisms    by   visions    con- 

292 

THE  HINDOO   CYCL:E 

nected  with  certain  episodes,  and  not  forming  an 
entire  continuation  of  supposed  Asiatic  pre-existence. 
Some  of  these  scenes  concern  her  hfe  as  a  young 
Arab  girl.  One  sees  her  there,  for  example,  play- 
ing joyously  with  her  little  monkey,  Mitidja  ;  or 
copying  an  Arab  text  (see  Fig.  35,  p.  312),  which 
her  father,  the  sheik,  surrounded  by  his  tribes,  fur- 
nishes her ;  or  embarking  on  a  strange  boat,  escorted 
by  black  Hindoos,  for  her  new  country,  etc.  But 
much  the  larger  number  of  her  somnambulistic 
trances  and  her  spontaneous  visions  have  reference 
to  her  life  in  India  and  to  the  details  of  her  daily  ex- 
istence. Her  bath,  which  the  faithful  domestic  Adel 
prepares  for  her  ;  her  walks  and  reveries  in  the 
splendid  gardens  of  the  palace,  all  full  of  a  luxurious 
vegetation  and  rare  birds  of  brilliant  colors  ;  her 
scenes  of  tenderness  and  of  affectionate  effusions — 
always  stamped,  this  is  to  be  noted,  with  the  most 
perfect  propriety  —  towards  the  Prince  Sivrouka, 
when  he  is  kindly  disposed ;  scenes  of  regret  also 
and  abundant  tears  for  the  memory  of  her  far-off 
native  land,  when  the  capricious  and  brutal  humor 
of  the  Oriental  despot  makes  itself  too  severely  felt  ; 
conversation  with  the  fakir  Kanga  ;  devotions  and 
religious  ceremonies  before  some  Buddhist  image, 
etc.,  all  this  forms  an  ensemhle  extremely  varied 
and  full  of  local  color.  There  is  in  the  whole  being 
of  Simandini — in  the  expression  of  her  countenance 
(Helene  almost  always  has  her  large  eyes  open  in 
this  somnambulism),  in  her  movements,  in  the  qual- 
ity of  her  voice  when  she  speaks  or  chants  Hin" 
doo  — a  languishing  grace,  an   abandon,  a  melan- 

293 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

choly  sweetness,  a  something  of  languor  and  of 
charm,  which  corresponds  wonderfully  with  the 
character  of  the  Orient,  as  the  spectators  conceive 
it  to  be,  who,  like  me,  have  never  been  there,  etc. 
With  all  this  a  bearing  always  full  of  noblesse  and 
dignity  conforms  to  that  which  one  would  expect  of 
a  princess  ;  there  are  no  dances,  for  example,  noth- 
ing of  the  bayadere. 

Mile.  Smith  is  really  very  wonderful  in  her  Hindoo 
somnambulisms.  The  way  in  which  Simandihi 
seats  herself  on  the  ground,  her  legs  crossed,  or  half 
stretched  out,  nonchalantly  leaning  her  arms  or  her 
head  against  a  Sivrouka,  who  is  sometimes  real 
(when  in  her  incomplete  trance  she  takes  me  for 
her  prince),  sometimes  imaginary ;  the  religious 
and  solemn  gravity  of  her  prostrations  when,  after 
having  for  a  long  time  balanced  the  fictitious 
brazier,  she  crosses  her  extended  hands  on  her 
breast,  kneeling  and  bowing  herself  three  times, 
her  forehead  striking  the  ground;  the  melancholy 
sweetness  of  her  chants  in  a  minor  key,  wailing  and 
plaintive  melodies,  which  unfold  themselves  in  cer- 
tain flute-like  notes,  prolonged  in  a  slow  decrescendo, 
and  onh^  dying  away  at  the  end  of  a  single  note  held 
for  fully  fourteen  seconds ;  the  agile  suppleness  of 
her  swaying  and  serpentine  movements,  when  she 
amuses  herself  with  her  imaginary  monkey,  caresses 
it,  embraces  it,  excites  it,  scolds  it  laughingly,  and 
makes  it  repeat  all  its  tricks — all  this  so  varied  mim- 
icry and  Oriental  speech  have  such  a  stamp  of  orig- 
inality, of  ease,  of  naturalness,  that  one  asks  in 
amazement  whence  it  comes  to  this  little  daughter 

294 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

of  Lake  Leman,  without  artistic  education  or  special 
knowledge  of  the  Orient — a  perfection  of  play  to  which 
the  best  actress,  without  doubt,  could  only  attain  at 
the  price  of  prolonged  studies  or  a  sojourn  on  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges. 

The  problem,  as  I  have  already  stated,  is  not  yet 
solved,  and  I  am  obliged  still  to  endeavor  to  discover 
whence  Helene  Smith  has  derived  her  ideas  in  regard 
to  India.  It  seems  that  the  more  simple  method 
would  be  to  take  advantage  of  the  hypnotic  state  of 
the  seances  to  obtain  a  confession  from  Helene' s 
subconscious  memory,  and  persuade  it  to  disclose 
the  secret ;  but  my  efforts  in  that  direction  have  not 
as  yet  succeeded.  It  is  doubtless  incompetency  on 
my  part,  and  I  will  end,  perhaps — or  some  one  better 
qualified  than  I — in  finding  the  joint  in  the  armor. 
The  fact  is  that  hitherto  I  have  always  run  up 
against  Leopold,  who  will  not  allow  himself  to  be 
ejected  or  ridiculed,  and  who  has  never  ceased  to 
affirm  that  the  Sanscrit,  Simandini,  and  the  rest 
are  authentic.  All  the  trails  which  I  have  thought 
I  have  discovered — and  they  are  already  numerous — 
have  proved  false.  The  reader  must  pardon  me  for 
not  going  into  the  details  of  my  failures  in  this 
regard. 

If  it  was  only  a  question  of  the  Hindoo  pantomime 
the  mystery  would  not  be  so  great :  some  recitations 
at  school,  newspaper  articles  concerning  the  incinera- 
tion of  the  widows  of  Malabar,  engravings  and  de- 
scriptions relative  to  the  civil  and  religious  life  of 
India,  etc. — in  short,  the  varied  sources  of  informa- 
tion which,  in  a  civilized   country  and  at  our  epoch 

295 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

of  cosmopolitanism,  inevitably  meet  some  time  or 
other  the  eyes  or  ears  of  every  one  of  us  and  form 
part  of  the  equipment  (conscious  or  unconscious)  of 
every  individual  who  is  not  altogether  uncultured, 
would  more  than  suffice  to  explain  the  scene  of  the 
funeral  pile,  the  prostrations,  and  the  varied  atti- 
tudes. There  are,  indeed,  some  well-known  examples 
showing  how  small  a  th  ng  a  cunning  intelligence, 
furnished  with  a  good  memory  and  a  fertile  and 
plastic  imagination,  needs  in  order  to  reconstruct 
or  fabricate  out  of  nothing  a  complex  edifice,  having 
every  appearance  of  authenticity,  and  capable  of 
holding  in  check  for  a  considerable  length  of  time 
the  perspicacity  even  of  skilled  minds.  But  that 
which  conscious  and  reflecting  labor  has  succeeded 
in  accomplishing  in  the  cases  referred  to,  the  sub- 
liminal faculties  can  execute  to  a  much  higher  de- 
gree of  perfection  in  the  case  of  persons  subject  to 
automatic  tendencies. 

But  two  points  remain,  which  compl'cate  the  case 
of  the  Hindoo  romance  and  seem  to  defy — thus  far,  at 
least — all  normal  explanation,  because  they  surpass 
the  limits  of  a  simple  play  of  the  imagination.  These 
are  the  precise  historical  information  given  by  Leo- 
pold, some  of  which  can  be,  in  a  certain  sense,  veri- 
fied ;  and  the  H  ndoo  language  spoken  by  Simandini, 
which  contains  words  more  or  less  recognizable,  the 
real  meaning  of  which  is  adapted  to  the  situation  in 
which  they  have  been  spoken.  But,  even  if  Helene's 
imagination  could  have  reconstructed  the  manners 
and  customs  and  scenes  of  the  Orient  from  the  general 
information  floating  in  some  way  in  cosmopolitan 

296 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

atmosphere,  still  one  cannot  conceive  whence  she 
has  derived  her  knowledge  of  the  language  and  of 
certain  obscure  episodes  in  the  history  of  India. 
These  two  points  deserve  to  be  examined  sepa- 
rately. 

11.    SiVROUKA  AND  M.  DE  MARLES 

When  Kanara,  Sivrouka,  Simandini,  etc.,  suc- 
cessively made  their  appearance,  slowly  spelled  out 
by  Leopold,  with  the  date  of  1401,  my  companions 
of  the  seance  and  1  hastened  to  investigate  Brouillet, 
who  brought  to  mind  the  province  of  Malabar  in  con- 
nection with  the  first  of  these  names,  but  left  us  in 
utter  darkness  as  to  the  others.  The  geography 
of  Vivien  Saint-Martin  revealed  the  existence  of  no 
fewer  than  three  Tchandraguiris — a  hill,  a  river,  and 
a  small  town  in  the  district  of  Arcot-Nord  (Madras). 
The  latter — or  rather  its  citadel  on  the  summit  of  the 
hill — answered  quite  well  to  the  description  given  by 
Helene  in  her  visions  of  the  7th  and  14th  of  April, 
but  the  construction  of  this  fortress  dates  back  only 
to  1510,  and  this  locality  is  very  far  removed  from  the 
Kanara  where  Leopold  locates  this  entire  story  (see 
pp.  286-288). 

As  to  Sivrouka  and  his  surroundings,  neither  bio- 
graphical dictionaries  nor  encyclopaedias  were  able 
to  furnish  me  the  least  hint  on  this  subject.  Living 
historians  or  Or'entalists  to  whom  I  addressed  myself 
were  of  a  discouraging  unanimity  in  replying  that 
they  did  not  recognize  even  the  names,  the  historic 
correctness  of  which  they  regarded  as  doubtful,  and 

297 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

they  did  not  at  all  remember  having  met  with  them 
in  works  of  fiction. 

''  1  have  there/'  said  a  learned  professor  of  his- 
tor3^,  showing  me  a  good-sized  bookcase,  "  numer- 
ous works  on  the  history  of  India  ;  but  they  relate 
onh^-  to  the  north  of  the  peninsula  ;  and  as  to  what 
transpired  in  the  south  during  the  period  to  which 
you  refer,  we  know  almost  nothing.  Your  names 
are  unknown  to  me  and  do  not  recall  to  my  mind 
any  personage,  real  or  fictitious." 

"  The  very  name  of  Sivrouka  seems  to  me  im- 
probable as  a  Hindoo  name  "  replied  another,  who 
was  unable  to  give  me  any  more  information  on  the 
subject. 

"  I  greatly  regret,"  wrote  a  third,  on  receipt  of  He- 
lene's  texts,  ''  not  to  have  succeeded  in  getting  upon 
the  trail  of  the  recollections  of  your  medium.  I  can- 
not think  of  any  book  which  would  be  likely  to  fur- 
nish the  information.  Tchandraguiri  and  Manga- 
lore  (where  several  scenes  of  the  Hindoo  cycle  are 
located)  are  correct,  but  Madras  (id.)  did  not  exist  in 
1 40 1,  Its  name  and  foundation  do  not  go  further 
back  than  the  seventeenth  century.  That  region 
was  then  a  dependency  of  the  kingdom  of  Vijaya- 
nagara,  and  a  naik  in  the  service  of  those  princes 
resided  successively  at  Tchandraguiri  and  at  Man- 
galore.  I  can  make  nothing  of  Sivrouka ;  the 
king  of  Vijayanagara,  in  1402,  was  Bukkha  II.,  or 
Bukkha  called  Siribukkha,  Tiribukkha.  But  the 
naik  who  so  often  changed  his  residence  was  evi- 
dently not  a  ruling  prince.  Was  it  a  romance  ? 
Certain  details  caused  me  to  doubt  it.     A  romancer 

298 

THE   HINDOO  CYCLE 

so  careful  in  regard  to  local  coloring  as  to  introduce 
into  his  narrative  Indian  words,  would  not  have 
gi  \^en  the  title  of  the  prince  under  the  Sanscrit  form 
Nayaka,  but  would  have  used  the  vulgar  form  naik  ; 
he  would  not  have  made  the  wife,  in  speaking  to  her 
husband,  call  him  by  his  name  Sivrouka  (as  Helene 
constantly  does  in  this  somnambulism).  I  have  no 
recollection  of  having  read  anything  of  this  kind, 
and  I  know  of  no  work  of  fiction  from  which  the  story 
might  have  been  taken." 

It  will  be  readily  understood  that  I  was  annoyed  at 
not  being  able  to  establish  clearly  my  presumed 
Asiatic  previous  existence.  However,  while  pro- 
fessional science  was  administering  to  me  these  cold 
douches,  I  continued,  on  my  own  account,  to  search 
the  libraries  at  my  disposal,  and  here  one  fine  day  I 
accidentally  came  across,  in  an  old  history  of  India, 
in  six  volumes,  by  a  man  named  De  Maries,  the  fol- 
lowing passages  : 

"  Kanara  and  the  ne^'ghboring  provinces  on  the 
side  towards  Delhi  may  be  regarded  as  the  Georgia 
of  Hindustan  ;  it  is  there,  it  is  said,  that  the  most 
beautiful  women  are  to  be  found;  the  natives,  how- 
ever, are  very  jealous  in  guarding  them,  and  do  not 
often  allow  them  to  be  seen  by  strangers." 

'' Tchandraguiri,  which  signifies  Mountain  of  the 
Moon,  is  a  vast  fortress  constructed,  in  1 40 1,  by  the 
rajah  Sivrouka  Nayaka.  This  prince,  as  also  his 
successors,  belonged  to  the  sect  of  the  Djams." 

At  last  !  With  what  a  beating  heart  did  I  fasten 
my  eyes  on  that  irrefutable  historic  evidence  that  my 
preceding  incarnation,  under  the  beautiful  skies  of 

299 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

India  was  not  a  myth  !  1  felt  new  life  in  my  veins. 
1  reread  twenty  times  those  blessed  lines,  and  took  a 
copy  of  them  to  send  to  those  pretended  savants  who 
were  ignorant  even  of  the  name  of  Sivrouka,  and 
allowed  doubts  to  be  cast  upon  his  reality. 

Alas  !  my  triumph  was  of  brief  duration.  It 
seems  that  the  testimony  of  De  Maries  is  not  of  the 
highest  order.  This  author  is  held  in  slight  esteem 
in  well-informed  circles,  as  may  be  seen  from  the 
following  passage  in  a  letter  of  M.  Barth,  which 
merely  expresses,  in  a  vigorous  and  lively  man- 
ner, an  opinion  which  other  specialists  have  con- 
firmed :" 

'"  It  is  through  a  letter  of  M.  Flournoy  that  I  learn 
that  there  has  existed  since  1828  in  Paris,  printed  in 
Roman  characters,  a  history  of  India  by  De  Maries 
containing  a  statement  that  the  fortress  of  Can- 
dragiri  was  built  in  1 40 1,  and  that  its  founder  was 
Sivrouka  Nayaka.  What  new  facts  there  are  in 
books  one  no  longer  consults  !  And  that  of  De 
Maries  is,  indeed,  one  of  those  that  are  no  longer 
consulted.  I  found  it  yesterday  at  the  library  of  the 
Institute.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to  have 
done  worse,  even  in  1828.  But  sometimes  we  find 
pearls  in  a  dung-hill,  and  perhaps  this  Sivrouka 
Nayaka  is  one  of  them.  Unfortunately,  the  author 
gives  no  hint  as  to  the  scources  of  his  information  ; 
and  later,  in  his  fourth  volume,  in  which  he  narrates 
the  history  of  the   twelfth  to  the  sixteenth  centuries, 

*  De  Maries'  General  History  of  India,  Ancient  and  Modern> 
from  the  Year  2000  B.  C.  to  our  Own  Times.  Pp.  268-269.  Paris, 
1828. 

300 

THE    HINDOO   CYCLE 

he  does  not  say  a  word  more  either  of  Candragiri  or 
of  Sivrouka." 

Here  was  a  terrible  blow  to  my  Hindoo  existence, 
which  poor  M.  de  Maries  had  so  well  established  for 
me. 

Nevertheless,  the  hope  still  lingers  that  his  informa- 
tion, although  not  reproduced  by  later  writers  more 
highly  esteemed,  may  perhaps  still  be  correct.  This 
is  quite  possible,  since  science  has  not  yet  spoken  its 
last  word  in  this  department,  hardly  even  its  first,  if 
men  still  more  competent  may  be  believed,  beginning 
with  M.  Barth  himself. 

"  Up  to  the  present  moment,"  says  he,  "  there  is  no 
trustworthy  history  of  the  south  of  the  peninsula.  .  .  . 
The  Dravidian  languages  of  India  is  a  domain 
very  unfamiliar  to  the  majority  of  Indian  scholars. 
.  .  .  There  is  nothing  to  draw  upon  but  some  works 
and  monographs  on  the  aboriginal  chronicles  and 
legendary  traditions  ;  and  it  would  be  necessary 
to  know  the  Dravidian  languages  on  the  one  hand 
and  Arabic  on  the  other,  to  be  able  to  examine  or 
even  consult  them  with  profit.  The  only  works  which 
we  are  able  to  follow  are  those  which  undertake  to 
make  this  history  by  epigraphic  documents,  but  these, 
thus  far,  say  nothing  of  Simandini,  of  Adel,  of  Mi- 
tidja,  or  even  of  Sivrouka." 

This  silence  of  epigraphy  is  certainly  to  be  re- 
gretted ;  but  who  knows  whether  it  will  not  some  day 
enlighten  us  by  proving  De  Maries  to  be  right — and 
also  Leopold — by  narrating  to  us  the  true  story  of 
the  Hindoo  princess,  the  Arabian  monkey,  and  the 
slave  Adel  !     It  costs  nothing  to  hope  !     Already, 

301 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

thanks  again  to  M.  Barth,  I  have  gained  information 
concerning  another  Tchandraguiri  than  the  one  of 
the  District  of  North  Arcot  mentioned  by  Vivien  de 
Saint-Martin — i.e.,  a  Tchandraguiri,  situated  in  South 
Kanara,  and  in  the  citadel  of  which  a  hitherto  un- 
known inscription  has  been  discovered  which  must 
date  back  o  the  time  of  King  Harihara  II.,  of  Vijaya- 
nagara,  who  reigned  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth 
century/''  Here  is  something  approaching  the  som- 
nambuhstic  revelations  of  Mile.  Smith.  While  await- 
ing their  definite  confirmation  by  new  archaeological 
discoveries,  traces  of  Sivrouka  may  be  sought  for  in 
the  earlier  works  upon  which  De  Maries  must  have 
drawn.  Unfortunately  these  works  are  not  easy  to 
find,  and  are  inconvenient  to  consult.  Professor 
Michel,  of  the  University  of  Liege,  has  had  the 
kindness  to  run  through  those  of  Buchananf  and 
of  Rennell,!:  but  without  result. 

If  De  Maries  did  not  invent  Sivrouka  out  of  whole 
cloth,  which  is  hardly  supposable,  it  was  very  prob- 
ably in  the  translation  of  Ferishta  by  Dow,§  that  he 

*  Robert  Sewell.  Lists  of  Antiquarian  Retiiains  in  the  Presi- 
dency of  Madras.  Vol  i.  p.  238  (1882.)  Citation  by  M.  Barth.  I 
have  not  been  able  to  consult  this  work. 

f  Buchanan.  A  Journey  from  Madras  through  the  Countries  of 
Mysore,  Canara,  and  Malabar,  etc.     3  vols.  4to.      London,  1807. 

X  James  Rennell.  Description  Historique  et  Ge'ographique  de  V I71- 
dostan.  Translated  from  the  English.  Paris,  an.  viii.  (1800). 
3  vols.,  Bvo  and  atlas  4to. 

§  Dow.  History  of  Hindustan.  Translated  from  the  Persian 
of  Ferishta.  London,  1803.  M.  Michel  suggests  Wilks's  Histor- 
ical Sketches  of  the  South  of  India  (London,  1810)  as  having  possi- 
bly served  as  a  source  of  information  for  De  Maries.      If  some 

302 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

found  his  facts.  I  have,  unhappily^  not  yet  been  able 
myself  to  consult  that  very  rare  work,  which  is  not 
to  be  found  in  Geneva,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  nor  to 
obtain  accurate  information  regarding  its  contents. 

The  uncertainty  which  hovers  over  the  historical 
problem  extends,  naturally,  to  the  psychological  prob- 
lem also.  It  is  clear  that  if  certain  inscriptions,  or 
even  some  old  work,  should  coriie  some  day  to  tell  us 
not  only  of  Sivrouka,  but  of  Simandini,  of  Adel,  and 
the  other  personages  who  figure  in  Helene's  Hindoo 
romance,  but  of  whom  De  Maries  does  not  whisper  a 
word,  we  should  no  longer  care  about  the  latter 
author,  and  the  question  would  then  be  as  follows  : 
Could  Mile.  Smith  have  had  cognizance  of  these  early 
works,  and  if  not,  how  do  their  contents  reappear 
in  her  somnambulism  ?  But  in  the  actual  condition 
of  things,  and  all  allowance  made  for  possible  sur- 
prises in  the  future,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  regard  as  the 
more  probable  and  more  rational  supposition,  that  it 
was  really  the  passage  of  De  Maries,  quoted  above, 
which  furnished  .he  subliminal  memory  of  Helene 
the  precise  date  of  1401 — and  the  three  names  of  the 
fortress,  the  province,  and  the  rajah. 

Various  other  traits  of  the  visions  of  Mile.  Smith 
betray  likewise  the  same  inspiration.  The  scene  in 
which  she  sees  them  engaged  in  building,  and  her 
description  of  that  which  is  being  built,  suggest 
clearly  the  idea  of  a  fortress  furnished  by  the  text. 
The  translation  Mountain  of  the  Moon  contributed  to 

learned  reader  may  discover  any  traces  of  Sivrouka  antecedent 
to  De  Maries,  I  shall  be  under  great  obligation  to  him  if  he  will 
communicate  the  information  to  me. 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

causing  her  to  locate  the  scene  upon  a  hill.  The 
beauty  of  the  women  of  the  country,  on  which  De 
Maries  dwells,  has  its  echo  in  the  remark  of  Helene 
that  the  women  whom  she  sees  are  "  good  looking." 
Finally,  the  princely  character  of  Sivrouka,  men- 
tioned by  De  Maries,  is  found  throughout  the  length  of 
the  entire  romance,  and  displays  itself  in  the  splen- 
dor of  his  costume,  of  the  palace,  of  the  gardens,  etc. 

It  is  possible  that  the  names  and  the  nation- 
ality of  the  other  personages — Simandini,  Adel,  the 
monkej^  the  sheik,  etc. — may  have  been  borrowed 
from  some  unknown  work,  which  would  be,  for  the 
Arabian  portion  of  the  narrative,  the  pendant  to 
De  Maries  for  the  Hindoo  past. 

This  may  be,  but  it  is  not  necessary.  It  is  per- 
missible to  regard,  provisionally,  the  imaginations 
built  up  around  Sivrouka,  as  an  ingenious  expedi- 
ent, by  means  of  which  Helene's  imagination  finds 
a  way  of  binding  to  that  central  figure,  and  also  of 
blending  in  a  single  whole,  her  other  Oriental  mem- 
ories not  specifically  Hindoo. 

The  hypothesis  which  I  am  about  to  assume, 
which  connects  directly  with  De  Maries  the  data  of 
Helene' s  Asiatic  dream,  contained  likewise  in  the 
work  of  that  author,  arouses,  nevertheless,  two  ob- 
jections. The  first  is  drawn  from  the  slight  differ- 
ences of  orthography  between  the  text  of  De  Maries 
and  the  words  spoken  by  Leopold.  This  difficulty  is 
only  insurmountable  by  elevating  the  inerrancy  of 
the  subliminal  memory  to  the  plane  of  absolute  infal" 
Ubility,  though  the  latter  must  be  admitted  to  be  ordi- 
narily very  much  superior  to  that  of  the  conscious 

304 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLI^. 

memory.  But  the  favorite  comparison  of  the  for- 
gotten memories,  reappearing  in  somnambuUsms, 
to  unchangeable,  absolutely  true  photographic  im- 
pressions, causes  us  readily  to  exaggerate  the  fidel- 
ity of  the  unconscious  memory-images.  The  ex- 
ample of  certain  dreams — in  which  memories  of 
childhood  sometimes  return  with  a  startling  clear- 
ness, but,  nevertheless,  altered  or  distorted  in  some 
details,  conformably  to  later  experiences  or  to  recent 
events  —  suffices  to  show  that  automatisms  of  the 
memory  are  not  always  sheltered  by  influences  of 
the  imagination,  nor  absolutely  free  from  error. 

In  this  particular  case  there  are  two  divergences 
between  De  Maries  and  Leopold  :  the  latter  has  sub- 
stituted a  k  for  the  c  in  Nayaca,  and  has  omitted 
the  n  in  Tchandraguiri  (compare  pp.  2%  and  288). 
Another  mistake,  which  he  immediately  corrected, 
consisting  in  dictating  first  Kanaraau,  was  evidently 
a  confusion  such  as  frequently  occurs  in  writing,  oc- 
casioned by  a  too  rapid  passing  from  the  word  Kan- 
ara  to  the  information  following,  and  already  about 
to  come — "  au  fifteenth  centur3^"  The  spelling 
Nayaka,  instead  of  Nayaca,  is  attributable  to  the 
termination  of  the  word  Sivrouka,  which  precedes  it. 
Identity  of  pronunciation  has  produced  identity  of 
orthography. 

The  second  objection  is  of  a  negative  character. 
It  consists  in  the  impossibility  of  showing  where, 
when,  or  how  Mile.  Smith  obtained  cognizance  of 
the  text  of  De  Maries. 

I  admit  frankly  that  I  know  nothing  about  it,  and 
I  give  full  credit  to  Helene  for  the  indomitable  and 
u  305 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

persevering  energy  with  which  she  has  never  ceased 
to  protest  against  my  hypothesis,  which  has  the 
faculty  of  exasperating  her  in  the  highest  degree — 
and  one  readily  understands  that  it  would  naturally 
do  so.  For  it  is  in  vain  that  she  digs  down  to  the  very 
bottom  of  her  memories  ;  she  does  not  discover  the 
slightest  trace  of  this  work.  And  not  only  that,  but 
how  can  one  seriously  suppose  that  she  has  ever 
had  the  slightest  intimation  of  it,  since  she  never 
studied  the  history  of  India,  has  neither  read  nor 
heard  anything  on  the  subject,  the  very  name  of  De 
Maries  having  been  utterly  unknown  to  her  up  to  the 
day  on  which  she  learned  that  I  suspected  that  author 
of  being  the  source  of  the  Hindoo  romance  ?  It  must- 
indeed,  be  admitted  that  the  idea  of  the  passage  in 
question  having  come  before  the  eyes  or  ears  of  Mile. 
Smith  through  any  ordinary  channel  seems  a  trifle 
absurd.  I  only  know  in  Geneva  of  two  copies  of  the 
work  of  De  Maries,  both  covered  with  dust — the  one 
belonging  to  the  Societe  de  Lecture,  a  private  asso- 
ciation of  which  none  of  the  Smith  family  nor  any 
friend  of  theirs  was  ever  a  member  ;  the  other  in  the 
Public  Library,  where,  among  the  thousands  of 
more  interesting  and  more  modern  books,  it  is  now 
very  rarely  consulted.  It  could  only  have  happened, 
therefore,  by  a  combination  of  absolutely  exception- 
al and  almost  unimaginable  circumstances  that  the 
work  of  De  Maries  could  have  found  its  way  into  He- 
lene's  hands  ;  and  how  could  it  have  done  so  and 
she  not  have  the  slightest  recollection  of  it? 

I  acknowledge  the  force  of  this  argument,  and  that 
the  wisest  thing  to  do  is  to  leave  the  matter  in  sus- 

306 

THE    HINDOO    CYCLE 

pense.  But  if  the  question  must  be  decided,  though 
there  is  scarcely  any  choice,  extravagance  for  extrav- 
agance, I  still  prefer  the  hypothesis  which  only  in- 
vokes natural  possibilities  to  that  which  appeals  to 
occult  causes. 

Possibly  the  work  of  De  Maries  may  have  been 
heard  of  by  Mile.  Smith  without  her  normal  con- 
sciousness taking  note  of  it.  Either  when  among 
her  friends  or  acquaintances,  or  with  her  parents, 
she  might  have  heard  some  passages  read  in  her 
young  days,  etc.  The  fact  that  she  has  no  con- 
scious recollection  of  it  proves  nothing  against  such 
a  supposition  to  any  one  who  is  at  all  familiar  with 
the  play  of  our  faculties. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  my  method  of  reason- 
ing is  the  inverse  of  that  which  generally  prevails  in 
spiritistic  circles.  Witness  the  celebrated  Aksakoff, 
as  a  single  example,  who,  discovering  that  a  curious 
typtological  message  was  found  already  in  print  in  a 
book  which  could  not  readily  have  come  to  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  medium,  and  recognizing  the  fact  that  the 
message  came  from  that  book,  says  :  ''  But  in  what 
waj^  could  the  brain  of  the  medium  have  been  made 
aware  of  the  contents  of  the  book?  There  is  the 
mystery.  I  refuse  to  admit  that  it  could  have  been 
through  natural  means.  I  believe  it  was  by  sojne  occult 
process." 

Very  well !  this  is  plain  language,  and  the  frank- 
ness of  the  declaration  charms  me  to  such  a  degree 
that  I  cannot  resist  the  temptation  to  appropriate  it 
for  myself  in  the  case  of  Mile.  Smith  and  M.  de  Maries, 
transposing  only  two  words :  "I  refuse  to  admit  that  it 

307 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

could  have  been  through  occult  means.  I  believe  it  was 
by  some  natural  process."  Evidently,  in  doubtful  cases 
(which  are  in  an  enormous  majority),  in  which  the 
natural  and  the  occult  explanations  are  in  direct  op- 
position, without  the  possibility  of  a  material  demon- 
stration as  to  which  is  true  in  fact,  a  decision  must  be 
reached  in  accordance  with  personal  taste  and  feeling. 
Between  these  two  methodological  points  of  view  a 
reconciliation  is  scarcely  possible.  The  reader  may 
think  what  he  will.  But,  right  or  wrong,  1  claim  the 
first  of  these  as  my  opinion,  and  regard  the  tendency 
of  the  supernatural  and  occult  to  substitute  them- 
selves, on  account  of  the  insufficiency  of  our  knowl- 
edge, for  the  acquired  rights  of  natural  hypothesis, 
as  an  unjustifiable  reversal  of  roles. 

To  those  who  shall  find  my  hypothesis  decidedly 
too  extravagant — or  too  simple — remains  a  choice  be- 
tween the  multiple  forms  of  occult  hypothesis.  Shall 
it  be  Leopold  who,  in  his  all-powerful  state  of  disin- 
carnation,  has  read  in  the  closed  volume  of  De  Maries? 
Or  has  there,  indeed,  been  a  telepathic  transmission 
of  this  passage  from  the  brain  of  some  unknown  ter- 
restrial reader  to  that  of  Mile.  Smith?  Shall  it  be 
with  her  a  case  of  clairvoyance,  of  lucidity,  of  intuition 
in  the  astral  body ;  or,  again,  of  trickery  on  the  part  of 
some  facetious  spirit  ?  And  if,  taking  the  reincar- 
nationist  theory  seriously,  it  is  admitted  that  Siv- 
rouka,  1401,  and  Tchandraguiri,  are  indeed  really 
reminiscences  of  the  past  life  of  Simandini,  how  ex- 
plain that  curious  coincidence  in  their  choice  and 
their  spelling  with  precisely  the  designations  used 
by  M.  de  Maries  ? 

308 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

Verily  my  brain  reels  in  the  midst  of  all  these 
alternatives,  and  1  hasten  to  pass  to  another  sub- 
ject. 

111.  The  Arab  Elements  of  the  Oriental 
Cycle 

Here  is  a  problem  for  the  partisans  of  the  Ori- 
ental pre-existence  of  Mile.  Smith :  How  comes  it 
that,  recovering  in  her  trances  the  use  of  the  Hin- 
doo which  she  formerly  spoke  at  the  court  of  Siv- 
rouka,  she  has  totally  forgotten  Arabian,  which,  how- 
ever, had  been  her  mother-tongue  in  that  same  pre- 
vious existence,  and  which  she  was  accustomed  to 
use  exclusively  up  to  the  time  of  her  departure  from 
her  native  land,  in  her  eighteenth  year  ? 

If  the  emotions  caused  by  her  royal  marriage  had 
destroyed  all  memory  of  the  past,  one  could  under- 
stand how  the  idiom  might  have  become  obscured 
along  with  the  rest  in  that  loss  of  memory  of  her  life 
as  a  young  girl. 

But  such  was  not  the  case.  She  preserved  very  vivid 
memories  of  her  father  the  sheik,  of  his  tents  gleam- 
ing in  the  sunlight,  of  the  people,  of  the  camels  and 
landscapes  of  Arabia.  In  many  seances  and  spon- 
taneous visions  she  finds  herself  carried  back  to  that 
first  half  of  her  Asiatic  existence.  But  then  she  nar- 
rates in  French  that  which  is  unfolded  before  her  eyes, 
or  gives  herself  up  to  a  silent  pantomime.  She  has 
never  spoken  or  written  anything  at  all  resembling 
Arabian.  Can  it  be  supposed  that  already  in  her 
Hindoo  life  she  had  assimilated  the  language  of  her 

309 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

adopted  country  to  the  point  of  losing  even  the  latent 
memories  of  her  maternal  language  ?  That  would 
be  contrary  to  all  known  psychological  analogies. 

However,  in  saying  that  Helene  has  never  written 
or  spoken  Arabian  1  exaggerate.     On  one  occasion 
she  spoke  four  words  of  it.     It  is  the  exception  which 
proves  the   rule.     In  fact,  not  only  did  she  fail  to 
accompany  that  single  text  with  any  pronunciation, 
but  she  executed  it  as  a  drawing,  and  apparently 
copied,  without  comprehending,  a  model  which  an 
imaginary  person  presented  to  her. 
Here  is  a  review  of  that  incident  : 
October  27,  1895. — Shortly  after  the  beginning  of 
the  seance  Mile.  Smith  has  an  Arabian  vision  :  ''  Look 
at  those  tents!     There  are  no  stones  here — it  is  all 
sand  .  .  .   [she  counts  the  tents  one  by  one].     There 
are  twenty  of  them.     That  one  is  beautiful.     Don't 
you  find  it  so,  M.  Lemaitre — that  largest  one  ?     It  is 
fastened  by  cords  and  small  stakes.   .   .   .''etc.  Then 
she    describes    the    personages  :     The    one   who    is 
smoking,  seated  in  a  corner,  with  his  legs  crossed  ; 
others  all  black  (the  table  says  they  are  negroes, 
and  that  the  scene  takes  place  in  Arabia) ;  then  a  man 
clothed  in  white,  whom  Helene  has  the  feeling  of 
knowing  without  being  able  to  recognize  him  ;  she 
places  her  finger  upon  her  forehead,  in  the  attitude 
of  a  person  trying  to  remember,  and  the  table  (on 
which  she  has  her  left  hand)  informs  us  then  that  she 
lived  in  Arabia  in  her  life  as  Simandini,  and  that  she 
is  trying  to  recollect  those  far-distant  times.     A  quite 
long  scene  follows,  in  which  her  Arab  reminiscences 
alternate  and  mingle  with  the  consciousness  of  the 

310 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

real  environment,  though  she  neither  sees  nor  hears 
us.  At  this  point  a  state  of  mental  confusion  ensues, 
which  seems  to  be  very  painful  to  her. 

'' .  .  .  M.  Lemaitre  I  M.  Flournoy  !  are  you  there  ? 
Answer  me,  then.  Did  I  not  come  here  this  evening  ? 
If  only  I  could  .  .  .  however,  I  am  not  en  voyage.  .  .  . 
I  really  believe  it  is  Sunday  at  last  ...  I  under- 
stand nothing  more  about  it.  I  think  my  brain  is  so 
tired  that  all  my  ideas  are  mixed  up  .  .  .  however, 
I  am  not  dreaming.  ...  It  seems  to  me  that  I  have 
also  lived  with  them  .  .  .  [the  sitters  at  the  table], 
and  with  them  [the  Arabs  of  her  vision].  .  .  .  But 
I  know  them — all  those  men.  Tell  me,  then,  who 
you  are  !  Did  you  arrive  in  Geneva  lately?  [They 
are,  says  the  table,  Arabs  who  lived  five  centuries 
ago,  among  them  the  father  of  Simandini.]  Come 
nearer,  then,  come  here.  I  want  you  to  speak  to  me  1 
M.  Lemaitre  !  Oh,  that  pretty  httle  sketch  I  What 
is  that  sketch?  [The  table  having  said  that  it  is  a 
drawing  which  her  father  is  presenting  to  her,  and 
that  she  can  copy  it,  a  pencil  and  a  sheet  of  paper 
are  placed  before  her,  the  latter  of  which  seems  to 
be  transformed  into  papyrus  in  her  dream.]  That 
green  leaf  is  pretty.  Of  what  plant  is  it  the  leaf  ? 
I  think  I  have  a  pencil;  I  am  going  to  try  to  make 
this  sketch,  ..." 

After  the  usual  struggle  between  the  two  methods 
of  holding  the  pencil  (see  pp.  100-102),  she  yields  to  Leo^ 
pold's  manner  of  holding  it,  saying,  "  So  much  the 
worse";  then  traces,  slowly  and  with  great  care, 
Fig.  35,  from  left  to  right,  often  raising  her  eyes  to 
her  imaginary  model,  as  if  copying  a  drawing.    After 

311 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

which  she  goes  profoundly  asleep ;  then  other  som- 
nambulisms come. 

On  awaking  she  recollects  the  state  of  confusion 
through  which  she  had  passed.  "  Wretched  even- 
ing/' said  she.  "  1  was  unhappy.  1  felt  that  1  was 
living  here,  as  1  always  have,  and  1  saw  some  things 
as  though  1  were  a  foreigner.  1  was  with  you,  but  1 
was  living  elsewhere,"  etc. 

This  whole  scene  gives  the  distinct  impression  that 
the  Arab  phrase  only  existed  in  Helene's  recollec- 
tion as  a  visual  memory,  without  meaning  or  any 
verbal  images.  It  was  for  her  an  incomprehensible 
piece  of  writing,  a  simple  drawing,  like  Chinese  or 
Japanese  characters  would  be  for  us.  Evidently  it 
was  a  text  which  had  come  before  her  eyes  at  some 
propitious  moment,  and,  having  been  absorbed  by 
the  subliminal  imagination — always  on  the  watch 
for  matters  of  Oriental  aspect — had  been  incorporated 
in  a  scene  of  the  Asiatic  dream. 

Such,  at  least,  is  the  supposition  which  seems  to 
me  the  most  plausible.  For,  to  regard  it  as  a  frag- 
ment of  Arabian,  which  Helene  could  speak  and 
write  fluently  if  she  were  in  an  appropriate  state  of 
somnambulism — as  Leopold  pretended  one  day  to 
be  the  fact — seems  to  me  an  hypothesis  still  more 

Fig.  35-  Arabian  text  drawn  from  left  to  right  by  Mile.  Smith  in  hemisomnambu- 
lism:  elqalil  men  elhabib  ktsir,  ike  little  from  the  frieiid  (is)  much. 
Natural  size. 

312 

THE   HINDOO  CYCLE 

arbitrary,  and  little  in  accord  with  the  other  trance 
phenomena  of  Mile.  Smith. 

Occasions  have  not  been  wanting  to  her  in  the  five 
years  during  which  her  exotic  romances  have  been 
unfolding  themselves  to  make  use  of  her  supposed 
philological  reserves  by  speaking  and  writing  Ara- 
bian, if  her  subliminal  memory  had  so  desired. 

She  has  presented  all  degrees  and  kinds  of  som- 
nambulism, and  more  visions  of  Arabia  than  could 
have  failed  to  awaken  by  association  the  correspond- 
ing idiom,  if  it  really  was  slumbering  in  her.  The 
complete  and  total  isolation  of  the  text  given  above, 
in  the  midst  of  this  flood  of  Oriental  scenes,  seems  to 
me,  therefore,  to  testify  strongly  in  favor  of  my  sup- 
position that  it  has  to  do  with  a  visual  flash,  unique 
in  its  kind,  accidentally  encountered  and  stored  up, 
and  that  the  Asiatic  secondary  personality  of  Mile. 
Smith  is  absolutely  ignorant  of  Arabic. 

Concerning  the  other  details  of  the  Arab  somnam_ 
bulisms  of  Helene,  1  have  nothing  to  say;  they  do 
not  go  beyond  the  ideas  which  she  could  unconscious- 
ly have  gathered  from  the  surrounding  environ- 
ment;  and  to  the  other  sources  of  her  knowledge 
must  be  added  whatever  she  might  have  heard  from 
her  father,  who  had  at  one  time  lived  in  Algeria. 

The  proper  names  connected  with  the  Arab  scenes, 
with  the  possible  exception  of  Pirux,  awaken  certain 
associations  of  ideas,  without  making  it  possible  to 
affirm  anything  with  certainty  as  to  their  origin, 

313 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

IV.  The  Hindoo  Language  of  Mlle.  Smith 

The  nature  of  the  Hindoo  language  of  Helene  is 
less  easy  to  explain  clearly  than  that  of  the  Martian, 
because  it  has  never  been  possible  to  obtain  either 
a  literal  translation  of  it  or  written  texts.  Besides, 
being  ignorant  of  the  numberless  dialects  of  ancient 
and  modern  India,  and  not  believing  it  to  be  incum- 
bent upon  me  to  devote  myself  to  their  study  solely 
that  I  might  be  able  to  appreciate  at  their  proper 
value  the  philological  exploits  of  an  entranced  me- 
dium, I  am  not  in  a  situation  to  allow  myself  any 
personal  judgment  in  regard  to  this  matter. 

There  is  not  even  left  to  me  the  resource  of  placing 
the  parts  of  the  process  as  a  whole  before  the  reader, 
as  I  have  done  in  the  case  of  the  Martian,  for  the 
reason  that  our  ignorance  of  Helene' s  Hindoo,  added 
to  her  rapid  and  indistinct  pronunciation — a  real 
prattle  sometimes — has  caused  us  to  lose  the  greater 
part  of  the  numerous  words  heard  in  the  course  of 
some  thirty  Oriental  scenes  scattered  over  a  space  of 
four  years. 

Even  the  fragments  which  we  have  been  able  to 
note  down  present  for  the  most  part  so  much  uncer- 
tainty that  it  would  be  idle  to  publish  all  of  them. 
I  have  communicated  the  best  of  them  to  several 
distinguished  Oriental  scholars.  From  certain  in- 
formation which  they  have  kindly  given  me,  it  ap- 
pears that  the  soi-disant  Hindoo  of  Helene  is  not 
any  fixed  idiom  known  to  these  specialists;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  there  are  to  be  found  in  it,  more  or  less 

314 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

disfigured  and  dif&cult  to  recognize,  certain  terms 
or  roots  which  approach  more  nearly  to  Sanscrit 
than  any  actual  language  of  India,  and  the  mean- 
ing of  which  often  very  well  corresponds  with  the 
situations  in  which  these  words  have  been  uttered. 
1  proceed  to  give  some  examples  of  them : 

I.  The  two  words,  atieyd  ganapatinima,  which 
inaugurated  the  Hindoo  language  on  the  6th  of 
March,  1895  (see  p.  282),  and  which  were  invested 
at  that  moment,  in  the  mouth  of  Simandini,  with 
the  evident  meaning  of  a  formula  of  salutation  or 
of  benediction,  addressed  to  her  late  husband,  in- 
opportunely returned,  were  articulated  in  a  manner 
so  impressive  and  so  solemn  that  their  pronunci- 
ation leaves  scarcely  any  room  for  doubt. 

It  is  all  the  more  interesting  to  ascertain  the  ac- 
cord of  my  scientist  correspondents  upon  the  value 
of  these  two  words  ;  the  first  recalls  to  them  nothing 
precise  or  applicable  to  the  situation,  but  the  sec- 
ond is  a  flattering  and  very  appropriate  allusion  to 
the  divinity  of  the  Hindoo  Pantheon,  which  is  more 
actively  interesting  to  the  professional  world. 

M.  P.  Oltramare,  to  whom  I  sent  these  words,  with- 
out saying  anything  as  to  their  source,  replied:  "  There 
is  nothing  more  simple  than  the  word  ganapati- 
ndmd;  it  means,  'who  hears  the  name  of  Ganapati/ 
which  is  the  same  as  Ganesa.  ...  As  to  atieyi,  that 
word  has  not  a  Hindoo  appearance  ;  it  might  perhaps 
be  atreya,  which,  it  seems,  serves  as  a  designation  for 
women  who  have  suffered  an  abortion,  an  explication 
which,  however,  I  do  not  guarantee.      [In  order  to 

315 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

affirm  more  concerning  these  words,  it  would  be  nec- 
essary to  know]  whether  they  are  really  Sanscrit, 
since  if  they  belong  to  the  vulgar  languages,  1  ex- 
cuse mj^self  absolutely/' 

M.  Glardon,  who  is  more  familiar  with  the  vulgar 
languages  and  speaks  Hindustani  fluently,  did  not 
hint  to  me  of  any  other  meaning  for  atieyd  and  saw 
also  in  the  other  word  "  an  epithet  of  honor,  literally, 
'named  Ganapati/  familiar  name  of  the  god  Ganesa." 

M.  de  Saussure  also  found  no  meaning  whatever 
for  the  first  term,  in  which  he  inclines  now  to  see  an 
arbitrary  creation  of  the  Martian  order,  and  he  re- 
marked that  in  the  second, ''  the  two  words,  Ganapati, 
well-known  divinity,  and  namd,  name,  are  con- 
structed together,  in  some  inexplicable  manner,  but 
not  necessarily  false.  It  is  quite  curious,''  adds  he, 
''  that  this  fragment,  which  is  mixed  up  with  the  name 
of  a  god,  may  be  properly  pronounced  with  a  kind  of 
solemn  emphasis  and  a  gesture  of  religious  bene- 
diction. This  denotes,  indeed,  an  intelligent  and 
intentional  use." 

According  to  this  first  brief  specimen,  therefore, 
Helene's  Hindoo  appears  to  be  a  mixture  of  impro- 
vised articulations  and  of  veritable  Sanscrit  words 
adapted  to  the  situation.  Later  specimens  only 
serve  to  corroborate  this  impression. 

2.  The  next  outbreak  of  Hindoo  took  place  five 
months  later  (September  15,  1895),  in  the  midst  of  a 
very  long  Oriental  seance,  in  which  I  only  refer  to 
points  especially  interesting  to  us — to  wit,  lielene's 
supposed  Sanscrit,  the  French  interpretation  which 

^i6 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

Leopold  gave  of  it,  and  the  curious  evidences  of  agree- 
ment of  these  two  texts. 

In  one  tender  scene,  with  sighs  and  tears,  in  connec- 
tion with  Sivrouka,  Helene  uttered  in  an  exceedingly 
sweet  voice  the  following  words  :  ou  mama  priva  (or 
prira,  priya) — mama  radisivou — mama  sadiou  siv- 
rouka — apa  tava  va  signa  damasa — simia  damasa 
bagda  sivrouka.  During  the  various  phases  which 
precede  the  awaking,  I  ask  Leopold  the  meaning  of 
these  words.  He  at  first  refused  to  give  it,  saying, 
"  Find  it  out  yourself";  then,  as  I  insist,  "  I  would  have 
preferred  that  you  found  it  out  yourself."  I  beg  him 
to  give  at  least  the  correct  spelling  of  an  Oriental 
text  furnished  us  in  so  uncertain  a  manner,  but  he 
disappeared,  saying  he  was  ignorant  of  Sanscrit.  By 
means  of  later  questions  which  he  answers  by  "  yes  " 
and  "no,"  it  is  discovered  that  they  are  words  of  love 
from  Simandini  to  her  husband,  who  was  about  to 
leave  her  for  a  voyage  to  his  principality.  Then  sud- 
denly, as  the  awaking  seems  to  be  approaching, 
Leopold  moves  the  index-finger  feverishly,  and  com- 
mences to  dictate  impatiently  :  "  Hasten  [to  spell] 
.  .  .  My  good,  my  excellent,  my  dearly  loved  Siv- 
rouka, without  thee  where  to  find  happiness  T  His 
answers  to  our  questions  lead  us  to  understand  that 
this  is  the  substantial  meaning  of  all  the  Sanscrit 
spoken  that  evening  (and  given  above),  that  it  is  not 
he,  Leopold,  who  speaks  this  language  to  Helene, 
because  he  does  not  understand  it,  but  that  it  is  in- 
deed he  who  gives  us  the  French  equivalent  for  it, 
not  by  a  literal  translation  of  the  words  themselves, 
since  he  does  not  understand  them,  but  by  interpret- 

317 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

ing  the  inmost  feelings  of  Mile.  Smith,  with  which  he 
is  perfectly  familiar.  Shortly  afterwards  Helene 
awakes  without  recollection. 

According  to  M.  de  Saussure  there  are  certainly  in 
this  text  some  Sanscrit  fragments  answering  more 
or  less  to  the  interpretation  of  Leopold.  The  most 
clear  are  mama  priya,  which  signifies  fny  dear,  my 
dearly  loved,  and  mama  sadiou  (corrected  to  sddho), 
my  good,  m,y  excellent.  The  rest  of  the  phrase  is 
less  satisfactory  in  its  present  condition ;  tava  could 
well  be  of  thee,  but  apa  tava  is  a  pure  barbarism, 
if  it  is  intended  for  far  from,  thee.  In  the  same  way 
the  syllable  bag  in  bagda  seems  to  mean,  indepen- 
dently of  the  translation  of  Leopold,  bhdga,  happi- 
ness, but  is  surrounded  by  incomprehensible  syl- 
lables. 

3.  In  a  subsequent  seance  (December  i,  1895), 
Helene  gave  herself  up  to  a  varied  series  of  somnam- 
bulistic pantomimes  representing  scenes  in  the  life 
of  Simandini,  which  were  thought  to  be  located  at 
Mangalore,  and  in  the  course  of  which  several  Hindoo 
words  escaped  her,  of  which,  unhappily,  no  inter- 
pretation could  be  obtained  from  Leopold.  But  here 
again,  if  one  is  not  too  difficult  to  satisfy,  a  meaning 
more  or  less  adapted  to  the  pantomime  is  finally  dis- 
covered. 

In  the  midst  of  a  playful  scene  with  her  little  mon- 
key, Mitidja,  she  tells  him  in  her  sweetest  and  most 
harmonious  tones  (A),  mama  kana  sour  (or  sourde) 
mitidya  .  o  .  .  kana  mitidya  {ter).  Later,  answering 
her  imaginary  prince,  who,  according  to  Leopold, 

318 

THE    HINDOO  CYCLE 

has  just  given  her  a  severe  admonition  (the  reason 
for  which  is  not  known),  and  to  which  she  hstened 
with  an  air  of  forced  submission,  and,  almost  sneer- 

ingly,  she  tells  him  (B),  adaprati  tava  sivrouka 

no  simyo  sinonyedo  ...  on  yedio  sivrouka.  Re- 
turning to  a  better  feeling  and  leaning  towards  him, 
she  murmurs  with  a  charming  smile  (C)  mama  plia 
.  .  .  mama  naximi  (or  naxmi)  sivrouka  .  .  .  ao 
laos,  mi  sivrouka. 

In  the  fragment  (A),  one  may  suppose  the  mama 
kana  to  be  a  term  of  affection,  taking  the  kana  to  be 
equivalent  to  the  Sanscrit  kanta,  "  beloved,"  or  ha- 
nistha,  ''darling,"  unless  it  be  translated,  as  M. 
Glardon  does,  kana  (corrected  to  khana)  mitidya 
to  eat  for  Mitidja. 

In  the  phrase  (B),  according  to  M.  de  Saussure, 
"  the  last  words  might,  with  some  show  of  rea- 
son, make  us  think  of  the  word  anyediuh,  the  fol- 
lowing day,  or,  another  day,  repeated  twice  ;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  first  word  might  be  trans- 
formed into  adya-prabhrti,  starting  from  to-day ; 
which,  combined  with  other  syllables,  themselves 
conventionally  trittirated,  might  give  something 
like :  adya-pra-bhrti  tava,  sivruka  .  .  .  yoshin  .  .  . 
na  anyediuh,  any  ediuh :  from  to-day,  of  thee, 
Sivrouka,  that  I  am  .  .  .  wife  .  .  .  not  another  day, 
another  day — which,  besides  (if  it  has  any  mean- 
ing at  all,)  has  scarcely  any  connection  with  the 
scene." 

In  the  phrase  (C)  the  words  mama  plia  evidently 
mean  the  same  as  the  words  above,  mama  priya, 
my  beloved;   naxmi  might  be  lakshmi,  beauty  and 

319 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

fortune ;  and  the  last  words  might  contain  asmi,  1 
am. 

While,  therefore,  recognizing  some  words  of  pure 
Sanscrit,  the  whole  appearance  of  these  first  texts 
presents,  on  the  other  hand,  certain  matters  quite 
suspicious,  from  the  point  of  view  of  construction, 
of  the  order  of  the  words,  and  possibly  also  the  cor- 
rectness of  the  forms. 

"E.g.,"  observes  M.  de  Saussure, ''  1  do  not  remem- 
ber that  one  can  say  in  Sanscrit,  '  my  Sivrouka,' 
nor  '  my  dear  Sivrouka/  One  can  well  say  mama 
priya,  my  tvell  beloved,  substantively ;  but  mama 
priya  Sivruka  is  quite  another  thing  :  but  it  is  m.y 
dear  Sivrouka  wliich  occurs  most  frequently.  It 
is  true,"  adds  my  learned  colleague,  "  that  nothing 
can  be  affirmed  absolutely,  especially  concerning 
certain  epochs  at  which  much  bad  Sanscrit  was 
made  in  India.  The  resource  always  remains  to  us 
of  assuming  that,  since  the  eleventh  wife  of  Siv- 
rouka was  a  child  of  Arabia,  she  had  not  had  time 
to  learn  to  express  herself  without  error  in  the  idiom 
of  her  lord  and  master,  up  to  the  moment  at  which 
the  funeral  pile  put  an  end  to  her  brief  existence." 

The  misfortune  is,  in  assuming  by  hyjDothesis  the 
point  of  view  of  the  romance,  one  exposes  himself 
to  another  difficulty.  "  The  most  surprising  thing," 
remarks  M.  de  Saussure,  "  is  that  Mme.  Simandini 
spoke  Sanscrit,  and  not  Pracrit  (the  connection  of 
the  first  with  the  second  is  the  same  as  that  be- 
tween Latin  and  French,  the  one  springing  from 
the  other,  but  the  one  is  the  language  in  which  the 
savants   write,   while  the   other   is  the  spoken  lan- 

320 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

guage).  While  in  the  Hindoo  drama  the  kings,  the 
brahmins,  and  the  personages  of  high  degree  are  ob- 
served habitually  to  use  Sanscrit,  it  is  questionable 
if  such  was  constantly  the  case  in  real  life.  But, 
under  all  circumstances,  all  the  women,  even  in  the 
drama,  speak  Pracrit.  A  king  addresses  his  wife  in 
the  noble  language  (Sanscrit) ;  she  answers  him  al- 
ways in  the  vulgar  language.  But  the  idiom  of  Si- 
mandini,  even  though  it  be  a  Sanscrit  very  hard  to 
recognize,  is  not  in  any  case  the  Pracrit." 

The  numerous  Hindoo  speeches  of  Mile.  Smith  dur- 
ing these  latter  years  give  rise  to  certain  analogous 
observations,  and  do  not  throw  any  new  light  on 
their  origin.  I  shall  confine  myself  to  a  few  ex- 
amples, which  I  have  chosen  less  for  the  sake  of  the 
Sanscritoid  texts  themselves,  which  are  also  always 
defective  and  distorted,  than  for  the  reason  that  the 
varied  circumstances  in  which  they  have  been  pro- 
duced afford  a  certain  psychological  interest. 

4.  Scene  of  Chiromancy.  In  the  course  of  a  long 
Arab  seance,  then  Hindoo  (February  2,  1896),  Helene 
knelt  down  by  the  side  of  my  chair,  and,  taking  me 
for  Sivrouka,  seized  and  examined  my  hand,  all  the 
while  carrying  on  a  conversation  in  a  foreign  lan- 
guage (without  seeming  to  notice  my  actual  words). 
It  seems  that  this  conversation  contained  some  ex- 
pression of  anxiety  in  regard  to  my  health,  which  had 
inspired  several  somnambulisms  of  Mile.  Smith  dur- 
ing the  preceding  months  (an  example  will  be  found 
on  pp.  121-122). 

At  the  same  time  at  which  she  attentively  exam- 
X  321 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

ines  the  lines  of  my  hand,  she  pronounces  the  fol- 
lowing fragmentary  sentences,  separated  by  silences 
corresponding  to  the  hallucinatory  replies  of  Siv- 
rouka  :  "  Priya  sivrouka  ...  no  [signifying  No,  ac- 
cording to  Leopold]  .  .  .  tvandastroum  sivrouka  .  .  . 
itiami  adia  priya  .  .  .  itiami  sivra  adia  .  .  .  yatou  . . . 
napi  adia  .  .  .  no  .  .  .  mama  souka,  mama  baga  siv- 
rouka . . .  yatou."  Besides  sivra,  which,  Leopold  says, 
is  an  affectionate  name  for  Sivrouka,  we  can  divine  in 
this  text  other  terms  of  affection  :  priya,  beloved ; 
mama  soukha,  mama  bhdga.  Oh,  my  delight,  oh, 
my  happiness  I"  M.  Glardon  also  calls  attention  to 
the  word  tvandastroum,  which  approaches  the  Hin- 
dustani tandarast  (or  tandurust),  "  who  is  in  good 
health" — tandurusti,  '' health,"  coming  from  the  two 
words  tan,  "  physical  condition,"  and  durust,  "  good, 
true,"  of  Persian  origin.  But  he  adds  that  it  is  pos- 
sibly only  a  coincidence,  and  seems  to  me  doubtful 
whether  he  would  have  thought  of  the  connection  if 
it  were  not  found  in  a  scene  of  chiromancy. 

5.  The  Hindoo  cycle,  like  the  others,  makes  numer- 
ous irruptions  into  the  ordinary  life  of  Mile.  Smith, 
and  affects  her  personality  in  most  varied  degrees, 
from  the  simple  waking  vision  of  Oriental  landscapes 
or  people  up  to  the  total  incarnations  of  Simandini,  of 
which  Helene  preserves  no  memory  whatever.  One 
frequent  form  of  these  spontaneous  automatisms  con- 
vsists  in  certain  mixed  states,  in  which  she  perceives 
personages  who  seem  to  her  objective  and  independent, 
while  continuing  to  have  the  feeling  of  a  subjective 
implication  or  identification  in  regard  to  them,  the 

322 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

impression  of  an  indefinable  tua  res  agitur.  It  then 
easily  happens  that  the  conversations  she  has  with 
them  are  a  mixture  of  French  and  a  foreign  language 
which  she  is  wholly  ignorant  of,  though  feeling  the 
meaning  of  it.     The  following  is  an  example  : 

March  I,  1898. — Between  five  and  six  in  the  morn- 
ing, while  still  in  bed  but  wide  awake,  as  she  affirms, 
Helene  had  "  sl  superb  Hindoo  vision."  Magnificent 
palace,  with  a  huge  staircase  of  white  stone,  leading 
to  splendid  halls  furnished  with  low  divans  without 
cushions,  of  yellow,  red,  and  more  often  of  blue  ma- 
terials. In  a  boudoir  a  woman  (Simandini)  reclining 
and  leaning  nonchalantly  on  her  elbow  ;  on  his 
knees  near  her  a  man  with  black  curly  hair,  of  dark 
complexion  (Sivrouka),  clothed  in  a  large,  red,  em- 
broidered robe,  and  speaking  a  foreign  language,  not 
Martian,  which  Helene  did  not  know,  but  which,  how- 
ever, she  had  the  feeling  of  comprehending  inwardly, 
and  which  enabled  her  to  write  some  sentences  of  it 
in  French  after  the  vision.  While  she  listened  to 
this  man  speaking,  she  saw  the  lips  of  the  woman 
open,  without  hearing  any  sound  come  from  her 
mouth,  in  such  a  way  that  she  did  not  know  what 
she  said,  but  Helene  had  at  the  same  time  the  impres- 
sion of  answering  inwardly,  in  thought,  to  the  con- 
versation of  the  man,  and  she  noted  his  reply.  (This 
means,  psychologically,  that  the  words  of  Sivrouka 
gushed  forth  in  auditive  images  or  hallucinations, 
and  the  answers  of  Simandini-FIelene  in  psycho- 
motor-spoken  images  of  articulation,  accompanied 
by  the  usual  representation  of  Simandini  effectuating 
the   corresponding   labial   movements.)     Here   is   a 

323 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

fragment  of  conversation  noted  by  Helene  in  pencil 
at  the  outset  of  the  vision,  in  her  ordinary  hand- 
writing, but  very  irregular,  attesting  that  she  had 
not  yet  entirely  regained  her  normal  state. 

(Sivrouka.)  "  My  nights  without  repose,  my  eyes 
red  with  tears,  Simandini,  will  not  these  touch  at 
last  thy  attamana?  Shall  this  day  end  without 
pardon,  without  love?"  (Simandini.)  "  Sivrouka,  no, 
the  day  shall  not  end  without  pardon,  without  love  ; 
the  sumina  has  not  been  launched  far  from  me, 
as  thou  hast  supposed  ;  it  is  there — dost  thou  see  V 
(Sivrouka.)  ''Simandini,  my  soucca,  maccanna 
baguea — pardon  me  again,  always  !" 

This  little  scrap  of  conversation,  it  may  be  re- 
marked in  passing,  gives  quite  correctly  the  emo- 
tional note,  which  is  strong  throughout  the  whole 
length  of  the  Hindoo  dream  in  the  relationship  of 
its  two  chief  personages.  As  to  the  Sanscritoid 
words  which  are  there  mingled  with  the  French, 
they  have  not  an  equal  value.  "  Sumina,"  says 
M.  de  Saussure,  ''recalls  nothing.  Attamana,  at 
most  dtmdnam  (accusative  of  dtmd),  Vame,  'the 
soul';  but  I  hasten  to  say  that  in  the  context 
in  which  attamana  figures  one  could  not  make 
use  of  the  Sanscrit  word  which  resembles  it,  and 
which  at  bottom  only  signifies  (ame)  '  soul '  in  phil- 
osophical language,  and  in  the  sense  of  '  I'dme  uni- 
verselle/  or  other  learned  meanings." 

6.  The  apparition  of  isolated  Hindoo  words,  or 
words  incorporated  in  a  non-Hindoo  context,  is  not 
very  rare  with  Helene,  and  is  produced  sometimes 

324 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

in  auditive  hallucinations,  sometimes  in  her  writ- 
ings (see,  e.  g.,  Fig.  37,  p.  333);  sometimes,  again, 
in  the  course  of  words  uttered  in  hemisomnambu- 
lism  more  or  less  marked.  The  list  which  has  been 
collected  of  these  detached  terms  shows  the  same 
mixture  of  pure  Sanscrit  and  unknown  words,  which 
can  only  be  connected  with  that  language  by  some 
transformation  so  arbitrary  or  forced  as  to  destroy 
altogether  the  value  of  such  comparison. 

To  this  second  category  belong,  for  example,  gava, 
vindamini,jotisse,also  spelled  by  Mile.  Smith.  These 
terms,  of.  whose  signification  she  is  absolutely  igno- 
rant, struck  her  ear  in  the  course  of  a  Hindoo  vi- 
sion which  occurred  in  the  morning  when  she  first 
awoke.  The  last  of  these  words  recalls  to  M.  de 
Saussure  the  Sanscrit  jyotis,  "  a  constellation  ";  but 
then  he  would  pronounce  it  djiotisse,  which  hardly 
corresponds  to  the  manner  in  which  Helene  heard 
and  wrote  it.  There  must  be  added  to  these  exam- 
ples certain  Hindoo  words  which  have  made  irrup- 
tions into  some  Martian  texts. 

These  are  Adel,  a  proper  name,  and  yestad,  "  un- 
known," in  text  13 ;  and  (in  text  31)  vadasa,  which, 
according  to  the  rest  of  the  sentence,  seems  to  desig- 
nate some  divinities  or  some  powers,  and  in  which 
MM.  de  Saussure  and  Glardon  suspect  a  mangled 
reminiscence  of  the  Sanscrit  term  deva-ddsa,  ''slave 
of  the  gods." 

7.  To  crown  these  specimens  of  the  Sanscrit  of 
Helene,  let  us  cite  her  "  Hindoo  chant,"  which  has 
made  half  a  dozen  appearances  in  the  last  two  years, 

325 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

and  of  which  Leopold  deigned,  on  a  single  occasion, 
to  OLitline  the  translation. 

The  utterances  consist  essentially  of  the  Sanscrit 
word  gaya  ''chant, "repeated  to  satiety,  with  here  and 
there  some  other  terms,  badly  articulated  and  offer- 
ing discouraging  variations  in  the  notes  taken  by 
the  different  hearers.  I  will  confine  myself  to  two 
versions. 

A(ii^^Cei)i 

c 

, ,  r>,  r      - ' 

fe 

^ 

IJJ'lJii'J] 

f^i&^ 

i^ 

^ 

i 

W.VOA 

^\3'.yav. 

Oj>  J.;jJI.I  P 4   i/jj/JI  o  I 

Fig.  36.  Modulation  of  a  Hindoo  song.  The  final  G  of  the  three  variations  was 
held  with  perfect  steadiness  during  fourteen  seconds.  The  series  A  was  often 
doubled  and  trebled  before  the  continuation. 

One  of  them  is  by  Helene  herself.  In  a  spontane- 
ous vision  (May  18,  1898,  in  the  morning,  upon  awak- 
ing), she  perceived  a  man,  richly  dressed  in  yellow 
and  blue  (Sivrouka),  reclining  upon  beautiful  cush- 
ions near  a  fountain  surrounded  by  palm-trees  ;  a 
brunette  woman  (Simandini)  seats  herself  on  the 
grass,  sings  to  him  in  a  strange  language  a  ravish- 
ing melody.  Helene  gathers  the  following  frag- 
ments of  it  in  writing,  in  which  may  be  recognized 
the  disfigured  text  of  her  ordinary  song,  "  Ga  haia 
vahaiyami  .  .  .  vassen  lata  .  .  .  pattissaia  priaia." 

The  other  version  is  that  of  M.  de  Saussure,  very 
much  better  qualified  than  we  are  to  distinguish 
the  Hindoo  sounds.     He  was  quite  near  Helene,  who 

326 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

sang  seated  upon  the  ground,  whose  voice  for  the 
moment  articulated  so  badly  that  several  words  es- 
caped him,  and  he  does  not  vouch  for  the  accuracy 
of  his  text,  which  is  as  follows,  as  he  wrote  it  to  the 
measure:  "Gdya  gaya  naia  ia  miya  gaya  briti  .  .  . 
gaya  vaya  ydni  pritiya  kriya  gayani  i  gaya  mama- 
tua  gaya  mama  nara  mama  patii  si  gaya  gandaryo 
gdya  ityami  vasanta  .  .  .  gaya  gaya  ydmi  gaya 
priti  gaya  priya  gaya  patisi.  .  .  ." 

It  was  towards  the  end  of  this  same  seance  that 
Leopold,  undoubtedly  with  the  idea  of  doing  honor 
to  the  distinguished  presence  of  M.  de  Saussure, 
decided,  after  a  scene  of  Martian  translation  (text  14, 
by  Esenale),  to  give  us,  in  Helene's  voice,  his  inter- 
pretation of  the  Hindoo  chant,  which  follows,  verba- 
tim, with  its  mixture  of  Sanscrit  words  :  ''  Sing,  bird, 
let  us  sing  !  Gaya !  Adel,  Sivrouka,  sing  of  the 
spring-time  !  Day  and  night  I  am  happy  !  Let  us 
sing  !  Spring-time  bird,  happiness  !  itydmi  ma- 
manara  priti,  let  us  sing !  let  us  love !  my  king ! 
Miousa,  Adel  \" 

In  comparing  these  translations  of  the  Hindoo 
text,  certain  points  of  resemblance  are  discovered 
between  them.  Outside  the  two  perfectly  correct 
words,  gdya,  song,  and  vasanta,  spring-time,  the  idea 
of  "  let  us  love  "  is  discovered  in  priti  and  briti  (San- 
scrit prUi,  the  act  of  loving),  and  an  approximate 
equivalent  of  ''  my  king  "  in  mama  patii,  recalling 
the  Sanscrit  mama  pate,  "  my  husband,  my  master." 

It  is,  unfortunately,  hardly  possible  to  carry  the 
identification  further,  except  perhaps  for  bird,  which, 
with  some  show  of  reason,  might  be  suspected  in 

327 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

vayaydni,  vaguely  recalling  vdyasan  (accusative 
plural  of  vdyasa   bird). 

As  to  the  melody  of  this  plaintive  ditty,  M.  Aug. 
de  Morsier,  who  heard  it  at  the  seance  of  the  4th  of 
September,  1898,  has  kindly  noted  it  as  exactly  as 
possible  (see  Fig.  1,6). 

The  preceding  examples  suffice  to  give  an  idea  of 
Helene's  Hindoo,  and  it  is  time  to  conclude. 

It  apparently  does  not  belong  to  any  actually  ex- 
isting dialect.  M.  Glardon  declares  that  it  is  neither 
ancient  nor  modern  Hindustani,  and,  after  having 
put  forth  at  the  beginning,  by  way  of  simple  hypoth- 
esis, the  idea  that  it  might  be  Tamil,  or  Mahratta, 
he  now  sees  in  it  a  melange  of  real  terms,  probably 
Sanscrit  and  invented  words.  M.  Michel,  likewise, 
is  of  the  opinion  that  the  grotesque  jargon  of  Siman- 
dini  contains  fragments  of  Sanscrit  quite  well  adapted 
to  the  situation.  All  my  correspondents  are,  on  the 
whole,  of  exactly  the  same  view,  and  1  could  not  bet- 
ter sum  up  their  opinion  than  by  quoting  the  words 
of  M.  de  Saussure : 

''  As  to  the  question  of  ascertaining  whether  all 
this  really  represents  Sanscrit,  it  is  evidently  neces- 
sary to  answer.  No.     One  can  only  say  : 

"  First  :  That  it  is  a  medley  of  syllables,  in  the 
midst  of  which  there  are,  incontestably,  some  series  of 
eight  to  ten  syllables,  constituting  a  fragment  of  a  sen- 
tence which  has  a  meaning  (especially  exclamatory 
phrases — e.  ^.,  mama  priya,  mon  bien-aime  (" my  well- 
beloved")  ;  mama  soukha,  nies  delices  ("my  delight"). 

"  Secondly :  That  the  other  syllables,  of  unintel- 
ligible aspect,  never  have  an  anti-Sanscrit  character — ■ 

328 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

i.  e.,  do  not  present  groups  materially  contrary  or  in 
opposition  to  the  general  figure  of  the  Sanscrit  words. 

"  Thirdly  and  finally  :  That  the  value  of  this 
latter  observation  is,  on  the  other  hand,  quite  consid- 
erably diminished  by  the  fact  that  Mile.  Smith  sel- 
dom launches  out  into  complicated  forms  of  syllables, 
and  greatly  affects  the  vowel  a  ;  but  Sanscrit  is  a 
language  in  which  the  proportion  of  the  a's  to  the 
other  vowels  is  almost  four  to  one,  so  that  in  utter- 
ing three  or  four  syllables  in  a,  one  could  hardly 
avoid  vaguely  encountering  a  Sanscrit  word." 

It  follows  from  this  last  remark  of  M.  de  Saussure 
that  it  ought  not  to  be  very  difficult  to  fabricate  San- 
scrit after  the  mode  of  Simandini,  if  only  one  is  pos- 
sessed of  some  veritable  elements  which  can  serve 
as  a  model  and  give  tone  to  the  remainder.  And 
there  is  no  need  to  know  very  much  of  it,  either,  as 
M.  Barth  remarks : 

"  Has  Mile.  Smith  been  in  communication  with 
any  person  from  whom  she  could  have  taken  some 
scraps  of  Sanscrit  and  of  history  ?  That  would  suffice, 
in  this  case,  for  the  original  germ,  even  though  it 
were  but  slight.  Imagination  would  do  the  rest. 
Children  are  very  frequently  onomatopoioi." 

But  it  is,  naturally.  Mile.  Smith  herself  who 
furnishes  us,  in  her  own  Martian,  the  fact  most  likely 
to  throw  light  upon  her  Hindoo.  It  evidently  is  not 
difficult  for  a  subconscious  activity  capable  of  man- 
ufacturing a  language  out  of  whole  cloth  to  make 
another  by  imitation  and  by  spinning  out  some 
real  data.  Also,  as  to  the  beginning  of  the  Martian 
(a  year  later,  as  we  have  seen,  to  that  of  the  Hindoo), 

329 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

M.  de  Saussure  does  not  hesitate  to  make  this  com- 
parison, and  explains,  e.g.,  the  initial  Sanson toid 
text,  the  famous  phrase  of  benediction,  atieya  gana- 
patindma,  by  the  same  process  of  fabrication  which 
shone  forth  in  the  words  of  Esenale  or  Astane. 

I  am  not  convinced  that  the  general  process  of  re- 
placing word  for  word  the  French  terms  by  terms 
of  Oriental  aspect,  which  is  certainly  the  process  em- 
ployed in  the  fabrication  of  the  Martian,  has  been 
made  use  of  in  the  case  of  Helene's  Oriental  words. 
Leopold,  who  has  laid  so  much  stress  on  procuring 
us  a  ^Ma5t-magical  means  of  obtaining  the  literal 
translation  of  the  Martian,  has  never  condescended 
to  do  the  same  thing  for  the  Hindoo,  but  has 
confined  himself  to  outlining  for  us  some  free  and 
vague  interpretations,  which  scarcely  add  anything 
to  that  which  the  pantomime  permits  us  to  divine. 
This  leads  us  to  think  that  an  entire  precise  trans- 
lation of  the  Hindoo  is  impossible — in  other  terms, 
that  Helene  does  not  fabricate  her  pseudoSsniscrit  by 
following  step  by  step  a  French  plot,  and  by  main- 
taining in  her  neologisms  the  meaning  which  has 
been  once  adopted,  but  that  she  improvises  and  leaves 
the  result  to  chance,  without  reflection  (with  the  ex- 
ception of  some  words  of  true  Sanscrit,  the  meaning 
of  which  she  knows  and  which  she  applies  intelli- 
gently to  the  situation) . 

It  is  not,  then,  to  the  Martian  texts  proper,  in  my 
opinion,  that  we  must  compare  Helene's  Hindoo,  but 
to  that  pseudo-Martian  jargon  spoken  with  volubil- 
ity in  certain  seances,  and  which  have  never  been 
noted  with  certainty  nor  translated  by  Esenale, 
330 

THE   HINDOO  CYCLE 

It  is  understood,  too,  that  while  Helene's  sublim- 
inal self  can  safely  give  itself  up  to  the  creation  of  a 
definite  language  in  the  freedom  which  the  planet 
Mars  affords,  where  there  is  no  pre-existing  system 
to  be  conformed  to  nor  any  objective  control  to  fear, 
it  would  be  very  imprudent  and  absurd  to  repeat 
the  process  in  connection  with  India  :  the  few  words 
of  pure  Sanscrit  which  were  at  its  disposal  kept  it 
from  inventing  others,  the  falseness  of  which  would 
be  evident  at  the  first  attempt  at  a  literal  and  verbatim 
translation.  It,  therefore,  contented  itself  with  these 
veridical  elements,  insufficient  in  themselves  alone  for 
the  construction  of  complete  sentences,  being  a  jargon 
devoid  of  meaning,  but  in  harmony  through  their 
dominant  vowels  with  the  authentic  fragments. 

Now  how  could  these  authentic  fragments  have 
come  into  the  possession  of  Mile.  Smith,  who  has  no 
recollection  whatever  (nor  has  her  family)  of  ever  hav- 
ing studied  Sanscrit,  or  of  having  ever  been  in  com- 
munication with  Oriental  scholars  ?  This  is  the 
problem  which  my  researches  have  encountered 
hitherto,  and  as  a  solution  of  which  I  can  think  of 
nothing  more  likely  than  that  of  a  fortunate  chance, 
analogous  to  that  which  enabled  me  to  discover  the 
passage  of  De  Maries.  I  am,  for  the  time  being, 
reduced  to  vague  conjectures  as  to  the  extent  of 
Mile.  Smith's  latent  knowledge  of  Sanscrit,  and  the 
probable  nature  of  its  manner  of  acquisition. 

I  had  long  thought  that  Helene  might  have  ab- 
sorbed her  Hindoo  principally  by  auditive  means,  and 
that  she  had,  perhaps,  in  her  infancy  lived  in  the  same 
house  with  some  Indian  student,  whom  she  had  heard, 

331 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

across  the  street  or  through  an  open  window,  speak- 
ing aloud  Sanscrit  texts  with  their  French  transla- 
tion. The  story  of  the  young  domestic  without  edu- 
cation is  well  known,  who,  seized  with  a  fever,  spoke 
both  Greek  and  Hebrew,  which  had  been  stored  up  in 
her  mind,  unknown  to  her,  while  she  was  in  the  ser- 
vice of  a  German  savant.  Se  non  e  vero  e  ben  trovato. 
In  spite  of  the  just  criticisms  of  Mr.  Lang,  apropos  of 
its  poorly  established  authenticity,  this  standard  an- 
ecdote may  be  considered  as  a  type  of  many  other 
facts  of  the  same  kind  which  have  since  been  actual- 
ly observed,  and  as  a  salutary  warning  to  distrust 
subconscious  memories  of  auditive  origin.  But  Ind- 
ian scholars  are  rare  in  Geneva,  and  this  trail  has 
yielded  me  nothing. 

I  am  really  inclined  to  admit  the  exclusively  visual 
origin  of  Helene's  Sanscrit.  First,  it  is  not  necessary 
for  her  to  have  heard  that  idiom.  Reading  of  texts 
printed  in  French  characters  coincides  very  well 
with  a  pronunciation  so  confused  and  badly  ar- 
ticulated as  hers;  and,  further,  it  alone  can  ac- 
count for  certain  inexplicable  errors  of  pronuncia- 
tion if  Mile.  Smith  had  acquired  that  language  by 
ear. 

The  most  characteristic  of  her  errors  is  the  pres- 
ence in  Hindoo  of  the  French  sound  u,  which  does 
not  exist  in  Sanscrit,  but  is  naturally  suggested  by 
reading  if  it  has  not  been  previously  ascertained 
that  that  letter  is  pronounced  ou  in  the  Sanscrit  words 
in  which  it  appears. 

Other  observations  militate  in  favor  of  the  same 
supposition.      Never  in  the  seances  has  Simandini 

332 

!  p  s  ^ 

B  s  o 

^  en  - 

o  2 

0<5 

I?, 
en    6    pj 

THE  HINDOO   CYCLE 

.^s<« 

c  ">  2, 

CO      Hh 

""  as- 
ill 

O    S    0) 

ni  "^  _ 

S  ^~-  o 

ft  »Tj  "^ 

t»  ^    p 

»  2.  s^ 

as  § 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

ventured  to  write  Sanscrit^  and  it  is  in  French  letters 
that  her  name  was  given  (see  p.  288). 

Still,  Helene  subconsciously  possesses  a  part,  at 
least,  of  the  Devanagari  alphabet,  since  sometimes 
certain  characters  belonging  to  it  slip  into  her  nor- 
mal writing.  But  it  is  to  be  noted  that  her  knowl- 
edge of  this  kind  does  not  seem  in  any  way  to  go  be- 
yond that  which  might  have  resulted  from  a  rapid 
glance  at  a  Sanscrit  grammar. 

In  certain  cases  this  irruption  of  foreign  signs 
(altogether  analogous  to  that  which  has  been  seen  in 
the  case  of  the  Martian)  is  connected  with  an  ac- 
cess of  spontaneous  somnambulism  and  makes  pari 
of  a  whole  troop  of  images  and  of  Oriental  terms. 

An  interesting  example  is  found  in  Fig.  37,  which 
reproduces  the  end  of  a  letter  which  Helene  wrote  me 
from  the  country.  All  the  rest  of  this  six-page  let- 
ter is  perfectly  normal,  both  as  to  handwriting  and 
content,  but  suddenly,  tired  by  her  effort  of  pro- 
longed attention,  she  begins  to  speak  of  her  health, 
sleep  overcomes  her,  and  the  last  lines  show  the  in- 
vasion of  the  Oriental  dream. 

Kana,  the  slave,  with  his  tame  birds,  and  the  brill- 
iant plants  of  the  tropics,  substitute  themselves 
little  by  little  for  the  actual  room.  The  letter  reached 
me  unfinished  and  without  signature,  as  is  shown 
in  Fig.  37  ;  Helene  closed  it  mechanically  during 
her  somnambulism,  without  knowledge  of  this  un- 
usual termination,  at  which  she  was  surprised  and 
annoyed  when  I  showed  it  to  her  later. 

Examination  and  comparison  of  all  these  grapho- 
motor automatisms  show  that  there  are  in  Helene's 

334 

THE   HINDOO  CYCLE 

subconsciousness  some  positive  notions,  albeit  su- 
perficial and  rudimentary,  of  the  Sanscrit  alpha- 
bet. She  knows  the  exact  form  of  many  isolated 
characters,  and  their  general  value,  in  the  abstract, 
as  it  were,  but  she  does  not  seem  to  have  any  idea 
of  their  concrete  use  in  connection  with  other  letters. 

In  a  word,  these  fragments  of  graphic  automa- 
tisms betray  a  knowledge  of  Hindoo  writing  such  as 
a  curious  mind  might  be  able  to  acquire  by  perusing 
for  some  moments  the  first  two  or  three  pages  of  a 
Sanscrit  grammar.  It  would  retain  certain  de- 
tached forms  ;  first,  the  a  and  the  e,  which,  striking 
the  eye  at  the  commencement  of  the  two  first  lines 
(containing  the  vowels,  and  usually  separated  from 
the  following  lines  containing  the  consonants)  of 
the  standard  arrangement  of  the  Hindoo  letters  in 
ten  groups  ;  then  the  series  of  ciphers,  occupying 
a  line  by  themselves  and  easy  to  retain  ;  finally, 
some  other  simple  signs  gleaned  at  hazard  ;  but 
there  will  probably  not  be  retained  any  of  the  too 
complicated  figures  resulting  from  the  union  of  sev- 
eral characters  in  order  to  form  words.  This  sup- 
posed genesis  entirely  corresponds  with  the  extent 
of  the  notions  as  to  Sanscrit  writing  of  which  Mile. 
Smith's  subconsciousness  gives  evidence. 

It  will  suffice  in  summing  up,  to  account  for  Mile. 
Smith's  Hindoo  language,  that  perhaps  in  the  N. 
group,  or  in  some  other  spiritistic  environment  of 
which  I  am  ignorant,  some  one,  for  the  sake  of  curi- 
osity, may  have  shown  her  and  allowed  her  to  glance 
over  a  Sanscrit  grammar  or  lexicon,  immediately 
after  a  seance,  during  that  state  of  suggestibility  in 

335 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

ry^ji 

vvie 

?)DA/D 

\{J^ 

^1^> 

Fig.  38.  Examples  of  Sanscrit  characters,  automatically  substituted  for  French 
words  and  ciphers,  in  words  and  figures  appearing  in  the  normal  writings  of  Mile. 
Smith  (lame,  richis,  166,  pits,  2865,  15^)-     Natural  size. 

which  the  exterior  suggestions  are  registered  very 
strongly  in  her  case,  often  without  leaving  traces  in 
her  conscious  memory.  The  fact  will  also  be  ex- 
plained that  Helene  has  no  memory  whatever  of  it, 
is  absolutely  convinced  that  she  never  saw  or  heard 
the  least  fragment  of  Sanscrit  or  any  other  Oriental 
language. 

I  ought  also  to  add  that  the  information  which  I 
have  up  to  the  present  time  been  able  to  gather  has 
furnished  me  with  no  positive  indication  of  the  truth 
of  my  supposition,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has 
not  tended  to  establish  its  falsity. 

336 

THE   HINDOO   CYCLE 

V.  The  Sources  of  the  Hindoo  Dream 

This  paragraph  will  have  no  meaning  whatever 
for  those  who  hold  the  Oriental  cycle  to  be  in  reality 
the  reappearance  in  Mile.  Smith's  somnambulistic 
states,  of  memories  belonging  to  an  anterior  existence 
in  which  she  was  an  Asiatic  princess,  and  I  myself 
naik  of  Tchandraguiri,  Professor  Seippel,  an  Arab 
slave,  etc. 

I  shall  confine  myself  in  this  case  to  an  expression 
of  regret  that  the  chance  which  has  united  us  afresh, 
after  five  centuries  of  separation,  did  not  leave  us  in 
the  midst  of  those  tropical  splendors  instead  of  trans- 
porting us  to  the  banks  of  the  Rhone  just  where 
the  fog  is  densest  in  winter.  It  is  a  severe  punish- 
ment for  our  past  misdeeds.  But  when  one  pushes 
his  skepticism  so  far  as  only  to  see  in  the  entire  Hindoo 
dream  a  fantastic  product  elaborated  out  of  certain 
scattered  facts,  as  I  have  done  in  the  preceding  para- 
graphs, one  is  likewise  punished  for  his  want  of  faith 
by  the  obscure  problems  which  are  met  with  on  the 
subject  of  the  sources  of  this  dream.  I  would  say 
also  that  it  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the  hyp- 
noid  imagination  of  Mile.  Smith  gave  itself  up  to 
such  pranks,  and  distributed  as  it  did  the  roles  of 
this  comedy. 

It  is  easy  to  understand  how  a  nature  given  to 

subconscious  reveries,  and  such  as  I  have  described 

in  the  first  chapters  of  this  book,  has  taken  pleasure 

in  the  fiction  of  the  tragic  destiny  of  Simandini,  and 

Y  337 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

also  that  she  felt  specially  attracted  towards  the 
career  of  Marie  Antoinette. 

But  M.  Seippel,  whom  I  quoted  above,  has  nothing 
about  him  of  the  Arab,  and  still  less  of  the  slave,  nei- 
ther in  outward  appearance  nor  in  character  ;  and  as 
to  myself,  let  us  say  here,  M.  F. — if  I  may  be  permitted 
to  substitute  harmless  initials  for  the  always  odious 
"I" — as  for  M.  F.,  there  is  generally  to  be  met  with 
in  him,  under  some  diffidence,  a  certain  mildness  of 
manner  and  disposition  which  would  scarcely  seem 
to  predestinate  him  to  the  energetic  and  wild  role  of 
a  violent,  whimsical,  capricious,  and  jealous  Oriental 
despot. 

As  to  the  psychological  origins  of  the  Hindoo 
dream — considered  not  so  much  in  its  Oriental  deco- 
ration, but  in  its  essential  note,  which  is  the  relation 
of  Simandini  to  Sivrouka  (the  pretended  anteriority 
of  M.  F.) — two  hypotheses  can  be  framed,  between 
which  it  is  difficult  to  choose. 

First.  From  the  point  of  view  of  psychopathology 
I  should  be  tempted  to  cause  this  entire  somnambu- 
listic romance  to  be  included  in  that  which  Freud  calls 
Abwehrpsy chosen,  resulting  from  a  sort  of  autotomy 
which  frees  the  normal  self  from  an  affective  idea 
incompatible  with  it ;  which  idea  revenges  itself  by 
occasioning  very  diverse  perturbations,  according  to 
the  subjects,  from  disorders  of  innervation,  coming 
to  disturb  the  daily  life  (hysteria  by  somatic  con- 
version of  the  affective  coefficient  of  the  repulsed 
idea),  up  to  the  case  in  which  the  self  only  escapes 
the  intolerable  contradiction  between  the  given  reality 
and  the  idea  which  besets  it  by  plunging  itself  en- 

338 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

tirely  into  the  latter  (mental  hallucinatory  confu- 
sion, delirium,  etc.). 

Between  these  varied  results  may  be  found  that  in 
which  the  idea  excluded  from  the  consciousness  be- 
comes the  germ  of  hypnoid  developments,  the  point 
of  departure  of  a  secondary  consciousness  unknown 
to  the  ordinary  personality,  the  centre  of  a  somnam- 
bulistic life  in  which  the  tendencies  which  the  normal 
self  has  driven  far  away  from  it  may  take  refuge 
and  give  themselves  free  play. 

This  is,  perhaps,  the  happiest  solution,  from  a  prac- 
tical and  social  point  of  view,  since  it  leaves  the  in- 
dividual in  a  state  of  perfect  equilibrium  and  free 
from  nervous  troubles,  outside  of  the  very  limited 
moments  in  which  the  underlying  processes  break 
out  in  accesses  of  somnambulism. 

Such  may  be  the  case  of  the  Hindoo  dream  and 
the  origin  of  the  attributing  of  the  role  of  Sivrouka 
to  M.  F.  Nothing,  assuredly,  in  the  normal  life  or 
being  of  Mile.  Smith  would  cause  the  suspicion  that 
she  had  ever  consciously  felt  towards  the  latter  the 
absurd  sentiments  which  good  sense  would  have  con- 
demned in  advance  ;  but  divers  hints  of  her  sub- 
liminal life,  independently  of  the  Hindoo  cycle  itself 
(certain  dreams,  etc.),  have  sometimes  seemed  to  be- 
tray a  latent  conflict,  which  the  sane  and  reasonable 
self  would  have  quickly  gotten  rid  of  by  the  banish- 
ment from  the  ordinary  personality  of  the  affective 
idea,  inadmissible  in  the  given  conditions  of  reality. 
Hence,  with  a  temperament  accustomed  to  medium- 
istic  doubling  of  personality  and  imbued  with  spirit- 
istic doctrines,  the  birth  and  development,   under- 

339 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

neath  the  level  of  the  normal  consciousness,  of  this 
romance  of  a  former  existence,  in  which  emotional 
tendencies  incompatible  with  the  present  life  have 
found  on  occasion  a  sort  of  theoretic  justification 
and  a  free  field  for  expansion. 

Secondly  :  It  may  also  be  presumed,  and  I  prefer 
to  admit,  that  the  sentiments  of  Simandini  towards 
her  fictitious  rajah,  far  from  being  the  reflection  and 
somnambulic  transposition  of  an  impression  really 
felt  by  Mile.  Smith  in  regard  to  some  one  real  and 
determined,  are  only  a  fantastic  creation — like  the 
passion  with  which  juvenile  imaginations  are  some- 
times inflamed  for  an  ideal  and  abstract  type  while 
awaiting  the  meeting  with  a  concrete  realization 
more  or  less  like  it  —  and  that  the  assimilation  of 
Sivrouka  to  M.  F.  is  only  a  coincidence  due  to  the 
simple  chance  of  Mile.  Smith  having  made  the  ac- 
quaintance of  M.  F.  at  the  time  when  the  Hindoo 
dream  was  about  to  begin.  Two  points  strengthen 
this  hypothesis  of  a  contingent  and  superficial  con- 
fusion between  M.  F.  and  Sivrouka.  First,  the 
Hindoo  dream  was  evidently  begun  by  a  character- 
istic vision  in  which  Simandini  appeared,  almost 
two  months  before  the  admission  of  M.  F.  to  the 
seances  (see  pp.  279-281).  Instead  of  supposing 
that  the  subconsciousness  of  Mile.  Smith  fore- 
saw already  the  probable  arrival  of  this  new  spec- 
tator, and  reserved  for  him  in  advance  a  leading 
role  in  the  romance  of  former  existence  which  she 
was  in  process  of  elaborating  (which  is  not  al- 
together impossible,  it  is  true),  it  hardly  seems 
as   though  M.   F.   could  have   stood   for   anything 

340 

THE  HINDOO  CYCLE 

in  the  dream-personage  of  Sivrouka.  In  the  second 
place,  it  is  only  in  the  light  somnambulisms  and 
her  mixed  or  crepuscular  states  that  Mile.  Smith 
happens  to  take  M.  F.  for  the  Hindoo  prince  and  to 
seat  herself  at  his  feet  in  attitudes  of  tenderness  and 
abandon  (without  otherwise  ever  departing  from 
the  bounds  of  perfect  propriety);  as  soon  as  the 
trance  becomes  profound  and  the  Hindoo  somnam- 
bulism complete,  M.  F.  ceases  to  exist  for  her,  as  well 
as  the  others  present,  and  she  then  is  concerned 
only  with  an  absolutely  hallucinatory  Sivrouka .  This 
is  the  place  to  state  that  Helene  has  never  presented 
any  phenomenon  similar  to — far  from  it — certain 
cases  in  which  have  been  seen  the  awakening  in  the 
hypnotic  subject  of  gross  and  more  or  less  bestial 
tendencies,  for  which  the  subjects  would  have  blushed 
in  their  waking  state.  There  is  nothing  of  that  nat- 
ure in  Mile.  Smith.  Somnambulism  does  not  de- 
tract in  any  way  from  the  elevation  of  her  moral 
sense.  The  same  is  true  of  her  deepest  trances  or 
when  she  "incarnates"  personages  very  different  from 
her  ordinary  character — she  never  departs  from  that 
real  dignity  which  is  a  trait  of  her  normal  personality. 
To  sum  up — the  hypothesis  of  a  purely  accidental 
identification,  a  kind  of  association  by  simple  con- 
tiguity between  the  Hindoo  prince  and  M.  F.,  seems 
to  me,  on  the  whole,  the  most  natural.  It  releases 
the  latter,  besides,  from  all  responsibility  (altogether 
involuntary,  however)  for  the  sentiments  so  pro- 
found, so  disinterested,  so  worthy  of  a  less  tragic 
fate,  which  the  imaginary  personage  of  Sivrouka 
Nayaka  inspires  in  the  poor  Princess  Simandini. 

341 

CHAPTER  IX 

THE  ROYAL  CYCLE 

IF  I  were  obliged  to  give  this  cycle  a  place  pro- 
portioned to  that  which  it  occupies  in  the  som- 
ambulic  life  of  Mile.  Smith,  a  hundred  pages 
would  not  sufi&ce.  But  permit  me  to  pass  rapidly 
over  facts  concerning  which  1  should  only  be  obliged 
to  repeat  the  greater  part  of  the  observations  called 
forth  by  the  preceding  romances,  which  apply  equal- 
ly well,  mutatis  fnutandis,  to  the  personification  of 
Marie  Antoinette  by  Helene. 

The  choice  of  this  role  is  naturally  explained  by 
the  innate  tastes  of  Mile.  Smith  for  everything  that 
is  noble,  distinguished,  elevated  above  the  level  of 
the  common  herd,  and  by  the  fact  that  some  exterior 
circumstance  fixed  her  hypnoid  attention  upon  the 
illustrious  queen  of  France  in  preference  to  the 
many  other  historic  figures  equally  qualified  to  serve 
as  a  point  of  attachment  for  her  subconscious  mega- 
lomaniac reveries. 

In  default  of  absolutely  certain  information  on 
this  point,  1  strongly  suspect  the  engraving  from  the 
Memoirs  of  a  Physician,  representing  the  dramatic 
scene  of  the  decanter  between  Balsamo  and  the  Dau- 
phiness,  of  having   given   birth   to   this    identifica- 

342 

THE  ROYAL   CYCLE 

tion  of  Helene  with  Marie  Antoinette,  as  well  as  to 
that  of  her  secondary  personality  of  Leopold  with 
Cagliostro. 

We  have,  in  fact,  seen  that  this  engraving  (pp.  94- 
95),  so  well  calculated  to  impress  the  imagination, 
was  shown  to  Mile.  Smith  by  Mme.  B.  at  the  end  of  a 
seance — that  is,  at  a  moment  when  one  is  never  sure 
that  Helene's  return  to  her  normal  state  is  complete, 
and  in  which  her  hypnoid  personality,  still  on  a  level 
with  consciousness,  so  to  speak,  is  very  prone  to  ab- 
sorb the  interesting  suggestions  which  the  environ- 
ment may  furnish.  It  was  several  months — a  year 
and  a  quarter,  possibly — after  this  incident  (the  pre- 
cise date  of  which,  in  1892  or  1893,  it  is  impossible 
to  determine)  that  announcement  was  made  by  the 
table,  on  the  30th  of  January,  1894,  that  Helene 
was  the  reincarnation  of  Marie  Antoinette.  It  is  to  be 
recollected  that  in  the  interval  she  had  for  some  time 
believed  herself  to  be  the  reincarnation  of  Lorenza 
Feliciani ;  it  is,  however,  to  be  noted  that  these  two 
successive  identifications  did  not  have  the  same 
guarantee  or  psychological  signification.  In  fact,  it 
was  Mile.  Smith,  in  the  waking  state— that  is,  in  her 
normal  personality — who  accepted  the  supposition 
of  Mme.  B.,  that  she  was  the  reincarnation  of  Loren- 
za; but  the  table — i.e.,  her  subconsciousness — always 
remained  silent  on  this  point.  On  the  contrary,  the 
idea  of  having  been  Marie  Antoinette  does  not  seem 
to  have  occurred  to  Helene's  ordinary  consciousness 
up  to  the  time  at  which  Leopold  revealed  this  secret 
by  the  table.  If  any  conclusion  may  be  drawn  from 
this,  it  is  that,  under  the  multiple  suggestions  of  the 

343 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

engraving  from  Dumas'  works  and  the  suppositions 
of  Mme.  B.,  the  hypnoid  imagination  of  Mile.  Smith 
at  first  preferred  to  the  role  of  Lorenza  that  of  Marie 
Antoinette,  which  is  undoubtedly  more  flattering  and 
more  conformable  to  Helene's  temperament,  and  then 
elaborated  and  matured  it,  very  slowly,  it  is  true, 
but  not  excessively  so,  in  comparison  with  other  ex- 
amples of  subliminal  incubations  of  Mile.  Smith. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  its  psychological  forms 
of  manifestation,  the  Royal  cycle  from  that  time  fol- 
lowed an  evolution  analogous  to  that  of  its  congeners 
described  in  the  preceding  chapters.  After  some 
months,  during  which  it  unfolded  itself  in  visions 
described  by  Helene  and  accompanied  by  typto- 
logical  explanations  dictated  by  the  table,  the  trance 
became  more  profound.  Mile.  Smith  began  to  per- 
sonate the  queen  in  pantomime,  of  which  Leopold 
gave  the  exact  signification  by  digital  indications. 
Speech  was  added  the  year  following,  at  a  date 
which  I  cannot  fix,  but  the  first  occasion  on  which 
I  was  a  witness  to  it  was  on  the  13th  of  October, 
1895.  Handwriting  only  made  its  appearance,  as 
far  as  I  am  aware,  two  years  later  (November  i, 
1897,  see  Fig.  39),  when  the  royal  incarnation  at- 
tained its  apogee  and  Helene  was  in  the  habit  of  re- 
taining in  memory  the  somnambulistic  role  of  Marie 
Antoinette  for  several  hours.  Since  then  the  role 
has  maintained  itself  at  a  very  remarkable  level  of 
perfection,  but  it  scarcely  seems  to  me  progressing, 
and  seems  likely  to  become  stereotyped.  The  ob- 
jectivity of  the  general  type  of  queen  must  be  dis- 
tinguished in  this  brilliant  personality^  or  at  least 

THE  ROYAL  CYCLE 

or  (i£,-qu'cf''M^  ^ 

Fig.  39.  Firstknown  example  of  automatic  irruption  of  the  orthography  and  hand- 
writing called  that  of  Marie  Antoinette  among  the  normal  writings  of  Mile.  Smith. 
Fragments  of  a  letter  of  Helen  of  November  i,  1897,  narrating  a  seance  during 
which  she  had  successfully  incarnated  the  queen  of  France  and  the  Hindoo  prin- 
cess.    [Collection  of  M.  Lemaitre.]     See  also  p. 

that  of  a  lady  of  great  distinction,  as  well  as  a  real- 
ization of  the  individual  characteristics  of  Marie 
Antoinette  of  Austria.  As  to  the  first  point  there  is 
almost  nothing  left  to  be  desired.  Mile.  Smith  seems 
by  nature  to  possess  all  that  this  role  demands,  and 
hypnoid  autosuggestion  finds  no  lack  of  material 
upon  which  to  work. 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

When  the  royal  trance  is  complete  no  one  can  fail 
to  note  the  grace,  elegance,  distinction,  majesty  some- 
times, which  shine  forth  in  Helene's  every  attitude 
and  gesture. 

She  has  verily  the  bearing  of  a  queen.  The  more 
delicate  shades  of  expression,  a  charming  amiability, 
condescending  hauteur,  pity,  indifference,  overpow- 
ering scorn  flit  successively  over  her  countenance 
and  are  manifested  in  her  bearing,  to  the  filing  by 
of  the  courtiers  who  people  her  dream.  The  play  of 
her  hands  with  her  real  handkerchief  and  its  fictitious 
accessories,  the  fan,  the  binocle  with  long  handle,  the 
scent-bottle  which  she  carries  in  a  pocket  in  her  gir- 
dle ;  her  courtesyings,  the  movement,  full  of  grace 
and  ease,  by  which  she  never  forgets  at  each  turning 
around,  to  throwback  her  imaginary  train;  everything 
of  this  kind,  which  cannot  be  described,  is  perfect  in  its 
ease  and  naturalness.  Special  personification  of  the 
unhappy  Austrian  wife  of  Louis  XVl.  is  of  a  less  evi- 
dent, and  moreover  doubtful,  accuracy.  To  judge  of 
it  from  the  only  objective  point  of  comparison  at  our 
disposal,  the  handwriting  (see  Figs.  39  to  41),  the 
Marie  Antoinette  of  Helene's  somnambulisms  little 
resembles  her  supposed  prototype,  for  there  is  less 
of  difference  between  the  autographs  of  Cagliostro 
and  of  Leopold  (see  p.  109)  than  there  is  between  that 
of  the  real  queen  and  that  of  her  pretended  reincarna- 
tion in  Mile.  Smith,  the  latter  having  a  rounded,  in- 
clined calligraphy,  much  more  regular  than  in  her 
normal  state,  instead  of  the  angular  and  illegible  writ- 
ing which  was  characteristic  of  the  queen  of  France, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  glaring  differences  in  formation 

346 

THE  ROYAL  CYCLE 

^^"^^  A^e^    ^'-t5V^  »rf2*- 

Fig.  40.  Writing  of  Mile.  Smith  incarnating.  Marie  Antoinette.  Seance  of  Novem- 
ber 7,  1897.  Beginning  of  a  letter,  written  in  ink  and  addressed  to  Philippe 
d'Orleans  (M.  Aug.  de  Morsier,  who  was  not  present  at  the  seance).  After  the 
ink-stains  of  the  last  line,  Helene  threw  down  her  pencil,  then  began  again  and 
finished  her  letter  in  pencil  in  a  still  more  regular  and  slanting  hand  than  the 
above. 

^0iU>  ^avc^.'ier^/^' /^'ff\cor.y,n^  yV^^/r/;,  /,u^^t,fl 

tUi 

rS-M'te  /?yr^/ftfM: 

Fig.  41.  Writing  and  signature  of  Marie  Antoinette.  Fragment  of  a  letter  written 
from  the  Temple  to  General  de  Jarnayes,  and  reproduced  in  the  Isographie  des 
Hommes  cilhbres.  [Collection  of  fac-similes  published  under  the  direction  of  Du- 
chesne, Sr.,  Paris,  1827-30.] 

347 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

of  many  letters.  Some  orthographic  analogies  (He- 
lene  writes  instans,  enfans,  etois,  etc.)  have  nothing 
specific  about  them,  and  simply  recall  the  general 
habits  of  the  last  century  (see  p.  112). 

Not  having  discovered  any  indication  as  to  Marie 
Antoinette's  manner  of  speaking,  1  do  not  know 
whether  the  hypnoid  imagination  of  Helene  has 
succeeded  better  than  with  the  handwriting  in  adopt- 
ing in  her  royal  incarnations  certain  intonations 
and  a  pronunciation  which  have  nothing  of  German 
in  them,  and  would  rather  recall  the  English  accent. 
The  timbre  of  her  voice  does  not  change,  but  her 
speech  becomes  trailing,  with  a  slight  rolling  of  the 
r's,  and  takes  on  something  precise  and  affected,  very 
pretty,  but  slightly  irritating  by  its  length.  We  al- 
ready know  that  there  is  not  an  absolute  wall  of 
separation  between  Helene's  various  trances.  Just 
as  is  the  case  with  the  Martian  and  the  Hindoo, 
the  handwriting  or  the  spelling  of  the  queen  some- 
times slips  into  the  correspondence  of  Mile.  Smith 
(see  Fig.  39),  and  she  also  sometimes  assumes  the 
accent  of  Marie  Antoinette,  if  not  in  the  ordinary^ 
waking  state  (I  do  not  know  whether  that  is  ever  the 
case),  at  least  outside  her  Royal  cycle,  especially  in 
the  phases  of  transition  in  which  she  begins  or  ends 
by  incarnating  Leopold,  the  Martians,  etc.  (see,  for 
example,  p.  56). 

From  the  point  of  view  of  its  content,  the  Royal  cycle 
forms  a  collection  of  scenes  and  varied  tableaux,  like 
the  Martian  dream,  lacking  any  continuous  plot,  and  in 
which  marked  historic  events  scarcely  hold  a  place — 
e.  g.,  in  it  the  queen  is  never  seen  to  mount  the  scaffold 

348 

THE   ROYAL   CYCLE 

as  Simandini  ascends  her  funeral  pile.  One  does  not 
always  even  know  whether  the  spectacle  before  our 
eyes  is  supposed  to  be  the  repetition,  the  exact  recol- 
lection, of  unknown  but  real  episodes  in  the  life  of 
Marie  Antoinette,  or  indeed  whether  it  has  to  do  with 
new,  actual  incidents  passing  now  between  the  rein- 
carnated queen  and  her  old  acquaintances  whom 
she  discovers  in  the  persons  present  at  the  seance  or 
in  the  disincarnate  spirits  in  mediumistic  relation- 
ship with  her.  That  depends  on  the  case — e.  g.,  on 
the  25th  of  December,  1896,  Mile.  Smith,  entranced, 
addresses  touching  exhortations  to  a  lady  present 
whom  she  took  for  the  Princess  Lamballe,  which, 
according  to  Leopold,  is  a  reproduction  of  the  last 
evening  which  the  unhappy  queen,  sustained  by  her 
companion  in  captivity,  passed  in  this  world.  (It  is 
true  that  at  Christmas,  1792,  the  princess  had  al- 
ready, three  months  previously,  fallen  a  victim  to  the 
massacres  of  September.)  Again  the  Abbe  Gregoire 
dictates  by  the  table,  which  bows  significantly  to 
Helene,  "I  desired  to  save  you,  but  I  was  not  able  ";  or 
the  sinister  Hebert  says  to  her  by  the  same  process, 
"  I  was  the  cause  of  your  death  ...  7  suffer ;  pray 
for  me."  Ought  we  to  consider  real  the  homage  and 
the  posthumous  remorse  which  these  two  disincar- 
nate spirits  bring  after  the  lapse  of  a  century  to 
their  sovereign,  finally  recognized  in  the  person  of 
Mile.  Smith  ? 

Generally  it  is  impossible  to  decide  whether  the 
incident  transpiring  pretends  simply  to  republish 
the  past  or  constitutes  a  new  fact. 

The  location  of  the  royal  scenes  and  visions  is 
349 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

often  undetermined.  Many  are  located  in  the  gar- 
dens or  the  apartments  of  the  Petit  Trianon,  and 
the  furniture  which  Helene  describes  there  is,  in- 
deed, always  pure  Louis  XVI.  More  rarely  Marie 
Antoinette  is  found  at  the  Temple,  or  at  certain 
rendezvous — innocent,  but  very  imprudent — in  some 
secret  abode  in  Paris.  She  is  never  seen  in  Austria, 
since,  unlike  the  Hindoo  princess  still  filled  with  her 
Arab  memories,  she  seems  to  have  completely  lost 
sight  of  her  past  as  a  young  girl. 

In  the  surroundings  of  the  queen,  the  king  is 
conspicuous  by  his  absence  ;  very  rarely  she  makes 
some  allusions  to  him  with  a  marked  indiffer- 
ence. The  greater  part  of  the  personages  known 
to  that  epoch,  whom  I  refrain  from  enumerating, 
figure  in  it  incidentally,  but  there  are  three  who 
continually  reappear  and  hold  the  first  rank.  There 
is,  first,  the  Count  of  Cagliostro,  "  mon  sorcier," 
or  "  ce  cher  sorcier,"  as  the  queen  familiarly  calls 
him,  who  never  has  enough  of  his  visits  and  his 
conversations,  which  are  very  varied,  including  the 
discussion  of  philosophic  subjects,  such  as  the  fut- 
ure life  and  the  existence  of  God  as  well  as  the  gos- 
sip of  the  last  fete  at  Versailles.  There  is,  secondly, 
Louis  Philippe  d'Orleans  (Equality)  ;  while  the  third 
is  the  old  Marquis  de  Mirabeau ;  all  of  whom,  es- 
pecially the  first,  have  served  as  hallucinatory  inter- 
locutors towards  Helene  in  numerous  scenes — up  to 
the  time  at  which,  to  the  great  amusement  of  the 
sitters,  the  somnambulistic  monologue  was  trans- 
formed into  real  and  lively  conversation,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  introduction  into  the  seances  of  M.  Eu- 

350 

THE  ROYAL  CYCLE 

gene  Demole,  then  of  M.  Aug.  de  Morsier,  in  whom 
Marie  Antoinette  immediately  recognized  the  two 
personages  last  above  mentioned. 

Since  this  unexpected  meeting  with  her  two  con- 
temporaries, reincarnated,  like  herself,  the  somnam- 
bulistic queen  freely  permits  herself,  on  occasion,  the 
pleasure  of  renewing  the  little  suppers  and  joyous 
evenings  of  long  ago.  When  a  seance  which  has 
lasted  from  four  o'clock  until  seven  in  the  afternoon 
seems  to  have  come  to  an  end,  and  Mile.,  Smith,  after 
having  awakened  from  a  long  series  of  Hindoo, 
Martian,  and  other  scenes,  has  been  invited  to  dine 
and  refresh  herself  before  taking  up  her  household 
duties,  it  often  happens  that,  perceiving  M.  Demole 
or  M.  de  Morsier  among  the  persons  present,  she 
gives  a  slight  start,  with  a  change  of  countenance, 
sometimes  barely  perceptible,  but  which  there  is  no 
mistaking  ;  then,  in  her  very  characteristic  accent 
of  Marie  Antoinette,  exclaims,  ''  Oh,  marquis,  you 
have  been  here,  and  1  had  not  noticed  you  before  \" 
And  then  follows  a  somnambulistic  vigil  which  may 
be  prolonged  until  nearly  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening, 
maintained  by  means  of  the  suggestive  amiability  of 
her  improvised  companions  in  sustaining  their  roles 
of  Mirabeau  or  Philippe  d 'Orleans. 

They  descend  to  the  dining-room.  The  queen 
takes  her  place  at  the  table  alongside  of  the  marquis 
(or  of  Philippe).  She  has  eyes  and  ears  for  him 
alone,  the  other  guests  and  the  servants  remaining 
shut  out  from  her  dream.  She  eats  and  drinks  only 
that  which  he  sets  before  her,  and  it  is  no  sinecure 
to  supply  the  wants  of  this  august  neighbor,  since 

351 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

she  possesses  a  truly  royal  appetite.  The  amount 
of  food  which  she  devours  and  the  goblets  of  wine 
which  she  drinks  off  one  after  another,  without  suf- 
fering any  inconvenience,  are  astounding,  as  in  her 
normal  state  Mile.  Smith  is  sobriety  itself  and  eats 
very  little.  After  dinner  they  pass  into  the  salon, 
with  many  compliments  and  obeisances,  and  Marie 
Antoinette  takes  coffee.  On  the  first  occasions  of 
this  kind,  she  also  accepted  a  cigarette  from  Philippe 
and  smoked  it — Mile.  Smith  never  smokes  in  her 
waking  state — but  the  remarks  of  the  persons  pres- 
ent upon  the  hiv^torical  untruthfulness  of  this  feature 
must  have  been  registered,  and  bore  fruit,  since  at  the 
following  seances  she  did  not  seem  to  understand 
the  use  of  tobacco  in  that  form  ;  she  accepted,  on 
the  other  hand,  with  eagerness,  a  pinch  of  imaginary 
snuff,  which  almost  immediately  brought  about  by 
autosuggestion  a  series  of  sneezes  admirably  suc- 
cessful. 

The  evening  passes  in  most  varied  conversation, 
until,  evidently  feeling  fatigue,  the  queen  becomes 
silent,  closes  her  eyes,  and  goes  to  sleep  in  an 
easy-chair.  At  that  instant  Leopold,  who  gives 
no  sign  of  life,  and  from  whom  no  response  can  be 
obtained  during  the  royal  somnambulism,  reap- 
pears and  answers  by  the  fingers  or  manifests  him- 
self in  spontaneous  gestures.  Helene's  hand,  e.  g., 
is  raised,  and  makes  passes  on  her  forehead  to  ac- 
centuate the  restorative  sleep  which  is  about  to  bring 
her  back  to  her  normal  state.  At  the  end  of  some 
time — half  an  hour  or  more — she  awakes  without 
any  recollection  of  the  evening,  believing  that    she 

352 

THE  ROYAL  CYCLE 

has  not  yet  dined,  and  complaining  of  hunger  and 
thirst,  as  if  her  stomachic  sensibihty  participated 
in  the  amnesia  and  other  modifications  which  ac- 
company the  change  of  personahty.  Nevertheless, 
at  such  times  1  have  never  seen  her  accept  anj^thing 
more  than  a  couple  of  glasses  of  water,  after  which 
she  feels  wide  awake. 

In  escorting  her  home,  1  was  witness  on  one  oc- 
casion to  a  return  of  the  royal  somnambulism.  She 
was  exceedingly  desirous  of  going  to  the  house  of  a 
well-known  personage  (whom  she  had  perceived  in 
her  vision  during  the  seance),  who  had  been  re- 
ceived at  the  court  of  Marie  Antoinette,  and  who  died 
in  Geneva  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  century  ;  it 
was  only  upon  arriving  before  the  house  in  which 
he  had  lived,  and  as  she  was  upon  the  verge  of  en- 
tering it,  that  I  finally  succeeded  in  awakening  and 
restoring  her  to  herself,  without  memory  of  the  in- 
cident, and  very  much  astonished  at  the  unaccus- 
tomed streets  in  which  we  found  ourselves. 

It  is  useless  to  give  a  more  circumstantial  narra- 
tion of  these  dinners  and  soirees  of  Marie  Antoinette. 
They  are  very  entertaining  for  the  spectators,  but  lose 
much  of  their  interest  when  related  in  their  entirety. 
Their  details  are  exactly  what  might  be  expected 
of  a  lively  subliminal  imagination,  alert  and  full  of 
verve,  abundantly  supplied,  on  account  of  the  illus- 
trious queen,  with  notions  still  more  easily  explica- 
ble, thanks  to  the  intellectual  atmosphere  of  France, 
than  those  of  the  Hindoo  cycle. 

Numerous  anachronisms,  however,  slip  into  them, 
and  her  Majesty  sometimes  falls  into  the  snares 
2  353 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

which  the  marquis  or  Phihppe  take  a  mahcious 
pleasure  in  setting  for  her.  She  often  escapes  them 
when  they  are  too  chmisy,  and,  with  a  most  comical 
display  of  temper,  is  at  first  confused,  then  curiously 
questions,  or  manifests  uneasiness  in  regard  to  the 
mental  state  of  her  interlocutors  when  they  intro- 
duce the  telephone,  the  bicycle,  steamships,  or  the 
modern  scientific  vocabulary  into  their  eighteenth- 
century  conversation.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  she 
herself  employs  terms  still  more  malapropos,  such 
as,  "  to  derail ''  (figuratively),  "  metre  "  and  ''  centi- 
metre," etc.  Certain  words,  such  as  ''  tramway  "  and 
"photography,"  have  occasioned  serious  conflicts. 
Marie  Antoinette  first  allows  the  treacherous  word 
to  pass  unnoticed,  and  it  is  evident  that  she  perfectly 
understood  it,  but  her  own  reflection,  or  the  smile  of 
the  sitters,  awakens  in  her  the  feeling  of  incompati- 
bility ;  she  returns  to  the  word  just  used,  and  pre- 
tends a  sudden  ignorance  and  astonishment  in  re- 
gard to  it.  Spiritism  explains  these  blunders  by 
accusing  the  Machiavelian  companions  of  the  queen 
of  grossly  abusing  the  suggestibility  attached  to 
the  trance  state  by  jumbling  her  ideas  and  throw- 
ing her  into  confusion.  Psychology  is  not  sur- 
prised that  the  subliminal  imitation,  however  re- 
markable it  may  be,  presents  some  little  defects,  and 
every  one  is  in  accord  in  regard  to  her  thought- 
less manner  of  expressing  herself,  in  attributing 
these  anachronisms  to  an  accidental  mingling  of 
the  memories  of  her  ordinary  personality  and  of  the 
present  life  with  those  of  the  royal  personality  re- 
vived during   the   somnambulism.     In  her  role  as 

354 

THE   ROYAL  CYCLE 

queen.  Mile.  Smith  gives  evidence  of  a  great  deal 
of  ingenuity.  She  is  full  of  witty  repartees,  which 
disconcert  her  interlocutors,  the  style  of  which  is 
sometimes  perfectly  after  the  manner  of  the  epoch. 

This  ease  and  readiness  of  dialogue,  excluding 
all  reflective  or  calculating  preparation,  denote  a 
great  freedom  of  mind  and  a  wonderful  facility  for 
improvisation.  There  are  mixed  with  these,  on  the 
other  hand,  some  witticisms  and  episodes  which  are 
not  at  all  impromptu,  but  are  the  evident  result  of  a 
preliminary  elaboration  in  the  course  of  the  sub- 
conscious reveries  and  various  automatisms  which 
the  royal  romance  causes  to  surge  up  in  Helene's 
ordinary  life. 

There  are  some  scenes  whose  development  or  repe- 
tition can  be  followed  in  a  series  of  seances  and  spon- 
taneous visions  as  it  passes  through  the  other  cycles. 
The  following  is  one  example  among  many  : 

At  the  end  of  a  seance  at  which  M.  de  Morsier  was 
present  (October  lo,  1897),  Mile.  Smith  enters  into 
her  dream  of  Marie  Antoinette.  During  dinner  she 
makes  several  allusions  to  her  son,  the  Dauphin, 
speaks  of  her  daughter,  tells  of  having  demanded  of 
her  sorcerer  the  sex  of  her  next  child,  etc. — matters 
all  foreign  to  the  conversation  of  Philippe,  and  which 
seem  to  announce  some  underlying  scene  ready  to 
break  forth.  In  fact,  in  the  middle  of  the  soiree 
the  queen  becomes  absorbed  and  distrait,  and  finally 
falls  on  her  knees  in  a  dark  corner  of  the  salon  ;  her 
monologue  indicates  that  she  is  before  the  cradle 
where  the  little  Dauphin  and  his  sister  are  lying 
asleep.     Presently  she  returns  to  seek  Philippe  and 

355 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

to  conduct  him  to  admire  the  sleeping  children,  to 
whom,  in  a  very  soft  voice,  she  sings  an  unknown 
nursery  rhyme  ("  Sleep  in  peace,"  etc.)  of  a  plaintive 
melody  analogous  to  that  of  the  Hindoo  chant  ;  the 
tears  gush  from  her  eyes  ;  tender  kisses  upon  the 
imaginary  cradle  and  a  fervent  prayer  to  the  Virgin 
terminate  this  extremely  touching  maternal  scene. 

Several  weeks  after  (the  1st  of  December),  a  new 
romance  makes  its  appearance  in  a  spontaneous 
access  of  visual,  auditive,  and  graphic  automatism,- 
the  recital  of  which  Helene  sent  me  the  following 
day.  That  evening,  while  alone  with  her  mother,  she 
had  interrogated  Leopold  upon  an  affair  in  which 
she  was  greatly  interested,  and  had  obtained  from 
him  an  answer :  "  As  soon  as  his  communication 
was  ended,  I  saw  everything  disturbed  around  me ; 
then  at  my  left,  at  a  distance  of  about  thirty  feet,  a 
Louis  XVI.  salon,  not  very  large,  was  outlined,  in 
the  middle  of  which  was  a  square  piano,  open.  Be- 
fore this  piano  was  seated  a  woman,  still  young, 
the  color  of  whose  hair  I  could  not  distinguish. 
Whether  it  was  blond  or  gray  I  could  not  clearly 
see.  She  played  and  sang  at  the  same  time.  The 
sounds  of  the  piano,  the  voice  even,  reached  me,  but 
I  could  not  catch  the  words  of  the  song.  A  young 
girl  and  a  boy  stood  on  either  side  of  the  piano.  Not 
far  from  them  was  seated  a  young  lady  holding 
an  infant  on  her  lap.'''  This  charming  vision  lasted 
a  very  short  time,  not  longer  than  ten  minutes." 

*  It  will   be    readily    understood    that   this    vision    represents 
Marie  Antoinette  with  her  three  children  and  Madame  Elizabeth. 

356 

THE  ROYAL  CYCLE 

After  the  disappearance  of  the  vision,  Helene  had 
the  idea  of  taking  up  her  pencil.  "  With  pencil  in  hand, 
1  was  asking  myself  what  1  should  write,  when  all  at 
once  I  heard  again  the  melody  ;  then,  this  time  very 
distinctly,  the  words,  but  without  any  vision.  The 
whole  passed  into  my  head,  into  my  brain,  and 
instinctively  1  pressed  my  hand  to  my  forehead  in 
order  to  hear  and  understand  better.  1  felt  myself 
compelled  to  hold  the  pencil  in  a  manner  different 
from  my  habitual  way  of  holding  it.  Here  are  the 
words  of  the  song  heard  and  traced  at  that  instant. 
As  you  see,  the  handwriting  is  not  like  mine  ;  there 
are  also  some  very  glaring  errors  of  orthography. 

"  Approchez-vous  approchez-vous  |  enfans  cheris  approchez- 
vous  I  quand  le  printemps  sur  nous  ramene  |  ses  frais  parfums 
ses  rayons  d'or  |  venez  enfans  sous  son  haleine  |  gazouiller  bas 
mes  doux  tresors  |  approchez  -  vous  approchez -vous  |  enfans 
cheris  approchez-vous  |  etres  cheris  enfans  benis — approchez- 
vous  de  votre  mere  |  son  doux  baiser  petits  amis  |  calme  et  guerit 
toutes  miseres  |  approchez-vous  approchez-vous  |  enfans  cheris 
approchez-vous."* 

Some  months  later  the  two  preceding  scenes  were 
reproduced,  with  variations  of  detail,  on  the  same 
evening,  during  which  Marie  Antoinette  first  con- 
ducts Philippe  towards  the  fictitious  cradle  of  her 
cherubs  and  sings  to  them  her  first  song  :  ''  Sleep  in 

*I  have  respected  the  orthography  as  well  as  the  complete  ab- 
sense  of  punctuation  of  this  bit  of  automatic  writing,  confining 
myself  to  marking  by  vertical  bars  its  evident  separation  into 
verses  of  eight  feet.  It  is  written  in  the  inclined  and  regular 
hand  called  that  of  Marie  Antoinette  (like  that  of  Fig.  40),  but 
with  a  pencil  too  pale  to  permit  its  reproduction. 

357 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

peace/'  etc.  Then  she  leads  him  to  the  piano,  and, 
displaying  an  imaginary  sheet  of  music  beneath 
his  eyes,  obliges  him  to  accompany  her  while  she 
sings  the  "  Song  of  Elizabeth." 

M.  de  Horsier,  who,  fortunately,  is  not  easily  em- 
barrassed, improvised  an  accompaniment  to  which 
the  queen  accommodated  herself  after  some  criti- 
cism, and  to  which  she  sings  in  a  very  sweet,  pure 
voice  some  words  which  were  found  to  be,  word  for 
word,  identical  with  those  automatically  written  by 
Helene  on  the  preceding  1st  of  December.  In  this 
example  is  seen  the  mixture  of  preparation,  of  repe- 
tition, and  of  impromptu,  which  are  inferred  from  the 
varied  incidents  which  constitute  the  royal  soirees. 

It  is  probable  that  if  it  were  possible  to  be  a  witness 
of,  or  if  Mile.  Smith  could  remember  all  the  spon- 
taneous automatisms  which  aid  in  nourishing  the 
royal  romance,  nocturnal  dreams,  hypnagogic  vi- 
sions, subconscious  reveries  during  the  waking  state, 
etc.,  there  would  be  presented  interminable  imagi- 
nary conversations  with  the  marquis,  Philippe,  Cag- 
liostro,  and  all  the  fictitious  personages  who  occa- 
sionally make  their  appearance  in  the  somnambu- 
listic scenes  of  Marie  Antoinette. 

It  is  by  this  underlying  and  unknown  work,  per- 
haps never  interrupted,  that  the  personality  of  the 
queen  of  France  is  slowly  prepared  and  elaborated, 
and  which  shines  forth  and  displays  itself  with  so 
much  of  magnificence  in  the  soirees  with  Philippe 
d'Orleans  and  the  Marquis  de  Mirabeau. 

I  have  stated  that,  except  these  two  gentlemen, 
who  always  form  part  of  the  royal  dream  when  they 

358 

THE  ROYAL  CYCLE 

are  present  (and  even  sometimes  when  absent),  the 
others  present  at  the  seances  are  excluded.  It  is 
understood  that  they  do  not  pass  unperceived  on 
this  account. 

In  the  same  manner  as  in  the  negative  hallucina- 
tions or  systematic  anaesthesia  of  hypnotized  sub- 
jects, that  which  seems  to  be  not  felt  is  nevertheless 
registered  :  so,  in  like  manner,  it  is  altogether  prob- 
able that  nothing  of  that  which  passes  around  her 
escapes  the  fundamental  individuality  of  Mile.  Smith. 
The  royal  personality  which  occupies  the  foreground 
of  the  scene  and  finds  itself  in  an  elective  rapport, 
limited  to  Philippe  and  the  marquis,  merely  causes 
the  other  personalities  to  be  relegated  to  the  back- 
ground without  breaking  their  connection  with  the 
environment.  There  are  many  proofs  of  this.  For 
example,  in  walking,  Marie  Antoinette  never  runs 
against  any  of  the  others  present.  The  remarks  and 
criticisms  of  the  latter  are  not  lost  upon  her,  since 
very  frequently  her  conversation  betrays  their  in- 
fluence after  some  minutes.  At  the  same  time,  if 
any  one  pinches  her  hand  or  tickles  her  ear,  her  lips, 
her  nostrils,  she  seems  anaesthetic  ;  still,  at  the  end 
of  a  few  seconds  she  turns  her  head  away,  and  if  the 
tickling  is  persisted  in,  she  experiences  a  kind  of 
agitation  accommodated  to  the  circumstances  of  her 
dream,  changes  her  position  on  some  pretext,  etc. 

It  is  manifest,  in  short,  that  the  excitations  to 
which  she  seems  to  be  insensible  at  the  moment,  far 
from  having  no  effect,  are  stored  up  and  produce,  by 
their  sum  total,  reactions  which  are  retarded  for  some 
minutes  and  which  are  intelligently  adapted  to  the 

359 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

somnambulistic  scene,  but  with  an  intensity  much 
more  exaggerated  than  diminished  by  this  period  of 
latency. 

Music  also  affects  her,  precipitating  her  out  of  the 
dream  of  Marie  Antoinette  into  a  common  hypnotic 
state,  in  which  she  assumes  passionate  attitudes, 
which  have  in  them  nothing  of  the  regal,  and  which 
conform  to  the  varied  airs  which  follow  each  other 
upon  the  piano. 

In  her  phases  as  Marie  Antoinette,  Helene  has  an 
accent  characteristic  of  it;  she  recognizes  me  vaguely; 
she  has  some  allochiria,  a  complete  insensibility  of 
the  hands,  and  a  large  appetite ;  she  does  not  know 
who  Mile.  Smith  is  ;  if  she  is  asked  to  give  the  actual 
date,  she  replies  correctly  as  to  the  month  and  day, 
but  indicates  a  year  of  the  last  century,  etc.  Then  all 
at  once  her  state  changes ;  the  royal  accent  gives 
wa3^  to  her  ordinary  voice,  she  seems  wide  awake, 
all  mental  confusion  has  disappeared,  she  is  perfect- 
ly clear  as  to  persons,  dates,  and  circumstances,  but 
has  no  memory  of  the  state  from  which  she  has  just 
emerged,  and  she  complains  of  a  sharp  pain  in  her 
finger  (where  I  had  pinched  it  while  in  her  preceding 
phase).  I  took  advantage  one  day  of  these  alter- 
nations to  offer  her  a  pencil,  and  dictated  to  her  the 
sentence  of  Fig.  42.  In  her  normal  moments  she 
holds  the  pencil  in  her  accustomed  manner,  between 
the  index  and  middle  fingers,  and  writes  in  her 
usual  hand ;  during  the  returns  of  the  royal  som- 
nambulism she  holds  it  between  the  thumb  and 
index-finger  and  assumes  her  handwriting  and  or- 
thography   known    as    that    of    Marie    Antoinette^ 

369 

THE  ROYAL  CYCLE 

exactly  as  her  voice  is  invested  with  the  accent. 
It  is  to  be  presumed  that  all  her  other  functions,  if 
one  could  examine  them,  would  show  parallel  anal- 
ogous variations,  the  changing  of  the  personality 
being  naturally  accompanied  by  connected  changes 
not  only  of  the  memory  and  the  sensibility,  but  of 
motility  of  the  emotional  disposition — in  brief,  of  all 
the  faculties  of  the  individuality. 

1  must  add  that  in  each  of  her  states  Helene  has 
the  memory  of  preceding  periods  of  the  same  kind, 
but  not  of  another  state  :  it  was,  for  example,  neces- 
sary to  dictate  anew,  for  the  second  test,  the  sentence 
of  Fig.  42,  which  she  did  not  remember  having  heard 
or  written  a  few  minutes  previously.  This  separa- 
tion into  distinct  memories  is  not,  however,  absolute, 
nor  very  profound  :  the  personality  of  Marie  An- 

c-oe^      -e^' 

Fig.  42.  Differences  of  handwriting  of  Mile.  Smith  at  the  end  of  an  incarnation  of 
Marie  Antoinette,  according  to  whether  she  is  in  her  normal  state  (upper  lines,  in 
her  usual  handwriting),  or  in  a  return  of  the  royal  dream  (lower  lines;  note  the 
viorA/oisoit).  Natural  size.  The  tremor  of  some  of  the  strokes  is  not  in  thf 
original,  but  occurred  in  the  reproduction  in  ink. 

36J 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

toinette  is,  in  short,  a  modification — of  an  intensity 
and  extent  which  vary  greatly  with  the  seances — of 
the  ordinary  personaHty  of  Mile.  Smith,  rather  than 
an  alternating  and  exclusive  personality,  of  which  so 
many  striking  cases  have  been  observed. 

For  the  mere  spectators,  the  royal  somnambulism  is 
perhaps  the  most  interesting  of  all  of  Helene's  cycles, 
on  account  of  the  brilliancy  and  life  of  the  role,  the 
length  of  time  during  which  it  may  be  sustained, 
the  unexpected  happenings  which  the  presence  of 
other  real  persons  brings  into  it.  It  is  truly  a  com- 
edy. 

But  for  the  lovers  of  the  supernormal  it  is  the  least 
extraordinary  of  the  subliminal  creations  of  Mile. 
Smith,  because  the  general  environment,  being  in 
France,  is  so  imbued  with  historic  or  legendary  mem- 
ories of  the  illustrious  and  unfortunate  queen  that 
there  is  nothing  surprising  in  the  hypnoid  recon- 
struction of  a  personage  so  well  known. 

Finally,  the  psychologist  and  moralist  who  un- 
dertakes to  reflect  on  the  inner  meaning  of  things 
cannot  escape  the  impression  of  sharp  contrast  as 
compared  with  reality  which  this  sparkling  romance 
affords. 

In  themselves.  Mile.  Smith's  royal  somnambulisms 
are  almost  always  gay  and  joyous  ;  but,  considering 
their  hidden  source,  in  so  far  as  they  are  the  ephe- 
meral and  chimerical  revenge  of  the  ideal  upon  the 
real,  of  impossible  dreams  upon  daily  necessities,  of 
impotent  aspirations  upon  blind  and  crushing  des- 
tiny, they  assume  a  tragic  signification.  They  ex- 
press the  sensation  lived  through,  felt,  of  the  bitter 

362 

THE   ROYAL  CYCLE 

irony  of  things,  of  futile  revolt,  of  fatality  dominat- 
ing the  human  being.  They  seem  to  say  that  all 
happy  and  brilliant  life  is  only  an  illusion  soon  dis- 
pated.  The  daily  annihilation  of  the  dream  and  the 
desire  by  implacable  and  brutal  reality  cannot  find 
in  the  hypnoid  imagination  a  more  adequate  repre- 
sentation, a  more  perfect  symbol  of  an  emotional 
tonality,  than  her  royal  majesty  whose  existence 
seemed  made  for  the  highest  peaks  of  happiness 
and  of  fame — and  ended  on  the  scaffold. 

CHAPTER  X 

SUPERNORMAL    APPEARANCES 

THE  mediumship  of  Mile.  Smith  is  full  of  facts 
supernormal  in  appearance,  and  the  question 
which  offers  itself  for  our  solution  is  that  of 
determining  to  what  extent  they  are  super- 
normal in  reality. 

The  title  of  this  chapter,  I  must  assert,  is  not  to  be 
understood  in  a  partisan  sense.  The  term  "  appear- 
ances "  is  not  used  in  its  unfavorable  acceptation,  as 
meaning  that  they  are  deceptive,  and  that  there  is 
nothing  behind  them.  It  is  taken  in  a  frank  and  im- 
partial sense,  to  designate  simply  the  exterior  and 
immediate  aspect  of  a  thing,  without  prejudging  its 
real  nature,  in  order,  by  the  very  force  of  this  neutral- 
ity, to  provoke  investigation  destined  to  separate  the 
true  from  the  false,  the  pure  gold  from  the  dross.  It 
is  precisely  this  investigation  which  constitutes  my 
present  task. 

A  rather  difficult  task,  for  it  is  always  risky  to 
touch  upon  a  subject  which  is  an  apple  of  discord 
among  psychologists,  and  which  has  even  been 
considered  the  ''  Dreyfus  case  of  science."  The  mat- 
ter is  complicated,  too,  in  this  particular  case,  by  the 
absolute  faith  of  Mile.  Smith  and  her  friends  in  the 

364 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

supernormal  character  of  her  phenomena  ;  a  state  of 
mind  extremely  worthy  of  respect^  but  which  is  not 
calculated  to  facilitate  research^  all  desire  of  or- 
dinary analysis  and  explanation  being  resented  by 
them  as  an  unjustifiable  suspicion,  interpreted  as 
being  an  indication  of  invincible  skepticism. 

I.  The  Study  of  the  Supernormal 

The  term  "  supernormal  '^  has  been  used  for  some 
years  by  the  investigators  of  the  Society  for  Psychi- 
cal Research  to  take  the  place  of  the  old  word  "  su- 
pernatural," which  has  become  impracticable  on 
account  of  interloping  connections,  which  finally 
caused  its  use  to  be  limited  to  theological  and  philo- 
sophical environments.  Mr.  Meyers,  to  whom  the 
credit  is  due,  if  1  am  not  mistaken,  of  coining  this  as 
well  as  many  other  new  terms  used  to-day  in  the  psy- 
chical vocabulary,  applies  it  to  every  phenomenon  or 
faculty  which  passes  beyond  ordinary  experience,  and 
reveals  either  a  degree  of  higher  evolution  not  yet  at- 
tained by  the  mass  of  humanity,  or  an  order  of  tran- 
scendental things  superior  to  the  world  of  sense.  In 
these  two  cases  one  finds  one's  self,  indeed,  in  the  pres- 
ence of  facts  which  are  above  the  normal,  but  which 
are  by  no  means  to  be  taken  as  foreign  or  contrary  to 
the  true  laws  of  human  nature  (as  the  word  "  super- 
natural "  would  imply) . 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  definition  of  Mr.  Meyers 
lays  stress  upon  the  character  of  superiority  of  su- 
pernormal phenomena.  I  shall,  however,  separate 
this  character  from  it  in  the  present  chapter,  and  in 

365 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

spite  of  the  etymology,  and  for  lack  of  any  better 
term,  shall  simply  use  the  word  "  supernormal  "  to 
designate  facts  which  come  within  the  actual  frame- 
work of  the  science  of  to-day,  and  the  application  of 
which  would  necessitate  principles  not  yet  admitted 
— without  occupying  myself,  however,  with  endeav- 
oring to  ascertain  whether  these  facts  are  messengers 
of  a  superior  economy  or  forerunners  of  a  future  evolu- 
tion rather  than  the  survival  of  a  condition  of  things 
which  has  disappeared,  or  whether  they  are  purely 
accidental,  lusus  naturae,  denuded  of  signification. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  in  treating  of  the  super- 
normal we  must  admit  theoretically  its  possibility,  or 
— which  amounts  to  about  the  same  thing — fail  to  be- 
lieve in  the  infallibility  and  perfection  of  present-day 
science.  If  I  consider  it,  a  priori,  absolutely  impossi- 
ble for  an  individual  to  know,  some  time  before  the  ar- 
rival of  a  telegram  containing  the  news,  of  an  accident 
by  which  his  brother  at  the  antipodes  has  been  killed, 
or  that  another  can  voluntarily  move  an  object  at  a 
distance  without  having  a  string  attached  to  it,  and 
contrary  to  the  laws  of  mechanics  and  physiology,  it 
is  clear  that  I  will  shrug  my  shoulders  at  every  men- 
tion of  telepathy,  and  I  shall  not  move  a  step  to  be 
present  at  a  seance  of  Eusapia  Paladino.  What  an 
excellent  means  of  enlarging  one's  horizon  and  of 
discovering  something  new,  by  being  satisfied  with 
one's  ready-made  science  and  preconceived  opinion, 
quite  convinced  beforehand  that  the  universe  ends  at 
the  wall  opposite,  and  that  there  is  nothing  to  be  ob- 
tained beyond  that  which  the  daily  routine  has  accus- 
tomed us  to  look  upon  as  the  limit  of  the  Real  !     This 

366 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

philosophy  of  the  ostrich,  illustrated  formerly  by  those 
grotesque  monuments  of  erudition — over  whom  Gali- 
leo did  not  know  whether  to  laugh  or  weep — who  re- 
fused to  put  their  eyes  to  the  glass  for  fear  of  seeing 
something  that  had  no  official  right  to  existence ;  and, 
again,  that  of  many  brains  petrified  by  the  unseason- 
able reading  of  works  of  scientific  vulgarization,  and 
the  unintelligent  frequenting  of  universities — these 
are  the  two  great  intellectual  dangers  of  our  time. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  philosophical  doubt  de- 
generates in  the  presence  of  these  scientific  impos- 
sibilities into  blind  credulity ;  if  it  suffices  that  a  thing 
be  unheard  of,  upsetting,  contrary  to  common-sense 
and  to  accepted  truths,  in  order  to  be  immediately 
admitted,  practical  existence,  without  speaking  of 
other  considerations,  becomes  unbearable.  The 
convinced  occultist  ought  never  to  allow  the  creak- 
ing of  a  piece  of  furniture  to  pass  without  assuring 
himself  that  it  is  not  the  desperate  call  of  some  great- 
grandaunt  trying  to  enter  into  conversation  with 
him  ;  nor  to  complain  to  the  police  when  he  finds  his 
house  upset  during  his  absence — for  how  is  he  to 
know  that  it  is  not  some  "  elementals  "  from  the 
world  beyond  who  have  done  the  deed  ?  It  is  by  the 
fortunate  failure  of  consequences  alone,  and  a  con- 
tinual forgetting  of  the  doctrine,  that  one  can  con- 
tinue to  live  in  a  universe  constantly  exposed  to  the 
capricious  incursions  of  the  ''invisibles.'' 

These  opposite  turns  of  the  mind — the  invincible 
fatuity  of  some  and  the  silly  superstition  of  others — 
inspire  many  people  with  an  equal  repugnance.  The 
need  of  a  happy  medium  between  these  opposed  ex- 

367 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

cesses  has  been  felt  for  some  time.  Here  are,  for 
example,  a  few  lines,  which  have  lost  nothing  after 
the  lapse  of  two  centuries  : 

''  What  are  we  to  think  of  magic  and  witchcraft 
[to-day  we  would  say  '  occultism  '  and  '  spiritism  ']? 
Their  theory  is  obscure,  their  principles  vague,  un- 
certain, approaching  the  visionary  ;  but — they  are 
embarrassing  facts,  affirmed  by  grave  men,  who 
have  seen  them,  or  who  have  heard  of  them  from  per- 
sons like  themselves ;  to  admit  them  all,  or  to  deny 
them  all,  seems  equally  embarrassing,  and  I  dare 
to  assert  that  in  this,  as  in  all  extraordinary  things 
which  depend  upon  customary  rules,  there  is  a  happy 
medium  to  be  found  between  credulous  souls  and 
strong  minds/' 

It  is  the  voice  of  reason  itself  that  the  sagacious 
author  of  Les  Caracteres  permits  us  to  hear.  We 
must,  however,  add  that  this  "  happy  medium  to  be 
found  "  would  not  consist  in  a  theory,  a  doctrine,  a 
ready-made  and  entire  system,  from  the  height  of 
which,  as  from  a  tribunal  of  arbitration,  we  would 
judge  the  "  embarrassing  cases  "  which  reality  places 
in  the  path  of  the  seeker  ;  for  this  system — how- 
ever perfect  it  might  be — would  again  be  one  more 
infallibility  added  to  all  those  which  already  encum- 
ber the  road  to  truth.  The ''  happy  medium  "  dreamed 
of  by  La  Bruyere  can  be  but  a  "  method "  always 
perfectible  in  its  application  and  prejudging  in  noth- 
ing the  results  of  investigation  which  go  against 
the  grain  of  the  dogmatic  points  of  view,  equally 
authoritative  and  sterile,  which  characterize  the  two 
extremes  of  the "  credulous  souls  "  and  "  strong  minds." 

368 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

To  develop  here  this  methodology  of  psychical 
research  which  might  guide  the  investigator  strug- 
gling with  the  apparent  or  real  supernormal,  would 
take  me  too  far  from  Mile.  Smith.  But  I  will  briefly 
indicate  its  essence  and  general  spirit,  of  which  an 
excellent  summary  may  be  found  in  the  following 
passage  of  Laplace : 

"  We  are  so  far  from  knowing  all  the  agents  of 
nature  and  their  divers  modes  of  action  that  it  would 
not  be  philosophical  to  deny  phenomena  solely  be- 
cause they  are  inexplicable  in  the  actual  state  of  our 
knowledge.  But  we  ought  to  examine  them  with 
an  attention  all  the  more  scrupulous  as  it  appears 
more  difficult  to  admit  them." 

In  writing  these  words  Laplace  hardly  thought  of 
telepathy,  of  the  spirits,  or  the  movements  of  objects 
without  contact,  but  onl}^  of  animal  magnetism, 
which  represented  the  supernormal  of  his  time.  This 
passage  remains  none  the  less  the  rule  of  conduct 
to  be  followed  concerning  all  the  possible  manifesta- 
tions of  this  multiform  subject.  Two  inseparable 
facts,  completing  each  other,  as  the  faces  of  a  medal, 
may  be  distinguished  in  it  ;  but  it  is  advisable,  in 
order  to  place  them  the  better  in  the  light,  to  formu- 
late them  separately  into  two  propositions  represent- 
ing the  governing  principles,  the  axioms  of  all  inves- 
tigations of  the  supernormal.  The  one,  which  1  shall 
call  "  Principle  of  Hamlet,"  may  be  condensed 
in  these  words  :  All  is  possible.  The  other,  to  which 
it  is  but  just  to  leave  the  name  of  "  PRINCIPLE  OF 
Laplace,"  is  susceptible  of  many  forms  of  expres- 
sion. 1  shall  express  it  thus  :  The  weight  of  the 
2  A  369 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

evidence  should  be  proportioned  to  the  strangeness  of  the 
facts. 

The  forgetfulness  of  the  "  Principle  of  Hamlet  " 
makes  the  "  strong  minds/'  for  whom  the  limits  of 
nature  would  not  exceed  those  of  their  system,  the 
simpleton  popes  of  all  times  and  of  all  kinds,  from 
the  burlesque  adversaries  of  Galileo  to  the  poor  Au- 
guste  Comte,  declaring  that  the  physical  constitution 
of  the  stars  would  never  be  known,  and  to  his  noble 
rivals  of  the  learned  societies,  denying  the  aerolites  or 
condemning  railroads  beforehand.  In  its  turn,  the 
ignorance  of  the  ''  Principle  of  Laplace  "  makes  the 
"  credulous  souls,"  who  have  never  reflected  that,  if 
all  is  possible  to  the  eyes  of  the  modest  seeker,  all  is, 
however,  not  certain,  or  even  equally  possible,  and 
that  some  evidence  would  yet  be  necessary  in  order 
to  suppose  that  a  stone  falling  on  the  floor  in  an  oc- 
cult reunion  arrived  there  through  the  walls  by  the 
aid  of  a  dematerialization,  rather  than  to  admit  that 
it  came  there  in  the  pocket  of  a  joker. 

Thanks  to  these  axioms,  the  investigator  will  avoid 
the  doubly  signalled  danger,  and  will  advance  with- 
out fear  into  the  labyrinth  of  the  supernormal  in  ad- 
vance of  the  monsters  of  the  occult.  However  fan- 
tastic and  magical  the  things  may  be  which  will 
spring  up  before  his  eyes  or  which  will  fill  his  ears, 
he  will  never  be  taken  unawares,  but,  expecting  all 
in  the  name  of  the  "  Principle  of  Hamlet,"  he  will  not 
be  astonished  at  anything,  and  simply  say  :  "  Be  it 
so  !  Why  not  ?  We  shall  see."  On  the  other  hand, 
he  will  not  allow  the  wool  to  be  pulled  over  his  eyes, 
and  he  will  not  easily  be  satisfied  in  the  matter  of 

370 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

evidence ;  but,  firmly  intrenched  behind  the  "  Prin- 
ciple of  Laplace/'  he  will  show  himself  all  the  more 
exacting  as  to  the  proofs,  in  proportion  to  the  degree 
in  which  the  phenomena  or  the  conclusion,  which 
they  may  wish  him  to  accept,  may  be  extraordinary, 
and  he  will  oppose  a  merciless  non  liquet  to  every 
demonstration  which  still  seems  suspicious  or  lame. 

1  wish  to  speak  a  word  here  of  the  inevitable  role 
which  the  personal  coefficient  of  the  turn  of  mind  and 
character  plays  in  the  concrete  application  of  the 
"  Principle  of  Laplace."  This  latter  is  of  a  vague- 
ness and  a  deplorable  elasticity  which  opens  the  door 
to  all  divergences  of  individual  appreciation.  If  we 
could  express  in  a  precise  manner  and  translate  in 
ciphers,  on  the  one  hand,  the  strangeness  of  a  fact, 
which  makes  it  improbable;  on  the  other  hand,  the 
weight  of  evidence  which  tends  to  make  it  admissible  ; 
and,  finally,  the  demandable  proportion  between  these 
two  contrary  factors,  so  that  the  second  may  counter- 
balance the  first  and  secure  assent — that  would  be 
perfect,  and  everybody  would  soon  come  to  an  agree- 
ment. Unhappily,  the  means  to  accomplish  this  re- 
sult is  not  yet  perceived. 

We  must  pass  now  to  the  weight  of  the  evidence. 
We  may,  up  to  a  certain  point,  submit  it  to  an  objec- 
tive judgment  and  to  an  impartial  estimation  by 
following  the  rules  and  methods  of  logic,  in  the 
broadest  sense  of  the  term.  But  the  strangeness  of 
the  facts,  or,  as  Laplace  said,  the  difficulty  in  ad- 
mitting them !  Who,  then,  is  to  be  the  judge  of 
them,  and  by  what  universal  standard  can  we 
measure  them  ? 

371 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

We  must  recognize  that  we  are  here  in  presence 
of  an  eminently  subjective  and  emotional  factor, 
changeable  from  one  individual  to  another. 

It  is  necessary  to  take  some  stand.  In  the  mat- 
ter of  the  supernormal  there  are  too  many  interior 
and  personal  factors  (intellectual  idiosyncrasies, 
£esthetic  temperaments,  moral  and  religious  senti- 
ments, metaphysical  tendencies,  etc.)  tending  to 
determine  the  quality  and  intensity  of  the  character- 
istic of  the  strangeness  in  the  facts  in  litigation, 
to  enable  one  to  flatter  himself  upon  a  disinterested, 
objective,  and  quasi-scientific  verdict  upon  their  de- 
gree of  probability  or  improbability.  It  is  only  when, 
after  the  accumulation  of  cases  and  evidences  of 
similar  character,  a  tacit  agreement  shall  finally  have 
been  reached  by  those  who  have  studied  the  subject, 
that  the  problem  can  be  said  to  be  solved,  either  by 
the  relegation  of  pretended  supernormal  phenomena 
to  the  domain  of  vanished  illusions  and  abandoned 
superstitions,  or  by  the  recognition  of  new  laws  and 
forces  in  nature.  The  phenomena  considered  till 
then  as  supernatural  will  cease  to  be  so  ;  they  will 
form  a  part  of  established  science,  they  will  have 
nothing  more  in  them  that  is  strange,  and  will  be 
admitted  by  everybody.  As  long  as  this  mile-post 
is  not  reached,  as  long  as  the  supernormal  phenom- 
enon is  discussed  as  such,  there  are  but  individual 
opinions  on  this  subject,  subjective  certitudes  or 
probabilities,  verdicts  in  which  reality  is  only  re- 
flected as  closely  welded  to  the  personality  of  their 
authors. 

Two  suggestions  seem  to  me  to  spring  from  this. 

372 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

First,  authors  who  take  it  upon  themselves  to  give 
their  advice  upon  the  extraordinary  facts  coming 
to  their  knowledge  ought  always  to  begin  by  mak- 
ing their  confession,  so  that  the  reader  may  the 
better  distinguish  the  intimate  factors  which  may 
have  influenced  them.  It  is  true  that  we  are  not 
always  thoroughly  acquainted  with  ourselves,  but  it 
would  be  something  to  say  frankly  what  we  believe 
we  have  discovered  in  ourselves  as  to  the  position 
involuntarily  taken  by  us,  obscure  inclinations  for 
or  against  the  hypothesis  involved  in  the  phenome- 
na in  question.  This  is  what  I  shall  try  to  do  here, 
by  confining  myself  to  the  problems  raised  by  the 
mediumship  of  Mile.  Smith,  and  without  entering 
upon  the  boundless  domain  of  "psychical  research." 
I  shall,  therefore,  begin  each  of  the  following  para- 
graphs by  giving  my  personal  advice  and  my  sub- 
jective sentiment  on  the  point  upon  which  Helene's 
supernormal  appearances  touch. 

It  seems  to  me,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  only 
rational  position  to  take,  concerning  the  supernor- 
mal, is,  if  not  a  complete  suspension  of  judgment, 
which  is  not  always  psychologically  possible,  at 
least  that  of  a  wise  probability,  exempt  from  all  dog- 
matic obstinacy.  The  fixed  beliefs,  the  unshaka- 
ble opinions  as  to  the  reality  and  the  meaning  of 
life,  are  certainly  subjective  conditions,  indispen- 
sable to  all  properly  moral  conduct,  to  all  human 
existence  truly  worthy  of  this  name — that  is  to  say, 
all  that  which  pretends  to  be  above  the  animal  rou- 
tine of  inherited  instincts  and  social  slavery.  But 
these  firm  convictions  would  be  absolutely  misplaced 

373 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

on  the  objective  ground  of  science,  and  consequently 
also  that  of  supernormal  facts,  which,  though  still 
situated  outside  of  the  scientific  realm,  hope  shortly 
to  be  received  within  its  pale.  Practical  necessities 
make  us  but  too  often  forget  that  our  knowledge  of 
the  phenomenal  world  never  attains  absolute  certi- 
tude, and  as  soon  as  one  passes  beyond  the  brutal 
facts  of  the  senses,  the  best-established  truths,  as 
w^ell  as  the  most  thoroughly  refuted  propositions, 
do  not  rise  above  a  probability  which,  however  great 
or  insignificant  we  may  suppose  it  to  be,  never  equals 
infinity  or  zero.  The  intellectual  attitude  which 
common -sense  prescribes  in  the  supernormal  con- 
sists, for  very  strong  reasons,  in  never  absolutely 
and  irrevocably  denying  or  afi&rming,  but  provision- 
all3^  and  by  hypothesis,  as  it  were.  Even  in  cases 
when,  after  having  examined  everything  scrupulous- 
ly, one  imagines  he  has  finally  reached  certitude, 
it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  this  word  is  but  a  mode 
of  expressing  one's  self ;  because,  in  point  of  fact, 
one  does  not  rise  above  a  probable  opinion,  and  the 
possibility  of  an  unsuspected  error,  vitiating  the  most 
apparently  evident  experimental  demonstration,  is 
never  mathematically  excluded. 

This  reserve  is  particularly  indicated  in  cases  of 
phenomena  like  those  of  Mile.  Smith,  which  often 
leave  much  to  be  desired  concerning  accessory  in- 
formation, which  would  be  necessary  in  order  to  ex- 
press one's  self  categorically  on  their  account.  My 
appreciation  of  these  phenomena,  far  from  pretend- 
ing to  an  infallible  and  definite  character,  demands, 
therefore,  from  the  start,  the  right  of  modification 

374 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

under  the  influence  of  new  facts  which  may  be  pro- 
duced subsequently. 

For  the  sake  of  clearness  I  shall  set  off  again  in 
four  groups  the  supernormal  appearances  with  which 
I  shall  have  to  occupy  myself  in  this  chapter — viz., 
so-called  physical  phenomena,  telepathy,  lucidity, 
and  spirit  messages.  The  boundaries  of  these  three 
last  categories  are  but  poorlj^  defined  and  might 
easily  be  fused  into  one.  But  my  division  is  but  a 
kind  of  a  measure  of  order,  and  not  a  classification. 

11.  Physical  Phenomena 

This  designation  again  covers  several  rather  di- 
verse categories  of  strange  facts.  1  shall  only  speak 
of  the  two  kinds  of  which  Mile.  Smith  has  furnished 
samples  (and  which  1  have  never  personally  wit- 
nessed)— that  is  to  say,  "  apports  "  and  "  movements 
of  objects  without  contact." 

I.  Apports r — Besides  the  unknown  causes  pre- 
siding over  their  aerial  transportation,  the  arrival  of 
exterior  objects  in  a  closed  space,  often  coming  from 
a  considerable  distance,  implies,  in  order  that  they 
may  pass  through  the  walls  of  the  room,  either  the 
subterfuge  of  a  fourth  dimension  of  space,  or  the 
penetration  of  the  matter — that  is  to  say,  the  passage 
of  the  molecules  or  atoms  of  the  object  (its  momentary 
dematerialization)  between  the  molecules  or  atoms 
of  the  wall.     All  these  impediments  to  our  vulgar 

*  By  this  is  meant  the  bringing  or  conveying  of  material  ob- 
jects into  a  closed  space — the  passage  of  one  solid  body  through 
another, 

375 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

conception  as  to  the  stability  of  matter,  or,  what  is 
worse,  to  our  geometrical  intuition,  seem  to  me  so 
hard  to  digest  that  1  am  tempted  to  apply  to  them 
the  words  of  Laplace  :  "  There  are  things  that  are  so 
extraordinary  that  nothing  can  counterbalance  their 
improbability."  This  is  not  to  declare  as  false,  a 
priori,  all  the  stories  of  this  kind,  for  we  know  that 
the  true  is  not  always  the  probable  ;  but  assuredly, 
even  in  the  case  of  the  good  Mr.  Stainton  Moses, 
the  weight  of  the  proof  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  equal 
the  strangeness  of  the  facts. 

So  far  as  concerns  the  apports  obtained  at  the 
seances  of  Mile.  Smith,  they  all  took  place  in  1892-93, 
in  the  reunions  of  the  N.  group,  where  the  obscurity 
favored  the  production  of  marvellous  things  in  close 
relation  with  the  visions  and  typtological  messages. 

1  will  cite  from  memory  certain  acoustic  phenom- 
ena mentioned  in  the  reports :  The  piano  sounded 
several  times  under  the  touch  of  the  favorite  disin- 
carnate  spirits  of  the  group ;  the  same  happened  to 
a  violin  and  to  a  bell  ;  once  we  also  heard  metallic 
sounds  that  seemed  to  come  from  a  small  musical 
box,  although  there  was  none  in  the  room.  As  to 
the  apports,  always  received  with  delight  by  the 
members  of  the  group,  who  are  ever  anxiously  wish- 
ing for  them  and  asking  their  spirit  friends  for  them, 
they  were  frequent  and  varied  enough.  In  mid- 
winter roses  showered  upon  the  table,  handfuls  of 
violets,  pinks,  white  lilacs,  etc.,  also  green  branches; 
among  other  things  there  was  an  ivy  leaf  having 
engraved  upon  it  in  letters,  as  though  by  a  punch- 
ing-machine,  the  name  of  one  of  the  principal  dis- 

37^ 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

incarnate  spirits  at  play.  Again,  at  the  tropical  and 
Chinese  visions  sea-shells  were  obtained  that  were 
still  shining  and  covered  with  sand,  Chinese  coins, 
a  little  vase  containing  water,  in  which  there  was 
a  superb  rose,  etc.  These  last  objects  were  brought 
in  a  straight  line  from  the  extreme  East  by  the  spirits, 
in  proof  of  which  they  had  the  honor  of  a  public  pres- 
entation at  a  seance  of  La  Societe  d' Etudes  Psy- 
chiques  de  Geneve,  and  were  placed  upon  the  desk 
of  the  president,  where  all,  myself  included,  could 
satisfy  themselves  at  their  leisure  as  to  their  reality. 

2.  Movements  of  objects  without  contact. — The  dis- 
placing, without  contact  and  in  the  absence  of  all 
known  mechanical  processes,  of  objects  situated 
at  a  distance  (telekinesis),  is  very  strange.  How- 
ever, it  only  upsets  physiological  notions,  and  does 
not,  as  is  the  case  with  the  apports,  go  as  far  as 
to  overthrow  our  conceptions  in  regard  to  the  con- 
stitution of  matter  or  our  spatial  intuitions.  It  only 
supposes  that  the  living  being  possesses  forces  act- 
ing at  a  distance,  or  the  power  of  putting  forth  at  in- 
tervals a  species  of  invisible  supernumerary  prehen- 
sile organs,  capable  of  handling  objects,  as  our  hands 
do  (ectenic  forces  of  Thury,  ectoplasms  of  Richet, 
dynamic  members  of  Ochorowicz,  etc.).  Such  are 
the  ephemeral  but  visible  pseudopodes  that  the  amoe- 
ba puts  forth  in  all  directions. 

It  may  be  conceived  that,  as  the  atom  and  the  mol- 
ecule are  the  centre  of  a  more  or  less  radiating  influ- 
ence of  extension,  so  the  organized  individual,  iso- 
lated cell  or  colony  of  cells,  is  originally  in  possession 
of  a  sphere  of  action,  where  it  concentrates  at  times 

377 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

its  efforts  more  especially  on  one  point,  and  again  on 
others  ad  libitum.  ThroLigh  repetition,  habit,  selec- 
tion, hereditary  and  other  principles  loved  by  biolo- 
gists, certain  more  constant  lines  of  force  would  be 
differentiated  in  this  homogeneous  primordial  sphere, 
and  little  by  little  could  give  birth  to  motor  organs. 
For  example — our  four  members  of  flesh  and  blood, 
sweeping  the  space  around  us,  would  be  but  a  more 
economic  expedient  invented  by  nature,  a  machine 
wrought  in  the  course  of  better  adapted  evolution,  to 
obtain  at  the  least  expense  the  same  useful  effects  as 
this  vague  primitive  spherical  power.  Thus  sup- 
planted or  transformed,  these  powers  would  there- 
after manifest  themselves  only  very  exceptionally, 
in  certain  states,  or  with  abnormal  individuals,  as 
an  atavic  reapparition  of  a  mode  of  acting  long  ago 
fallen  into  disuse,  because  it  is  really  very  imperfect 
and  necessitates,  without  any  advantage,  an  expen- 
diture of  vital  energy  far  greater  than  the  ordinary 
use  of  arms  and  limbs.  Unless  it  is  the  cosmic  pow- 
er itself,  the  amoral  and  stupid  demiurge,  the  un- 
consciousness of  M.  de  Hartman,  which  comes  di- 
rectly into  play  upon  contact  with  a  deranged  nervous 
system,  and  realizes  its  disordered  dreams  without 
passing  through  the  regular  channels  of  muscular 
movements. 

But  enough  of  these  vapory  metaphysicalor  pseudo- 
biological  speculations  to  give  an  account  of  a  phe- 
nomenon for  which  it  will  be  time  enough  to  find 
precise  explanation  when  its  authenticity  shall  be 
beyond  dispute,  if  that  time  shall  ever  arrive. 

Three  groups  of  proofs,  of  a  diverse  nature,  have 
378 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

gradually  brought  me  to  look  upon  the  reality  of  these 
phenomena — in  spite  of  the  instinctive  difficulty  of 
admitting  them — as  an  infinitely  more  probable 
hypothesis  than  its  opposite. 

First :  I  was  first  unsettled  by  the  reading  of  the 
too-much-neglected  memoir  of  Professor  Thury, which 
seems  to  me  to  be  a  model  of  scientific  observations, 
the  weight  of  which  I  could  only  overlook  by  rejecting, 
a  priori — in  the  name  of  their  strangeness — the  pos- 
sibility itself  of  the  facts  in  question,  which  would 
have  been  against  the  Principle  of  Hamlet.  The 
conversations  which  it  was  my  privilege  to  hold  with 
M.  Thury  have  greatly  contributed  to  arouse  in  me 
a  presumption  in  favor  of  these  phenomena,  which 
the  book  would  evidently  not  have  done  in  the  same 
degree  if  the  author  had  not  been  personally  known 
to  me. 

Secondly  :  Once  created,  my  idea  of  the  probability 
of  these  facts  became  rather  strengthened  than  weak- 
ened by  a  number  of  foreign  works  of  more  recent 
date ;  but  I  doubt  whether  any,  or  all  of  these  com- 
bined, would  have  been  sufficient  to  create  it.  The 
displacement  of  objects  without  contact  being  once 
hypothetically  admitted,  it  seems  easier  to  me  to  ex- 
plain Crookes's  observations  on  the  modifications  of 
the  weight  of  bodies  in  the  presence  of  Home  by 
authentic  phenomena  of  this  kind  (in  spite  of  the 
well-deserved  criticisms  that  Crookes's  publications 
brought  upon  him)  than  to  suppose  that  he  was 
simply  Home's  dupe.  The  same  is  true  with  the 
cases  of  E sprits  tapageurs  (Poltergeister),  published 
by    the   Society    for    Psychical    Research^    the    ex- 

379 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

elusive  hypothesis  of  the  "  naughty  little  girl" 
without  the  addition  of  any  trace  of  telekinesis, 
which  seems  to  me  a  less  adequate  and  more  im- 
probable explanation  than  that  of  real  phenomena, 
which  would  have  tempted  fraud.  Naturally  all 
depends  on  the  preconceived  opinion  one  may  have 
as  to  the  general  possibility  or  impossibility  of  these 
facts,  and  my  feeling  in  regard  to  the  matter  would 
certainly  be  different  without  the  preceding  or  the 
following  groups  of  evidence. 

Thirdly  :  The  probability  of  the  movement  of  objects 
without  contact  has  reached  with  me  a  degree  practi- 
cally equivalent  to  certitude,  thanks  to  M.  Richet,  to 
whom  I  am  indebted  for  my  presence  at  his  house  last 
year  at  several  seances  of  Eusapia  Paladino,  under 
conditions  of  control  which  gave  no  room  for  doubt 
— at  least  without  challenging  the  combined  witness 
of  the  senses  of  sight,  hearing,  and  touch,  as  well  as 
the  average  quantity  of  critical  sense  and  perspicacity 
with  which  every  ordinary  intelligence  flatters  itself 
it  is  endowed  ;  or,  again,  of  suspecting  the  walls  of  M. 
Richet's  study  had  been  tampered  with,  and  he  him- 
self, with  his  attending  colleagues,  of  being  impostors, 
in  collusion  with  the  amiable  Neapolitan  herself — a 
supposition  which  the  most  elementary  sense  of  pro- 
priety would  absolutely  forbid  me  to  entertain.  From 
that  moment  I  believed  in  telekinesis  by  constraint  of 
the  perception,  sensata  et  oculata  certitudine,  to  borrow 
the  expression  of  Galileo,  who  certainly  did  not  mean 
by  that  an  unreflecting  adhesion  to  the  evidences  of 
the  senses,  like  that  of  the  casual  onlooker  at  the  tricks 
of  the  prestidigitator,  but  rather  the  final  crowning  of 

380 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

an  edifice  having  for  its  rational  framework  the  rea- 
soned analysis  of  the  conditions  of  observation,  and 
of  the  concrete  circumstances  surrounding  the  pro- 
duction of  the  phenomenon. 

In  saying  that  1  believe  in  these  facts,  I  will  add  that 
there  is  no  question  here  of  a  conviction,  in  the  moral, 
religious,  or  philosophical  sense  of  the  term.  This  be- 
lief is  for  me  devoid  of  all  vital  importance  ;  it  does 
not  move  any  essential  fibre  of  my  being,  and  1  would 
not  feel  the  least  inclination  to  submit  to  the  slightest 
martyrdom  in  its  defence.  Whether  the  objects  move 
or  do  not  move  without  contact  is  absolutely  indiffer- 
ent to  me.  Should  any  one  some  day  succeed  in  un- 
veiling the  physical  tricks  or  the  fallacious  psycho- 
logical processes  which  have  led  into  error  the  best 
observers  of  telekinesis,  from  M.  Thury  down  to  M. 
Richet,  with  a  number  of  other  witnesses,  myself  in- 
cluded, I  would  be  the  first  to  laugh  at  the  trick  that 
art  and  nature  had  played  upon  me,  to  applaud  the 
perspicacity  of  the  one  who  discovered  it,  to  congratu- 
late myself,  above  all,  in  seeing  supernormal  appear- 
ances returning  to  the  ordinary  course  of  things. 

This  is  a  disproportionally  lengthy  preamble  to 
facts  of  which  I  shall  have  to  speak  here,  for  they  are 
reduced  to  a  few  displacements  of  objects  without 
contact  (raising  of  tables,  transporting  or  project- 
ing of  flowers  and  diverse  things  placed  out  of  reach), 
of  which  Helene  and  her  mother  were  witnesses  on 
several  occasions  at  their  house.  I  cannot  be  accused 
of  stubborn  skepticism,  since  I  admit  the  reality  of 
telekinesis.  In  the  present  case,  however,  all  the 
stories  which  have  been  told  me  leave  much  to  be  de- 

381 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

sired  from  an  evidential  point  of  view.  Without  sus- 
pecting in  any  way  the  perfect  good  faith  of  both 
Mme.  and  Mile.  Smith,  it  suf&ces  to  recall  the  possi- 
bility of  malobservation  and  errors  of  memory  in  the 
stories  of  supernormal  events  in  order  not  to  attribute 
a  great  evidential  value  to  the  absolutely  sincere  evi- 
dence of  these  ladies. 

Incapacitated  as  I  am  from  pronouncing  judgment 
upon  phenomena  of  which  I  was  not  a  witness,  I  shall, 
however,  put  forth  a  fact  which  might  militate  in 
favor  of  their  authenticity  (their  possibility  having 
been  first  hypothetically  admitted)  —  namely,  that 
these  phenomena  have  always  been  produced  under 
exceptional  conditions,  at  a  time  when  Helene  was 
in  an  abnormal  state  and  a  prey  to  a  deep  emotion. 
On  the  one  side,  this  circumstance  increases  the 
chances  of  malobservation,  while,  on  the  other,  the 
day  on  which  it  shall  be  well  established  that  (as  di- 
vers observations  cause  us  to  think)  certain  abnor- 
mal a-nd  emotional  states  set  at  liberty  in  the  organ- 
ism latent  forces  capable  of  acting  at  a  distance,  it 
will  be  permitted  us  to  suppose  that  perhaps  some- 
thing analogous  has  taken  place  in  Mile.  Smith's 
case.  Here  is,  as  an  example  of  these  perplexing 
cases,  a  fact  which  happened  to  her  during  a  period 
of  general  indisposition.  Abridging  the  story,  I 
reproduce  it  as  Helene  sent  it  to  me  the  following 
day: 

"  Last  night  I  had  a  visit  from  M.  H.  I  do  not 
need  to  give  you  an  analysis  of  my  impressions  ; 
you  will  understand  them  as  well  as  I  do.  He  came 
to  tell  me  that  he  had  held  a  seance  with  a  lady  who 

382 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

was  a  stranger  to  me,  and  that  this  lady  had  seen 
Leopold,  who  had  given  her  a  remedy  for  the  indis- 
position from  which  I  was  suffering.  I  could  not  re- 
frain from  telling  him  that  Leopold  had  assured  me 
that  he  manifested  himself  only  to  me,  and  that  it 
would  consequently  be  difficult  for  me  to  admit  his 
alleged  utterances  to  others."  But  that  is  not  the 
most  interesting  part  of  the  story. 

"  While  M.  H.  spoke  to  me  I  felt  a  sharp  pain  in 
my  left  temple,  and,  perhaps  two  minutes  afterwards, 
my  eyes,  constantly  directed  towards  the  piano,  on 
which  I  had  placed  two  oranges  the  evening  before, 
were  entirely  fascinated  with  I  know  not  what.  Then, 
suddenly,  at  the  moment  when  w^e  least  expected  it — 
we  were  all  three  (M.  H.,  my  father,  and  myself)  seat- 
ed at  a  reasonable  distance  from  the  piano — one  of 
the  oranges  displaced  itself  and  rolled  to  my  feet. 
My  father  maintained  that  it  had  no  doubt  been 
placed  too  near  the  edge  of  the  lid,  and  at  a  certain 
moment  had  fallen  in  a  natural  way.  M.  H.  saw 
immediately  in  this  incident  the  intervention  of 
some  spirit.  I  myself  dared  not  pass  my  opinion 
on  it.  Finally,  I  picked  up  the  orange,  and  we 
spoke  of  other  things. 

"  M.  H.  remained  about  an  hour ;  he  went  away 
exactly  at  nine.  I  went  to  my  mother's  room  to 
give  her  a  few  details  of  M.  H.'s  visit.  I  described 
to  her  the  fall  of  the  orange,  and  what  was  my  sur- 
prise when,  on  returning  to  the  drawing-room  and 
stepping  up  to  the  piano  to  take  the  lamp  I  had 
placed  on  it,  I  found  the  famous  orange  no  longer 
there.     There  was  but  one  left ;  the  one  I  had  picked 

383 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

up  and  replaced  by  the  side  of  the  other  had  disap- 
peared. 1  looked  for  it  everywhere,  but  without  suc- 
cess. 1  went  back  to  my  mother,  and  while  1  spoke 
to  her  we  heard  something  fall  in  the  vestibule.  I 
took  the  lamp  to  see  what  might  have  fallen.  I 
distinguished  at  the  farthest  end  (towards  the  door 
of  the  entrance  to  the  apartment)  the  much-sought- 
f or  orange ! 

"  Then  I  asked  myself  quite  frankly  whether  1  was 
in  presence  of  some  spiritistic  manifestation.  1  tried 
not  to  be  frightened.  1  took  the  orange  to  show  it  to 
my  mother.  1  returned  to  the  piano  to  take  the  sec- 
ond orange,  so  as  not  to  be  frightened  in  a  similar 
way.  But  it,  in  its  turn,  had  disappeared  !  Then 
I  felt  a  considerable  sensation  of  trembling.  I  re- 
turned to  my  mother's  room,  and,  while  we  discussed 
the  matter,  we  heard  again  something  thrown  with 
violence,  and,  rushing  out  to  see  what  had  happened, 
I  saw  the  second  orange  placed  in  exactly  the  same 
spot  where  the  other  had  been,  and  considerably 
bruised.  Imagine  how  astonished  we  wxre  !  I 
took  both  oranges,  and,  without  losing  an  instant, 
went  to  the  kitchen  and  put  them  in  a  cupboard,  where 
I  found  them  again  the  following  morning ;  they 
had  not  moved.  I  did  not  go  to  bed  without  some 
fear,  but  fortunately  I  quickly  went  to  sleep.  My 
mother  is  sure  that  it  is  M.  H.  who  brought  some 
evil  spirit  into  the  house,  and  she  is  quite  un- 
easy.  ..." 

From  the  oral  explanations  of  Mile.  Smith  and  her 
mother,  and  also  from  the  location  of  the  places,  it 
follows  that  the  oranges  had  been  thrown  at  a  dis- 

384 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

tance  of  ten  yards  from  the  piano,  through  the  wide- 
open  parlor  door  leading  to  the  vestibule,  against  the 
door  of  the  apartment,  as  if  to  follow  and  strike  fic- 
titiously M.  H.,  who  a  few  moments  before  had  left 
by  this  door. 

One  has  undoubtedly  always  the  right  of  discard- 
ing at  the  outset,  as  presenting  too  little  guarantee  of 
genuineness,  the  extraordinary  stories  of  a  person 
subject  to  hallucinations.  In  the  present  case,  all 
that  I  know  of  Mile.  Smith  and  her  parents  keeps  me 
from  doing  so,  and  persuades  me  that  her  story  is 
thoroughly  exact,  which,  however,  does  not  amount 
to  saying  that  there  is  anything  of  the  supernormal 
about  it.  One  has,  in  fact,  the  choice  between  two 
interpretations. 

First :  In  the  hypothesis  of  veritable  telekinesis, 
the  following  is  the  manner  in  which  the  adventure 
would  be  summed  up  :  the  emotion  due  to  the  unex- 
pected and  unpleasant  visit  of  M.  H.  had  brought 
about  a  division  of  consciousness.  The  feeling  of 
irritation,  anger,  and  repulsion  against  him  had  con- 
densed themselves  into  some  secondary  personality, 
which,  in  the  general  perturbation  of  the  entire  psy- 
chophysiological organism,  had  momentarily  recov- 
ered the  use  of  these  primitive  forces  of  action  at  a 
distance,  entirely  removed  from  the  will,  and  without 
the  participation  of  the  ordinary  self,  and  thus  auto- 
matically accomplished  outwardly  the  instinctive 
idea  of  bombarding  this  ill  -  bred  visitor.  Notice 
is  to  be  taken  of  the  painful  aura  at  the  temple 
and  the  fascination  of  gaze,  which,  according  to 
Helene's  story,  preceded  the  first  signs  of  the  phe- 
2B  385 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

noraenon,  the  orange  falling  and  rolling  at  her 
feet. 

Secondly  :  But  the  most  natural  supposition  is 
certainly  that  Mile.  Smith,  by  the  ordinarj^  use  of 
her  limbs,  had  taken  and  thrown  these  projectiles  in 
an  access  of  unconscious  muscular  automatism.  It 
is  true  that  this  would  not  agree  with  the  presence  of 
her  father,  mother,  or  M.  H.,  who  did  not  see  her  make 
the  supposed  movements.  But  an  absent-mindedness 
of  even  normal  witnesses  will  seem  easier  to  admit 
than  the  authentic  production  of  a  supernormal  phe- 
nomenon. 

These  episodes  which  have  happened  to  Mile. 
Smith  and  her  mother  since  1  have  known  them  are 
very  few,  amounting  to  half  a  dozen  at  the  most, 
and  I  will  not  dwell  longer  upon  this  subject.  He- 
lene  is  not  conscious  of  possessing  any  faculty  of 
movement  at  a  distance,  and  she  always  attributes 
these  phenomena  to  spirit  intervention.  Leopold,  on 
the  other  hand,  has  never  acknowledged  that  he  is 
the  author  of  them.  He  claims  that  Helene  possesses 
within  herself  supernormal  powers,  and  that,  in  order 
to  succeed,  she  would  only  have  to  set  them  to  work, 
but  that  she  did  not  wish  to  do  so.  All  my  sugges- 
tions and  repeated  entreaties  with  Leopold  and  He- 
lene— either  awake  or  in  a  state  of  somnambulism — 
in  the  hope  of  obtaining  in  my  presence  some  physi- 
cal phenomenon,  have  been  in  vain  up  to  the  present 
time. 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

III.  Telepathy 

One  may  almost  say  that  if  telepathy  did  not  exist 
one  would  have  to  invent  it.  I  mean  by  this  that  a 
direct  action  between  living  beings,  independent  of 
the  organs  of  the  senses,  is  a  matter  of  such  con- 
formity to  all  that  we  know  of  nature  that  it  would 
be  hard  not  to  suppose  it  a  priori,  even  if  we  had  no 
perceptible  indication  of  it.  How  is  it  possible  to 
believe  that  the  foci  of  chemical  phenomena,  as  com- 
plex as  the  nervous  centres,  can  be  in  activity  with- 
out giving  forth  diverse  undulations,  x,  y,  or  z  rays, 
traversing  the  cranium  as  the  sun  traverses  a  pane 
of  glass,  and  acting  at  a  distance  on  their  homo- 
logues  in  other  craniums  ?  It  is  a  simple  matter  of 
intensity. 

The  gallop  of  a  horse  or  the  leap  of  a  flea  in  Austra- 
lia causes  the  terrestrial  globe  to  rebound  on  its  oppo- 
site side  to  an  extent  proportional  to  the  weight  of 
these  animals  compared  to  that  of  our  planet.  This 
is  little,  even  without  taking  into  account  the  fact  that 
this  infinitesimal  displacement  runs  the  risk  at  every 
moment  of  being  neutralized  by  the  leaps  of  horses 
and  fleas  on  the  other  hemisphere,  so  that,  on  the 
whole,  the  shocks  to  our  terrestrial  globe  resulting 
from  all  that  moves  on  its  surface  are  too  feeble  to 
prevent  our  sleeping.  Perhaps  it  is  the  same  with 
the  innumerable  waves  which  coming  from  all  other 
living  beings,  shock  at  every  moment  a  given  brain  : 
their  efforts  are  counterbalanced,  or  their  resultant 
too  slight  to  be  perceived.     But  they  exist  none  the 

387 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

less  in  reality,  and  1  confess  1  do  not  understand 
those  who  reproach  telepathy  with  being  strange, 
mystical,  occult,  supernormal,  etc. 

As  to  the  knowledge  whether  this  theoretical  tele- 
pathy offers  results  open  to  experimental  demonstra- 
tion— that  is  to  say,  whether  this  chain  of  intercerebral 
vibrations  into  which  we  are  plunged  exercises  Siny 
notable  influence  on  the  course  of  our  psychic  life ; 
and  whether,  in  certain  cases,  we  happen  to  feel  emo- 
tions, impulses,  hallucinations,  which  the  psycholog- 
ical state  of  one  or  another  of  our  own  kind  exercises 
directly  upon  us,  across  the  ether  and  without  the 
ordinary  intermediary  of  the  channel  of  our  senses — 
that  is  a  question  of  fact  arising  from  observation  and 
experience.  We  know  how  much  this  question  has 
actually  been  discussed,  and  how  difficult  it  is  to  solve 
it  in  a  decisive  way,  as  much  on  account  of  all  the 
sources  of  errors  and  illusions,  to  wliich  one  is  ex- 
posed in  this  domain,  as  on  account  of  a  probably 
always  necessary  concurrence  of  very  exceptional 
circumstances  (which  we  do  not  as  yet  know  how  to 
accomplish  at  will),  in  order  that  the  particular  action 
of  a  determined  agent  should  sweep  away  all  rival 
influences,  and  betray  itself  in  a  manner  sufficient- 
ly marked  and  distinct  in  the  life  of  the  percipient. 
Everj^thing  considered,  I  strongly  lean  towards  the 
affirmative.  The  reality  of  telepathic  phenomena 
seems  to  me  difficult  to  reject  in  presence  of  the  cluster 
of  very  diverse  evidences,  entirely  independent  of 
each  other,  that  militate  in  its  favor.  Undoubtedly 
none  of  these  evidences  is  absolutely  convincing 
when  taken  separately ;    but  their  striking  conver- 

388 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

gence  towards  the  same  result  gives  to  their  entirety 
a  new  and  considerable  weight,  which  tips  the  scale, 
in  my  opinion,  while  awaiting  an  inverse  oscillation, 
which  may  some  day  destroy  this  convergence,  or 
explain  it  by  a  common  source  of  error.  Besides, 
1  understand  very  well  why  those  to  whom  telepathy 
remains  a  mystic,  and  to  our  scientific  conceptions 
heterogeneous,  principle,  should  obstinately  resist  it. 
But,  seeing  nothing  strange  in  it  myself,  I  do  not  hes- 
itate to  admit  it,  not  as  an  intangible  dogma,  but  as 
a  provisional  hypothesis,  corresponding  better  than 
any  other  to  the  condition  of  my  certainly  very  in- 
complete knowledge  of  this  department  of  psycho- 
logical research. 

Although  predisposed  in  favor  of  telepathy,  I  have 
failed  in  finding  striking  proofs  of  it  in  Mile.  Smith, 
and  the  few  experiments  1  have  attempted  with  her 
on  this  subject  offered  nothing  encouraging. 

1  tried  several  times  to  make  an  impression  upon 
Helene  from  a  distance  and  to  appear  before  her  dur- 
ing the  evening,  when  1  thought  she  had  returned  to 
her  home,  which  is  a  kilometre  distant  from  mine. 
1  obtained  no  satisfactory  result.  My  only  case 
of  striking  success,  lost  among  a  number  of  non- 
successes,  can  be  explained  by  mere  coincidence  as 
well,  and,  after  taking  all  the  accessory  circum- 
stances into  consideration,  does  not  deserve  a  lengthy 
discussion. 

As  to  spontaneous  telepathy,  a  few  indications 
would  make  me  think  that  Mile.  Smith  sometimes 
involuntarily  submits  to  my  influence.  The  most 
curious  is  a  dream    (or  a  vision)  that  she  had  one 

389 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

night  at  a  time  when  I  had  suddenly  fallen  ill 
during  a  stay  in  the  country  some  twenty  leagues 
distant  from  Geneva.  She  heard  the  ringing  of  a 
bell  at  her  door,  then  saw  me  entering,  so  emaciated 
and  apparently  so  tired  that  she  could  not  refrain 
from  speaking  to  her  mother  on  the  following  morn- 
ing of  her  uneasiness  concerning  me.  Unfortu- 
nately these  ladies  took  no  note  of  the  exact  date  of 
this  incident,  and  Helene  did  not  speak  of  it  to  M. 
Lemaitre  until  three  weeks  later,  w^hen  he  told  her 
about  my  illness,  the  beginning  of  which  dated  back 
to  the  approximate  time  of  the  dream.  The  evi- 
dential value  of  this  case  is  weak.  On  other  occa- 
sions Mile.  Smith  announced  to  me  that,  to  judge 
from  her  dreams  or  vague  intuition  in  a  waking 
state,  I  was  to  have  on  a  certain  day  an  unexpected 
vexation,  a  painful  preoccupation,  etc.  But  the 
cases  in  which  she  was  right  were  counterbalanced 
by  those  in  which  she  was  wrong.  It  does  not  appear 
that  Helene's  telepathic  relations  with  other  persons 
are  closer  than  with  me,  and  among  the  cases  known 
to  me  there  is  not  one  that  deserves  the  trouble  of 
being  related.  An  exception  must,  however,  be 
made  on  behalf  of  a  M.  Balmes  (pseudonym),  who 
was  for  some  time  employed  in  the  same  business 
house  as  Mile.  Smith,  and  concerning  whom  she 
had  several  really  curious  phenomena.  This  M. 
Balmes  was  himself  ''  a  sensitive  medium  "  of  a  very 
nervous  and  vibrating  nature.  He  was  working 
in  the  story  above  that  of  Helene,  and  stopped 
sometimes  to  talk  concerning  spiritism  with  her. 
Their  relations,  which  they  did  not  extend  beyond 

390 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

the  office,  ended  there.  There  never  seemed  to  be 
any  personal  sympathy  or  special  affinity  between 
them,  and  it  is  not  known  how  to  account  for  the 
telepathic  bond  that  seemed  to  exist  between  them. 
The  following  are  examples  : 

I.  One  morning  M.  Balmes  lent  a  newspaper  to 
Helene  in  which  there  was  an  article  on  spiritism. 
He  himself  had  received  this  paper  from  one  of 
his  friends,  M.  X.,  a  Frenchman  who  had  been  in 
Geneva  for  some  three  weeks  only  and  who  did  not 
know  Helene  even  by  name.  This  M.  X.  had 
marked  the  interesting  article  in  red  and  had  added 
on  the  margin  an  annotation  in  black.  During  her 
noon  meal  at  home  Helene  read  the  article  rapidly, 
but  for  lack  of  time  did  not  read  the  annotation  mark- 
ed in  black.  Having  returned  to  her  office  she  began 
again  to  work.  However,  at  a  quarter-past  three  her 
eyes  fell  on  the  annotation  of  the  paper,  and  as  she 
was  taking  up  her  pen  to  make  some  calculation  in  her 
note-book,  "  1  do  not  know,"  she  wrote  to  me,  "  either 
how  or  why  1  began  to  draw  on  this  writing-tablet 
the  head  of  a  man  entirely  unknown  to  me.  At  the 
same  time  I  heard  the  voice  of  a  man,  of  a  high,  clear, 
and  harmonious  quality,  but  unfortunately  1  could 
not  understand  the  words.  A  great  desire  came 
over  me  to  run  and  show  this  drawing  to  M.  Balmes. 
He  examined  it,  and  seemed  astonished,  for  the  head 
drawn  in  ink  was  no  other  than  that  of  his  friend 
who  had  lent  him  the  paper  marked  in  pencil.  The 
voice  and  the  French  accent  were,  as  it  seems,  en- 
tirely correct  also.     How  was  it  that  at  the  sight 

391 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

of  an  annotation  1  found  myself  in  communication 
with  a  stranger  ?  M.  Balmes,  in  presence  of  this 
curious  phenomenon,  hastened  that  very  evening 
to  his  friend  and  learned  that  at  the  time  when  I  drew 
his  portrait  there  was  a  very  serious  discussion  in 
progress  concerning  him  (M.  Balmes)  between  M.  X. 
and  other  persons." 

Strictly  speaking,  this  case  may  be  normally 
explained  by  supposing:  First,  that  Mile.  Smith, 
without  consciously  noticing  or  remembering  him, 
had  seen  M.  X.  during  his  short  stay  in  Geneva, 
walking  in  the  street  with  M.  Balmes,  and  that  the 
paper,  which  she  knew  had  been  lent  to  M.  Balmes  by 
one  of  his  friends,  had,  by  means  of  a  subconscious 
induction,  awakened  the  latent  memory  of  the  face 
and  voice  of  the  stranger  whom  she  had  seen  with 
him.  Secondly,  that  there  is  but  a  fortuitous  coinci- 
dence in  the  fact  that  M.  X.  spoke  of  M.  Balmes  at  pre- 
cisely the  hour  when  Helene  traced  the  face  and  heard 
the  voice  of  the  aforesaid  M.  X.  in  an  access  of  au- 
tomatism, set  free  at  the  sight  of  his  annotation  on 
the  paper. 

In  the  telepathic  hypothesis,  on  the  contrary,  the 
incident  would  have  been  explained  somewhat  as  fol- 
lows :  The  conversation  of  M.  X.  concerning  M. 
Balmes  (which  was,  as  it  appears,  of  an  excited  nat- 
ure) had  telepathically  impressed  the  latter  and  awak- 
ened in  him  subliminally  the  remembrance  of  M.  X. 
M.  Balmes,  in  his  turn,  without  consciously  suspect- 
ing it,  had  transmitted  this  remembrance  to  Mile. 
Smith,  who  was  already  predisposed  to  suggestion  on 
that  day  by  the  loan  of  the  paper,  and  with  whom  the 

393 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

said  remembrance  broke  forth  into  a  graphic,  audi- 
tive, and  impulsive  (the  desire  of  showing  her  draw- 
ing to  M.  Balmes)  automatism.  The  subconscious 
strata  of  M.  Balmes  had  thus  served  as  a  link  between 
M.  X.  and  Mile.  Smith. 

2.  ''Some  eight  days  after  the  preceding  case, 
being  a  few  minutes  after  noon  in  an  open  street- 
car, 1  saw  before  me  this  same  M.  Balmes  talking  to 
a  lady  in  a  room  apparently  close  to  the  street-car. 
The  picture  was  not  very  clear.  A  kind  of  mist 
seemed  to  extend  over  the  whole,  which  was,  however, 
not  strong  enough  to  hide  from  me  the  personages. 
M.  Baimes,  especially,  was  quite  recognizable,  and 
his  somewhat  subdued  voice  made  me  overhear  these 
words:  'It  is  very  curious,  extraordinary.'  Then 
I  felt  a  sudden,  violent  commotion,  and  the  picture 
vanished  at  the  same  time.  Soon  1  found  myself 
again  riding  in  the  street-car,  and,  according  to  the 
progress  which  it  had  made,  1  understood  that  the 
vision  had  lasted  but  three  minutes  at  the  most. 
Notice  must  be  taken  of  the  fact  that  during  these 
few  minutes  1  did  not  lose  for  a  single  moment  the 
consciousness  of  my  situation ;  1  knew  and  felt  that 
1  was  riding  home,  as  1  was  in  the  habit  of  doing  each 
day,  and  1  felt  entirely  like  myself,  without  the 
slightest  mental  disturbance. 

"  Two  hours  later  1  went  up  to  M.  Balmes.  Ap- 
proaching him  frankly — yes,  even  a  little  abruptly — 
1  said  to  him  :  '  Were  you  satisfied  with  the  short 
visit  you  made  a  few  minutes  after  twelve,  and  would 
it  be  indiscreet  to  ask  what  you  found  so  curious,  so 
extraordinary?'     He   seemed   confused,  astonished, 

393 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

pretended  even  to  be  vexed,  and  looked  as  if  he  wished 
to  ask  me  by  what  right  I  permitted  myself  to  con- 
trol his  actions.  This  movement  of  indignation 
passed  as  quickly  as  it  came,  to  give  way  to  a  senti- 
ment of  the  greatest  curiosity.  He  made  me  tell  him 
in  detail  my  vision,  and  confessed  to  me  that  he  really 
had  gone  at  noon  to  call  upon  a  lady,  and  that  they 
had  discussed  the  incident  about  the  newspaper.  He 
had  really  pronounced  the  words  that  I  had  heard  : 
'It  is  curious,  extraordinary,'  and,  strange  to  say, 
I  also  learned  that  at  the  end  of  these  words  a  violent 
ringing  of  the  bell  had  been  heard,  and  that  the  con- 
versation between  M.  Balmes  and  his  friend  had  sud- 
denly come  to  an  end  by  the  arrival  of  a  visitor.  The 
commotion  felt  by  me  was,  therefore,  nothing  more 
than  the  violent  ringing  of  the  bell,  which,  putting 
an  end  to  the  conversation,  had  also  put  an  end  to 
m^^  vision." 

3.  At  the  beginning  of  a  seance  one  Sunday  af- 
ternoon at  a  quarter  to  four,  I  handed  to  Helene  a 
glass  ball,  of  the  kind  used  for  developing  clairvoy- 
ance bjT-  means  of  gazing  into  a  crystal.  Shortly 
afterwards  she  saw  in  it  M.  Balmes  and  his  friend, 
and  above  their  heads  an  isolated  pistol,  but  which 
seemed  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  them.  She  told 
me  then  that  M.  Balmes  had  received  the  day  before 
at  his  office  a  telegram  which  very  much  upset  him, 
and  which  obliged  him  to  leave  Geneva  that  very 
evening  for  S.  She  seemed  to  apprehend  some  mis- 
fortune about  to  befall  M.  Balmes,  but  soon  fell  asleep. 
By  his  digital  dictations  Leopold  tells  us  that  he  sent 
her  to  sleep  to  save  her  some  painful  visions  seen 

394 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

in  the  crystal,  and  that  she,  Helene,  has  a  medi- 
umistic  consciousness  in  regard  to  all  that  is  passing 
at  S.,  and  that  the  pistol  is  connected  with  M.  Balmes. 
It  was  impossible  to  learn  more,  and  the  remainder 
of  the  seance  was  taken  up  with  other  matters. 

M.  Balmes,  'who  returned  to  Geneva  on  the  follow- 
ing Monday,  and  whom  1  saw  the  same  evening,  was 
very  much  struck  with  Helene's  vision,  for,  on  Sun- 
day afternoon  he  really  took  part  in  a  scene  which 
came  near  being  tragic,  and  in  the  course  of  which 
his  friend  X.  had  offered  him  a  pistol  which  he  al- 
ways carried  with  him.  Mile.  Smith  and  M.  Balmes 
did  not  hesitate  to  see  in  this  coincidence  a  highly 
characterized  supernormal  phenomenon.  This  case 
offers,  however,  some  difficulty — viz.,  that  the  in- 
cident of  the  pistol  at  S.  did  not  take  place  till  more 
than  two  hours  after  Helene's  visions,  and  that  M. 
Balmes,  as  he  affirms,  had  no  premonition  of  the  affair 
at  the  time  when  Helene  had  her  vision.  It  follows 
from  this  that  there  was  a  kind  of  anticipated  tele- 
pathy, a  premonition  experienced  by  another  than 
the  interested  principal,  and  this  raises  the  great 
question  of  the  supernormal  knowledge  of  future 
events.  I  find  it  easier  to  admit  that,  although  M. 
Balmes  did  not  consciously  foresee  the  incident  of 
the  pistol,  he  foresaw  subconsciously  the  event,  and 
that  this  idea  passed  telepathically  to  Helene.  Per- 
haps this  case  might  be  explained  without  having 
recourse  to  the  supernormal  at  aU.  Mile.  Smith, 
knowing  M.  Balmes'  character,  and  up  to  a  certain 
point  his  personal  circumstances,  having  been  pres- 
ent the  evening  before  when  M.  Balmes  received  the 

395 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

telegram,  and  foreseeing  (as  she  said  at  the  seance), 
the  gravity  of  the  situation,  could  easily  imagine  the 
intervention  of  a  fire-arm  in  the  affair.  Besides, 
no  detail  of  the  vision  indicates  that  the  pistol  seen  in 
the  glass  ball  corresponds  to  that  of  M.  X. 

How  far  the  delicate  sense  of  probabilities  can  go, 
and  how  often  spontaneous  inferences,  with  people 
of  a  quick  imagination,  are  correct,  one  never  knows. 
Undoubtedly  we  often  see  a  supernormal  connection 
where  there  is,  in  reality,  only  a  striking  coincidence, 
due  to  a  happy  divination  and  prevision,  which  is 
very  natural.  1  ought  to  add  that  this  manner  of 
evicting  the  supernormal  and  reducing  the  vision  of 
the  pistol  to  a  mere  creation  of  the  subliminal  fantasy, 
seems  inadmissible  to  Helene,  who  remains  abso- 
lutely certain  that  this  was  a  convincing  case  of 
telepathy. 

The  above  example,  2,  which  is  the  best  of  all,  in 
my  opinion,  is  still  not  irreproachable. 

IV.  Lucidity 

All  the  facts  of  lucidity  (clairvoyance,  second-sight, 
etc.)  which  are  attributed  to  Mile.  Smith  may  be  ex- 
plained by  telepathic  impressions  proceeding  from 
living  persons.  This  means  that  1  not  only  admit 
from  the  start  the  possibility  of  such  phenomena  by 
virtue  of  the  "  Principle  of  Hamlet,"  but,  since  tele- 
pathy is  not,  in  my  opinion,  anything  very  strange, 
1  shall  feel  no  subjective  difficulty  in  accepting  the 
reality  of  lielene's  supernormal  intuitions,  provided 
that  they  present  some  serious  guarantee  of  authen- 

396 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

ticity,  and  do  not  explain  themselves  still  more  sim- 
ply by  normal  and  ordinary  processes. 

Leopold,  who  appears  in  almost  all  of  these  veridi- 
cal messages — whether  he  recognizes  himself  as  the 
author  or  whether  he  accompanies  simply  by  his 
presence  their  manifestation  through  Helene — has 
never  deigned  to  grant  me  one  under  entirely  sat- 
isfactory conditions,  and  he  censures  my  insistence 
as  vain  and  puerile  curiosity.  As  to  the  innumer- 
able phenomena  with  which  others  more  fortunate 
than  myself  have  been  gratified,  they  have  always 
offered  this  singularity  :  when  they  appeared  to  be 
really  of  a  nature  calculated  to  furnish  a  decisive  and 
convincing  proof  as  to  their  supernormal  origin,  1 
never  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  written,  precise,  and 
circumstantial  account,  but  only  uncertain  and  in- 
complete tales,  too  intimate  and  too  personal  to  be 
divulged  by  those  interested  in  them;  and,  again, 
when  my  friends  were  quite  willing  to  write  out  a  de- 
tailed account  and  to  answer  to  my  demand  for  ex- 
act information,  the  fact  reduced  itself  to  such  a  small 
matter  that  it  was  beyond  my  power  to  see  anything 
of  the  supernormal  in  it. 

Taking  everything  into  consideration,  1  am  in- 
clined to  believe  that  Mile.  Smith,  in  truth,  possesses 
real  phenomena  of  clairvoyance,  not,  however,  pass- 
ing beyond  the  possible  limits  of  telepathy  ;  only, 
in  order  that  they  may  be  produced,  it  is  necessary 
that  Leopold — that  is  to  say,  the  special  psychic  state 
of  Helene  which  is  necessary  for  the  reception  and 
externalization  of  these  telepathic  impressions — be 
aided  from  the  outside  by  the  influence  of  certain 

397 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

favorable  temperaments,  more  frequently  met  with 
among  convinced  spiritists  than  among  persons 
who  are  normal,  and  that  he  be  not  impeded,  on  the 
other  hand,  by  the  paralyzing  presence  of  hostile 
temperaments,  such  as  that  of  a  critical  observer. 
It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  the  naive  believers 
who  inspire  and  succeed  in  obtaining  magnificent 
phenomena  of  lucidity  usually  care  so  little  for  the 
desiderata  of  science,  and,  above  all,  refuse  to  sub- 
mit themselves  to  an  examination  which  might  ex- 
plain the  phenomena  in  a  natural  manner ;  while  the 
investigators  in  search  of  ''  convincing  "  proofs  are 
not  inspiring  and  obtain  almost  nothing. 

However  it  may  be,  I  shall  give  a  few  examples  of 
Mile.  Smith's  proofs  of  lucidity,  which  are  not  very 
varied,  and  can  be  divided  into  the  three  categories 
of  the  medical  prescriptions  and  diagnoses,  of  lost 
objects  found  again,  and  of  retrocognitions  of  events 
more  or  less  remote. 

I.  Medical  Consultations. — In  promising  speci- 
mens of  extraordinary  facts  of  this  kind  I  have  gone 
too  far.  Many  such  have  been  told  me — as,  for  in- 
stance, Leopold  dictating  an  unknown  and  compli- 
cated recipe  of  a  hair  tonic  for  a  gentleman  living 
abroad,  a  single  bottle  of  which  was  sufficient  to  bring 
forth  a  full  growth  of  hair  on  a  head  which  had  be- 
come bald  before  middle  age ;  or,  again,  Leopold, 
being  consulted  about  the  health  of  a  lady  living 
at  a  great  distance  from  Geneva,  revealing  both  the 
veridical  nature  of  her  illness,  which  was  unknown 
till  then  to  her  physicians,  and  its  origin,  which  was 
due  to  certain  unsuspected  but  perfectly  true  inci- 

398 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

dents  connected  with  her  childhood,  and,  finally, 
the  treatment,  which  was  crowned  with  success. 
Bvit  the  absence  of  written  testimony  and  precise 
information  as  to  the  concomitant  circumstances 
of  these  marvellous  cures  reduce  them  to  the  rank 
of  amusing  stories,  the  value  of  which  cannot  posi- 
tively be  estimated.  As  to  better-attested  episodes, 
it  is  true  I  have  been  able  to  obtain  authentic  stories, 
but  they  are  those  in  which  the  probability  of  a  su- 
pernormal element  has  been  reduced  to  a  minimum — 
imperceptible  to  me.     I  will  cite  but  one  case. 

M.  and  Mme.  G.  having  invited  Mile.  Smith  dur- 
ing the  month  of  August  to  pass  a  day  with  them 
in  the  country,  a  few  leagues  distant  from  Geneva, 
took  advantage  of  the  visit  to  hold  a  seance  in  or- 
der to  consult  Leopold  on  the  health  of  one  of  their 
children.  I  will  tell  the  incident  from  a  written  ac- 
count sent  me  by  Mme.  G.  soon  afterwards  : 

"  Our  little  girl  was  suffering  from  anaemia,  and 
fell  frequently  into  a  state  of  weakness,  in  spite  of 
intervals  of  improvement.  Dr.  d'Espine  had  been 
recommended  to  us  for  the  time  of  our  return  to  Ge- 
neva. The  medium  [Mile.  Smith]  knew  nothing  of 
this ;  we  had  taken  the  precaution  to  keep  it  from 
her."  The  seance  begins  with  a  few  kind  words 
from  Leopold,  whom  M.  G.  then  asks  whether  he 
would  do  well  in  consulting  Dr.  d'E  spine.  "  And  I" 
replied  Leopold,  ''  can  I  do  nothing  for  you  ?  Un- 
grateful people  I"  But  when  he  was  asked  to  indi- 
cate some  treatment,  he  replied  :  ""  Wait  till  your  re- 
turn to  Geneva."  Then,  upon  being  asked  whether 
an  egg  mixed  with  brandy  would  be  good  for  the 

399 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

child,  he  repHed  that  the  egg  would  be  good,  but  the 
brandy  was  not  necessary  in  her  case.  Then  he 
recommended  that  the  child  be  taken  for  an  hour's 
walk  in  the  open  air  every  day.  As  to  the  prescrip- 
tion relating  to  her  food,  he  repeated  :  ''  I  told  you  to 
wait  till  your  return  to  Geneva." 

On  their  return  to  Geneva  in  the  middle  of  Sep- 
tember, M.  and  Mme.  G.  held  a  second  seance.  This 
time  Leopold  was  more  exact ;  he  advised  :  '"  Not  too 
much  milk,  but  rather  a  few  glasses  of  good  pure  wine 
at  each  meal."  Then  he  added  :  "  Treat  the  anaemia 
first  and  you  will  triumph  over  the  throat  trouble, 
which  would  finally  weaken  her  too  m.uch.  Her  blood 
is  so  weak  that  the  least  cold,  the  slightest  emotion,  I 
will  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  expectation  of  a  pleas- 
ure even,  ivould  be  sufficient  to  bring  the  angina  to  a 
crisis.  You  ought  to  have  foreseen  that."  "  Leopold," 
M.  G.  notes  here,  ''  has  enabled  us  to  put  our  finger 
upon  such  of  the  details  as  we  did  not  know  how  to 
explain.  At  each  sentence  my  wife  and  1  looked  at 
each  other  with  stupefaction."  Leopold  ordered  also 
many  green  vegetables,  warm  salt-water  douches  of 
three  minutes'  duration  in  the  evening,  and  :  "  The 
principal  thing  now  is  five  drops  of  iron  in  half  a 
glass  of  water  twice  a  day  before  the  meal.  Do  this 
and  you  will  see  the  result  in  a  month. "  In  two  weeks' 
time  the  little  girl  was  hardly  recognizable. 

I  have  cited  this  case  because  it  is  among  those  that 
have  most  struck  M.  and  Mme.  G.,  and  upon  which 
they  build  their  conviction  of  the  independent  exist- 
ence and  supernormal  knowledge  of  Leopold,  and 
because  it  shows  how  little  is  needed  to  kindle  the 

400 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

faith  among  spiritists.  I  forgot  to  say  that  the  G. 
family  was  well  known  by  Mile.  Smith,  and  that  dur- 
ing the  whole  winter  and  the  preceding  spring  she  had 
held  weekly  seances  at  their  home.  There  is  but  one 
thing  that  astonishes  me,  and  that  is,  that  Leopold,  at 
the  time  of  the  first  improvised  consultation,  should 
have  been  taken  unawares  up  to  the  point  of  postpon- 
ing his  orders  until  later,  and  adhering  to  such  com- 
monplace things  as  a  walk  in  the  open  air  and  the 
suppression  of  brandy.  In  the  second  seance  one 
sees  the  effect  of  a  month's  incubation.  Leopold  has 
had  time  to  recover  in  Helene's  memory  the  remem- 
brance concerning  the  little  girl  who  was  anaemic  and 
subject  to  sore  throat ;  also  the  prescription  which,  in 
the  given  case,  surely  proved  most  efficacious,  but 
which  hardly  denotes  a  supernormal  knowledge.  One 
does  not  even  need  here  telepathy  to  explain  messages 
which  are  amply  accounted  for  by  the  subconscious 
functions  of  Mile.  Smith's  ordinary  faculties. 

Examples  of  this  kind,  drawn  from  Mile.  Smith's 
mediumship,  might  be  almost  indefinitely  multi- 
plied ;  but  cut  bono  ?  Once  more,  1  do  not  claim  that 
Leopold  has  never  given  any  medical  consultation 
surpassing  Helene's  latent  knowledge  and  implying 
supernormal  powers  of  clairvoyance.  I  only  say  that 
I  have  not  yet  succeeded  in  finding  a  single  case 
where  the  proofs  reached  the  height  of  that  con- 
clusion. 

2.   Objects  Recovered. — I  do  not  know  any  case  in 

which  Mile.  Smith  has  indicated  the  situation  of  an 

object  which  had  been  hidden,  and  as  to  the  location 

of  which  she  could  have  had  no  information  through 

2C  401 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

natural  channels.  All  her  discoveries  consist,  so  far 
as  I  have  been  able  to  judge,  in  the  return,  under  a 
spiritistic  and  with  a  dramatic  aspect,  of  memories 
either  simply  forgotten  or  properly  subliminal,  which 
depended  upon  the  incidents  concerned  having  first 
belonged  to  the  ordinary  consciousness,  or  their  hav- 
ing always  escaped  it  and  having  been  from  their 
origin  registered  in  the  subconsciousness. 

These  are  facts  of  cryptomnesia  pure  and  simple — 
i.e.,  explicable  by  a  normal  psychological  process 
very  common  in  its  essence,  while  the  picturesque 
embellishments  added  by  the  mediumistic  imagina- 
tion give  to  these  teleological  automatisms  a  certain 
mysterious  and  supernormal  appearance  which  in 
other  surroundings  would  certainly  create  for  He- 
lene — or  rather  for  Leopold — a  place  alongside  St. 
Anthony  of  Padua.  1  confine  myself  to  two  exam- 
ples. Mile.  Smith  being  charged  with  the  duty  of 
making  ready  the  merchandise  sent  out  from  her 
department,  was  handed  a  telegram  one  day  from  a 
customer  who  asked  that  four  yards  of  No.  13,459 
be  despatched  to  him  immediately.  ''  This  brief 
order,"  said  Helene,  "  was  not  calculated  to  hasten 
the  forwarding  of  the  goods.  How  could  1  readily 
find  this  No.  13,459,  in  the  midst  of  six  or  seven  thou- 
sand others  in  the  store  ?  Pondering,  telegram  in 
hand,  1  was  wondering  how  I  could  find  it,  when  a 
voice  outside  of  but  very  near  me  said  to  me :  '  Not 
there,  but  here,'  and  involuntarily  I  turned  round, 
without  knowing  why,  and  my  hand  laid  itself  me- 
chanically on  a  piece  of  goods  which  1  drew  towards 
me,  and  which  actually  bore  the  No.  13,459." 

402 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

It  is  not  necessary  to  be  a  medium  to  know  by  ex- 
perience these  happy  reminiscences  or  inspirations 
which  sometimes  come  to  free  us  from  embarrass- 
ment by  shining  forth  hke  a  hght  at  an  opportune 
moment ;  but  that  which  in  the  case  of  ordinary 
persons  remains  in  the  feeble  condition  of  an  idea  or 
internal  image,  among  mediumistic  temperaments 
assumes  readily  the  fixed  and  vivid  form  of  an  hal- 
lucination. Instead  of  simply  "  suddenly  recollect- 
ing "  in  the  case  of  the  No.  13,459,  as  would  have 
happened  to  any  one  else,  Helene  hears  an  exterior 
voice,  and  perceives  her  hand  moving  involuntarily 
in  a  given  direction.  It  is  noted  that  this  automatism 
assumed  an  auditive  and  motor  form  which  is  the 
pendant  of  the  vocal  and  visual  automatism  which  1 
have  referred  to  on  pp.  58-59.  It  is  to  this  same  class 
of  facts,  well  known  and  almost  common  to-day,  that 
the  following  example  likewise  belongs,  although 
the  subliminal  imagination  had  surrounded  it  with 
the  form  of  an  intervention  on  the  part  of  Leopold. 

One  Sunday  evening,  on  returning  home.  Mile. 
Smith  noticed  that  she  had  lost  a  small  breastpin 
which  had  been  fastened  to  her  corsage,  and  which 
she  greatly  valued  as  a  souvenir.  The  following 
day  she  returned  to  look  for  it  where  she  had  been  the 
evening  before,  but  in  vain,  and  a  notice  which  she 
caused  to  be  inserted  in  the  "  lost  "  columns  of  a  daily 
newspaper  gave  no  result.  Here  I  leave  the  narra- 
tion of  the  story  to  her  :  "  Persuaded  that  my  pin 
was  really  lost,  I  did  my  best  to  think  no  more  about 
it,  but  this  was  a  difficult  matter,  since  one  night  I 
was  awakened  suddenly  by  three  raps  struck  against 

403 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

my  bed.  Somewhat  frightened,  I  looked  around, 
but  saw  nothing.  I  tried  to  go  to  sleep,  but  again 
many  raps  were  struck,  this  time  near  my  head.  I 
seated  myself  on  my  bed  (I  was  agitated),  trying  to 
discover  what  was  happening,  and  hardly  had  I 
seated  myself  when  I  saw  a  hand  shaking  my  lost 
breastpin  before  my  eyes.  This  vision  lasted  only 
a  minute,  but  that  was  long  enough  for  it  to  make 
a  deep  impression  upon  me." 

The  following  Tuesday  evening  (ten  days  after 
the  loss  of  the  trinket)  Helene  held  a  seance  at  the 
house  of  M.  Cuendet,  at  which  two  other  persons  were 
also  present.  She  told  of  the  loss  of  her  pin  and  the 
curious  vision  above  described  ;  then  all  seated  them- 
selves at  the  table.  After  a  typtological  dictation 
upon  an  altogether  different  subject,  the  following 
incident  occurred,  the  account  of  which  1  have  bor- 
rowed from  notes  taken  by  M.  Cuendet  (it  was  in  1894, 
and  1  only  knew  Mile.  Smith  by  reputation  at  the  time) : 

"  We  notice  that  from  the  beginning  of  the  seance 
Mile.  Smith  describes  to  us  our  familiar  spirit  [Leo- 
pold] as  holding  a  lantern  in  his  hand.  Why  ?  The 
table  is  shaken  anew,  about  to  tell  us  something. 
The  following  is  then  dictated  to  us  by  it  :  'Arise. 
Take  a  lantern.  Extend  your  walk  to  the  Municipal 
Building.  Take  the  path  which  crosses  the  meadow, 
and  which  ends  at  the  Street  of  the  Baths.  In  the  middle 
of  the  path,  to  the  left,  a  few  yards  distant,  a  block  of 
white  stone  will  be  found.  Starting  from  the  block  of 
stone,  only  one  yard  away  from  it,  towards  the  setting 
sun,  the  pin  so  much  sought  for  will  be  found.  Go,  I 
accompany  you. ' 

404 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

"  I  copy  verbatim  this  communication,  which  was 
obtained  letter  by  letter.  1  add  nothing,  take  noth- 
ing from  it.  General  stupefaction  !  We  hesitate  ! 
Finally,  we  all  four  rise,  we  light  a  lantern  and  set 
out.     It  was  twenty  minutes  to  ten  o'clock. 

"  We  walk  slowly  ;  we  arrive  at  the  Municipal 
Building,  and  take  the  path  which  leads  from  it  to 
the  Street  of  the  Baths.  In  the  middle,  to  the  left, 
some  yards  distant,  we,  in  fact,  find  the  block  of 
stone  indicated.  We  search  for  a  moment  without 
result,  and  begin  to  fear  we  shall  find  nothing. 
Finally,  towards  the  setting  sun,  a  yard  from  the 
block  of  stone,  I  find  buried  in  the  grass,  covered 
with  sand,  and  consequently  badly  soiled,  the  pin 
indicated. 

"  Some  one  had  evidently  stepped  on  it,  as  it  was 
slightly  bent.  Mile.  Smith  uttered  an  exclamation 
of  surprise,  and  we  all  four  returned  to  the  house,  to 
recover  from  our  very  natural  emotion." 

This  case  has  remained  in  the  eyes  of  Mile.  Smith 
and  her  spiritistic  friends  as  one  of  the  most  striking 
and  irrefragible  proofs  of  the  objective  and  indepen- 
dent reality  of  Leopold.  For  the  psychologist  it  con- 
stitutes a  very  beautiful  and  interesting  example  of 
cryptomnesia,  well  worthy  to  figure  among  the  very 
instructive  cases  collected  by  Mr.  Myers,  in  which 
the  memory  of  a  subliminal  perception  {i.  e.,  regis- 
tered immediately  without  striking  the  normal  per- 
sonality) appears  as  a  revelation  in  a  dream  of  or- 
dinary sleep,  or  under  some  other  equivalent  form 
of  automatism.  Here  is  "  Leopold  " — the  subcon- 
sciousness of  Helene — who,  having  felt  the  pin  fall 

405 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

and  noticed  where  it  rolled,  first  manifested  himself 
in  a  passing  nocturnal  vision,  and  then  took  advan- 
tage of  the  next  spiritistic  gathering  to  restore  com- 
pletely her  latent  memories.  It  is  not  necessary  to 
see  anything  intentional  in  this  restitution,  the  sim- 
ple play  of  association  of  ideas  sufficing  to  explain 
that  the  memory  of  the  situation  of  the  pin  stored  up 
in  a  subliminal  stratum  and  stimulated  by  a  desire 
to  recover  the  lost  object  might  have  mechanically 
reappeared  at  the  moment  of  the  seance,  thanks  to 
mediumistic  autohypnotization,  and  gushed  forth 
under  the  dramatic  form,  naturally  appropriate  to 
the  environment,  of  an  apparently  supernormal  piece 
of  information  furnished  by  Leopold. 

3.  Retrocognitions. — The  apparently  supernormal 
revelations  in  regard  to  the  past,  furnished  at  the 
seances  of  Mile.  Smith,  can  be  divided  into  two  groups 
— namely,  whether  they  concern  universal  history,  or 
deal  with  private  interests  relative  to  the  families  of 
the  sitters. 

First  :  The  messages  of  the  first  group  abound, 
under  the  form  of  visions  accompanied  by  typtologi- 
cal  explanations,  in  Helene's  seances  of  1894,  t)ut 
have  almost  wholly  come  to  an  end  since  I  made  her 
acquaintance,  and  I  have  never  been  witness  of  any. 
According  to  the  reports  which  I  have  seen,  all  these 
retrocognitions  have  reference  to  the  history  of  Prot- 
estantism, or  that  of  the  French  Revolution — i.  e., 
to  two  classes  of  facts  which  are  among  the  best 
known  in  France  to-day. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  the  firmly  convinced 
spiritistic  group  in  which  these  messages  were  re- 

406 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

ceived  have  never  had  a  doubt  that  the  apparitions 
which  Helene  perceived  were  the  veritable  personages 
they  asserted  themselves  to  be,  habited  as  they  were 
in  the  costume  of  the  period  to  which  they  belonged, 
communicating  by  means  of  the  table,  and  speaking 
in  the  first  person  (except  when  Leopold  acted  as 
showman  and  dictated  in  his  own  name  the  explana- 
tions asked  for). 

But  as  the  content  of  these  messages  is  always  the 
verbatim  reproduction  or  almost  exact  equivalent  of 
information  which  is  to  be  found  in  historical  and 
biographical  dictionaries,  1  cannot  avoid  being  in- 
clined to  the  impression  that  we  here  are  concerned 
with  common  facts  of  cryptomnesia. 

If  the  intervention  of  the  supernormal  be  absolutely 
insisted  upon  in  this  case,  it  can  only  be  manifested 
under  the  form  of  a  telepathic  transmission  from  the 
sitters  to  the  medium.  In  favor  of  that  supposition 
two  facts  may  be  urged  :  first,  that  Mile.  Smith  pass- 
ed in  that  group  as  devoid  of  all  historical  knowledge, 
and  was  very  much  surprised  at  these  revelations  of 
facts  totally  unknown  to  her  ;  secondly,  that  there 
were  regularly  in  attendance  at  these  seances  one  or 
more  members  of  the  teaching  body,  who  by  their 
general  education  possessed,  without  any  doubt  what- 
ever, either  consciously  or  in  a  latent  manner,  all  the 
historical  knowledge,  which,  after  all,  was  not  very 
great,  displayed  by  Leopold. 

But  these  arguments  are  not  of  much  weight  in  my 
opinion.  To  begin  with  the  second :  as  the  sitters  had 
their  hands  on  the  table  at  the  same  time  with  the  me- 
dium, according  to  the  spiritistic  custom,  they  could 

407 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

themselves,  without  any  telepathy,  properly  speak- 
ing, and  simply  by  their  slight,  unconscious  muscular 
contractions,  have  directed,  unknown  to  themselves, 
the  movements  of  that  piece  of  furniture.  Mile.  Smith 
only  augmenting  these  shocks  proceeding  from  her 
neighbors. 

As  to  the  supposed  ignorance  of  Mile.  Smith,  it  is 
not  at  all  so  great  as  has  been  imagined,  and  the  his- 
torical revelations  obtained  at  her  seances  do  not 
in  any  degree  surpass  the  level  of  that  which  she 
could  have  absorbed,  consciously  or  unconsciously, 
at  school  and  in  her  surroundings. 

Moreover,  the  hypothesis  which  appears  to  me  the 
most  probable,  and  on  which  I  rest,  is  that  the  mes- 
sages come  essentially  from  Helene  herself — I  ought 
rather  to  say  from  her  subliminal  memory  ;  that, 
however,  does  not  exclude  a  certain  amount  of  co- 
operation on  the  part  of  the  sitters,  whose  conversa- 
tion, on  the  one  hand,  and  their  unconscious  muscu- 
lar action  upon  the  table,  on  the  other,  have  often 
maintained  and  directed  the  course  of  the  subcon- 
scious ideas  of  the  medium  and  the  automatic  unfold- 
ing of  her  latent  memories. 

Secondly  :  Retrocognition  of  family  events,  which 
are  exhibited  in  Mile.  Smith's  seances,  have  generally 
the  savor  of  the  unknown  for  the  sitters,  from  the  fact 
that  they  concern  incidents  of  the  past  which  have 
never  been  printed  save  in  the  memories  of  certain 
aged  persons  or  of  a  few  lovers  of  local  anecdotes. 

1  do  not  hesitate  to  see  in  these  stories  of  other  days, 
gushing  forth  in  visions  and  in  dictations  by  the  table 
in  the  course  of  Helene's  hemisomnambulisms,  narra- 

408 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

lives  heard  in  her  childhood  and  long  since  forgotten 
by  her  ordinary  personality,  but  which  reappear  by 
the  aid  of  mediumistic  autohypnotization,  bringing 
the  deepest  strata  to  the  surface ;  the  simple  play  of  as- 
sociation, in  an  entirely  natural  manner,  then  causes 
the  memories  relative  to  the  families  of  the  persons 
present  at  the  seance  to  be  poured  forth.  There  is 
nothing  whatever  of  the  supernormal  in  all  this,  in 
spite  of  the  dramatic  form,  the  piquant  and  unexpect- 
ed art,  the  amusing  embellishments,  of  which  the 
subliminal  imagination  bethinks  itself — or  1  should 
rather  say  Leopold,  in  his  role  of  historiographei 
and  scene-shifter  of  the  past. 

The  judgment  which  I  have  pronounced  is  the  result 
of  a  course  of  inductive  reasoning  based  on  the  retro- 
cognitions  of  Mile.  Smith  concerning  my  own  fam- 
ily. 1  trust  it  may  be  allowable  for  me  to  enter  upon 
some  details  designed  to  justify  my  opinion. 

I  note  first  that  all  these  retrocognitions  with  which 
Leopold  honored  me  took  place  in  the  first  six  se- 
ances which  I  had  with  Helene,  after  which  there 
has  not  been  a  single  one  in  the  whole  five  years 
which  have  since  elapsed.  This  argues  in  favor  of 
a  limited  group  of  latent  memories,  which  my  intro- 
duction to  the  seances  set  free,  a  sort  of  subliminal 
sac  or  pocket  which  was  emptied  once  for  all  on  the 
first  occasions  of  my  presence. 

In  the  second  place,  this  knowledge  only  concerns 
outside  details,  susceptible  of  striking  the  attention 
of  the  gallery  and  of  being  carried  from  mouth  to 
mouth.  Since  family  histories  have  no  great  interest 
for  the  ordinary  reader,  I  will  confine  myself  to  citing, 

409 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

by  way  of  example,  the  vision  which  so  astonished 
me  at  my  first  meeting  with  Helene  (p.  2),  and  which 
has  alreadj^  been  pubHshed  by  M.  Lemaitre.  1  re- 
produce his  narrative,  giving  real  names  : 

"  The  medium  [Mile.  Smith]  perceives  a  long  trail 
of  smoke,  which  envelopes  M.  Flournoy.  '  A  wom- 
an !'  cries  the  medium,  and,  a  moment  after,  '  Two 
women  .  .  .  quite  pretty,  brunettes  .  .  .  both  are 
in  bridal  toilet !  .  .  .  This  concerns  you,  M.  Flour- 
noy!' [The  table  approves  by  a  rap.]  They  re- 
main motionless  ;  they  have  white  flowers  in  their 
hair  and  resemble  each  other  a  little  ;  their  eyes, 
like  their  hair,  are  black,  or,  at  all  events,  very  dark. 
The  one  in  the  corner  appears  under  two  different 
aspects;  under  both  forms  she  is  young — perhaps 
twenty  -  five  years  old ;  on  the  one  hand  she  re- 
mains with  the  appearance  already  described  (bridal 
toilet),  and  on  the  other  she  appears  very  luminous 
in  a  great  space,  a  little  more  slender  of  visage,  and 
surrounded  by  a  number  of  pretty  children,  in  the 
midst  of  whom  she  appears  very  happy ;  her  hap- 
piness manifests  itself  by  her  expression,  but  still 
more  in  her  surroundings.  Both  women  seem  ready 
to  be  married.  The  medium  then  hears  a  name, 
which  at  first  escapes  her,  then  returns  little  by  lit- 
tle. *An!  .  .  .An!  .  .  .  Dan  .  .  .  Ran  .  .  . 
Dandi  .  .   .   Dandiran!' 

"  '  To  which  of  these  two  women  does  this  name  be- 
long T  demands  M.  Flournoy — '  to  the  one  you  see 
under  two  aspects,  or  to  the  other  ?'  Answer  :  '  To 
the  one  who  is  presented  under  two  forms.'  The  me- 
dium does  not  see  the  other  woman  as  distinctly  as 

410 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

fhe  first,  but  all  at  once  distinguishes  a  tall  man  by 
her  side,  who  only  passes  by,  when  the  table  dic- 
tates:  '1  am  his  sister;  we  will  return!'  after 
which  the  scene  changes  and  we  pass  to  another 
subject." 

This  vision  revolves  altogether  around  the  facts 
that  my  mother  and  her  sister  were  married  on  the 
same  day  ;  that  they  were  brunettes,  quite  pretty, 
and  looked  alike ;  that  my  father  was  tall  ;  that 
my  aunt  married  M.  Dandiran  and  died  while  still 
young,  without  children ;  all  matters  which  should 
have  been  of  public  notoriety  in  a  small  city  like 
Geneva.  But  the  same  is  true  of  all  the  other  re- 
trocognitions  of  Mile.  Smith ;  their  content  is  al- 
ways veridical,  but  at  the  same  time  is  also  such 
as  could  not  fail  to  be  known  to  a  host  of  people. 
This  causes  me  to  doubt  whether  there  is  at  the 
base  of  these  phenomena  a  really  supernormal  facul- 
ty of  retrocognition. 

A  third  striking  feature  is,  that  all  Helene's  retro- 
cognitions  concerning  me  are  relative  to  the  family 
of  my  mother,  and  are  connected  with  two  quite  pre- 
cise and  brief  periods,  the  first  of  which  is  many  years 
previous  to  Mile.  Smith's  birth.  This  limitation  as 
to  times  and  persons  seems  to  me  significant. 

To  clear  up  the  matter,  if  possible,  I  addressed  my- 
self to  the  last  representative  of  the  present  genera- 
tion of  my  family.  Professor  Dandiran,  of  Lausanne, 
and  laid  the  case  before  him.  He  did  not  immediate- 
ly remember  whether  my  grandparents  Claparede  had 
any  communication,  nearly  half  a  century  before, 
with  the  Smith  family,  but  on  the  following  day  he 

411 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

wrote  me  that  he  distinctly  recalled  a  young  woman 
of  that  name  in  whom  his  mother  and  aunt  had  been 
greatly  interested,  and  who  had  been  employed  by 
them  as  a  dressmaker  previous  to  her  marriage  to 
a  Hungarian. 

One  understands  that  I  had  a  reason  for  not  ad- 
dressing myself  first  to  Mme.  Smith  herself ;  but  1 
must  do  her  the  justice  to  state  that  when  I  questioned 
her  in  turn,  she  very  obligingly  gave  me  all  the  infor- 
mation I  desired,  and  which  was  in  perfect  accord  with 
the  statements  of  M.  Dandiran. 

Without  entering  into  details  wearisome  to  the 
reader,  it  will  be  sufficient  for  me  to  state  that  all  the 
retrocognitions  in  which  1  was  involved  were  con- 
nected with  two  periods  in  which  Mme.  Smith  had 
relations  with  my  mother's  family,  periods  separated 
by  an  interval  during  which  these  relations  were  sus- 
pended by  the  fact  of  M.  and  Mme.  Smith  making 
a  sojourn  of  several  years  in  a  foreign  country.  It 
would  have  been  possible  for  Helene  to  know  directly 
the  facts  of  the  second  period,  at  which  time  she  was 
about  five  or  six  years  of  age.  As  to  the  first  period, 
which  was  many  years  prior  to  her  birth  (the  time 
of  the  double  marriage  of  my  mother  and  her  sister  in 
1853),  it  is  evident  that  Mme.  Smith  has  had  many 
opportunities  at  a  later  date  to  narrate  these  facts 
to  her  daughter  ;  and  it  would  have  been  altogether 
natural  for  her  to  have  done  so. 

Ab  uno  disce  omnes.  Although  1  am  less  familiar 
with  the  retrocognitions  of  Mile.  Smith  concerning 
other  families,  everything  contributes  to  prove  to  me 
that  they  are  explicable  in  the  same  manner.     In 

412 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

two  cases,  at  least,  proof  has  been  obtained  that  the 
mother  of  Mile.  Smith  was  found  to  have  been  in  direct 
and  personal  communication  with  the  families  con- 
cerned, exactly  as  was  the  case  with  my  grandparents, 
and  this  circumstance  is  sufficient  to  account  for  the 
knowledge,  very  astonishing  at  first  sight,  contained 
in  the  revelations  of  Leopold. 

To  sum  up — pure  cryptomnesia  seems  to  me  to 
furnish  a  sufficient  and  adequate  explanation  for 
Helene's  retrocognitions,  both  as  to  family  events  as 
well  as  historic  facts. 

And  no  more  in  this  domain  of  knowledge  of  the 
past  than  in  those  of  recovered  objects  and  medical 
consultations  have  1  thus  far  succeeded  in  discovering 
in  her  the  least  serious  indication  of  supernormal 
faculties. 

V.  Incarnations  and  Spirit  Messages 

The  time  having  arrived  to  speak  of  spiritism,  I 
feel  ill  at  ease  and  embarrassed  by  my  surroundings, 
for  divers  reasons,  some  of  which  I  will  set  forth, 
without,  however,  endeavoring  to  explain  them  at 
length,  since  my  aim  is  simply,  as  has  been  seen 
above  (p.  373),  to  indicate  my  subjective  ideas  as  to 
the  standing  of  that  doctrine,  in  order  that  the  reader 
may  share,  if  he  pleases,  in  my  appreciation  of  the 
phenomena  of  this  class  presented  by  Mile.  Smith. 
1  confess,  in  the  first  place,  that  spiritism  is  a  subject 
which  has  the  faculty  of  arousing  my  mirth,  and 
develops  a  spirit  of  playfulness.  1  really  do  not 
know  why  this  should  be  the  case,  since  that  which 

413 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

concerns  the  dead  and  the  great  beyond  ought  not 
to  be  a  matter  for  joking.  Perhaps  the  cause  is  to  be 
found  in  the  nature  of  the  intermediaries,  and  the 
character  of  the  messages  with  which  the  spirits  are 
accustomed  to  favor  us.  However  it  may  be,  1  have 
ordinarily  much  difficuUy  in  preserving  a  serious 
countenance  in  the  presence  of  manifestations  of 
"  disincarnates." 

But  I  reproach  myself  bitterly  with  this  facetious 
humor  when  1  reflect  that  it  is  indulged  in  at  the  ex- 
pense of  conceptions  and  beliefs  which  supported  the 
first  steps  of  our  race  on  its  painful  ascent,  the  sur- 
vival or  atavic  reapparition  of  which  is  yet,  even  to- 
day, a  source  of  moral  strength,  of  happy  certitude, 
of  supreme  consolation  for  a  host  of  my  contempo- 
raries, many  of  whom  1  have  learned  to  know,  and 
who,  moreover,  inspire  me  with  respect  as  well  as 
admiration  •by  their  uprightness  of  life,  their  nobil- 
ity of  character,  the  purity  and  elevation  of  their 
sentiments. 

In  the  second  place,  I  have  often  had  the  deceptive 
experience  that,  when  it  comes  to  a  discussion  of  it, 
spiritism  possesses  a  great  advantage  for  its  defend- 
ers, but  which  is  most  inconvenient  for  those  who 
would  investigate  it  closely — of  being  fugitive  and  in- 
capable of  being  grasped  on  account  of  the  fact  of  its 
double  nature  —  a  science  and  religion  at  the  same 
time — which  never  permits  it  to  be  wholly  and  en- 
tirely the  one  or  the  other. 

When  we  come  to  analyze  and  criticise,  according 
to  strict  scientific  methods,  the  positive  facts  upon 
which  it  pretends  to  base  its  fundamental  argument 

414 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

— the  reality  of  communication  with  the  spirits  of 
the  departed,  through  the  intervention  of  mediums — 
as  soon  as  the  adepts  begin  to  tmpack  for  you  their 
stock  of  theories  (I  was  about  to  say  their  stock  theo- 
ries !)  they  are  astonished  at  the  lack  of  ideal  on  the 
part  of  these  terrible  materialist-scientists,  who  are 
intent  upon  searching  for  the  ''  hidden  rat  "  in  the 
demonstrations  of  spiritism,  instead  of  falling  on 
their  knees  before  the  splendor  of  its  revelations. 

A  third  cause  of  my  uneasiness  whenever  obliged 
to  approach  this  subject  is  the  fear  of  being  misun- 
derstood or  misinterpreted,  thanks  to  the  naive  and 
simple  classification  which  prevails  in  the  environ- 
ments which  the  "  disincarnates  "  frequent. 

Spiritism  or  materialism — these  are  the  brutal  al- 
ternatives to  which  one  finds  himself  driven  in  spite 
of  himself.  If  you  do  not  admit  that  the  spirits  of 
the  dead  reveal  themselves  by  raps  on  the  table  or 
visions  of  the  mediums,  you  are,  therefore,  a  materi- 
alist !  If  you  do  not  believe  that  the  destiny  of  the 
human  personality  is  terminated  at  the  grave,  you 
are  a  spiritist  !  This  mode  of  nomenclature  and 
labelling  is  surely  puerile.  Moreover,  no  one  will- 
ingly consents  to  be  thrust  into  the  company  of  those 
with  whom,  no  matter  how  honorable  they  may  be, 
he  is  not  in  sympathy. 

I  also  wish  to  state  that  I  absolutely  repudiate 
the  above  alternative.  There  is  greater  variety  of 
choice  in  the  cabinet  of  human  thought.  In  the 
last  century,  for  example,  outside  the  spiritism  of 
Swedenborg  and  the  materialism  of  Baron  d'Hol- 
bach,  there   was   yet   the    criticism   of   one   named 

415 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

Kant,  who  made  some  noise  in  the  world  and  whose 
vogue  is  even  now  not  absolutely  extinct.  I  should 
not  fear  to  range  myself  among  his  followers.  And 
in  our  own  times,  if  it  was  necessary  for  me  to  choose 
between  Biichner  and  Allan  Kardec,  as  the  spirit- 
ist seems  sometimes  to  believe,  I  would  not  hesitate 
to  choose — in  favor  of  M.  Renouvier,  or  my  deceased 
compatriot  Charles  Secretan. 

I  hold  to  no  other  philosophy,  and  it  suffices  me, 
in  order  to  repulse  the  whole  of  materialism  and  spir- 
itism, to  be  the  disciple  —  unworthy,  but  convinced 
— of  the  Nazarene,  who  replied  to  the  materialists 
of  his  time,  not  by  spiritistic  evocations,  but  by  the 
simple  words,  ''  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead  but  of 
the  living,  for  all  live  unto  Him."  I  am  not  sure 
whether  this  argument  convinced  the  Sadducees, 
but  it  pleases  me  by  its  simplicity,  and  1  have  no 
desire  for  any  other. 

If  God  exists — 1  should  say,  if  the  supreme  reality  is 
not  the  unconscious  and  blind  force-substance  of  con- 
ventional monism,  but  that  sovereign  personality  (or 
supra  personality)  which  in  the  clear  consciousness 
of  Christ  made  its  paternal  presence  to  be  continually 
felt — if  God  exists,  it  is  not,  apparently,  in  order  to 
play  the  role  of  a  perpetual  undertaker  of  funereal 
pomp  that  he  consents  to  exist,  or  to  allow  to  fall  for- 
ever into  nothingness  the  poor  creatures  who  wait 
upon  Him. 

They  may  disappear  from  before  our  eyes,  but  they 
do  not  disappear  from  before  His  ;  for  they  are  dead 
to  us,  but  for  Him,  and,  consequently,  in  actual  real- 
ity, they  are  living.     Otherwise  He  would  not  be  God. 

416 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

This  is  all  I  need.  I  see  nothing  clearly,  it  is  true,  as 
to  the  concrete  conditions  of  that  other  existence,  of 
which  the  manner  even,  if  it  were  revealed  to  me, 
would  probably  remain  a  sealed  book  to  my  intelli- 
gence, hampered  by  the  bonds  of  space  and  time. 
But  of  what  importance  is  it  ?  That  which  I  am  igno- 
ant  of,  God  knows  ;  and  while  waiting  for  Him  to  call 
me  to  rejoin  those  who  have  preceded  me.  He  is  great 
enough  for  me  to  leave  to  Him  the  mysterious  fate  of 
our  personalities.  "  Since  all  live  unto  Him,"  I  ask 
no  more  than  that,  and  as  for  the  pretended  demon- 
strations of  spiritism,  true  or  false,  I  do  not  care  a 
farthing. 

Or  1  would  prefer  them  to  be  false.  And  if  they  are 
true,  if  it  is  actually  a  law  of  nature  that  during  long 
years  to  come,  after  this  terrestrial  existence,  we  must 
drag  ourselves  miserably  from  table  to  table  and  me- 
dium to  medium,  the  best  of  us  (not  to  speak  of  the 
others)  displaying  without  shame  the  proofs  of  our 
mental  decrepitude  in  pitiable  nonsense  and  wretched 
verses — oh,  so  much  the  worse  ! 

It  is  one  misery  and  shame  the  more  added  to  all 
those  of  which  this  satanic  world  is  made  up,  a  new 
calamity  coming  to  crown  the  physical  and  moral  ills 
of  a  world  against  which  the  Christian  continually 
protests  as  he  repeats  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  an  ad- 
ditional scandal  condemned  to  disappear  when  "  His 
kingdom  shall  have  come." 

There  is  nothing  in  common  between  the  empirical, 
spatial,  and  temporal  survivals  which  spiritism  pre- 
tends to  establish  and  that ''  eternal  life  "  proclaimed 
by  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth.     These  things,  said  Pas- 
2D  417 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

cal,  are  not  of  the  same  order.     That  is  why  I  am  not 
a  spiritist. 

Here  rises  a  last  point,  which  worries  me  when  I 
ought  to  speak  my  mind  in  regard  to  spiritism  in  the 
presence  of  spiritists.  ''  You  do  not  personally  hold," 
it  has  been  often  objected  to  me,  "  to  these  communi- 
cations of  the  living  with  those  who  have  gone  before 
us  into  the  great  unknown,  and  you  cry  out  against 
spiritistic  demonstrations.  It  is  all  very  well  for  you, 
who  are  a  mystic,  and  to  whom  the  existence  of  God 
in  Jesus  Christ  seems  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  the  des- 
tinies of  human  personality  and  its  ultimate  palingen- 
esis. But  every  one  has  not  the  same  temperament, 
and  does  not  take  so  blithely  his  ignorance  of  the  kind 
of  life  which  awaits  him  beyond  the  tomb.  To  be- 
lieve in  God,  and  to  abandon  to  Him  with  closed  eyes 
the  fate  of  those  who  leave  us,  carrying  away  with 
them  the  best  portions  of  our  being,  is  all  very  well, 
but  it  is  very  difficult.  The  times  of  the  psalmist  who 
could  say  '  Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  Him  ' 
are  no  more ;  and  as  for  Christ,  He  was  certainly 
a  very  remarkable  medium,  but  His  simple  affirma- 
tion would  scarcely  be  taken  to-day  for  gospel  words. 
The  solid  and  the  palpable  are  necessary  to  the 
'  fools'  of  our  epoch.  They  are  not  capable  of  admit- 
ting a  higher  world  than  that  of  sense,  unless  they  are 
enabled  to  touch  it  with  their  finger  by  means  of  mes- 
sages and  the  return  of  the  dead  themselves.  Whence 
it  results  that  every  attack,  every  hostile  attitude  tow- 
ards spiritism  tends  directly  to  break  down  the 
only  rampart  which  might  henceforth  be  efficacious 
against  materialism  and  its  disastrous  consequences 

418 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

— infidelity,  egotism,  vice,  despair,  suicide,  and,  final- 
ly, the  destruction  and  annihilation  of  the  entire  social 
organism.     On  the  other  hand,  when  science  at  length 
shall  recognize  and  consecrate  spiritism  ojHicially, 
thereupon,  simultaneously  with  the  tangible  certainty 
of  another  life,  courage  and  strength  will  return  to 
the  hearts  of  individuals,  devotion  and  all  virtues  will 
begin  to  flourish  once  again,  and  an  elevated  human- 
ity will  soon  see  heaven  descend  upon   the  earth, 
thanks  to  the  connection  established  and  daily  prac- 
tised between  the  living  and  the  spirits  of  the  dead." 
My  embarrassment  is  easily  seen.      On  the  one 
hand,  1  do  not  in  any  way  admit  the  foregoing  objec- 
tion.    I  do  not  think  that  the  gospel  has  had  its  day 
or  is  above  the  reach  of  ''  fools,"  since  it  was  for  them 
that  its  author  designed  it.     I  believe,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  the  Christian  faith,  the  faith  of  Christ  or 
faith  in  Christ,  is,  in  its  inmost  essence,  a  psychologi- 
cal reality,  a  personal  experience  accessible  to  the 
most  humble,  a  fact  of  consciousness  which  will  sur- 
vive when  all  theological  systems  shall  have  been 
forgotten  and  all  the  clergy  shall  have  been  abol- 
ished.    That  vital  and  regenerating  power  will  save 
our  civilization  (if  anything  can  save  it)   by  means 
of  the  individuals  whom  it  shall  have  regenerated, 
without   owing   anything   to   spiritistic   theories   or 
practices.     Inversely,  I  do  not  share  the  optimism  of 
those  who  would  make  of  spiritism  a  social  panacea, 
and  who  imagine  that  when  the  moral  conscious- 
ness on  the  one  side  and  the  religious  consciousness 
on  the  other  have  ceased  to  make  themselves  heard, 
the  messages  of  the  "  disincarnates  "  will  have  better 

419 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

success.  ("  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets, 
neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from 
the  dead.") 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  individual  cases 
which  are  interesting  and  which  certainly  merit  con- 
sideration. And  for  millions,  and  by  a  hundred  dif- 
ferent titles — religious  belief,  moral  consolation,  sol- 
emn and  mysterious  rites,  old  habit,  etc. — spiritism 
is  to-day  the  pivot  around  which  existence  turns,  and 
also  its  only  support ;  would  not  the  destruction  of 
it,  then,  be  productive  of  more  harm  than  good,  and 
would  it  not  be  better  to  let  matters  take  their 
course  ?  Why  prevent  man  from  delighting  in 
dreams,  if  he  so  pleases  ? 

All  things  are  possible,  and  was  it  not  of  the  reve- 
nants  that  Hamlet  was  thinking  in  his  celebrated 
apostrophe,  from  which  I  have  taken  this  principle  ? 

These  are  the  things  which  perplex  me :  while 
waiting  to  find  a  way  out  of  them,  and  by  way  of 
summing  up,  it  seems  to  me  indispensable  to  sepa- 
rate distinctly  spiritism-religion,  which  is  an  assem- 
blage of  beliefs  and  practices  dear  to  many,  from 
spiritism-science,  a  simple  hypothesis  designed  to  ex- 
plain certain  phenomena  arising  from  observation. 
The  first  tells  me  nothing,  or  rather  it  amuses  me 
or  repels  me  according  to  circumstances ;  but  the 
more  elevated  sentiments,  and  those  worthy  of  all  re- 
spect, which  it  inspires  in  its  adepts,  impose  upon  me 
the  duty  of  passing  it  by  and  ignoring  it  here.  The 
second,  on  the  contrary,  does  not  fail  to  interest  me, 
as  it  does  all  who  are  curious  in  regard  to  natural 
phenomena. 

420 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

For  the  question.  Do  human  or  animal  individ- 
uaUties  continue  to  intervene  in  an  effective  manner 
in  the  physical,  physiological,  or  psychological  phe- 
nomena of  this  universe  after  the  loss  of  their  corpo- 
real and  visible  organism  ?  is  not  an  ordinary  one.  If 
there  are  facts  which  peremptorily  establish  an  affirm- 
ative answer,  what  problems  will  arise,  what  an  un- 
expected field  of  investigation  will  it  not  open  up 
to  our  experimental  sciences  !  And  even  if  the  hy- 
pothesis is  false,  how  captivating  the  study  of  the 
singular  phenomena  which  have  been  able  to  give  it 
birth,  which  simulate  the  return  of  the  dead  to  our 
observable  world !  It  is  understood,  therefore,  that, 
even  despoiled  of  all  the  emotional  accessories  in 
which  it  so  easily  wraps  itself  in  the  heart  and  im- 
agination of  men,  the  empirical  question  of  im- 
mortality and  spiritistic  interventions,  apparent  or 
real,  preserves  its  scientific  importance,  and  merits 
being  discussed  with  the  calm  serenity,  independence, 
and  strictness  of  analysis  which  belong  to  the  ex- 
perimental method. 

It  goes  without  saying  that,  a  priori,  the  hypothe- 
sis of  spirits  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  mediums 
has  in  it  nothing  of  the  impossible  or  the  absurd. 
It  does  not  even  necessarily  contradict,  as  is  some- 
times imagined,  the  directing  principle  of  physio- 
logical psychology — the  psychological  parallelism — 
which  demands  that  every  mental  phenomenon  shall 
have  a  physical  correlative.  For,  in  spite  of  our 
habit  of  considering  the  molecular  or  atomic  phe- 
nomena of  the  brain,  the  katabolism  of  the  nerves, 
as  the  true  concomitant  of  conscious  processes,  it 

421 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

may  well  be — it  is  even  very  probable — that  these 
molecular  movements  do  not  constitute  the  ultimate 
ph^^sical  term  immediately  paralleling  the  mental 
world,  but  that  the  real  physical  correlatives  (spa- 
tial) of  the  (non-spatial)  psychological  phenomena 
should  be  sought  for  in  the  vibrations  of  imponder- 
able matter,  the  ether,  in  which  the  ponderable 
atoms  and  molecules  are  plunged  somewhat  like 
grains  of  dust  in  the  atmosphere,  in  order  to  make 
a  sensible  though  somewhat  inaccurate  comparison. 

The  ethereal  body,  perispiritistic,  astral,  fluid,  etc., 
of  the  occultists,  and  of  many  thinkers  who  are  not 
believers  in  occultism,  is  only  a  notion  scientifically 
absurd  when  it  is  made  to  be  an  equivocal  and  cloudy 
intermediary  between  the  soul  and  the  body,  an  un- 
assignable tertium  quid,  a  plastic  mediator  of  which 
nothing  is  known  as  to  its  being  material  or  spiritual 
or  something  else.  But  conceived  as  a  system  of 
movements  of  the  ether,  it  contains  nothing  abso- 
lutely anti-  or  extra-scientific  in  its  nature ;  the  con- 
nection between  the  subjective  facts  of  consciousness 
and  the  objective,  material  facts,  remains  essentially 
the  same  whether  one  considers  the  material  world 
under  the  imponderable  form  of  ether  or  under  the 
ponderable  form  of  chemical  atoms,  of  physical  mole- 
cules, and  of  anatomical  elements.  Nothing,  then, 
would  be  radically  opposed,  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  natural  sciences,  to  the  existence  of  disincar- 
nate  spirits  wandering  through  space. 

The  foregoing  will  doubtless  please  my  spiritistic 
friends.  ?Iere  are  two  facts  which  will  please  them 
less.     First :  I  separate  myself  from  them  when  they 

422 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

pass  prematurely  from  mere  abstract  possibilities  to 
the  affirmation  of  actualities.  Perhaps  the  outcome 
will  prove  them  right  some  day ;  perhaps  in  the 
near  future,  but  we  have  not  yet  reached  that 
point.  1  freely  admit  that  never  have  circumstances 
been  so  favorable  for  the  spiritistic  doctrines  as  at 
present.  The  authentic  return  of  George  Pelham  and 
other  deceased  persons,  through  Mrs.  Piper  entranced, 
as  intermediary,  seems  to  be  admitted  by  so  many 
acute  observers,  the  phenomena  observed  for  fif- 
teen years  past  in  the  case  of  this  incomparable  me- 
dium are  at  times  so  marvellous  and  surrounded 
with  such  solid  scientific  guarantees — the  case  is,  in 
a  word,  so  unheard  of  and  astounding  in  all  respects, 
that  those  who  are  only  acquainted  with  it  from  a  dis- 
tance, by  printed  reports  and  oral  narratives  of  im- 
mediate witnesses,  feel  themselves  in  a  poor  position 
for  formulating  their  doubts  and  reservations  upon 
this  subject. 

I  fear,  in  the  second  place,  for  mediums  and  prac- 
tical spiritists,  that  when  their  hypothesis  shall  have 
been  scientifically  demonstrated  the  result  may  be 
very  different  from  that  which  they  now  imagine  it 
will  be. 

It  might  well  happen  that  the  cult  of  the  table, 
mechanical  writing,  seances,  and  all  other  medium- 
istic  exercises,  may  receive  their  death-blow  from  the 
official  recognition  of  spirits  by  science.  Suppose, 
in  fact,  that  contemporaneous  researches  should  at 
last  have  proved  clearly  that  messages  actually  come 
from  the  disincarnate ;  it  has  already  followed  from 
the  same  researches  that  in  the  most  favorable  cases 

42.3 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

the  veritable  messages  are  very  difficult  to  distin- 
guish from  those  which  are  not  authentic.  When 
people  come  to  understand  that  this  sorting  of  mes- 
sages is  almost  always  beyond  their  power,  they 
will,  perhaps,  be  put  out  of  conceit  with  experiments 
in  which  they  have  ninety-nine  chances  against  one 
of  being  dupes  of  themselves  or  others,  and  in  which — 
a  still  more  vexatious  matter — if  they  should  even  be 
so  fortunate  as  to  light  upon  the  hundredth  chance, 
they  would  have  no  certain  means  of  knowing  it. 

This  subject,  decidedly,  is  fatal  to  me.  I  lose  my- 
self in  digressions  when  discussing  it — very  useless 
they  are,  too,  since  the  verdict  which  the  future  will 
pronounce  upon  the  theory  of  spirits,  with  or  without 
an  ethereal  body,  matters  little  as  far  as  the  actual  ex- 
amination of  the  messages  furnished  by  Mile.  Smith 
is  concerned.  Even  having  become  scientifically 
verified,  spiritism  will  never  absolve  us  from  bringing 
to  the  analysis  of  the  pretended  communications  less 
care  and  rigor  than  while  it  was  only  an  undemon- 
strated  hypothesis ;  each  particular  case  will  always 
demand  to  be  scrutinized  by  itself,  in  order  to  make 
the  distinction  between  that  which  in  all  probability 
only  arises  from  many  non-spiritistic  causes,  and  the 
residue  eventually  proceeding  from  the  disincarnate. 

1  ought  to  state  at  the  outset  that,  as  far  as  H^lene's 
mediumistic  phenomena  are  concerned,  their  careful 
analysis  has  not  revealed  to  me  in  them  any  evident 
vestige  of  the  other  world,  not  even  of  traces  of  a  tele- 
pathic transmission  on  the  part  of  the  Uving.  1  have 
only  succeeded  in  perceiving  in  them  very  beauti- 
ful  and   instructive   examples    of    the   well-known 

424 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

tendency  of  the  subliminal  imagination  to  reconstruct 
the  deceased  and  to  feign  their  pres^fice,  especially 
when  the  favorable  suggestions  of  "the  surrounding 
environment  incites  them  to  do'  so.  Not  being  in- 
fallible, and  bearing  in  mind  Hamlet's  principle,  I 
will  guard  myself  well  from  affirming  that  these  sub- 
liminal imitations  and  simulacra  are  absolutely  free 
from  any  spirit  collaboration ;  I  content  myself  with 
repeating  that  1  have  not  discovered  any,  and  that  it 
seems  to  me  in  the  highest  degree  improbable,  and 
with  leaving  it  to  others  to  demonstrate  its  reality, 
if  they  think  they  are  able  to  do  so.  Some  examples 
taken  from  the  principal  incarnations  of  Mile.  Smith 
will  enable  me  to  show  after  a  more  concrete  fashion 
my  manner  of  regarding  them. 

I.  Case  of  Mile.  Vignier. — This  case  has  no  evi- 
dential value  whatever,  since  (as  has  been  seen, 
p.  411),  there  were  formerly  relations  between  the 
Vignier  family  and  Mme.  Smith  which  suffice  to  ex- 
plain the  veridical  knowledge  manifested  by  Hel^ne 
in  this  incarnation. 

1  give  an  abridged  recital  of  it,  nevertheless,  for  the 
sake  of  certain  points  of  psychological  interest.  None 
of  the  spectators  had  any  suspicion  of  these  relations 
at  the  time  of  this  scene,  which  was  absolutely  enig- 
matical to  all  of  them. 

In  a  seance  at  my  house  (on  March  3,  1895,  after  a 
Hindoo  vision,  described  p.  280),  Mile.  Smith  saw  an 
unknown  lady  appear,  of  whom  she  gave  the  follow- 
ing description  :  ''  A  nose  bent  and  hooked  like  the 
beak  of  an  eagle ;  small  gray  eyes,  very  close  together ; 
a  mouth  with  three  teeth  only  ;  a  wicked  smile,  mock- 

425 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE   PLANET  MARS 

ing  expression  ;  simple  dress  ;  a  collar  not  of  the 
fashion  of  to-day ;  she  draws  near  to  this  portrait,* 
and  gazes  at  it  not  ill-naturedly." 

The  name  of  this  person  is  asked,  and  the  table 
(Leopold)  commences  to  spell :  "  Mademoiselle  " — but 
refuses  to  go  further,  while  H61ene  sees  the  apparition 
laughing,  "  with  a  sly  air  "  ;  as  the  name  is  insisted 
on,  the  table  dictates  :  "  That  does  not  concern  you" 
then  she  begins  to  jump  and  skip  as  though  glad  of 
an  opportunity  to  mock  us. 

Presently  Helene  falls  asleep  and  enters  into  som- 
nambulism ;  she  leaves  the  table  and  moves  towards 
the  portrait  in  question,  before  which  she  remains 
fixed,  completely  incarnating  the  unknown  lady  of 
her  vision.  I  take  down  the  portrait  and  place  it  in 
its  frame  upon  an  easy-chair  ;  immediately  she  kneels 
before  it  and  contemplates  it  with  affection  ;  then,  tak- 
ing the  frame  in  her  right  hand,  while  the  left,  very 
much  agitated,  plays  with  the  cord,  she  ends,  after 
many  vain  attempts,  by  saying  with  a  great  stam- 
mering, "J  —  j  —  je  Vaimais  b  —  b  —  beaucoup  :  je 
n'aime  pas  I'autre — / — j — je  ne  Vai  jamais  aimee 
V autre — j'amais  bien  mon  neveu — adieu! — je  le  vois." 
{"  I  liked  it  very  much :  I  do  not  like  the  other  one  : 
I  never  liked  the  other  one.  I  was  very  fond  of  my 
nephew.     Adieu  !     I  see  him.) 

It  was  impossible  to  obtain  any  explanation  of 
this  incomprehensible  scene,  until,  having  slipped 
a  pencil  and  a  writing-tablet  into  H61ene's  hand, 
she  scribbled  feverishly,  in  a  hand  not  her  own,  these 

*  A  small  oil-portrait  of  my  mother, 
426 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

two  words  ''  Mademoiselle  Vignier ";  then  she  fell 
into  a  cataleptic  phase,  from  which  she  awakened 
without  memory  at  the  end  of  half  an  hour. 

This  name  of  Vignier  evoked  in  me  far-off  mem- 
ories and  vaguely  recalled  to  my  mind  the  fact  that 
Professor  Dandiran  (who  had  married,  as  we  have 
seen,  my  mother's  sister)  had  an  ancestress  of  that 
name  ;  was  it  she  who  returned  to  express  to  me 
by  means  of  Mile.  Smith  her  affection  for  my  moth- 
er, whose  portrait  she  had  so  attentively  regarded, 
and  her  regrets,  perhaps,  that  her  nephew  had  not 
been  preferred  to  my  aunt  ? 

On  the  other  hand,  M.  Cuendet  recollected  a  Mile. 
Vignier  who  had  been  a  friend  of  his  family,  but  who 
did  not  correspond  at  all  with  the  description  of  He- 
lene's  visions ;  he  promised  to  obtain  information, 
and,  in  fact,  wrote  me  on  the  following  day  :  "'  Dear 
Sir, — Here  is  some  information  on  the  subject  of  our 
seance  of  yesterday.  This  morning  I  asked  my 
mother  :  '  Did  you  ever  know  another  Mile.  Vig- 
nier than  the  one  who  was  your  friend  V  After  an  in- 
stant of  reflection  :  '  Yes,'  replied  she ;  '  I  did  know 
another.  She  was  M.  Dandiran' s  aunt,  of  Lau- 
sanne, his  mother's  sister.  She  stammered,  and 
was  not  always  very  good-natured  ;  she  had  three 
large  teeth  which  projected,  and  a  hooked  nose.'  It 
is  useless  to  state  to  you  that  this  was  the  first  time 
I  had  heard  her  spoken  of." 

This  information,  coinciding  with  my  remem- 
brances and  Helene's  vision,  was  later  confirmed  by 
M.  Dandiran,  who  gave  me  the  following  informa- 
tion :  "  Your  aunt.  Mile.   Vignier,  who  died  about 

427 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

thirty-five  or  forty  years  ago,  loved  her  nephew 
very  much  ;  but  she  was  made  very  angry  by 
his  marriage,  and  the  sentence  uttered  before  my 
mother's  portrait  could  not  have  referred  to  a  differ- 
ence of  sentiment  in  regard  to  the  two  sisters,  for 
w^hom  she  always  had  an  equal  affection.  This 
sentence,  on  the  contrary,  is  wonderfully  well  ex- 
plained by  the  following  facts :  My  mother  and  her 
sister  having  become  betrothed  at  the  same  time, 
oil-paintings  of  both,  of  natural  size,  were  made  by 
the  same  painter.  These  portraits  were  not  of  equal 
merit,  and  Mile.  Vignier,  who  was  herself  some- 
thing of  an  artist,  always  considered  that  of  my 
mother  excellent,  while  the  other,  that  of  my  aunt, 
she  did  not  like  at  all.  Mile.  Vignier  was  very  live- 
ly, and  M.  Dandiran  finds  that  the  epithet  '  sly ' 
and  the  table  dictating  '  That  does  not  concern  you,' 
very  well  express  her  character  ;  she  was,  however, 
not  at  all  malicious  or  mocking  at  heart,  but  it  is 
true  that  persons  who  knew  her  slightly  could  easily 
have  gained  that  impression  of  her.  She  had  three 
or  four  prominent  teeth  and  stammered  badly.  In 
her  photograph  she  wears  a  white  collar,  has  a  nose 
long  and  arched,  but  the  eyes  are  rather  large  and 
wide  apart.  She  always  wore  gold  eye-glasses,  of 
which  the  medium  did  not  speak." 

If  the  reader  has  had  patience  to  read  these  details, 
he  will  have  remarked  that  the  distinctive  traits  of 
Mile.  Vignier  in  the  vision  and  her  incarnation  by 
H616ne  (the  stammering,  the  teeth,  the  shape  of  the 
nose,  the  ill-natured  air)  coincide  with  those  spon- 
taneously indicated  by  M.  Cuendet,  who  had  known 

428 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

her  slightly  ;  and  that  while  M.  Dandiran,  better 
posted  as  to  his  aunt's  character,  finds  the  note  of 
maliciousness  or  want  of  good-nature  false,  he  ac- 
knowledges that  people  outside  of  her  family  could 
have  been  deceived  concerning  it.  That  is  to  say, 
has  not  the  imagination  of  Mile.  Smith  produced 
the  exterior  memory,  the  description  according  to 
public  notoriety,  as  it  were,  which  Mile.  Vignier  left 
behind  her  ?  And  if  it  be  recalled  that  at  the  period 
at  which  the  two  fiancees  were  painted,  Mme.  Smith 
was  in  communication  with  my  maternal  grand- 
parents through  the  only  sister  of  Mile.  Vignier, 
there  would  be  a  probability  amounting  almost  to 
a  certainty  that  these  are  contemporary  remem- 
brances, narrated  some  time  or  other  to  Helene  by 
her  mother,  and  which  furnished  the  material  for 
this  somnambulic  personification. 

In  this  example,  to  which  1  might  add  several  anal- 
ogous ones,  the  apparent  spirit  control  is  reduced  to 
latent  memories  of  recitals  formerly  heard  by  He- 
lene. 

In  other  cases,  in  which,  for  lack  of  information,  it 
has  hitherto  been  impossible  to  discover  this  wholly 
natural  filiation  of  facts,  simple  analysis  of  the  cir- 
cumstances and  of  the  content  of  the  communications 
indicates  that,  in  all  probability,  they  proceed  from 
reminiscences  and  impressions  appertaining  to  living 
individuals  much  rather  than  from  disincarnates.  In 
other  words,  these  messages  and  personifications  too 
evidently  reflect  the  point  of  view  of  the  medium  or 
other  living  persons  for  it  to  be  permissible  to  regard 
them  as  due  to  the  intervention  of  deceased  persons, 

429 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE    PLANET   MARS 

whose  attitude  towards  them  would,  in  all  prob- 
ability, be  wholly  different. 

2.  Case  of  Jean  the  Quarryman. — We  have  here 
to  deal  with  a  very  curious  spirit  message  concerning 
i\Ime.  Mirbel,  in  which  I  cannot  fail  to  see  actual 
memories  of  the  latter — transmitted  I  know  not  how 
(but  not  necessarily  in  a  supernormal  manner)  to 
Mile.  Smith — rather  than  an  authentic  communica- 
tion from  a  pretended  disincarnate. 

In  a  seance  at  which  Mme.  Mirbel  was  not  present, 
Helene  had  the  hallucination  of  a  very  strong  odor  of 
sulphur  ;  then  the  vision  of  a  quarryman  from  the 
foot  of  Saleve,  in  which  she  perceived  and  described 
in  detail  an  unknown  man,  who,  by  the  dictations  of 
the  table,  was  declared  to  be  Jean  the  Quarryman, 
and  charged  the  sitters  with  an  affectionate  message 
for  Mme.  Mirbel.  The  latter,  interrogated  on  the  fol- 
lowing day,  recognized  in  the  very  circumstantial  de- 
scription of  this  man,  and  under  all  the  features  of 
Helene' s  vision,  perfectly  correct  facts  connected  with 
her  childhood,  and  which  had  passed  away  from  the 
habitual  circle  of  her  ideas  for  more  than  twenty 
years.  It  concerned  a  workman  employed  in  her 
father's  quarries,  and  who,  when  she  was  a  little 
girl,  had  always  evinced  a  special  affection  for  her. 

Let  us  suppose — in  the  absence  of  all  proof  that 
Mile.  Smith  had  ever  heard  these  remembrances  of 
Mme.  Mirbel's  childhood  mentioned — that  recourse 
must  be  had  to  the  supernormal  in  order  to  explain  the 
case.  It  still  would  not  amount  to  an  intervention  of 
the  deceased  quarryman  ;  and  M.  Lemaitre  was  per- 
fectly right,  in  my  opinion,  in  clinging  to  telepathy 

430 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

and  in  hazarding  the  idea  of  an  etheric  influence,  to 
which  Hel^ne  was  subjected  by  Mme.  Mirbel,  who  at 
the  hour  of  this  seance  happened  to  be  half  a  kilo- 
metre distant  from  the  place  of  the  seance.  Without 
going  out  of  the  domain  of  telepathy,  I  still  would  pre- 
fer the  hypothesis  of  a  previous  transmission  in  the 
course  of  one  of  the  seances  at  which  Mme.  Mirbel 
was  present  to  that  of  telepathy  at  a  great  distance 
at  the  time  of  the  seance.  It  is,  in  fact,  not  contrary 
to  that  which  is  believed  to  be  known  of  mental  sug- 
gestion, to  admit  that  Helene's  subliminal,  in  the 
state  of  Esenale,  for  example,  could  in  some  way 
draw  from  Mme.  MirbeFs  subliminal  the  latent  mem- 
ories which  there  lay  buried  for  some  time  before 
being  ready  to  reappear  at  a  seance  at  which  she 
had  some  reason  to  think  Mme.  Mirbel  would  again 
be  present. 

Whatever  the  mode  of  its  transmission  may  have 
been,  the  content  of  this  vision  seems  to  me  to  indicate 
clearly  that  it  has  its  origin  in  the  personal  memories 
of  Mme.  Mirbel  rather  than  in  the  posthumous  mem- 
ory of  Jean  the  Quarry  man.  All  the  presumptions 
in  this  case  are,  to  my  mind,  in  favor  of  a  memory  of 
Mme.  Mirbel,  and  not  of  a  veritable  communication 
from  the  other  world.  The  personal  aspect  of  the 
messages  supposed  to  be  dictated  by  the  quarryman 
do  not  constitute  an  obstacle  to  my  interpretation  or 
a  guarantee  of  spiritistic  authenticity,  this  aspect  be- 
ing the  form  that  the  automatisms  habitually  as- 
sume among  mediums. 

3.  Case  of  the  Syndic  Chaumontet  and  of  the  Cure 
Burnier. — The  following  case  is  the  last.     It  is  a 

4.31 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

very  recent  one,  in  which  the  spiritistic  and  the 
cryptomnesiac  hypotheses  exist  face  to  face,  apropos 
of  signatures  written  by  Mile.  Smith  in  somnambu- 
lism which  do  not  lack  similarity  to  the  authentic 
signatures  of  the  deceased  persons  to  whom  they  are 
supposed  to  belong. 

In  a  seance  at  my  house  (February  12,  1899),  Mile. 
Smith  has  a  vision  of  a  village  on  a  height  covered 
with  vines  ;  by  a  rocky  road,  she  sees  descending 
from  it  a  little  old  man,  who  has  the  air  of  a  quasi 
gentleman  ;  he  wears  shoes  with  buckles,  a  large 
felt  hat,  the  collar  of  his  shirt  is  unstarched,  and  has 
points  reaching  up  to  his  cheeks,  etc.  A  peasant 
in  a  blouse,  whom  he  meets,  makes  reverences  to  him, 
as  to  an  important  personage ;  they  speak  a  patois 
which  H61ene  does  not  understand  She  has  the  im- 
pression of  being  familiar  with  the  village,  but  vainly 
searches  her  memory  to  discover  where  she  has  seen 
it.  Presently  the  landscape  fades  away,  and  the 
little  old  man,  now  clothed  in  white  and  in  a  luminous 
space  (i.  e.,  in  his  actual  reality  of  a  disincarnate),  ap- 
pears to  draw  near  to  her.  At  this  moment,  as  she 
leans  her  right  arm  upon  the  table,  Leopold  dictates 
by  the  index-finger  :  "  Kiss  her  arm."  I  execute  the 
order  ;  Helene's  arm  at  first  resists  strenuously,  then 
yields  suddenly.  She  seizes  a  pencil,  and  in  the 
midst  of  the  customary  struggle  relative  to  the  manner 
of  holding  it  (see  p.  100),  "  You  are  holding  my  hand 
too  tightly,"  says  she  to  the  imaginary  little  old  man, 
who,  according  to  Leopold,  wishes  to  make  use  of  it  in 
order  to  write.  "  You  hurt  me  very  badly  ;  do  not  hold 
it  so  firmly.  .  .  .  What  difference  does  it  make  ivhether 

432 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

it  is  a  pencil  or  a  pen  ?"  At  these  words  she  throws 
away  the  pencil  and  takes  up  a  pen,  an  J,  holding  it 
between  the  thumb  and  index-finger,  slowly  traces 
in  an  unknown  hand  :  "  Chaumontet,  syndic  "  (see 
Fig.  44). 

Then  the  vision  of  the  village  returns ;  at  our  de- 
sire to  know  the  name  of  it  she  ultimately  perceives 
a  sign-post  on  which  she  spells  "  Chessenaz,"  a  name 
which  is  unknown  to  us.  Then,  having  by  my  ad- 
vice asked  the  little  old  man,  whom  she  still  sees, 
at  what  period  he  was  syndic,  she  hears  him  answer, 

"1839." 

It  is  impossible  to  learn  more  ;  the  vision  vanishes 
and  gives  way  to  a  total  incarnation  of  Leopold,  who, 
in  his  deep  Italian  voice,  speaks  to  us  at  length  of 
various  matters.  I  take  advantage  of  it  in  order  to 
question  him  upon  the  incident  of  the  unknown  vil- 
lage and  syndic ;  his  replies,  interrupted  by  long  di- 
gressions, may  be  summed  up  about  as  follows :  "  I 
am  searching.  ...  I  traverse  in  thought  the  ascent  of 
this  great  mountain  pierced  through  at  its  foot  by 
something,  the  name  of  which  I  do  not  know ;  I  see 
the  name  of  Chessenaz,  a  village  on  a  height,  and  a 
road  which  ascends  to  it.  Search  in  this  village ;  you 
will  certainly  find  the  name  (Chaumontet)  ;  seek  to 
examine  his  signature  ;  this  proof  you  will  find  there  ; 
you  will  find  that  the  handwriting  was  that  of  this 
man." 

To  my  question  whether  he  sees  this  in  Helene's 

memories  and  whether  she  has  ever  been  at  Chessenaz, 

he  replies  in  the  negative  as  to  the  first  point  and 

evasively  as  to  the  second  :    "  Ask  her  ;  she  has  a 

2ii  433 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

good  memory  for  everything.  I  have  not  followed 
her  in  all  her  wanderings." 

Awakened,  Helene  could  not  furnish  us  any  infor- 
mation. But  the  following  day  I  found  on  the  map 
a  little  village  called  Chessenaz,  in  the  Department 
of  Haute-Savoie,  twenty-six  kilometres,  in  a  straight 
line,  from  Geneva,  and  not  far  from  the  Credo.  As 
the  Chaumontets  are  not  rare  in  Savoy,  there  was 
nothing  unlikely  in  the  fact  of  a  person  of  that  name 
having  been  syndic  there  in  1839. 

Two  weeks  later  I  made  a  visit  to  Mme.  and  Mile. 
Smith — there  was  no  seance  held — when  Helene 
suddenly  assumed  the  voice  and  accent  of  Leopold, 
without  being  aware  of  the  change,  and  believ- 
ing me  to  be  joking  when  I  sought  to  cause  her 
to  notice  it.  Presently  the  hemisomnambulism  be- 
comes accentuated  ;  Helene  sees  the  vision  of  the 
other  day,  the  village  and  then  the  little  old  man  (the 
syndic)  reappear,  but  the  latter  is  accompanied  this 
time  by  a  cure  with  whom  he  seemed  on  good  terms 
and  whom  he  called  (which  she  repeats  to  me  all  the 
while  with  Leopold's  Italian  accent),  "  My  dear  friend 
Burnier."  As  I  ask  whether  this  ctire  could  not 
write  his  name  with  Helene 's  hand,  Leopold  prom- 
ised me  by  a  digital  dictation  that  I  should  have  that 
satisfaction  at  the  next  seance ;  then  he  begins  to 
talk  to  me  of  something  else  by  Helene's  mouth,  she 
being  now  entirely  entranced. 

At  the  following  seance  at  my  house  (the  19th  of 
March),  I  remind  Leopold  of  his  promise.  He  an- 
swers at  first  by  the  finger  :  "  Do  you  very  much  de- 
sire that  signature  ?"  and  it  is  only  upon  my  insisting 

434 

SUPERNORMAL   APPEARANCES 

that  he  consents.  Helene  then  is  not  long  in  again 
seeing  the  village  and  the  cure,  who  after  divers  in- 
cidents takes  hold  of  her  hand  as  the  syndic  had 
done,  and  traces  very  slowly  with  the  pen  these  words, 
" Burnier  greets  you"  (Fig.  44)  ;  then  she  passes  into 
other  somnambulisms.  The  moment  had  arrived 
to  clear  up  the  matter.  I  wrote  at  hazard  to  the  may- 
or's office  at  Chessenaz.  The  mayor,  M.  Saussier, 
had  the  kindness  to  answer  without  delay:  "Dur- 
ing the  years  1838-39/'  stated  he  to  me,  ''the  syndic 
of  Chessenaz  was  a  Chaumontet,  Jean,  whose  sig- 
nature 1  find  attached  to  divers  documents  of  that 
period.  We  also  had  as  cure  M.  Burnier,  Andre, 
from  November,  1824,  up  to  February,  1841  ;  dur- 
ing this  period  all  the  certificates  of  births,  mar- 
riages, and  deaths  bear  his  signature.  .  .  .  But  I 
have  discovered  in  our  archives  a  document  bearing 
both  signatures,  that  of  the  syndic  Chaumontet  and 
that  of  the  cure  Burnier.  It  is  an  order  for  the 
payment  of  money.  I  take  pleasure  in  transmitting 
it  to  you."  I  have  caused  to  be  reproduced  in  the  mid- 
dle of  Fig.  44  the  fragment  of  this  original  document 
(dated  July  29,  1838),  bearing  the  names  of  these  two 
personages  ;  the  reader  can  thus  judge  for  himself 
in  regard  to  the  quite  remarkable  similarity  which 
there  exists  between  these  authentic  signatures  and 
those  automatically  traced  by  the  hand  of  Mile. 
Smith. 

My  first  idea  was,  as  may  be  supposed,  that  Mile. 
Smith  must  some  time  or  other  have  seen  some  cer- 
tificates or  documents  signed  by  the  syndic  or  by  the 
cure  of  Chessenaz,  and  that  it  was  these  forgotten 

435 

''FROM  INDIA  TO  THE    PLANET  MARS 

visual  flashes,  reappearing  in  somnambulism,  which 
had  served  her  as  inner  models  when  her  entranced 
hand  retraced  these  signatures.  One  may  likewise 
imagine  how  angry  such  a  supposition  would  make 
Helene,  who  has  no  recollection  whatever  of  having 
ever  heard  the  name  of  Chessenaz  nor  of  any  of  its 
inhabitants,  past  or  present.  I  only  half  regret  my 
imprudent  supposition,  since  it  has  availed  to  fur- 
nish us  a  new  and  more  explicit  manifestation  of 
the  cure,  who,  again  taking  hold  of  Mile.  Smith's 
arm  at  a  later  seance  (May  21  st,  at  M.  .Lemaitre's) 
comes  to  certify  to  us  as  to  his  identity  by  the  attesta- 
tion, in  due  and  proper  form,  of  Fig.  43.  As  is  there 
seen,  he  makes  it  twice  ;  being  deceived  as  to  the 
signature,  he  incontinently,  with  disgust,  crosses 
out  that  which  he  had  so  carefully  written,  and  re- 
commences on  another  sheet ;  this  second  draft,  in 
which  he  has  omitted  the  word  ''  soussigne  "  (''  under- 
signed'') of  the  first,  took  him  seven  minutes  to  trace, 
but  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired  as  to  precision  and 
legibility.  This  painstaking  calligraphy  is  very 
like  that  of  a  country  cure  of  sixty  years  ago,  and  in 
default  of  another  specimen  for  comparison,  it  pre- 
sents an  undeniable  analogy  of  hand  with  the  au- 
thentic receipt  of  the  order  for  payment  of  money  of 
Fig.  44. 

Neither  Mile.  Smith  nor  her  mother  had  the  least 
notion  in  regard  to  the  cure  or  the  syndic  of  Chesse- 
naz. They  nevertheless  informed  me  that  their 
family  formerly  had  some  relatives  and  connections 
in  that  part  of  Savoy,  and  that  they  are  still  in  com- 
munication with  a  cousin  who  lives  at  Frangy,  an 

436 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

437 

PROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

important  town  nearest  the  little  village  of  Chesse- 
naz.  Helene  herself  made  only  a  short  excur- 
sion in  that  region,  some  dozen  years  ago  ;  and  if, 
in  following  the  road  from  Seyssel  to  Frangy,  she 
traversed  some  parts  of  the  country  corresponding 
well  to  certain  details  of  her  vision  of  the  1 2th  of  Feb- 
ruary (which  she  had  the  feeling  of  recognizing,  as 
we  have  seen,  p.  432),  she  has  not,  on  the  other  hand, 
any  idea  of  having  been  at  Chessenaz  itself,  nor  of 
having  heard  it  mentioned.  "  Moreover,"  says  she, 
"  for  those  who  can  suppose  that  I  could  have  been 
at  Chessenaz  without  remembering  it,  I  would  af&rm 
that  even  had  I  gone  there  I  would  not  have  been 
apt  to  consult  the  archives  in  order  to  learn  that  a 
syndic  Chaumontet  and  a  cure  Burnier  had  existed 
there  at  a  period  more  or  less  remote.  I  have  a  good 
'memory,  and  I  positively  affirm  that  no  one  of  the 
persons  around  me  during  those  few  days  while  I 
was  away  from  my  family  ever  showed  me  any 
certificate,  paper — anything,  in  a  word — which  could 
have  stored  away  in  my  brain  any  such  memory. 
My  mother,  at  the  age  of  fourteen  or  fifteen,  made 
a  trip  into  Savoy,  but  nothing  in  her  remembrances 
recalls  her  ever  having  heard  these  two  names  ut- 
tered." 

The  facts  are  now  presented,  and  I  leave  to  the 
reader  the  privilege  of  drawing  such  conclusion  from 
them  as  shall  please  him. 

This  case  seemed  to  me  worthy  to  crown  my  rapid 
examination  of  the  supernormal  appearances  which 
embellish  the  mediumship  of  Mile.  Smith,  because 
it  sums  up  and  puts  excellently  in  relief  the  irrecon- 

438 

SUPERNORMAL  APPEARANCES 

t*< 

Ls  SxvDtc  ,^^t^ 

Fig.  44.  Comparison  of  the  signatures  of  the  syndic  Chaumontet  and  of  the  curate 
Burnier,  with  their  pretended  signatures  as  disincarnates  given  by  Mile.  Smith  in 
somnambulism.  In  the  middle  of  the  figure,  reproduction  of  a  fragment  of  an 
order  for  payment  of  money  of  1838.  Above  and  below,  the  signatures  furnished 
by  the  hand  of  Helene.     Natural  size. 

cilable  and  hostile  respective  positions  of  the  spirit- 
istic circles  and  mediums  on  the  one  side,  perfectly 
sincere  but  too  easilj^  satisfied — and  investigators 
somewhat  psychological  on  the  other,  always  pur- 
sued by  the  sacrosanct  terror  of  taking  dross  for 
gold.  To  the  first  class,  the  least  curious  phenom- 
enon— an  unexpected  vision  of  the  past,  some  dicta- 
tion of  the  table  or  the  finger,  an  access  of  somnam- 
bulism, a  resemblance  of  handwriting  —  suffices  to 
give  the  sensation  of  contact  with  the  unknown  and 

439 

FROM  INDIA  TO   THE   PLANET  MARS 

to  prove  the  actual  presence  of  the  disincarnate  world. 
They  never  ask  themselves  what  proportion  there 
could  well  be  between  these  premises,  however  strik- 
ing they  may  be,  and  that  formidable  conclusion. 
Why  and  how,  for  example,  should  the  dead,  return- 
ing at  the  end  of  a  half-century  to  sign  by  the  hand 
of  another  person  in  flesh  and  blood,  have  the  same 
hand-writing  as  when  alive  ? 

The  same  people  who  find  this  altogether  natural, 
although  they  have  never  seen  any  absolutely  cer- 
tain cases  of  it,  fall  from  the  clouds  when  the  possi- 
bility of  latent  memories  is  invoked  before  them,  of 
which  the  present  life  furnishes  them,  moreover, 
daily  examples — which  they  have  not,  it  is  true, 
ever  taken  the  trouble  to  observe. 

The  psychologists,  on  the  contrary,  have  the  evil 
one  in  them  in  going  to  look  behind  the  scenes  of  the 
memory  and  the  imagination,  and  when  the  obscu- 
rity prevents  them  from  seeing  anything,  they  have 
the  folly  to  imagine  that  they  will  end  by  finding 
that  which  they  are  seeking — if  only  a  light  could 
be  had. 

Between  these  two  classes  of  temperaments  so 
unlike,  it  will,  1  fear,  be  very  difficult  ever  to  arrive 
at  any  satisfactory  and  lasting  understanding. 

CHAPTER  XI 
CONCLUSION 

THIS  volume  reminds  me  of  the  mountain  which 
gave  birth  to  a  mouse.  Its  length  would  be 
excusable  if  only  it  marked  a  step  in  advance 
in  the  field  of  psychology  or  physiology,  or  as  to  the 
question  of  the  supernormal.  As  such  is  not  the 
case,  it  is  unpardonable,  and  nothing  more  is  left  me 
to  do  except  to  make  clear  its  deficiencies  in  this 
triple  aspect. 

First  :  From  the  physiological  point  of  view,  it 
is  apparent  that  Mile.  Smith,  as  is  doubtless  true  of 
all  mediums,  presents  during  her  visions  and  som- 
nambulisms a  plenitude  of  disturbances  of  motility 
and  sensibility,  from  which  she  seems  entirely  free 
in  her  normal  state. 

But  these  trifling  observations  do  not  suffice  to 
solve  the  neuropathological  problem  of  mediumship, 
and  the  question  still  remains  open  as  to  whether 
that  term  corresponds  to  a  special  category  of  mani- 
festations and  to  a  distinct  syndrome,  or  whether  it 
merely  constitutes  a  happy  euphemism  for  various 
scientific  denominations  already  in  use. 

To  endeavor  to  fix  the  connections  of  mediumship 
with  other  functional  affections  of  the  nervous  sys- 

441 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

tern,  it  would  first  be  necessary  to  possess  exact  in- 
telligence on  a  number  of  important  points  still  en- 
veloped in  obscurity.  In  regard  to  some  of  these, 
such  as  the  phenomena  of  periodicity,  of  meteorolog- 
ical and  seasonal  influences,  of  impulses,  and  of  fa- 
tigue, etc.,  we  have  only  very  vague  and  incomplete 
hints.  And  we  know  almost  nothing  of  other  still 
more  essential  questions,  such  as  the  relations  of 
equivalence  and  substitution  between  the  various 
modalities  of  automatism  (nocturnal  visions,  crepus- 
cular states,  complete  trances,  etc.),  the  effect  of 
spiritistic  exercises,  and  especially  of  that  of  the 
seances  upon  nutrition  or  denutrition  (variations  of 
temperature,  of  urotoxicity,  etc.),  which  would  per- 
mit the  comparison  of  spontaneous  seizures  and 
those  excited  by  mediumship  with  those  of  the  more 
serious  nervous  affections,  the  phenomena  of  hered- 
ity, similar  or  reversed,  etc. 

Let  us  hope  that  a  near  future  will  establish  some 
good  mediums  and  their  observers  in  practical  con- 
ditions favorable  to  the  elucidation  of  these  various 
problems,  and  that  the  day  will  come  when  the  true 
place  of  mediumship  in  the  framework  of  nosology 
will  be  discovered. 

Secondly :  From  the  psychological  point  of  view, 
the  case  of  Mile.  Smith,  although  too  complex  to  be 
reduced  to  a  single  formula,  is  explicable  grosso  modo 
by  some  recognized  principle,  the  successive  or  con- 
current action  of  which  has  engendered  her  multiple 
phenomena.  There  is,  in  the  first  place,  the  influence, 
so  often  verified,  of  emotional  shocks  and  of  certain 
psychic  traumatisms  upon  mental  dissociation.    By 

443 

CONCLUSION 

means  of  these  the  birth  of  hypnoid  states  may  be- 
come the  germ  either  of  secondary  personahties  more 
or  less  strongly  marked  (we  have  seen  that  the  first 
manifestations  of  Leopold  in  the  childhood  of  Hel^ne 
are  attributable  to  this  cause)  or  of  somnambulistic 
romances,  which  hold  the  same  relation  towards  the 
normal  state  as  does  that  exaggeration  of  stories  and 
indulgence  in  reveries  to  which  so  many  are  addicted 
— perhaps  all  of  us. 

We  must  also  take  into  consideration  the  enormous 
suggestibility  and  auto-suggestibility  of  mediums, 
which  render  them  so  sensitive  to  all  the  influences 
of  spiritistic  reunions,  and  are  so  favorable  to  the 
play  of  those  brilliant  subliminal  creations  in  which, 
occasionally,  the  doctrinal  ideas  of  the  surrounding 
environment  are  reflected  together  with  the  latent 
emotional  tendencies  of  the  medium  herself.  The 
development  of  the  personality  of  Leopold-Cagliostro, 
starting  from  the  moment  at  which  Mile.  Smith  began 
her  seances,  is  easily  explained  in  this  manner,  as 
well  as  the  Martian  dream  and  the  previous  exist- 
ences of  the  Hindoo  princess  and  the  queen  of  France. 

And,  finally,  we  must  note  the  phenomena  of 
cryptomnesia,  the  awakening  and  setting  to  work  of 
forgotten  memories,  which  easily  account  for  the  ele- 
ments of  truth  contained  in  the  great  preceding  con- 
structions and  in  the  incarnations  or  casual  visions 
of  Mile.  Smith  in  the  course  of  her  seances. 

But  besides  this  general  explanation  how  many 
points  of  detail  there  are  which  remain  obscure  I  For 
example,  the  precise  origin  of  Helene's  Sanscrit, 
and  many  of  her  retrocognitions,  for  want  of  informa- 

443 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

tion  concerning  the  thousand  facts  of  her  daily  hfe 
whence  the  ideas  which  nourish  her  somnambuhsm 
maj^  have  been  drawn !  And  how  difficult  it  is  to 
gain  a  correct  idea  of  her  case  as  a  whole,  on  account 
of  the  crudity  of  our  actual  notions  as  to  the  constitu- 
tion and  organization  of  the  human  being,  of  our  al- 
most total  ignorance  of  psychological  ontogeny  ! 

Without  mentioning  H^lene's  ephemeral  incarna- 
tions (in  which  1  have  shown  there  is  no  reason  far 
seeing  anything  beyond  the  imitations  due  to  auto- 
suggestion), the  divers  more  stable  personalities 
which  manifest  themselves  in  her  hypnoid  life — Leo- 
pold, Esenale,  and  the  actors  of  the  Martian  romance, 
Simandini,  Marie  Antoinette,  etc. — are  only,  in  my 
opinion,  as  I  have  hinted  on  many  occasions,  the 
varied  psychological  states  of  Mile.  Smith  herself — 
allotropic  modifications,  as  it  were,  or  phenomena  of 
polymorphism  of  her  personality.  For  no  one  of 
these  personalities  corresponds  sufficiently  with  her 
ordinary  personality  by  intellectual  faculties,  the 
moral  character,  separation  of  memories,  to  justify 
the  hypothesis  of  a  foreign  possession. 

But  the  theory  of  psychic  polymorphism  is  still 
very  imperfect,  and  inadequate  to  explain  the  embryo- 
logical  shades  which  shine  forth  in  Hel^ne's  sub- 
liminal products — the  retrograde  perspective  which 
they  open  as  to  the  different  stages  or  periods  of 
her  evolution.  The  Martian  cycle,  with  its  un- 
known language,  evidently  betrays  an  eminently 
puerile  origin  and  the  display  of  an  hereditary  lin- 
guistic aptitude,  buried  under  H^l^ne's  ordinary 
self  ;  whereas  the  Hindoo  romance  denotes  a  more 

444 

CONCLUSION 

advanced  age,  and  that  of  Marie  Antoinette  seems 
to  have  sprung  from  still  more  recent  strata,  con- 
temporaneous with  the  actual  normal  personality 
of  Mile.  Smith.  The  primitive  nature  and  different 
ages  of  the  various  hypnoid  lucubrations  of  Mile. 
Smith  seem  to  me  to  constitute  the  most  interesting 
psychological  fact  of  her  mediumship.  It  tends  to 
show  that  the  secondary  personalities  are  probably, 
in  their  origin,  as  the  idea  has  been  sometimes  sug- 
gested, phenomena  of  reversion  of  the  ordinary  act- 
ual personality,  or  of  momentary  returns  of  inferior 
phases,  long  since  passed,  and  which  normally 
should  have  been  absorbed  in  the  development  of 
the  individuality,  instead  of  breaking  forth  again  in 
strange  proliferations. 

Thirdly  :  As  to  the  supernormal,  I  believe  I  have 
actually  found  a  little  telekinesis  and  telepathy. 
As  to  lucidity  and  spiritistic  messages,  1  have  only 
encountered  some  brilliant  reconstructions,  which 
the  hypnoid  imagination,  aided  by  latent  memory, 
excels  in  fabricating  in  the  case  of  mediums.  I  do 
not  complain  of  this,  since  for  psychology,  which 
is  not  specially  enamoured  of  the  marvellous,  these 
admirably  successful  imitations  are  also  interesting 
and  instructive  on  account  of  the  light  which  they 
throw  upon  the  inward  workings  of  our  faculties. 

Of  course  Mile.  Smith  and  her  friends  see  things 
in  a  very  different  light.  With  Helene  everything, 
or  almost  everything,  is  supernormal,  from  the  rem- 
iniscences of  her  lives  as  Marie  Antoinette  and  Si- 
mandini,  to  the  Martian  and  the  incarnations  of  Cag- 
liostro,  of  Mile.  Vignier,  or  of  the  cure  of  Chessenaz. 

445 

FROM  INDIA  TO  THE  PLANET  MARS 

And  now  let  us  admit,  hypothetically,  that  I  have 
not  been  able  to  see  the  supernormal,  which  was 
plainly  before  my  eyes,  and  that  it  is  this  blindness 
of  mine  alone  which  has  prevented  me  from  recog- 
nizing the  real  presence  of  Joseph  Balsamo,  my  own 
mother,  the  Hindoo  princess,  etc. — or,  at  all  events, 
the  presence  of  real,  disincarnate,  independent  spirits. 
It  is,  of  course,  to  be  regretted,  but  then  it  is  I  alone 
who  will  be  in  disgrace  on  the  day  when  the  truth 
shall  be  made  manifest. 

For,  as  to  progress  in  our  knowledge  of  things, 
everything  is  to  be  feared  from  easy  credulity  and 
obstinate  dogmatism,  but  that  progress  will  not  be 
arrested  or  seriously  retarded  by  possible  errors, 
committed  in  good  faith,  through  an  exaggerated 
severity  of  application  and  a  too  strict  observance 
of  the  principles  themselves  of  all  experimental  in- 
vestigation ;  while,  on  the  contrary,  the  obstacles 
and  the  difficulties  which  the  necessities  of  the  meth- 
od multiply  along  its  path  have  always  been  a  strong 
stimulant,  producing  new  movements  forward  and 
more  durable  conquests  based  on  better  demonstra- 
tions. 

It  is  better,  then,  to  follow  my  advice — in  the  well- 
understood  interest  of  and  for  the  advancement  of 
science,  in  a  domain  where  superstition  is  always 
ready  to  give  itself  free  play — it  is  better  to  err  through 
excess  of  caution  and  strictness  of  method  than  to 
run  the  risk  of  being  sometimes  deceived  ;  it  is  better 
to  allow  some  interesting  fact  to  escape  for  the  mo- 
ment, rather  than  to  open  the  door  to  the  follies  of  the 
imagination  by  a  relaxation  of  necessary  caution. 

446 

CONCLUSION 

As  to  Mile.  Helene  Smith,  supposing  that  I  have 
failed  to  recognize  in  her  phenomena  which  are  real- 
ly supernormal  (which,  in  that  case,  will  some  day 
be  better  set  forth  by  other  observers),  she  will,  never- 
theless, accomplish  more  in  the  way  of  discovering 
the  real  truth,  whatever  it  may  be,  in  submitting 
herself  disinterestedly  to  my  free  criticisms,  than 
by  doing  as  so  many  useless  mediums  have  done, 
who,  afraid  of  the  light,  in  their  foolish  eagerness  for 
the  triumph  of  a  cause  very  dear  to  their  hearts,  have 
shunned  close  investigation,  and  would  have  us 
rely  upon  their  word  alone. 

They  forget  the  saying  of  Bacon,  which  is  ever 
being  confirmed  :  "  Truth  is  the  daughter  of  time, 
not  of  authority." 

THE    END
