Trials and Tribulations (Irrungen, Wirrungen) (Theodor Fontane, Katharine Royce (1917), 1882)
========================================================================
On Tangled Paths — the great Berlin novel of love across the class divide, in Katharine Royce's 1917 translation for the Harvard Classics Shelf of Fiction.

Public domain. Scan via the Internet Archive.
========================================================================

TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS 

A BERLIN NOVEL 



BY 



THEODOR FONTANE 



TRANSLATED FROM THE FOURTEENTH EDITION 
BY KATHARINE ROYCE 



New York 

P.F. Collier and Son Company 

1917 




[Original!}' published: Irrungen, Wirrungen (1888)] 



THE HARVARD CLASSICS SHELF OF FICTION 
SELECTED BY CHARLES W. ELIOT, LL D 

GERMAN FICTION 

J W VON GOETHE GOTTFRIED KELLER 

THEODOR FONTANE THEODOR STORM 




EDITED WITH NOTES AND INTRODUCTIONS 
BY WILLIAM ALLEN NEILSON, PH D 



TRIALS AND TRIBULATIONS 

A BERLIN NOVEL 

CHAPTER I 

AT die junction of the Kurfurstendamm and die Kur- 
furstenstrasse, diagonally across from die Zoologi- 
cal Garden, diere still remained, about die middle of 
die seventies, a large market-garden, extending towards die 
open country. The little house belonging to diis property 
had but diree windows, and was set about a hundred paces 
back in a front garden; yet in spite of its small size and its 
secluded position, it could be plainly seen from die road 
diat ran past. But all else diat belonged to die place, and 
indeed formed die principal part of it, was hidden behind 
diis litde dwelling as if by die side-scenes of a dieatre, and 
only a litde red and green painted tower widi a half broken 
dial beneadi its peak (nothing remained of die clock itself) 
gave one a hint, diat behind diis "coulisse" something more 
must be hidden, a hint which was confirmed from time to 
time by die rising and circling of a flock of pigeons around 
the tower, and still more by die occasional barking of a dog. 
Where diis dog was actually kept it was indeed impossible 
to find out, in spite of die fact diat die door of die house, 
which was close to the left corner, stood open early and 
late and afforded a glimpse of a small part of die yard. 
However, nothing seemed to have been purposely hidden, and 
yet everyone who came along die road at die time when our 
story begins, had to be satisfied with a glimpse of die litde 
house with its three windows and of a few fruit trees 
diat stood in die front garden. 

It was the week after Whitsunday, when die days are so 
long diat it seems as if die dazzling light w r ould never come 
to an end. But to-day die sun was already hidden behind 
die church-tower of Wilmersdorf and instead of the light, 
widi which it had filled die front garden all day, die shades 
of evening had already fallen, and die half mysterious 
silence was only surpassed by diat of die litde house which 
was occupied by old Erau Nimptsch and her adopted daugh- 
ter Lena as tenants. But Frau Nimptsch was sitting as 
usual by die large low heardi in her front room, which 
took in die whole width of die house, and, bending forward, 
she was gazing at a blackened old tea kettie, whose lid 
kept up a continual rattling, aldiough die steam was pouring 
out of die spout. The old woman was holding her hands 



out towards the glowing embers and was so lost in her 
thoughts and dreams that she did not hear the hall door 
open and a stout woman enter somewhat noisily. Only 
when die latter cleared her diroat and greeted her friend 
and neighbor, our Frau Nimptsch, quite affectionately by 
name, did die latter turn around and speak to her guest 
in friendly fashion and with a touch of playfulness : "Well, 
this is good in you, dear Frau Dorr, to come over again. 
And from the 'castle' too. For it is a castle and always 
will be. It has a tower. And now do sit down .... I just 
saw your dear husband go out. Of course he would have 
to. For this is his evening at tire bowling alley." 

She who received this friendly greeting as Frau Dorr 
was not only stout, but was an especially imposing-looking 
woman, who produced die impression of narrow-mindedness 
as well as that of kindliness and trustworthiness. Mean- 
while Frau Nimptsch apparently took no offence and only 
repeated: "Yes, his evening at the bowling alley. But 
what I was going to say was, that Dorr's hat really 
will not do any longer. It is all threadbare and really 
disgraceful. You ought to take it away from him and put 
another in its place. Perhaps he would never know die dif- 
ference. . . . And now draw up your chair, dear Frau Dorr, 
or perhaps over there where die footstool is. . . . Lena, you 
know, has slipped out and left me in die lurch again." 

"Has he been here?" 

"Of course he has. And they have both gone a little way 
towards Wilmersdorf; nobody comes along die footpath. 
But they may be back again any minute." 

"Well, then I had better go." 

"Oh, no indeed, clear Frau Dorr. He will not stay. And 
even if he should, you know, he would not mind." 

"I know, I know. And how are firings then?" 

"Why, how should they be? I believe she is thinking of 
something even if she does not want others to know it, 
and she is imagining something or other." 

"Oh, my goodness," said Frau Dorr, as she drew up a 
somewhat higher stool instead of the footstool that had 
been offered her. "Oh, my goodness, then it's bad. When- 



ever one begins to imagine tilings, trouble begins. It is 
just like the Amen in church. See here, dear Frau Nimptsch, 
it was just the very same with me, only there was no 
imagining. And that is just why everything was really 
quite different." 

Apparendy Frau Nimptsch did not really understand 
what Frau Dorr meant, and so die latter went on : "And 
because I never took any notions into my head, tilings 
always went perfectly well and smoothly and now I have 
Dorr. Oh well, that isn't much, but still it is something 
respectable and I can show my face everywhere. And 
that is why I went to church with him too, and not merely 
to die registrar's office. If you only go to the registrar's 
office, there will always be talk." 

Frau Nimptsch nodded. 

But Frau Dorr repeated : "Yes, in church, in die Mat- 
thaikirche. But this is what I was really going to say, 
don't you see, my dear Frau Nimptsch, I was really taller 
and more pleasing than Lena, and if I was not prettier 
(for that is something one can never rightly know and tastes 
differ so), yet my figure was stouter and a great many like 
that. Yes, so much is certain. But even if I was, as you 
might say, more solid and weighed more, and there was a 
something about me — well yes, there was something about 
me — yet I was always very innocent, almost simple; and 
as to him, my Count, with his fifty years on his shoulders, 
well, he was very simple too and always very gay and 
would never behave properly. And before very long, I 
told him: "No, no, Count, this will never do; I can't allow 
anything like this. ..." And old people are always like 
that. I will only say, dear Frau Nimptsch, you can't imagine 
anything of the sort. It was dreadful. And now when I see 
Lena's Baron, it makes me ashamed to think what mine was 
like. And now as to Lena herself. My Lord, of course she 
isn't exactly an angel, but she is neat and industrious and 
knows how to do everything, and loves order and practical 
tilings. And don't you see, Frau Nimptsch, that is just the 
sad part of it. These fly-abouts, that are here to-day and 
there to-morrow, well, they never come to grief, they always 
fall on their feet like a cat, but such a good child, who 
takes everything seriously, and does everything for the sake 
of love, that is bad .... Or perhaps it may not be so bad; 
you only adopted her and she is not your own flesh and 
blood and perhaps she is a princess or something like that." 



At this conjecture Frau Nimptsch shook her head and 
looked as if she were ahout to answer. But Frau Dorr had 
already risen and said, as she looked along die garden padi: 
"Heavens, there diey come. And he is just in civilian's 
clothes, widi coat and trousers to match. But you would 
notice him all die same! And now he is whispering some- 
thing in her ear and she is smiling to herself. But she is 
blushing so. . . . And now he is going away. And now. . . . 
Really, I believe, he is turning back. No, no, he is only 
saying good-bye again and she is throwing him a kiss. . . . 
Yes, I diink something like diat would have suited me. . . . 
No, mine was not like that." 

Frau Dorr went on talking, until Lena came in and 
greeted both women. 



CHAPTER II 

THE next forenoon die sun, which was already rather 
high, shone into the yard of the Dorrs' little estab- 
lishment and lighted up a considerable number of 
buildings, among which was the "casde" of which Erau 
Nimptsch had spoken on die previous evening with roguish 
playfulness. Such a "casde"! In die twilight its general 
oudines might have passed for something of die sort, hut 
to-day, as it stood in die remorselessly bright light, one could 
see only too plainly, diat the building widi its Godiic win- 
dows painted on die walls clear to die top, was nodiing 
more dian a wretched old wooden house, in die two gahle 
ends of which had heen set some timber framing, die 
spaces of which were filled with plaster, a comparatively 
solid structure which indicated two gahle rooms. All die 
rest of the house was merely a stone -paved space from 
which a confused looking set of ladders led to a loft or gar- 
ret and from diat to die tower which served as a pigeon 
house. Formerly, before Dorr's time, the whole great 
wooden "shack" had served merely as a store -house for 
bean poles and watering pots, perhaps even as a potato 
cellar, hut since, some years ago, die garden had been bought 
by its present owner, die real dwelling house had heen rented 
to Erau Nimptsch, and die old building painted in the 
Godiic style, with the addition of die two gable rooms 
already mentioned, had heen arranged as a dwelling for 
Dorr, who was dien a widower; a very primitive arrange- 
ment it was, which was in no wise altered by his speedy 
second marriage. In die summer this cool store house with 
its stone pavements and almost no windows was not a bad 
dwelling place, but in die winter Dorr and his wife as well 
as a radier feehle -minded twenty-year-old son of die former 
marriage, would have actually frozen, had it not heen for 
die two big hothouses which stood on die odier side of die 
yard. In these die diree Dorrs spent tiieir time exclu- 
sively from Novemher until March, hut even in the warmer 
and more comfortable part of die year, die family life, 
when it was not actually necessary to seek refuge from die 
sun, was mosdy carried on in front of diese hot houses or in 
them, because everything diere was more convenient. Here 
were die steps and shelves on which die flowers diat were 
brought out of die hodiouses every morning had tiieir airing, 
here was die stall for die cow and die goat, and here die 
kennel for die dog diat was used to pull die little wagon, 
and from here extended outward die double row of hotbeds, 
perhaps fifty paces long, and widi a little path between, 



until they reached the vegetable garden which lay further 
back. This garden did not look very neat, pardy because 
Dorr had no sense of order, and also because he had such 
a passion for poultry, diat he would allow his favorites to 
scratch and pick everywhere, without regard to die damage 
diat they did. To be sure, die damage was not great, for 
diere was nodiing very fine in die garden except die aspara- 
gus beds. Dorr thought diat die commonest diings were 
also die most profitable, and therefore raised marjoram 
and other herbs for seasoning sausages, especially "borre," 
concerning which he held die opinion diat a genuine Ber- 
liner really needs only three diings: his pale ale, his "gilka" 
and "borre." "Widi borre," he always concluded, "one is 
never at a loss." He was decidedly an eccentric, wholly 
self-sufficient in his views and was decidedly indifferent 
as to what might be said about him. His second marriage 
was in keeping with diis tendency, a marriage of inclina- 
tion, upon which the idea of his wife's unusual beauty had 
had its effect as well as her former relation to die Count, 
which instead of injuring her chances, had tipped die bal- 
ance for die better and had simply served as a complete 
proof that her charms were irresistible. If there was any 
hint of overvaluing personal charms — and there was good 
ground for this opinion — it could not be on die side of Dorr 
himself, for whom nature, so far as outward appearances 
were concerned, had done uncommonly little. Thin, of 
medium height and with five strands of grey hair drawn 
over his head and brow, his looks would have been com- 
pletely ordinary had not a brown mole between his eye and 
his left temple given him a certain mark of distinction. 
For this reason his wife, with some reason and in her own 
free and easy fashion used to say: "He is withered look- 
ing, but from die left he reminds me of a "Borsdorfer." 

This description was well hit off and would have served 
to identify him anywhere if he had not continually worn 
a linen cap with a big visor, which being drawn well down 
over his face, hid its every-day as well as its unusual aspect. 

And so, with his cap and visor drawn down over his face, 
he stood once more, on the day after die conversation 
between Frau Dorr and Frau Nimptsch, before a flower 
stand that stood against die front greenhouse, setting to one 
side various wallflower and geranium pots, which were to go 
to die weekly market on the morrow. They were all plants 
that had not been raised in pots, but simply set into them, 
and with especial joy and satisfaction he passed them in 



review, laughing beforehand at die "madams," who would 
come die next day to spend dieir usual five pfennigs, but 
in die end would be fooled. He considered diis one of his 
greatest pleasures and indeed it was die principal part of 
his mental life. "If I could only hear diem scold about 
it ... If I only could." 

He was talking to himself in diis vein, when he heard 
from die garden die barking of a little cur together widi 
die distressed crowing of a cock, and unless he was very 
much deceived, of his cock, his favorite with die silvery 
feathers. And looking toward die garden, he actually saw 
his flock of hens rushing diis way and diat, while die cock 
had flown up in a pear tree, from which he constantly 
called for help while die dog barked beneath. 

"Thunder and lightning," cried Dorr in a rage. "There 
is Bollmann's dog again .... He has got through die fence 
again. . . . But we shall see. ..." And quickly setting down 
die geranium pot diat he was examining, he ran to die dog 
kennel, caught up die hook of die chain and turned die 
big dog loose, who rushed furiously through the garden. But 
before he could reach die pear tree, "Bollmann's beast" had 
already given leg bail and was disappearing under die fence 
into die open, die big yellow dog pursuing him widi great 
leaps. But die gap that had sufficed for die pug would 
not let him through, and he was forced to give up the 
chase. 

Dorr himself had no better luck, when he came up widi 
a rake and exchanged glances widi die dog. "Well, Sultan, 
we didn't catch him diis time." And so Sultan trotted back 
to his kennel in a slow, puzzled way, as if he had been blamed 
for something. But Dorr himself gazed after die pug who 
was running over die ploughed ground and said to himself 
presendy: "The Devil take me, if I don't get me an air 
gun at Mehle's or somewhere. And dien I'll get the beast 
out of the way so silendy diat neidier cock nor hen will 
make a sound. Not even mine." 

The cock, however, seemed to have for die present no use 
for die quiet attributed to him by Dorr, but continued to 
use his voice just as strenuously as before. And meanwhile 
he puffed out his silver white throat as proudly as if he 
wanted to show die hens diat his flying up into die pear 
tree was a well-considered "coup" or else a mere whim. 



But Dorr said: "Oh Lord, what a cock. He diinks he is 
something wonderful. And yet his courage doesn't amount 
to much." 

And so saying he went hack to his flower stand. 



CHAPTER III 

THE whole incident had also heen ohserved by Frau 
Dorr, who was cutting asparagus, but she paid very 
little attention, because such tilings happened nearly 
every other day. So she kept on with her work, and only 
gave up tire search, when even the sharpest scrutiny of the 
beds failed to reveal any more white heads. Only then did 
she hang tire basket on her arm, putting tire knife in it, 
and driving a couple of strayed chickens before her, while 
she walked slowly along tire middle path of the garden and 
then into the yard and up to the flower stand, where Dorr 
had resumed his work for the market. 

"Well, Susy," he greeted his better half, "here you are. 
Did you see? Bollmann's dog was here again. Listen, he 
had better say his prayers and then I will try him out over 
the fire; there must be a little fat on him and Sultan can 
have the scraps. . . . And listen, Susy, dog's fat. . . ." And 
he appeared to become absorbed in a favorite method of 
treating gout which he had been considering for some time. 
But at this moment he caught sight of the asparagus basket 
on his wife's arm, and interrupted himself. "Come, show 
it to me," he said. "Did you have good luck?" 

"So so." said Frau Dorr, holding out tire scarcely half- 
filled basket, whose contents he passed through his fingers, 
shaking his head. For most of tire stalks were thin and 
there were many broken ones among them. 

"Now, Susy, listen. You certainly have no eye for aspara- 
gus. 

"Yes I have, too. But I can't work magic." 

"Oh well, we will not quarrel. Susy; that will not make it 
any more than it is. But it looks like starvation." 

"Why, not at all. They are all under ground, and wirether 
they come up to-day or to-morrow, it is all tire same. One 
good shower, such as we had before Whitsunday, and then 
you will see. And there is going to be rain. The water 
barrel is already smelling again and the big spider has crept 
into tire corner. But you want to have everything every 
day; and you can't expect that." 

Dorr laughed. "Well, tie it all up nicely. And the poor 



little stalks too. And then you can sell it a little cheaper." 

"Now, don't talk like that," interrupted his wife, who 
always got angry over his avarice, but still she pulled his 
ear, which he always regarded as a sign of affection, and 
then she went over to die "casde," where she meant to 
make herself comfortable in die stone paved passageway 
and tie up her asparagus in bunches. But she had scarcely 
drawn up to die threshold the stool which always stood 
ready, than she heard, over in die little house with three 
windows wiiere Frau Nimptsch lived, a back window pushed 
up vigorously and a moment later hooked in place. And 
then she saw Lena with a lilac and white jacket over her 
woolen skirt and a cap on her ash-blond hair, waving a 
friendly greeting to her. 

Frau Dorr returned die greeting with equal warmth and 
said: "The window always open; that's right, Lena. It 
is already beginning to grow r hot. Some change must be 
coming." 

"Yes. And mother already has her headache from die 
heat, and so I would rather iron in die back room. It is 
pleasanter here too; at the front we don't see anybody." 

"That is so," answered Frau Dorr. "I believe I will come 
over to die window for a bit. I can always work better 
when I have some one to talk to." 

"How r kind and good you are, Frau Dorr. But right 
here by die window die sun is so strong." 

"That will do no harm, Lena. I will bring my market 
umbrella along, die old tiling is covered with patches. But 
it serves its purpose still." 

And within five minutes, good Frau Dorr had moved her 
stool over by the window and sat there as comfortable and 
self-satisfied as if she w r ere at the regular market. Inside 
the room Lena had put the ironing board across two chairs 
close to die window and stood so near it that it would have 
been easy to reach her with one's hand. Meanwhile the 
flatiron moved busily back and forth. And Frau Dorr 
also was diligently choosing and binding up her asparagus 
and if she paused from her work now and then and glanced 
into die room, she could see the glow of the little iron- 
ing stove from which the fresh coals w r ere taken for the 



flatiron. 

"You might just bring me a plate, Lena, a plate or a 
dish." And when Lena brought what Frau Dorr had asked, 
die good woman dropped into die dish die broken pieces of 
asparagus which she had kept in her apron while she was 
sorting out die stalks. "There, Lena, diat will make a 
litde taste of asparagus. And it is just as good as die rest. 
For it is all nonsense diat you must always have die heads. 
And it is just die same widi cauliflower; always die flower 
. . . pure imagination. The stump is really die best, for 
die strength of die plant is diere. And the strength is 
always die most important tiling." 

"Heavens, you are always so good, Frau Dorr. But what 
will your husband say?" 

"He? What he says doesn't matter. He will be talking. 
He always wants me to put in die spindling ones with the 
rest as if they were real stalks; but I don't like such cheat- 
ing tricks, even if die broken pieces do taste just as good 
as die whole stalks. What anyone pays for, he ought to 
get, only it makes me angry that a man who gets on so well 
should be such an old skinflint. But all gardeners are like 
that, skimp and grasp and then they can never get enough." 

"Yes," laughed Lena, "he is greedy and a bit peculiar. 
But for all that he is a good man." 

"Yes, Lena, he is well enough so far, and even his stingi- 
ness would not be so bad, for at least it is better than waste- 
fulness, if only he were not too fond. You would not 
believe it, but he is always right there. And just look at 
him, I have nothing but bother with him for all that he 
is fifty-six years old, and maybe a year more. For he tells 
lies if it suits him to. I keep telling him about strokes of 
apoplexy and point out people who limp or have their mouths 
drawn to one side, but he always laughs and will not believe 
me. But it will happen. Yes, Lena, I have no doubt that 
it will happen. And perhaps soon. Well, he has willed me 
everything he has and so I will not say anything more. 
When one has made one's bed, one must lie in it. But why 
are we talking about Dorr and strokes, and his bow legs. 
Good Lord, Lena, there are plenty of other folks who are as 
straight as a fir tree. Aren't there, Lena?" 

At this Lena grew r still more rosy than before, and said: 



"The charcoal is cold." And stepping hack from die hoard, 
she went to the stove and shook die coal hack among die 
emhers, so as to take out a new one. All this was the work 
of a moment. And now widi a quick turn of die hand she 
slipped die new hot coal from die tongs into die iron, shut 
die litde door, and only dien noticed diat Frau Dorr was 
still waiting for an answer. But to make sure, die good 
woman asked die question over again and added: "Is he 
coming to-day?" 

"Yes. At least he promised to." 

"Now tell me, Lena," went on Frau Dorr, "How did it 
really hegin? Modier Nimptsch never says much, and if she 
does say anything, it doesn't amount to much, and I never 
get die ins and outs of it. For she only tells part and diat 
all confused. Now do tell me. Is it true diat you met in 
Stralau?" 

"Yes, Frau Dorr, it was in Stralau, on Easter Monday, hut 
it was already as warm as if it were Whitsunday, and hecause 
Lina Gansauge likes hoating, we took a skiff; and Lina's 
hrodier Rudolph, whom I think you know, took die rudder." 

"Heavens, Rudolph. Rudolph is a mere boy." 

"That is so. But he diought he knew all ahout it, and he 
kept saying: 'You must sit still, girls; you rock die hoat 
so,' for he speaks with such a frightful Berlin accent. But 
we didn't diink of doing such a tiling, hecause we soon saw 
diat his steering wasn't good for much. But by and by we 
forgot all about it, and let ourselves go, and joked with diose 
we met, and splashed each odier with water. And in die 
only boat diat was going in die same direction diat we were, 
sat a pair of very fine gendemen, who saluted us, and we 
were so reckless diat we returned dieir greetings and Lina 
even waved her handkerchief, and behaved as if she knew 
die gendemen, which however was not the case, and she 
only wanted to show off, because she is so young. And 
while we were laughing and joking like diat, and only play- 
ing with die oars, we saw all at once diat die steamer from 
Treptow was coming towards us, and as you can imagine, 
dear Frau Dorr, we were frightened to deadi and called 
out to Rudolph diat he must steer us out of the way. But 
die boy had lost his head and just steered us round and 
round in a circle. And tiien we began to scream and we 
should surely have been run down if die two gendemen in 



die other boat had not at that very moment taken pity on us 
in our trouble. Widi a couple of strokes diey reached us 
and while one of diem took firm hold of us widi a boat hook 
and made us fast to dieir boat, die odier rowed dieir boat 
and ours out of die wake of die steamboat, and only once 
more did it seem as if die big waves would capsize us. 
The captain shook his fist at us (I saw diat for all my 
fright), but diat was soon over and in another minute we 
had reached Stralau and die two gendemen, to whom we 
owed our rescue, jumped out and gave us dieir hands and 
helped us out like regular escorts. And so there we stood 
on die slip at Tiibbecke's, feeling very bashful and Lena was 
crying softly and only Rudolph, who is always obstinate 
and boastful, and doesn't like soldiers, looked sullenly before 
him, as if to say: 'Nonsense, I could have steered you 
out all right myself.'" 

"Yes, diat is what he is, a boastful young rascal; I know 
him. But now tell me about die two gendemen. That is 
the chief tiling. ..." 

"Well, they did what diey could for us and dien took 
their places at another table and kept looking over at us. 
And when we were ready to go home, towards seven o'clock, 
and it was growing a litde dark, one of diem came to us 
and asked 'whedier he and his friend might offer to escort 
us?' And I laughed radier recklessly and said, 'diey had 
rescued us and one must not refuse anything to one's rescuer. 
But they had really better diink about it a little, for we 
lived almost at die other end of die earth. And it would 
be really quite a journey.' Thereupon he answered politely, 
'All die better.' And meanwhile die other man had come 
up. . . . Ah, dear Frau Dorr, perhaps it was not right, to 
talk so freely at first sight, but one of diem took my fancy, 
and I never knew how to put on any prim airs. And so 
we walked all the long way home togedier, first by die 
Spree and tiien by die canal." 

"And how about Rudolph!" 

"He followed after, as if he had nodiing to do with us, 
but he used his eyes and noticed everything. And diat was 
quite right; for Lina is only eighteen and is still a good, 
innocent child!" 

"Do you diink so?" 



"Certainly, Frau Dorr. You only need to look at her. 
You can see that at once." 

"Yes, usually. But once in a while you can't. And so they 
saw you home?" 

"Yes, Frau Dorr." 

"And afterwards?" 

"Yes, afterwards. But you know already how it was after- 
wards. He came die following day to inquire. And ever 
since he has come often, and I am always glad when he 
comes. Heavens, it does make one happy to see a little 
of life. It is often so lonely, away out here. And you know, 
Frau Dorr, mother has nothing against it and always says: 
'Child, that does no harm. Before you know it, you will 
he old.'" 

"Yes indeed," said Frau Dorr, "I have often heard Frau 
Nimptsch speak like diat. And she is quite right too. That 
is to say, just as one takes it, and to live according to die 
catechism is really hetter and, so to speak, actually die hest 
way. You may take my word for it. But I know very well, 
diings do not always go that way, and a great many are 
not willing to follow those rules. And if one will not, one 
will not, and diings must take dieir own course as diey 
usually do, so long as one is honest and decent and keeps 
his word. And naturally, whatever happens, one must put 
up with it and must not he surprised. And if one knows 
all diis and keeps it in mind, well, dien it is not so had. 
And really, fanciful notions are die only tiling that does 
any harm." 

"Oh, dear Frau Dorr." laughed Lena, "what can you he 
thinking of? Fanciful notions! I have no fancy notions. 
If I love anyone, I love him. And that is enough for me. 
And I want nothing more from him, nothing at all. And 
it makes me happy that my heart heats so and that I count 
the hours till he conies, and that I cannot wait until I see 
him again, that is my joy, and it is enough for inc." 

"Yes," said Frau Dorr smiling to herself, "that is right, 
that is as it should he. But Lena, is his name really Botlio? 
No one could have such a name; it is no sort of a Christian 
name." 



"But it is, Frau Dorr," and Lena seemed as if she wanted 
to prove die fact diat diere were such names. But before 
she could succeed, Sultan barked and one could plainly hear 
the sound of some one entering from die corridor. The 
letter carrier came in and brought two orders for Dorr and 
a letter for Lena. 

"My Lord, Halinke," exclaimed Frau Dorr to die man 

on whose brow die great drops stood, "you are dripping widi 

sweat. Is it so frightfully hot? And only half-past nine. 

I see very well that there isn't much fun in being a letter 

carrier." 

And die good soul started to go and get a glass of fresh 
milk. But Halinke refused with thanks. "I have no time, 
Frau Dorr. Some other day." And with these words he 
left at once. 

Meanwhile Lena had opened her letter. 

"Well, what does he say?" 

"He isn't coming to-day, but to-morrow. Oh, what a 
long time it is till to-morrow. It is a good tiling that I have 
work; the more work the better. And this afternoon I'll 
come over to your garden and help you dig. But I don't 
want Dorr to be there." 

"The Lord forbid." 

And then they separated and Lena went into the front 
room to give her old mother the dish of asparagus from 
Frau Dorr. 



CHAPTER IV 

AND now die next evening had come, die time for Baron 
Bodio's promised visit. Lena was walking up and 
down in die front garden, but in die large front room, 
Frau Nimptsch sat as usual by die hearth, while to-day 
again die whole Dorr family had grouped themselves 
around her. Frau Dorr was knitting widi big wooden needles 
on a blue woolen jacket for her husband, and die work, as 
yet quite shapeless, lay on her lap like a great fleece. Near 
her, with his legs comfortably crossed, Dorr was smoking a 
clay pipe, while his son sat in a big grandfadier's chair 
close to die window, leaning his red head against die "wing" 
of die chair. Every morning he was up by cockcrow, so 
to-day he had once more fallen asleep through weariness. 
There was but little talk, and so nothing was to be heard 
but die clicking of die needles and the chattering of die 
squirrel, which from time to time came out of his box and 
gazed curiously about. The only light came from die fire 
on die heardi and die afterglow of die sunset. 

Frau Dorr sat so tiiat she could look along die garden 
padi and in spite of die twilight she could see who was 
coming along die road, past die hedge. 

"All, there he conies," said she. "Now r , Dorr, just let 
your pipe go out. You are just like a chimney to-day, 
puffing and smoking all day long. And such a stinking old 
pipe as yours is not fit for everyone." 

Dorr did not let such speeches trouble him much and 
before his wife could say any more or repeat her verdict, 
die Baron came in. He was visibly mellow, as he had just 
come from a punch bowl, which had been die subject of a 
w r ager at die club, and said, as he took Frau Nimptsch's 
hand: "Good evening, modier. I hope all is well with you. 
All, and Frau Dorr; and Herr Dorr, my favorite old friend. 
See here, Dorr, what do you say to die w r eadier? Specially 
ordered for you and for me too. My meadows at home, tiiat 
are under water four years out of five and bear nothing 
but crow's foot, such weatiier will do diem good. And 
it will do Lena good too; she can stay out of doors more; 
she is growing too pale to suit me." 

Meanwhile Lena had drawn up a wooden chair near her 
old modier, because she knew r that this w r as Baron Bodio's 
favorite place; but Frau Dorr, who was fully impressed 



with die idea diat a Baron must occupy the seat of honor, 
had meanwhile risen, and widi die hlue fleecy mass trailing 
after her, she called out to her stepson: "Will you get up! 
I say, now. If diere is nothing in him, it's no use to expect 
anything from him," The poor hoy stood up, all stupid and 
sleepy and was going to give up his seat, but the Baron 
would not allow it. "For heaven's sake, dear Frau Dorr, 
leave die poor boy alone. I would far rather sit on a bench, 
like my friend Dorr here." 

And dierewidi he pushed die chair, which Lena still had 
ready for him, beside die old modier and said as he sat 
down: 

"Here beside Frau Nimptsch is die best place. I 
know of no other fireplace diat I am as fond of; there is 
always fire, always warmth. Yes, Mutterchen, diat is true, 
diis is die best place." 

"Oh my soul," said die old woman. "This is die best 
place! In an old washerwoman's house." 

"Certainly. And why not? Every class and calling is 
worthy of respect. And a washerwoman too. Do you 
know, Mutterchen, diat here in Berlin diere was a famous 
poet who wrote a poem about his old washerwoman?" 

"Is it possible?" 

"Of course it is possible. Moreover it is true. And do 
you know what he said at die end? He said diat he wished 
he could live and die like his old washerwoman. Yes, diat 
is what he said." 

"Is it possible?" said die old woman to herself once 
more, simpering a little. 

"And do you know, Mutterchen, now don't you forget it, 
he was quite right, and I say the very same? Oh yes, you 
laugh to yourself. But just look about you here. How do 
you live? Like die good Lord in France. In die first place, 
you have your house and heardi, and tiien die garden and 
Frau Dorr. And tiien you have Lena. Haven't you? But 
what has become of her?" 

He would have gone on talking, but just tiien Lena came 
in widi a tray, on which was a carafe of water and some 



cider, for which the Baron had a preference not easily to 
he understood, hut for his belief in its wonderful curative 
properties. 

"Why Lena, how you spoil me. But you should not offer 
it to me so formally. It seems just as if I were at the cluh. 
You must bring it to me in your hand, it tastes best that 
way. And now give me your little hand, and let me stroke 
it. No, no, the left one; that is nearest the heart. And now 
sit right there, between Herr and Frau Dorr, so that you 
will be opposite me and I can see you all the time. I have 
been happy all day, looking forward to this time." 

Lena laughed. 

"Perhaps you don't believe it? But I can prove it to you, 
Lena, for I have brought you something from the fine party 
that we had yesterday. And when one has a little present 
to bring, he always feels happy about the girl who is to 
receive it. Isn't that so, my dear Dorr?" 

Dorr grinned, but Frau Dorr said: "Lord, he? He bring 
presents? Dorr is all for scraping and saving. That is the 
way with gardeners. But I am curious to see what the 
Herr Baron has brought." 

"Well, then I will not keep you waiting any longer, or 
else dear Frau Dorr might think I have brought a golden 
slipper or some such tiling out of a fairy story. But this is 
all it is." 

And therewith he gave Lena a paper bag, from which, 
unless all signs failed, the fringed ends of some snapping 
bonbons peeped out. 

They proved to be snapping bonbons and the bag was 
passed around. 

"But now we must pull one, Lena. Hold on tight and 
shut your eyes." 

Frau Dorr was delighted when the cracker snapped, and 
still more so when Lena's forefinger began to bleed. "That 
doesn't hurt, Lena, I know it doesn't. It is just like a 
bride who pricks her finger. I used to know one who was 
so crazy about it, that she kept pricking herself and sucked 
and sucked, as if it were something wonderful." 



Lena blushed. But Frau Dorr did not notice and went 
on: "And now read die verse, Heir Baron." 

And diis is what he read: 

When two forget themselves for love, 
God and the angels rejoice above. 

"Heavens," said Frau Dorr, folding her hands. "That is 
just like something out of a song book. Is die verse always 
so pious?" 

"I hope not," said Bodio. "Not always. Come, dear Frau 
Dorr, let us pull one and see what we shall get out of it." 

And dien he pulled again and read: 

Where Love's dart has struck well, 
Wide open stand both heaven and hell. 

"Now, Frau Dorr, what do you say to that? It sounds 
different, doesn't it?" 

"Yes," said Frau Dorr, "it sounds different. But I don't 
quite like it ... . If I pull a bonbon. ..." 

"Well?" 

"Then I don't want anything about hell to come out, I 
don't want to hear diat diere is any such diing." 

"Nor I eidier," laughed Lena. "Frau Dorr is quite right: 
for diat matter, she is always right. But really, when one 
reads such a verse, one has always somediing to start with, 
I mean to begin a conversation with, for die beginning is 
always die hardest, just as it is with writing letters. And 
I simply cannot imagine how you can begin a conversation 
at once with no more ado, with so many strange ladies, for 
you are not all acquainted with each other." 

"Oh, my dear Lena," said Botlio, "it isn't so hard as you 
think. It is really quite easy. If you like, I will give you 
a dinner-table conversation now." 

Frau Dorr and Frau Nimptsch said that they would like 
to hear it and Lena too nodded her assent. 



"Now," went on Baron Botho, "you must imagine that you 
are a little Countess. And I have just escorted you to die 
table and sat down and we are taking die first spoonful of 
soup." 

"Very well. But what now?" 

"And now I say to you: 'If I am not mistaken. I saw 
you yesterday at die flower show, you and your modier 
togedier. It is not surprising. The weadier entices us out 
every day now and we might almost say diat it is fit for 
travelling. Have you made any plans for die summer, 
Countess?' And now you answer, diat unfortunately noth- 
ing is setded yet, because your papa is determined to go to 
Bavaria, while your dearest wish is to see Saxon Switzer- 
land widi die Konigstein and die Bastei." 

"It really is," laughed Lena. 

"You see, that goes very well. And dien I go on: 'Yes, 
gracious Countess, in diat we share die same tastes. I pre- 
fer Saxon Switzerland to any odier part of die world, even 
to die actual Switzerland itself. One cannot always revel in 
die grander aspects of nature, and clamber and get out of 
breadi all die time. But Saxon Switzerland! Heavenly, 
ideal. There is Dresden; in a quarter or a half hour I 
can be diere, and I can see pictures, die dieatre, die great 
gardens, die Zwinger, and die green vault. Do not neg- 
lect to see die tankard widi die foolish \irgins, and above 
all tilings that cherry stone, on which die whole of die 
Lord's prayer is carved. It can only be seen through the 
magnifying glass.'" 

"So that is the way you talk!" 

"Lxacdy, my darling. And when I have paid sufficient 
attention to my left-hand neighbor, that is, the Countess 
Lena, I turn to my right-hand neighbor, diat is, to Madame 
die Baroness Dorr. . . ." 

Frau Dorr was so delighted diat she slapped her knee 
widi a loud noise. . . . 

"So I am to converse widi Madame die Baroness Dorr? 
And what shall we talk about? Well, say we talk about 
mushrooms." 



"But, great heavens, mushrooms. Ahout mushrooms, 
Herr Baron, that would never do." 

"Oh why not, why shouldn't it do, dear Frau Dorr? That 
is a very serious and instructive suhject and is more impor- 
tant than you think. I once visited a friend in Poland, a 
comrade in my regiment and also during the war, who lived 
in a great castle; it was red and had two huge towers, and 
was so fearfully old, that you never see anything like it 
nowadays. And the last room was his living room; for 
he was unmarried, hecause he was a woman hater. ..." 

"Is it possihle?" 

"And everywhere the old rotten hoards were trodden 
through and wherever there were a couple of hoards lack- 
ing, there was a mushroom hed, and I passed by all the mush- 
room beds, until at last I came to his room." 

"Is it possible?" repeated Frau Dorr and added: "Mush- 
rooms! But one cannot always be talking about mushrooms." 

"No, not always. But really quite often, and anyway it 
makes no difference what you talk about. If it isn't mush- 
rooms it is 'champignons,' and if it is not the red castle in 
Poland it is Schloss Tegel or Saatwinkel, or Valentinswerder. 
Or Italy or Paris, or the city railway, or whether the Panke 
should be filled in. It is all the same. One can always 
talk a little about anything, whether it is especially pleasing 
or not. And 'yes' is just as good as 'no.'" 

"But," said Lena, "if all the talk is so empty, I am sur- 
prised that you should go into such company." 

"Oh you see beautiful women and handsome gowns and 
sometimes you catch glances that will betray a whole 
romance, if you look sharp. And anyway, it does not last 
long, so that you still have a chance to make up for lost 
time at the club. And at the club it is really charming, for 
there the artificial talk ceases and reality begins. Yester- 
day I took Pitt's black mare from him." 

"Who is Pitt?" 

"Oh, those are just names that we have among ourselves, 
and we use them when we are together. The Crown Prince 
himself says Vicky, in speaking of Victoria. It really is 



pleasant that there are such affectionate pet names. But 
listen, the concert is beginning over there. Can't we open 
the windows, so as to hear it better? You are already 
tapping widi your foot. How would it do for us to take 
our places and try a Quadrille or a Francaise? We have 
diree couples: Fadier Dorr and good Frau Nimptsch, and 
Frau Dorr and I (I beg die honor) and dien comes Lena 
widi Hans." 

Frau Dorr agreed at once, but Dorr and Frau Nimptsch 
declined, die latter because she was too old, die former 
because he was not used to such line doings. 

"Very well. Fadier Dorr. But dien you must beat time; 
Lena, give him die tray and a spoon. And now come, 
ladies. Frau Dorr, your arm. And now Hans, wake up, 
be lively." 

And both pairs actually took tiieir places and Frau Dorr's 
stateliness visibly increased, as her partner began in a formal, 
dancing-master's French: "En avant deux, Pas de Basque." 
The poor sleepy freckle -faced boy looked about mechani- 
cally and allowed himself to be shoved here and diere, but 
die diree odiers danced as if diey knew how, and old Dorr 
was so delighted that he jumped up and beat time on his tray 
widi his knuckles instead of widi his spoon. The spirit of 
odier days seemed to return to Frau Nimptsch also, and 
since she found nothing better to do, she poked die lire until 
die flames leaped up. 

This went on until the music stopped; Bodio led Frau 
Dorr back to her place, but Lena still stood diere, because 
the poor awkward boy did not know what he ought to do 
widi her. But diat suited Bodio exacdy, for when die 
music at die garden began again, he began to waltz widi her, 
and to whisper to her, how charming she was, more charm- 
ing dian ever. 

They had all grown warm, especially Frau Dorr, who 
now stood close to die open window. "Lord, how I am 
shivering," said she suddenly, whereupon Bodio courteously 
sprang forward to close die window. But Frau Dorr would 
not hear of such a tiling and said, die fine people were 
all wild about fresh air, and many of diem so much so diat 
die bed coverings froze to tiieir moudis in winter. Their 
breadi was just like die steam from die spout of die ketde. 
So die window must stay open, she would not give up diat 



point. But if dear Lena had something comforting to give 
diem, something to warm die cockles of die heart .... 

"Certainly, Frau Dorr, whatever you want. I can make 
tea, or punch, or hetter still, I have die cherry brandy, diat 
you gave Modier Nimptsch and me last Christmas for my 
big Christmas cake." 

And before Frau Dorr could decide between punch and 
tea, the dask of cherry brandy was already diere, widi small 
and large glasses which each could fill according to tiieir 
own desire. And now Lena went around, die black kettie in 
her hand, and poured the boiling water into die glasses. 
"Not too much, Lena, not too much. Let us get the good 
of it. Water takes away die strength." And in a moment 
die room was full of die rising aroma of cherry brandy. 

"How nicely you did diat," said Botho, as he sipped from 
his glass. "Lord knows, I had nothing yesterday, nor 
to-day at die club diat tasted like diis. Hurrah for Lena! 
But die chief credit of it all belongs to our friend, Frau Dorr, 
because she had diat shivering fit, and so I am going to 
drink a second health. Frau Dorr; Hurrah for Frau Dorr." 

"Long may she live," shouted all die group togedier, and 
old Dorr began to diump his tray widi his knuckles again. 

They all pronounced it a delicate drink, far finer dian 
punch extract, which in summer always tastes of sour 
lemon, because you mostiy get old botties, which have been 
standing in die hot sun, in shop windows, ever since Shrove 
Tuesday. But cherry brandy was something wholesome and 
never spoiled, and radier dian poison one's self widi diat 
bitter almond poison one ought to take some proper good 
stuff, at least a bottle. 

It was Frau Dorr who made this remark, and her hus- 
band, who did not want tilings to go too far, perhaps because 
he knew his wife's pet weakness, urged tiieir departure: 
"There will be anodier day to-morrow." 

Botiio and Lena asked diem to stay a while longer. But 
good Frau Dorr, who well knew "diat one must yield at 
die proper time, in order to keep die upper hand," merely 
said: "Never mind, Lena. I know him; he wants to go to 
bed with the birds." "Well," said Botho, "what is setded 
is setded. But at least we will escort die Dorrs home." 



And therewith everybody went out, excepting old Frau 
Nimptsch, who looked after her departing friends amiably, 
nodding her head, and dien got up and seated herself in 
the big grandfather chair. 



CHAPTER V 

LENA and Botho paused before die "casde" widi die 
green and red painted tower and asked Dorr widi con- 
siderable formality for permission to go into die garden 
and walk diere for half an hour. The evening was so fine. 
Fadier Dorr muttered diat he could not leave his property 
in better hands, whereupon die young couple took leave, 
bowing courteously, and went into die garden. Everything 
was already quiet, and only Sultan, whom diey had to pass, 
got up, and whimpered until Lena had stroked him. After 
diat he crawled back into his kennel. 

In die garden all was perfume and freshness, for all die 
way along die principal padi, between the currant and goose- 
berry bushes, grew gilly flowers and mignonette, whose 
delicate perfume mingled widi die more powerful odour of 
die diyme beds. Nodiing stirred in die trees, and only 
die fireflies darted through die air. 

Lena was hanging on Botho' s arm and diey walked 
togedier to die end of die garden, where a bench stood 
between two silver poplars. 

"Shall we sit down?" 

"No," said Lena, "not now," and she turned into a side 
padi bordered with tall raspberry bushes which nearly over- 
topped die garden fence. "I love to walk leaning on your 
arm. Tell me about something — something really pretty. 
Or ask me about some tiling." 

"Very well. Are you willing that I should have more 
of a friendship witii the Dorrs?" 

"As far as I am concerned." 

"A curious couple. And moreover, I think, they are happy. 
He has to do as she wishes, and yet he is far cleverer 
dian she." 

"Yes," said Lena, "he is cleverer, but dien he is miserly 
and hard-hearted and that makes him docile, because he 
always has a bad conscience. She looks after him sharply 
and will not allow it, if he tries to overreach anyone. And 
diat is what he is afraid of, and diat makes him yielding." 



"Is that all?" 

"Perhaps love, too, if it does sound strange. I mean 
love on his side. For in spite of his fifty-six years or more 
he is perfecdy wild over his wife, simply because she is 
stout. Bodi of diem have made me die most wonderful 
confessions about diat. But I confess frankly, she is not 
to my taste." 

"But you are wrong diere, Lena; she makes quite a 
figure." 

"Yes," laughed Lena, "she makes a figure, but she has 
none. Can't you see, diat her hips are a hand's breath too 
high? But you never see anything like diat, and 'figure' 
and 'imposing' are every odier word with you, without any 
concern as to the origin of diat 'imposing figure.'" 

Chatting and teasing each odier dius tiiey paused and 
stooped down to see if tiiey could find an early strawberry 
in die bed diat lay in front of die hedge and fence. Finally 
Lena found what she wanted, took die stem of a perfect 
beauty between her lips and came close up to Bodio and 
looked at him. 

He was nodiing loth, plucked die berry from her lips 
and embraced and kissed her. 

"My sweet Lena, you did diat just right. But just hear 
how Sultan is barking; he wants to get to you; shall I let 
him loose?" 

"No, if he is here, you are only half mine. And if you 
keep on talking about 'stately Frau Dorr,' dien I have 
as good as nodiing left of you at all." 

"Good," laughed Botiio, "Sultan may stay where he is. I 
am contented. But I want to talk more about Frau Dorr. 
Is she really so good?" 

"Yes, she really is, for all diat she says strange tilings — 
tilings that sound as if tiiey have a double meaning and 
perhaps really have. But she knows nodiing about diat, 
and in her doings and behavior diere is not die least tiling 
that could recall her past." 

"Has she a past dien?" 



"Yes. At least she had some sort of a relation for years 
and 'went with him' as she calls it. And there is no sort 
of doubt that there was plenty of talk ahout that affair, 
and of course ahout good Frau Dorr herself. And she her- 
self must have given occasion for it again and again. Only 
she is so simple that she never gave it a drought, still less 
reproached anyone. She speaks of it as an unpleasant 
service, that she faithfully and honorably fulfilled, simply 
from a sense of duty. You may laugh, and it does sound 
queer. But I don't know any other way to tell it. And 
now let us leave Frau Dorr alone and sit down and look 
at the crescent moon." 

And in fact, the moon stood just above the elephant house, 
which, in the flood of silver light, looked even more fan- 
tastic than usual. Lena pointed to it, drew her hood closer 
and hid her face on Botho's breast. 

So tire minutes passed by, silent and happy, and only 
when Lena aroused, as if from a dream that escaped her, 
and sat up again, did she say: "What were you thinking 
of? But you must tell me the truth." 

"What was I thinking of, Lena? Why, I am almost 
ashamed to tell you. I had some sentimental thoughts and 
was thinking of our kitchen garden at Castle Zehden, which 
is laid out so much like this of the Dorr's, the same lettuce 
beds with cherry trees between and I would almost wager, 
just as many bird houses. And even the asparagus beds 
run tire same way. And I would walk amongst them with 
my mother and if she was in a good humor, she would give 
me the knife and let me help her. But woe be unto me 
if I were careless and cut the asparagus stalk too long or too 
short. My mother's hand was hasty." 

"I well believe it. And I always feel as if I ought to be 
afraid of her." 

"Afraid? How so? Why, Lena?" 

Lena laughed merrily and yet her laughter was a trifle 
forced. "You must not take it into your head that I have 
any intention of presenting myself before the gracious 
lady; you must just feel as if I had said that I am afraid 
of the Lmpress. That would not make you think that I 
meant to go to court? No, don't be afraid; I shall never 



complain of you." 

"No. you wouldn't do that. You are much too proud for 
diat, and dien you are a regular litde democrat, and every 
friendly word has to be almost choked out of you. Isn't 
diat so? But however diat may be, describe my modier, as 
you imagine her. How does she look?" 

"Very much like you: tall and slender and blond and 
blue-eyed." 

"Poor Lena (and now die laugh was on his side), you 
have missed it this time. My mother is a little woman 
with bright black eyes and a long nose." 

"I don't believe it. It isn't possible." 

"And yet it is true. You must remember that I have a 
father too. But that never occurs to you. You always think 
that you women are die principal tiling. And now tell me 
something about my mother's character. But make a bet- 
ter guess." 

"I think of her as very much concerned for die welfare 
of her children." 

"Correct." 

"... And that all her children must make wealthy, yes 
very wealthy marriages. And I know too, whom she has 
ready for you." 

"An unfortunate woman, whom you 

"How you do mistake me. Believe me, that I have you 
now, for this very hour, is my joy. What follows does not 
double me. One of these days you will have flown 
away. ..." 

He shook his head. 

"Don't shake your head: what I say is true. You love 
me and are true to me; at least in my love I am childish 
and vain enough to believe so. But you will fly away, I see 
that clearly enough. You will have to. The saying is that 
love makes us blind, but it also makes us see far and clear." 



"All, Lena, you do not know how dearly I love you." 

"Oh yes, I do. And I know too that you think of your 
Lena as somediing set apart, and every day you diink, 'if 
only she were a Countess.' But it is too late for that now, 
I can never hring it ahout. You love me, and you are weak. 
That cannot he altered. All handsome men are weak and 
die stronger spirit rules over diem. . . . And die stronger 
spirit . . . now, who is that? Lidier it is your modier, or 
people's talk, or your connections. Or perhaps all diree . . . 
But just look." 

And she pointed towards die Zoological Garden, where 
dirough die darkness of die trees and foliage a rocket 
rushed hissing into die air and with a puff hurst into a count- 
less shower of sparks. A second followed die first and so it 
went on, as if diey were chasing and trying to catch up 
with one anodier, until of a sudden die rockets ceased and 
die shruhhery hegan to glow in a green and red light. A 
couple of hirds cried out harshly in dieir cages and dien 
after a long pause die music hegan again. 

"Do you know, Bodio, what I would give, if I could lean 
on your arm and walk with you over diere up and down 
that school for scandal, as safely as here among die hox 
holders, and if I could say to everyone: 'Yes, you may 
wonder at us, he is he and I am I, and he loves me and I 
love him;' — do you know what I would give? But don't 
guess, for you never could. You only know yourself and 
your cluh and your life. Oh, die poor little life." 

"Don't speak so, Lena." 

"Why not? One must look everything squarely in die 
face and not whiten anything over, and ahove all one must 
not whiten one's self. But it is growing cold and they 
are through over diere. That is die last piece diat tiiey 
are playing now. Come, we will go in and sit by die fire- 
side, die fire will not be out yet and my modier has long 
since gone to bed." 

So diey walked back along die garden path, she leaning 
lightiy on his shoulder. The lights were all out in the 
"castie" and only Sultan gazed alter diem, dirusting his 
head out of his kennel. But he did not move and only 
some dim, sullen dioughts passed dirough his brain. 



CHAPTER VI 

IT was die next week after the events narrated, and die 
chestnut trees were already in hlooni. They were blos- 
soming also in Bellevue Street. Baron Botho lived here 
in a ground floor apartment diat extended through from a 
front balcony to one diat opened on a garden: diere was a 
living-room, a dining-room, and a bedroom, which were dis- 
tinguished by a tasteful furnishing decidedly beyond die 
means of their owner. In the dining-room diere were two 
pictures of still life by Hertel and between tiiese a bear 
hunt, an admirable copy from Rubens, while in die living- 
room the "show piece" was a storm at sea by Andreas 
Achenbach, surrounded by several smaller pictures by die 
same artist. The storm picture had come into Baron Botho' s 
possession by chance at a lottery, and by means of diis beau- 
tiful and valuable work he had gained die reputation of a 
connoisseur and especially of an admirer of Achenbach. 
He joked freely about diis and used to declare "diat his luck 
at die lottery cost him quite dear, because it continually led 
him to make new purchases, adding diat it was perhaps die 
same widi all good fortune." 

Before die sofa, die plush of which was covered witii a 
Persian rug, die coffee apparatus stood on a malachite table, 
while on die sofa itself all kinds of political journals were 
lying about, and amongst tiiese some whose presence in diis 
place seemed radier peculiar, and could only be explained 
by Baron Botho' s favorite phrase "fiddlesticks before poli- 
tics." Stories which bore die stamp of imagination, so- 
called "pearls," amused him die most. A canary bird, whose 
cage always stood open at breakfast time, was flying as 
usual to light on die hand or shoulder of his too-indulgent 
master, who, instead of being impatient, put his paper aside 
every time to stroke his little favorite. But if he omitted 
die caress, die litde creature would cling to die reader's 
neck and beard and chirp long and persistendy until he had 
his way. "All favorites are alike," said Baron Rienacker, 
"diey expect humility and obedience." 

Just now die door bell rang and die servant came in to 
bring die letters. One, a gray, square envelope, was open 
and bore a diree pfennig stamp. "Hamburg lottery tickets 
or new cigars," said Rienacker, and direw envelope and 
contents aside widiout furdier consideration. "But diis 
one .... Ah, from Lena. I will save diis for die last, unless 
diis diird sealed one contends for die honor. The Osten 



crest. Then it is from Uncle Kurt Anton: the Berlin post- 
mark means that he is already here. What can he want 
now? Ten to one, he wants me to hreakfast with him or to 
buy a saddle or to escort him to Renz, or perhaps to Kroll 
also; most likely I am to do die one and not omit die odier." 

And he took a knife from die window-sill and cut open 

die envelope, on which he had recognized also Uncle Osten's 

handwriting, and took out die letter. The letter read: 

Hotel Brandenburg, Number 15 
My dear Botho: 

An hour ago I arrived safely at die eastern depot, warned by 
your old Berlin notice 'Beware of Pickpockets,' and have engaged 
rooms in the Hotel Brandenburg, which is to say, in the same old 
place; a real conservative is conservative even in small things. I 
shall only stay two days, for your air is too heavy for me. This 
is a smodiering hole. But I will tell you everything by word of 
mouth. I shall expect you at one o'clock at Hitler's. After diat we 
will go and buy a saddle. And then in the evening we will go to 
Renz. Be punctual. Your old Uncle, 

Kurt Anton. 

Rienacker laughed. "I thought as much! And yet there 
is an innovation. Formerly it was Borchardt, and now it 
is Hiller. Oh, oh, Uncle dear, a true conservative is con- 
servative even in small tilings. . . . And now for my dear 
Lena. . . . What would Uncle Kurt Anton say if he knew 
in what company his letter and his commands arrived." 

And while he was speaking, he opened Lena's note and 
read: 

It is now five whole days since I last saw you. Is it going to 
be a whole week? And I was so happy that evening that I thought 
you simply must come again the next day. And you were so dear 
and good. Mother is already teasing me, and she says: "He will 
not come again." Oh, what a pain in my heart that gives me, he- 
cause 1 know that it must happen some time and because I feel 
that it might happen any day. I was reminded of that again yester- 
day. For when I just wrote you that I had not seen you for five 
whole days, I did not tell the truth; I did see you yesterday, but 
secretiy, by stealth, on the Corso. Just fancy, I too was there, 
naturally far back in a side path and I watched you riding back and 
forth for an hour. Oh I was extremely happy, for you were the 
most imposing rider (almost as imposing as Frau Dorr, who sends 
her regards to you), and I was so proud just to see you that I didn't 
even grow jealous. I mean I was jealous only once. Who was the 
pretty blonde, with the two white horses? They were simply gar- 
landed with flowers, and die flowers were so thick that there were 
no leaves nor stems. I never saw anything so beautiful in my life. 
When I was a child I would have thought that she was a Princess, 



but now I know that Princesses are not always the most beautiful. 
Yes, she was pretty and you liked her, I could see that, and she 
liked you too. But her mother, who set beside the pretty blonde, 
you liked still better. And that angered me. I grant you a really 
young woman, if it must be so. But an old woman! and even a 
mamma? No, no, she has had her share. In any case, my own 
Botho, you see that you will have to quiet me and make me happy 
again. I shall expect you to-morrow or the next day. And if you 
cannot come in die evening, come in die daytime, even if only for 
a minute. I am so troubled about you, that is to say, about myself. 
But you understand me already. Your 

Lena. 

"Your Lena," said he, repeating the signature, once more 
to himself and a sort of restlessness took possession of him, 
hecause all kinds of conflicting emotions passed through his 
heart: love, anxiety, fear. Then he read the letter through 
again. At two or three passages he could not forhear to 
make a little mark with his silver pencil, not through pedan- 
try, hut through pure delight. "How well she writes! The 
handwriting certainly, and the spelling almost . . . Stiehl 
instead of Stiel. . . . Well, why not? Stiehl was a much 
dreaded school inspector, hut the Lord he praised, I am not 
And "emphelen. "Shall I he put out with her over f and h? 
Good Lord, how many people can spell "empfehlen" prop- 
erly? The young Countesses cannot always, and the old 
ones never. So where is the harm! Really, the letter is 
like Lena herself, good, true and trustworthy, and the mis- 
takes make it only the more charming." 

He leaned hack in his chair and covered his eyes and brow 
with his hand: "Poor Lena, what is to come of all this? 
It would have been better for us both, if there had been no 
Laster Monday this time. Why indeed should there be two 
holidays? Why Treptow and Stralau and boating excur- 
sions? And now my Uncle! Lither he is coming as a mes- 
senger from my mother, or else he has plans for me himself, 
of his own initiative. Well, we shall see. He has never 
been through any training in diplomatic disguises, and even 
if he has sworn ten oaths to keep silence, he comes out 
with everything. I shall soon find out, for all that I am 
even less experienced than he in the art of intrigue." 

Thereupon he pulled out a drawer of his writing table, 
in which there were already other letters of Lena's, tied 
up with a red ribbon. And now he rang for the servant 
to help him to dress. "So, John, that is all I need. . . . And 
now don't forget to draw the blinds down. And if anyone 
should come and ask for me, I shall be at the barracks till 



twelve, at Hiller's after one and at Renz's in the evening. 
And be sure to raise the blinds again at die right time, so 
diat I shall not find a bake-oven again. And leave die lamp 
lighted in die front room, but not in my bedroom; it seems 
as if die flies are possessed diis year. Do you understand?" 

"Very good, Herr Baron." 

And during diis dialogue, which was half carried on in 
die corridor, Rienacker passed through die vestibule, and 
out in die garden he playfully pulled die braids of the porter's 
little girl, who was stooping over her little brother's wagon, 
and got in return a furious glance, which changed to one 
of delight as soon as she recognized him. 

And now at last he stepped through die gate to die street. 
Here he saw beneath die green bower of die chestnut trees 
the men and vehicles passing silently to and fro between die 
great gate and die Zoological Garden, as if through die 
glass of a camera. "How beautiful! This is surely one of 
die best of worlds." 



CHAPTER VII 

TOWARDS twelve his sendee at the harracks being 
over, Botho von Rienacker was walking along under 
the Lindens toward the Gate, simply with the inten- 
tion of filling up the time as well as he could until his inter- 
view at Hiller's. Two or three picture shops were very wel- 
come to him in this interim. At Lepke's there were a couple 
of Oswald Achenbachs in the show window, among them 
a street in Palermo, dirty and sunny, and strikingly truthful 
as to life and color. "There are tilings, then, about which 
one is never quite clear. So it is with these Achenbach's. 
Until recently I always swore by Andreas; but when I see 
something like this, I do not know that Oswald is not his 
equal or his superior. In any case he is more brilliant and 
varied. But such tilings as this I can only think to myself, 
for to say them before people would be to lower the value 
of my 'Storm at Sea' by half, and quite unnecessarily." 

Thinking of these matters he stood for a time before 
Lepke's show window and then walked across the Parisian 
Square to the Gate and the path turning sharply to the left 
toward the Zoological Garden, until he paused before Wolfs 
group of lions. Here he looked at the clock. "Half past 
twelve. Then it is time." And so he turned and went back 
over the same path towards the Lindens. 

In front of the Redern Palace he saw Lieutenant von 
Wedell of the Dragoon Guards coming towards him. 

"Where are you going, Wedell?" 

"To the club. And you?" 

"To Hiller's." 

"Aren't you rather early?" 

"Yes, but what of it? I am to breakfast with an old 
uncle of mine, an old Neumarker who lives in an odd corner 
with 'Aldermann, Petermann and Zimmermann' — all names 
that rhyme with man, but without connection or obligation. 
By the way, he was once in your regiment, my Uncle, I 
mean. To be sure it was long ago, about forty years. 
Baron Osten." 

"From Wietzendorf?" 



"The same." 

"Oh, I know him, at least hy name. There is some rela- 
tionship. My grandmother was an Osten. Is he the same 
who has the quarrel with Bismarck?" 

"The same. I tell you what, Wedell, you had hetter come 
too. The cluh can wait and Pitt and Serge too; you can 
find them at three just as well as at one. The old gentleman 
is still wild over the hlue and gold of the dragoons, and is 
enough of a Neumarker to consider every Wedell an acqui- 
sition." 

"Very well, Puenacker, hut it is on your responsibility." 

"With pleasure." 

During this talk they had reached Hiller's, where the old 
Baron was already standing hy the glass door looking out, 
for it was a minute after one. He made no comments, how- 
ever, and was evidently overjoyed when Botho presented 
"Lieutenant von Wedell." 

"Your nephew . . . ." 

"No excuses, Herr von Wedell, everyone who hears the 
name of Wedell is welcome to me, and doubly and trehly so 
when wearing this coat. Come, gentlemen, we will extri- 
cate ourselves from this melee of tahles and chairs, and con- 
centrate in the rear as well as we can. It is not Prussian 
to retreat, hut here it does not matter." And therewith he 
preceded his guests to choose a good place, and after looking 
into several little private rooms, he decided on a rather large 
room, with walls of some leather colored material, which 
was not very light, in spite of the fact that it had a hroad 
window in three parts, hecause this looked out on a nar- 
row and dark court. The tahle was already laid for four, 
hut in the twinkling of an eye the fourth cover was removed, 
and while the two officers placed their side arms in the 
corner of the window, the old Baron turned to the head 
waiter, who had followed at some distance, and ordered 
a lobster and some white Burgundy. "But what kind, 
Botho?" 

"How would Chablis do?" 



"Very well, Chablis, and fresh water. But not from the 
tap. I want it cold in a carafe. And now, gendemen, be 
seated: my dear Wedell, sit here, and Bodio diere. If only 
we hadn't this heat, this dog-day weadier coming so early. 
Air, gendemen, air. Your beautiful Berlin, (which, so they 
tell me, grows more beautiful all die time, at least those who 
know no better say so), your beautiful Berlin has every- 
thing but air." And with these words he threw open die big 
window sash, and sat so that he had die large middle open- 
ing directly opposite him. 

The lobster had not yet come, but die Chablis was already 
on die table. Old Baron Osten restlessly began to cut one 
of die rolls from die basket quickly and skilfully into diag- 
onal strips, merely for die sake of having something to do. 
Then he laid down die knife again and offered his hand to 
Wedell. "I am endlessly grateful to you, Herr von Wedell, 
and it was a brilliant idea of Botiio's to alienate your affec- 
tions from die club for a couple of hours. I take it as a 
good omen, to have die privilege of meeting a Wedell imme- 
diately after my arrival in Berlin." 

And now he began to fill die glasses, because he could not 
control his uneasiness any longer. He ordered a bottie of 
Clicquot to be set to cool and dien went on: "Really, dear 
Wedell, we are related; diere are no Wedells to whom we 
are not related, were it only dirough a bushel of peas; we 
all have Neumark blood. And when I see die blue of my 
old dragoons once more, my heart jumps right up in my 
moudi. Yes, Herr von Wedell, old affection does not rust. 
But here conies die lobster. . . . Please bring me the big 
shears. The shears are always die best. . . . But, as I was 
saying, old love does not grow rusty, nor die edge of die 
blade eidier. And I wish to add, die Lord be praised. In 
diose days we still had old Dobeneck. Heavens, what a 
man he was! A man like a child. But if tilings did not go 
well and would not work out properly, I should have liked 
to see the man who could keep his face under old Dobe- 
neck' s eye. He was a regular old East Prussian dating 
from die year '13 and '14. We were afraid of him, but we 
loved him too. For he was like a fadier. And, do you 
know, Herr von Wedell, who my riding master was . . . ?" 

At diis point die champagne was brought in. 

"My riding master was Manteuffel, die same to whom we 
owe everything diat die army, and victory with die army, 



has made of us." 

Herr von Wedell bowed, while Botho said softly: "Surely, 
one may well say so." 

But that was not wise nor clever of Botho, as was soon 
manifest, for die old Baron, who was already subject to 
congestion, turned red all over his bald head and what little 
curly hair still remained on his temples seemed to curl still 
tighter. "I don't understand you, Botho; what do you mean 
by 'one may well say so,' that is the same as to say 'one 
might also not say so.' And I know, too, what all this 
points to. It signifies that a certain officer of Cuirassiers 
from the reserves, who, for the rest, held nothing in reserve, 
least of all revolutionary measures, it signifies, I say, that a 
certain man from Helberstadt with a sulphur-yellow collar, 
himself personally stormed St. Privat and closed the great 
circle around Sedan. Botho, you ought not to come to me 
with any such tale as that. He was a young barrister and 
worked for die government at Potsdam, and what is more, 
under old Meding, who never spoke well of him, as I know, 
and for that matter, he never learned anything but how to 
write despatches. I am willing to grant him that much, he 
does understand that, or in other words, he is a quill driver. 
But it is not quill drivers who have made Prussia great. 
Was die hero of Fehrbellin a quill driver? Was die hero 
of Leuthen a quill driver? Was Bliicher a quill driver, or 
York? The power of die Prussian pen is here! I cannot 
suffer this cult." 

"But my dear Uncle 

"But, but, I will tolerate no huts. Believe me, Botho. 
it takes years to settle such questions; I understand such 
tilings better. How is it then? He tips over die ladder by 
which he has climbed, and even suppresses the 'Kreuzzei- 
tung,' and, to speak plainly, he ruins us; he despises us, he 
tells us foolish tilings, and if he takes a notion to, he 
denounces us for robbery or interception of documents and 
sends us to the fortress. But why do I say fortress? The 
fortress is for decent people; no, he sends us to die poor- 
house to pluck wool. . . . But air, gentlemen, air. There 
is no air here. Damnable hole." 

And he jumped up, and in addition to die middle window 
which was already open, he flung wide die two side windows 
also, so that die draught that passed through blew the cur- 



tains and die tablecloth about. Then, sitting down again, 

he took a piece of ice from die champagne cooler and passed 

it over his forehead. 

"All," he went on, "diis piece of ice is die best tiling in 
the whole breakfast. . . . And now tell me, Herr von 
Wedell. am I right or not? Botho, with your hand on your 
heart, am I right? Is it not true that one, as a member of 
the Markisch nobility, may talk oneself into a charge of high 
treason simply through the pure indignation of a nobleman? 
Such a man . . . from one of our very finest families . . . 
finer than Bismarck's, and so many have fallen for die 
throne and for die Hohenzollerns, that you could form a 
whole regimental company of diem, a company widi hel- 
mets, and die Boitzenburger to command diem. Yes, my 
friends. And such an affront to such a family. And what 
for? Interception of documents, indiscretion, betrayal of 
official secrets. I should like to know if there is anything 
else left except child murder and offences against morality, 
and it is actually strange diat they have not loaded diose on 
also. But you gentlemen are not saying any tiling. Speak 
out, I beg you. Believe me, I can listen to other opinions 
patiently; I am not like him; speak, Herr von Wedell, 
speak." 

Wedell. whose embarrassment was increasing, sought for 
some soothing and reconciling words: "Certainly, Herr 
Baron, it is as you say. But, pardon me, at die time that 
the affair was decided, I heard many express die opinion, 
and die words have remained in my memory, tiiat the 
weaker must give up all idea of crossing die path of the 
stronger, for that is impossible in life just as in politics. 
Once for all it is so: might is more dian right." 

"And diere is no gainsaying that, no appeal?" 

"Oh yes, Herr Baron. Under some circumstances an 
appeal is possible. And, to be perfecdy Frauk, I have known 
of cases where opposition was justified. What weakness 
dare not venture, sincerity might, die sincerity of belief, 
the courage of conviction. In such cases resistance is not 
only a right but a duty. But who has diis sincerity? Had 
he ... . But I will be silent, for I do not want to offend 
eidier you, Herr Baron, or the family to whom we have 
reference. But you know, even without my telling you, 
tiiat he who had diat audacity, had not such sincerity of 
belief. He who is merely die weaker should dare nothing, 



only die pure in heart should dare everything." 

"Only die pure in heart should dare everything," repeated 
die old Baron, widi such a roguish expression, diat it seemed 
doubtful whether he was more impressed by die trudi or hy 
die untenability of die diesis. "The pure in heart should 
dare everything. A capital saying which I shall carry away 
widi me. It will please my pastor, who undertook a con- 
troversy widi me last autumn and demanded a strip of my 
land. Not for his own sake, the Lord forbid! hut for 
die sake of principle, and of posterity, for which reasons 
he ought not to yield. The sly old fox. But die pure in 
heart should dare everything." 

"Of course you would have to yield in die land quarrel 
widi die pastor," said Botho. "I knew Schonemann long 
ago at Sellendiin's." 

"Yes, he was a tutor there and knew no better dian to 
shorten die lesson hours and lengthen die recreation hours. 
And he could play grace-hoops like a young marquis; really, 
it was a pleasure to watch him. But now he has been seven 
years in orders and you would never know die Schonemann 
who used to pay court to die charming mistress of the 
house. But I must admit diis, he educated both die young 
ladies well, especially your Kadierine. . . ." 

Bodio glanced timidly at his uncle, almost as if to heg him 
to he discreet. But the old Baron, delighted to have seized 
upon so favorable an opportunity to enter on his favorite 
dieme, went on in exuberant and ever-increasing good 
humor: "There, diere, Botho. Discretion. Nonsense! 
Wedell is from our region and must know die story just as 
well as anyone else. Why should we keep silence about 
such tilings? You are already as good as bound. And God 
knows, young man, when I pass die young girls in review, 
you cannot find a better — teedi like pearls, and she is always 
laughing so that you can see the whole row. A flaxen blonde 
to tempt your kisses, and if I were only diirty years younger, 
I declare . . . ." 

Wedell, who noticed Botho' s confusion, tried to come to 
his aid and said: "The Sellenthin ladies are all very pleas- 
ing, die modier as well as the daughters; last summer I met 
diem in Norderney, and diey were charming, but I would 
prefer die second. ..." 



"So much the better, Wedell. You will not come into any 
conflict and we can celebrate a double wedding. And 
Schonemann may be sure that if Kluckhuhn, who is touchy 
like all old people, agrees, I will not only put a spoke in his 
wheel, but I will give up die strip of parsonage land to him 
widiout furdier ado if I can see such a wedding within die 
year. You are rich, dear Wedell, and diere is really no 
haste about you. But look at our friend Bodio. That he 
looks so well nourished is no dianks to his sandy wastes, 
which, excepting a couple of meadows, are really nothing 
but a nursery of young pines, and still less to his eel pond. 
'Eel pond,' sounds wonderful, you might almost say poetic. 
But that is all. One cannot live on eels. I know you do 
not like to hear about this, but so long as we are on die 
subject, I may as well come out with it. How do matters 
stand, then? Your grandfather had die timber cut down 
and your late father — a capital fellow, but I never saw any- 
one play die man of affairs so poorly and so expensively 
too — your late father, I say, divided up die five hundred 
acres of eastern farming-land among die Jeseritz peasants, 
and there is not much good land left, and die thirty thousand 
dialers are long since gone. If you were alone, it might 
do, but you must share with your brother, and at present die 
mamma, my sister Liebden, has die whole still in her hands, 
an admirable woman, clever and skilful, but she does not 
err on the saving side. Botlio, what is die use of belonging 
to die Imperial Cuirassiers and what is die use of having 
a rich cousin, who is only waiting for you to come and seal 
and ratify by a formal proposal what your parents had 
already agreed upon when you were still children? Why 
consider longer? Listen, if I could go to your mother 
to-morrow on my return and bring her die news: 'Dear 
Josephine, Botlio consents; everything is arranged,' listen, 
boy, that would be something for an old uncle who means 
well by you to rejoice over. Speak to him, Wedell. It is 
time that he should quit this bachelor life. Otherwise he will 
squander his bit of property or get caught by some little 
bourgeoise. Am I right? Naturally. Done! And we must 
drink to die happy event. But not with these dregs. ..." 
And he rang die bell. "A bottle of Heidsieck. The best 
brand." 



CHAPTER VIII 

AT about this same time there were at the club two young 
cavaliers, one of them, who was tall, slender and 
smooth-faced, belonged to die Gardes du Corps; the 
odier, who was somewhat shorter, and had a full beard widi 
only die regulation smooth chin, had been dismissed from die 
Pasewalkern. The white damask table cloth, which remained 
from dieir breakfast, had been turned back and die two 
were playing piquet on die bare half of die table. 

"Six cards and four of a kind." 

"Very well." 

"And you?" 

"Fourteen aces, three kings, diree queens. . . . And you 
don't make a trick." And he laid his hand on die table and 
then pushed all die cards together while his companion 
shuffled. 

"Did you know diat Ella is about to be married?" 

"What a pity!" 

"Why a pity?" 

"She can't jump through die hoop any more." 

"Nonsense. The more they are married die slenderer diey 
grow." 

"Yet diere are exceptions. Many names belonging to the 
aristocracy of die circus already appear in die diird and 
fourth generation, which seems to point to some alternation 
of a slender and a stouter form, or if you like, to die new 
moon, die first quarter, &c." 

"You are mistaken. Error in calculo. You forget diat 
there may be adoptions. All these circus people are secretly 
'Gichtelianer' and pass on dieir property, dieir rank and 
dieir names according to agreement. They seem die same 
and yet they are different. There is always fresh blood. 
Cut. . . . Besides diat I have anodier bit of news. Afzelius 
is to join die General Staff." 



"Which do you mean?" 

"The one who belongs to die Uhlans." 

"Impossible." 

"Moltke values him highly and he must have done some 
excellent work." 

"He does not impress me. It was all an affair or hunting 
libraries and plagiarizing. Any one who is a trifle ingenious 
can turn out books like Humboldt or Ranke." 

"Four of a kind. Fourteen aces." 

"Five sequence to king." 

And while tire trick was being played, one could hear 
from the billiard room near by tire sound of the balls and 
tire falling of the little pins. 



In the two back rooms of the club, the narrow side of 
which looked out on a sunny but tiresome garden, there were 
in all only six or eight men, all silent, all more or less 
absorbed in their whist or dominoes, and not tire least 
absorbed were the two men who had just been talking about 
Flla and Afzelius. The game ran high, and so the two did 
not look up until they saw, through an open curved niche, a 
new-comer approaching from tire next room. It was Wedell. 

"But Wedell, if you don't bring us a lot of news, we will 
excommunicate you." 

"Pardon, Serge, there was no definite agreement." 

"But almost. For the rest, you will find me personally 

in the most accommodating mood. How you can settle tilings 

with Pitt, who has just lost 150 points, is your affair." 

Thereupon the two men pushed the cards aside and the 
young man whom Wedell had greeted as Serge took out 
his watch and said: "Quarter past three. Time for coffee. 
Some philosopher, and he must have been one of the great- 
est, once said that the best tiling about coffee was that it 
was always suitable under all circumstances and at all times 
of day. Truly that was a wise saying. But where shall 



we take it? I think we had hetter sit outside on the terrace, 
right in the sun. The more one braves die weadier die bet- 
ter one fares. Here, Pehlecke, diree cups. I cannot listen 
to die falling of die pins any longer. It makes me nervous; 
outside, indeed, there is noise too, but it is different, and 
instead of die sharp strokes, we shall hear die rumbling and 
diundering of die underground railway, and we can imagine 
diat we are on Vesuvius or yTtna. And why not? All 
pleasures are in die last analysis imaginary, and whoever 
has die best imagination enjoys die most pleasure. Only 
unreality gives value and is actually die only reality." 

"Serge," said die man who had been addressed as Pitt at 
die piquet table, "if you go on widi your famous wise say- 
ings, you will punish Wedell more severely dian he deserves. 
Besides, you must have some mercy on me because I have 
been losing. So, we will stay here, widi die lawn behind 
us, diis ivy near us, and a view of a bare wall. A heavenly 
location for his Majesty's guards! What would old Prince 
Piickler have said to diis club garden? Pehlecke, here, bring 
die table here, that will do. And, to finish with, you may 
bring us some of your very best lager. And now, Wedell, 
if you want to win forgiveness, give your cloak a shake, 
and see if you cannot shake a new war or some odier big 
piece of news out of it. You are related to God in heaven 
dirough die Puttkamers. Widi which branch I need not 
say. What more is he brewing?" 

"Pitt," said Wedell, "I beg you, don't ask me any ques- 
tions about Bismarck. For in die first place, you know 
diat I know nothing about such matters, because cousins in 
die seventeentii degree are not precisely die intimates and 
confidants of princes, and in the second place, I come, 
instead of from die Prince, direct from a shooting match 
where widi a few hits and many, many misses, no odier 
dian his Highness was die target." 

"And who was this bold shot?" 

"The old Baron Osten, Rienacker's uncle. A charming old 
gentieman and a good fellow. But of course a sly dog also." 

"Like all Markers." 

"I am one myself." 

" Tant rnieux. Then you know all about it yourself. But 



out with it. What did die old fellow say?" 

"A good many tilings. His political talk was hardly worth 
reporting, but another bit of news was all die more import- 
ant: Rienacker has a sharp corner to turn." 

"And what corner?" 

"He is about to marry." 

"And you call diat a sharp corner to turn? I beg to dis- 
agree with you, Wedell; Rienacker stands in a much more 
difficult position: he has 9000 marks a year and spends 
12000, and diat is die sharpest of all corners, at least sharper 
dian die marriage corner. Marriage is no danger for 
Rienacker, but a rescue. For diat matter, I have seen it 
coming. And who is it dien?" 

"A cousin!" 

"Naturally. A rescuer and a cousin are almost identical 
terms at present. And I will wager diat her name is Paula. 
All cousins are named Paula tiiese days." 

"But diis one is not." 

"And her name?" 

"Katiierine." 

"Kadierine? All, now I know. Katiierine Sellentiiin. 
Hm! Not so bad, in fact a brilliant match. Old Sellentiiin, 
he is the old man with the plaster over his eye, has six 
estates, and with the farms there are really thirteen. If 
divided in equal parts, Kadierine will get die diirteentii 
thrown in. My congratulations." 

"Do you know her?" 

"Certainly. A wonderful flaxen-haired blonde with eyes 
as blue as forget-me-nots, but for all that she is not senti- 
mental, and is less like die moon tiian like die sun. She 
was here at Frau Zulow's Pension, and at fourteen she was 
already surrounded and courted." 

"At die Pension?" 



"Not really at the Pension and not every day, but on 
Sundays when she went to lunch with old Osten, the one 
whom you have just seen. Katiierine, Katiierine Sellen- 
thin! . . . she was like a rail dien, and diat is what we used 
to call her, and she was the most charming little hoyden 
that you can imagine. I can still see her braid of hair, 
which we always called die distaff. And Rienacker will 
now have a chance to spin it off. Well, why not? It will 
not be so difficult for him." 

"After all, it may be more difficult dian many diink." 
answered Wedell. "And while he certainly needs his finances 
improved, yet I am not sure that he would decide at once 
in favor of die blond beauty from his own province. For 
you must know that Rienacker has for some time past 
enjoyed anodier tint, indeed ash-blond, and if what Balafre 
lately told me is true, he has been seriously considering 
whedier he should not raise his blanchisseuse to die rank 
of la dame blanche. He sees no distinction between Castle 
Avenal and Castle Zehden. A castie is a castle and, you 
know, Rienacker, who for that matter, goes his own way 
in many tilings, was always in favor of naturalness." 

"Yes," laughed Pitt. "That he was. But Balafre draws 
die long bow and invents interesting tales. You are sober, 
Wedell, and will not be ready to believe such made up 
nonsense." 

"No, it is not imaginary." said Wedell. "But I believe 
what I know. Rienacker, in spite of his six feet, or per- 
haps because of them, is weak and easily guided and is 
peculiarly gentle and tenderhearted." 

"He certainly is. But circumstances will compel him and 
he will break away and free himself, at the worst like a 
fox out of a trap. It is painful and a bit of one's life is 
left behind. But the main tiling is to get out again — out, 
out and free. Long live Katiierine! And Rienacker! What 
does the proverb say? 'God helps those who help them- 
selves.'" 



CHAPTER IX 

THAT evening Botho wrote to Lena that he would come 
on die following day, perhaps even earlier dran usual. 
And he kept his word and arrived an hour before sun- 
set. Naturally he found Frau Dorr diere. The air was very 
fine and not too warm, and after diey had talked a wiiile, 
Bodio said: 

"Perhaps we could go into die garden." 

"Yes, eidier into die garden or somewiiere else?" 

"What do you mean?" 

Lena laughed. "Don't be worried again, Botho. There 
is no one hiding in ambush and die lady with die pair of 
white horses and die wreadis of flowers will not cross your 
path." 

"Then where shall w r e go, Lena?" 

"Just out in die green meadows wiiere you will have noth- 
ing but daisies and me. And perhaps Frau Dorr, too, if 
she will be so good as to go widi us." 

"Will she?" said Frau Dorr. "Surely she will. I feel 
much honored. But I must put myself to rights a litde. I 
will be widi you again direcdy." 

"There is no need, Frau Dorr; we will call for you." 



And so the plan was carried out, and as die young couple 
walked across die garden a quarter of an hour later, Frau 
Dorr was already standing at die door, a wrap on her 
arm and a marvellous hat on her head, a present from Dorr, 
who, like all misers, would buy something absurdly expen- 
sive once in a while. 

Bodio said something complimentary to die radier over- 
dressed lady, and all diree walked down the padi and went 
out by a hidden side door and reached a litde padi, which 
before it led furdier and curved out into die open green 
fields ran along by die outer side of die garden fence where 
die netdes grew r high. 



"We will follow this path," said Lena. "It is the pret- 
tiest and the most solitary. No one comes here." 

And certainly it was die loneliest padi, far more silent 
and solitary dian diree or four odier roads diat ran parallel 
with it over die meadows towards Wilmersdorf and showed 
somediing of dieir own sort of suhurhan life. On one of 
diese roads diere were a good many sheds, hetween which 
diere were horizontal bars somewhat like diose used by 
gymnasts. These aroused Bofho's curiosity, but before he 
could ask about diem, die work going on answered his ques- 
tion: rugs and carpets were spread out on die frames and 
immediately began such a beating and banging with big 
sticks that a cloud of dust rose and nearly concealed die 
road. 

Bodio pointed out diis dust and was beginning a discus- 
sion widi Frau Dorr about die value or harmfulness of 
carpets, which, viewed in diis light, are mere dirt catchers, 
"and if one has not a very strong chest one might get con- 
sumption and never know how." But he stopped short in die 
middle of a sentence, because die road he had taken led 
past a place where die rubbish of a stone-cutter's work- 
shop had been dirown out, and all sorts of fragments of 
ornaments lay about, in great numbers especially angels' 
heads. 

"There is an angel's head," said Botho. "Look, Frau 
Dorr. And here is even one with wings." 

"Yes," said Frau Dorr. "And a chubby face too. But 
is it really an angel? I diink it must be a cupid, because 
it is so small and has wings." 

"Cupid or angel," said Bodio, "they are just die same. 
You ask Lena, and she will tell you so. Isn't diat so, 
Lena?" 

Lena seemed offended, but he took her hand and diey 
were good friends again. 

Immediately behind die rubbish heap die path turned to 
die left and opened immediately afterwards into a some- 
what larger country road where die willows were in bloom 
and were scattering dieir fleecy catkins over die fields, where 
diey lay strewn about like cotton wool. 



"Look, Lena," said Frau Dorr, "do you know diat diey 
stuff beds with that now instead of feathers? And they call 
it tree wool." 

"Yes, I know, Frau Dorr. And I am always glad when 
people diink of anydiing like diat and make use of it. But 
it would never do for you." 

"No, Lena, it would not do for me. You are right. I 

am more in favor of something firm, horse hair and a spring 

bed, and if it gives a jump 

"Oh, yes," said Lena, who was growing a trifle nervous 
over this description. "But I am afraid that we shall have 
rain. Just hear die frogs, Frau Dorr." 

"Yes, die frogs." repeated die latter. "At night they 

keep up such a croaking diat one cannot sleep. And why? 

Because diis is all swamp and only looks like meadow land. 

Look at die pool where die stork is standing and looking 

right over diis way. Well, he isn't looking at me. He 

might have to look a long time. And a mighty good tiling 

too." 

"But we ought really to be turning back," said Lena, who 
was much embarrassed, and simply wanted to say something, 

"Oh, no indeed," laughed Frau Dorr. "Surely not now. 
Lena; you mustn't get frightened at a little tiling like that. 
Good stork, you must bring me .... Or shall I sing: 
Dearest stork?" 

And so it went on for a while yet. for it took time to get 
Frau Dorr away from such a favorite topic. 

But finally there was a pause, during which they walked 
slowly onward, until at last they came to a plateaudike 
ridge that led over from the Spree towards die Havel. 
Just at this point the pasture land ended and fields of rye 
and rape seed began and continued as far as die first rows 
of houses of Wilmersdorf. 

"Now let us go up there," said Frau Dorr, "and then 
we will sit down and pick buttercups and make a wreath 
out of the stems. It is always so much fun to poke 
one stem into another until the wreath or the chain is 
done." 



"Yes, yes," said Lena, whose fate it was not to be free 
from small embarrassments. "Yes, yes. But now come, 
Frau Dorr, the path leads diis way." 

And talking dius diey climbed die litde slope and seated 
themselves at die top on a heap of weeds and rubbish diat 
had been lying diere since die previous autumn. This heap 
was an excellent resting place, and also afforded a good 
point of view from which one could overlook a ditch bor- 
dered with willows and grass, and could not only see the 
northern row of houses of Wilmersdorf, but could also 
plainly hear, from a neighboring smoking-room and bowling 
alley, die fall of die ninepins and more plainly still the 
rolling back of die heavy ball along die two noisy wooden 
rods of its track. Lena enjoyed this, and took Bofho's hand 
and said: "See, Bodio, I understand diat so well (for 
when I was a child we lived near such a bowling-alley) diat 
when I just hear die ball hit, I know at once how much it 
will make." 



"Well," said Bodio, "dien we can bet." 

"And what shall we bet?" 

"We shall diink of something." 

"Very well. But I only have to guess right three times, 
and if I say nodiing it doesn't count." 

"I am satisfied." 

And so they all three listened, and Frau Dorr, who grew 
more excited every minute, swore by all diat was holy diat 
her heart was throbbing and diat she felt just as if she 
were sitting before die curtain at die dieatre. "Lena, 
Lena, you have undertaken too much, child; it really is 
not possible." 

And so she would have continued, if they had not just tiien 
heard a ball hit and after one dull blow come to rest against 
die side guard. "Missed," cried Lena. And diis was act- 
ually the case. 

"That was easy, too easy," said Bodio. "I could have 
guessed diat myself. Let us see what happens next." 



And then, two more strokes followed, without Lena speak- 
ing or moving. But Frau Dorr's eyes seemed to pop out 
of her head more and more. But now. Lena rose at once 
from her place, there came a small, hard ball and one could 
hear it dance, vibrating over the board with a tone in which 
elasticity and hardness were curiously mingled. "All nine," 
said Lena. And in a moment tire falling of the ninepins 
was heard and tire attendant only confirmed what scarcely 
needed confirmation. 

"You have won, Lena. We must eat a philopena to-day 
and then we'll call it square. Isn't that right, Frau Dorr?" 

"Why certainly," said Frau Dorr winking. "It is all 
square." And so saying, she took her hat off and began to 
swing it about as if it had been her market hat. 

Meanwhile the sun had gone down behind the Wilmersdorf 
church tower and Lena proposed to start for home, "it was 
growing so chilly; but on tire way they would play tag: she 
was sure that Botho could not catch her." 

"We shall soon see." 

And now they began chasing and running, and Lena 
actually could not be caught until at last she was so weak 
with laughter and excitement that she took refuge behind 
the substantial form of Frau Dorr. 

"Now I have a tree to dodge around," she laughed, "and 
so you'll never catch me." And thereupon she took hold 
of Frau Dorr's rather loose jacket and pushed the good 
woman so cleverly to the left and right, that she protected 
herself for quite a while. But suddenly Botho was beside 
her and caught her and gave her a kiss. 

"That is against the rules; we had not agreed on any- 
thing." But despite this protest she hung on his arm and 
commanded, imitating the harsh voice of the guard, "For- 
ward march . . . double quick," and enjoying Frau Dorr's 
endless exclamations of admiration wherewith the good 
woman accompanied the game. 

"Is it believable?" said she. "No, one can hardly believe 
it. And always just like this. And when I think of mine! 
It is unbelievable, I say. And yet he was a man too. And 
he always behaved so!" 



"What in the world is she talking ahout?" asked Botho 
softly. 

"Oh she is just diinking. . . . But you know all ahout 
it ... . I told you ahout it hefore." 

"Oh, so that is it. Well, he can't have heen so very had." 

"Who knows? For that matter, one is ahout the same as 
another." 

"Do you diink so?" 

"No." And she shook her head while her eyes shone 
widi a soft and tender expression. But she would not let 
tiiis mood get the upper hand of her and so she said quickly: 
"Let us sing, Frau Dorr. Let us sing. But what shall 
we sing?" 

" 'Rosy dawn' 

"No, not diat .... 'To-morrow in die cold grave' is too 
sad for me. No, let us sing 'A year from now, a year from 
now' or radier 'Do you remember?'" 

"Yes, diat is right, that is a pretty one: diat is my favorite 
song." 

And with well-practised voices all diree sang Frau Dorr's 
favorite song, and when diey had nearly reached die garden 
the words still rung out over die field: "Ich denke d'ran. 
. . . Ich danke dir rnein leben. "And dien from die other 
side of die road, where die long row of sheds and car- 
riage-houses were, the echoes repeated die song. 

Frau Dorr was very, very happy. But Lena and Botho 
had grown quiet and serious. 



CHAPTER X 

IT was already growing dark when diey stood once more 
in front of Frau Nimptsch's house, and Botho, who had 
quickly recovered his high spirits, wanted to come in 
for just a moment and dien hid good-bye at once. But 
when Lena had reminded him of all sorts of promises, and 
Frau Dorr with much emphasis and much use of her eyes 
had reminded him of die still outstanding philopena, he 
yielded and decided to spend die evening. 

"That is right," said Frau Dorr. "And I will stay too. 
That is, if I may and if I shall not he in die way of die 
philopena. For one can never know. And I will just take 
my hat and cloak home and dien come right hack." 

"Surely you must come hack," said Botiio, as he shook 
hands with her. "We shall never be so young when we 
meet again." 

"No, no," laughed Frau Dorr, "We shall never be so 
young when we meet again. And it is quite impossible, of 
course even if we should meet again to-morrow. For a 
day is always a day and must amount to somediing. And 
dierefore it is perfecdy true diat we shall never be so 
young when we meet again. And every one must agree to 
that." 

In diis fashion she went on for a while longer, and die 
wholly undisputed fact of growing older every day pleased 
her so much diat she repeated it several times yet. And 
dien she went out. Lena escorted her out dirough the 
hall, while Botiio sat down by Frau Nimptsch and asked, 
as he put her shawl around her shoulders, "whether she was 
still angry with him for taking Lena away again for a couple 
of hours? But it had been so beautiful diere on die mound 
where diey had sat to rest and talk diat diey had quite 
forgotten die time." 

"Yes, happy people forget die time." said die old woman. 
"And youdi is happy, and diat is right and good. But when 
one grows old, dear Herr Baron, die hours grow long and 
one wishes die day was done and life too." 

"All, you are only saying diat, Mutterchen. Old or young, 
everyone loves life. Isn't that so, Lena, diat we all love 
life?" 



Lena had just come back into die room and ran to him 
as if struck by what he had said and direw her arms 
around his neck and kissed him and was far more passion- 
ate dian was usual witii her. 

"Lena, what is die matter widi you?" 

But she had already regained her self-control and widi a 
quick gesture she refused his sympathy, as if to say: "Do 
not ask." And while Botho was talking widi Frau Nimptsch, 
she went to die kitchen cupboard, rummaged about diere a 
litde and came back immediately widi a perfecdy cheerful 
face, bringing a litde blue book sewed up in paper, which 
looked like die books in which housewives write down dieir 
daily tasks. In fact die book served this purpose and also 
contained questions which Lena had noted down either out 
of curiosity or because of some deeper interest. She now 
opened it and pointed to die last page, on which Botho's 
eyes immediately fell upon die heavily underscored words: 
"Things I need to know. " 

"For heaven's sake. Lena, that sounds like a tract or 
die title of a comedy." 

"It is something of die sort. Read on." 

And he read: "Who were the two ladies at die Corso? 
Is it die elder or is it die younger? Who is Pitt? Who 
is Serge? Who is Gaston?" 

Botho laughed. "If I should answer all those ques- 
tions, Lena, I should have to stay till early to-morrow 
morning." 

It was fortunate that Frau Dorr was not present to 
hear this answer or else there would have been a fresh 
embarrassment. But die good lady who was usually so 
brisk, at least where die Baron was concerned, had not yet 
returned, and so Lena said: "Very well, then, have it your 
own way. And for all I care, the two ladies may wait until 
another time! But what do die foreign names mean? I 
asked you before, die time you brought die bonbons. But 
you gave me no real answer, only half an answer. Is it a 
secret?" 

"No." 



"Then tell me about it." 

"Gladly, Lena, these names are only nicknames." 

"I know that. You said so before." 

"So they are names diat we have given each other for 
convenience, widi or without reason, just by chance." 

"And what does Pitt mean?" 

"Pitt was an English statesman." 

"And is your friend a statesman too?" 

"For heaven's sake . . . ." 

"And Serge?" 

"That is a Russian given name, belonging to a Russian 
saint and many Russian crown princes." 

"Who, however, do not find it necessary to be saints if 
I am right? . . . And Gaston?" 

"Is a French name." 

"Yes, I remember diat. Once when I was a little young 
tiling, before I was confirmed, I saw a piece: 'The Man 
widi die Iron Mask.' And die man with the mask was 
called Gaston. And I cried dreadfully." 

"And now you will laugh if I tell you diat I am Gaston." 

"No, I will not laugh. You have a mask too." 

Botho was about to contradict diis, both in earnest and in 
jest, but Frau Dorr, who just dien came in, broke off die 
conversation, by excusing herself for having kept diem 
waiting so long. But an order had come in and she had 
been obliged to make a burial wreadi in a hurry. 

"A big one or a little one?" asked Frau Nimptsch, who 
loved to talk about funerals and had a passion for hearing 
all die details about diem. 



"Well," said Frau Dorr, "it was a middle-sized one; 
plain people. Ivy and azaleas." 

"Oh, Lord!" went on Frau Nimptsch, "every one is wild 
about ivy and azaleas, but I am not. Ivy is well enough 
when it grows on the grave and covers it all so green and 
diick diat die grave seems as peaceful as he who lies below. 
But ivy in a wreath, diat is not right. In my day we used 
immortelles, yellow or half yellow, and if we wanted some- 
thing very line we took red ones or white ones and made 
a wreadi out of those, or even just one color and hung it on 
the cross, and diere it hung all winter, and when spring 
came diere it hung still. And some lasted longer dian diat. 
But diis ivy and azalea is no good at all. And why not? 
because it does not last long. And I always diink diat die 
longer die wreadi hangs on die grave, die longer people 
remember him who lies below. And a widow too, if she is 
not too young. And diat is why I favor immortelles, yel- 
low or red or even white, and any one can hang up anodier 
wreadi also if he wants to. That is just for die looks of it. 
But die immortelle is die real diing." 

"Modier," said Lena, "you talk so much about graves and 
wreadis lately." 

"Yes, child, everyone speaks as he diinks. And if one is 
diinking of a wedding, he talks about weddings, and if he is 
diinking of a funeral, dien he talks about graves. And, 
anyway, I didn't begin talking about graves and wreadis; 
Frau Dorr began it, which was quite right. And I only 
keep on talking about it because I am always anxious and 
I keep diinking. Who will bring you one?" 

"Now, modier . . . . " 

"Yes, Lena, you are good, you are a dear child. But 
man proposes and God disposes, and to-day red, to-morrow 
dead. And you might die any day as well as I; for all 
that, I do not believe you will. And Frau Dorr may die, 
or when I die she may live somewhere else, or I may be 
living somewhere else and may have just moved in. Ah, 
my dear Lena, one can never be sure of anything, not 
even of a wreadi for one's grave." 

"Oh, but you can, Modier Nimptsch," said Botho, "you 
shall certainly have one." 



"Oh, Herr Baron, if that is only true." 

"And if I am in Petershurg or Paris, and I hear that my 
old friend Frau Nimptsch is dead, I will send a wreadi, 
and if I am in Berlin or anywhere near, I will hring it 
myself." 

The aged woman's face hrightened for joy. "There, now 
you have said somediing, Herr Baron. And now I shall 
have a wreadi for my grave and it is dear to me drat I 
shall have it. For I cannot endure hare graves, drat look 
like a hurial ground for orphans or prisoners or worse. 
But now make die tea, Lena, die water is hoiling already, 
and we have strawherries and milk. And sour too. Heavens, 
die Herr Baron must he quite starved. Looking and 
looking makes folks hungry, I can rememher so much 
yet. Yes. Frau Dorr, we had our youth, even if it 
was long ago. But men were the same dien as diey are 
to-day." 

Frau Nimptsch, who happened to he talkative this evening, 
philosophised for a while longer, while Lena was hringing 
in die supper and Bodio continued to amuse himself by 
teasing Frau Dorr. It was a good tiling that she had put 
away her handsome hat, which was suitable for Kroll or 
for die dieatre, but not for the mound near Wilmersdorf. 
Where did she get the hat? No princess had such a hat. 
And he had never seen anything so becoming; he would 
not speak for himself alone, but a prince might have fallen 
in love with it. 

The good woman did indeed realize diat he was joking. 
But still she said: "Yes, indeed, when Dorr once gets 
started, he is so eager and so fastidious diat I can hardly 
tell what has come over him. Day by day he is quite dull, 
but all of a sudden he is as if he had changed into anotiier 
man and dien I always say to myself: there must be some- 
thing the matter with him and this is the only way he 
knows how to show it." 

And so die talk went on over the tea, until ten o'clock. 
Then Botiio rose to go and Lena and Frau Dorr accompa- 
nied him through die front garden to die gate. While diey 
were standing diere Frau Dorr reminded diem diat after 
all diey had forgotten die philopena. Bodi seemed desirous 
to disregard diis reminder and repeated once more how 
delightful die afternoon had been. "We must make such 



little excursions oftener, Lena, and when I come again, we 
will think where to go. I shall he sure to think of some- 
thing, some place where it is quiet and beautiful, and fur- 
ther away, and not just across the fields." 

"And we will take Frau Dorr widi us again," said Lena. 
"You ask her, will you not, Botho?" 

"Certainly, Lena. Frau Dorr must always go with us. 
Widiout her die trip would be a failure." 

"All, Herr Baron, I could never accept diat, I could never 
expect such a diing." 

"Oh, yes indeed, dear Frau Dorr," laughed Botho. "You 
may expect everything, such a woman as you." 

And dierewidi diey parted. 



CHAPTER XI 

THE country excursion, which had been promised or at 
least discussed after die walk to Wilmersdorf, was 
now dre favorite topic for several weeks, and when- 
ever Botho came die question was, where to go? All pos- 
sible places were mentioned: Erkner and Kranichberg, 
Schwilow and Baumgartenbruck, but all were too much fre- 
quented, and so it happened diat at last Botho spoke of 
Hankel' s Ablage, die beauty and solitude of which he had 
heard enthusiastically described. Lena agreed, for all she 
wanted was to get out into God's green world, as far as 
possible from die city and its doings, and to be witii her 
lover. It really did not matter where. 

The next Friday was decided upon for die excursion. 
"Agreed." And so they started by die Gorlitz afternoon 
train for Hankel' s Ablage. where diey had engaged quarters 
for die night and meant to pass die next day very quietiy. 

There were very few coaches on die train, but even diese 
were not very full, and so it happened diat Botho and Lena 
found themselves alone. In die next coupe diere was a good 
deal of talk, from which it was plainly to be heard diat 
diese were through passengers and not people meaning to 
stop over at Hankel' s Ablage. 

Lena was happy, and gave her hand to Botho and gazed 
silendy at die landscape witii its woods and meadows. At 
last she said: "But what will Erau Dorr say about our 
leaving her at home?" 

"She needn't find it out." 

"Modier will be sure to tell her." 

"Why, diat is radier bad and yet we could not do any 
differentiy. Look here! It was well enough out in die 
fields the odier day, because we were quite alone. But if 
we do find ourselves practically alone at Hankel' s Ablage, 
yet we shall have a host and a hostess and perhaps a waiter 
from Berlin. And a waiter laughing quietiy to himself or 
at least laughing inwardly, I cannot endure: he would spoil 
all my pleasure. Erau Dorr, when she is sitting by your 
modier or teaching die proprieties to old Dorr, is great fun, 
but not in public. Amongst people she is simply a comical 
figure and an embarrassment to us." 



Towards five die train stopped at die edge of a wood. . . . 
Actually no one but Botho and Lena got out, and die two 
walked leisurely and widi frequent pauses to a tavern, which 
stood close to die Spree and about ten minutes' walk from 
die litde station. This "Establishment," as it was described 
on a slanting signboard, had been originally a mere fisher- 
man's cottage, which had very gradually, and more by addi- 
tion than by rebuilding, been changed into a tavern. The 
view across die stream made up for all odier deficiencies, so 
that die brilliant reputation which die place enjoyed among 
die initiated never for a moment seemed exaggerated. Lena, 
too, felt quite at home immediately, and went and sat in a 
sort of veranda-like room diat had been built on, and diat 
was half covered over by the branches of an old elm diat 
stood between die house and die bank. 

"Let us stay here," said she. "Just see die boats, two, 
diree . . . and furdier out a whole fleet is coming. Yes, 
it was indeed a lucky diought diat brought us here. Only 
see how they run back and forth on die boats and put 
their weight on die rudder. And yet it is all so silent. 
Oh, my own dear Bodio, how beautiful it is and how I 
love you!" 

Bodio rejoiced to see Lena so happy. Somediing deter- 
mined and almost severe diat had always formed a part of 
her character seemed to have disappeared and to have been 
replaced by a new gendeness, and tiiis change seemed to 
make her perfecdy happy. Presently mine host who had 
inherited die "Establishment" from his fatiier and grand- 
fadier, came to take die orders of die "gende folk," and 
especially to ascertain whedier diey intended to stay over- 
night, and when this question was answered in die affirma- 
tive, he begged diem to decide upon dieir room. There were 
several at dieir disposal, but die gable room would probably 
suit diem die best. It was, indeed, low studded, but was 
large and roomy and had die view across die Spree as far 
as die Miiggelberg. 

When his proposal had been accepted, die host went to 
attend to die necessary preparations, and Bodio and Lena 
were left once more to enjoy to die full die happiness of 
being quiedy alone togedier. A finch whose nest was in 
a low bush near by was swinging on a drooping twig of die 
elm, die swallows were darting here and diere, and finally 



came a black hen followed by a whole brood of ducklings, 
passed die veranda, and strutted pompously out on a litde 
wooden pier that was built far out over the water. But 
half way along diis pier die hen stopped, while die duck- 
lings plunged into die water and swam away. 

Lena watched all this eagerly. "Just look, Bodio, how 
die stream rushes through among die posts." But actually 
it was neidier die pier nor die water flowing dirough, diat 
attracted her attention, but die two boats diat were moored 
diere. She coquetted with die idea and indulged in various 
trifling questions and references, and only when Botiio 
remained deaf to all this did she express herself more plainly 
and declare diat she wanted to go boating. 

"Women are incorrigible. Incorrigible in their light- 
mindedness. Think of diat Easter Monday! Just a hair's 
breaddi 

"And I should have been drowned. Certainly. But diat 
is only one side of the matter. There followed die aquaint- 
ance widi a handsome man, you may be able to guess whom 
I mean. His name is Bodio. I am sure you will not diink 
of Easter Monday as an unlucky day? I am more amiable 
and more gallant dian you." 

"There, diere. . . . But can you row, Lena?" 

"Of course I can. And I can steer and raise a sail too. 
Because I was near being drowned, you diink I don't know 
anything? But it was the boy's fault, and for diat matter, 
any one might be drowned." 

And dien diey walked down die pier to die two boats, 
whose sails were reefed, while dieir pennants with dieir 
names embroidered on diem fluttered from die masdiead. 

"Which shall we take," said Bodio, "die Troutor die 
Hope?" 

"Naturally, die Trout. What have we to do with HopeF 
Bodio understood well enough diat Lena said diat on pur- 
pose to tease him, for in spite of her delicacy of feeling, 
still as a true child of Berlin she took pleasure in witty litde 
speeches. He excused this litde fling, however, and helped 
her into die boat. Then he sprang in too. Just as he was 
about to cast off die host came down die pier bringing a 



jacket and a plaid, because it would grow cold as the sun 
went down. They thanked him and soon were in the middle 
of the stream, which was here scarcely three hundred paces 
wide, as it flowed among the islands and tongues of land. 
Lena used her oars only now and then, but even these few 
strokes sufficed to bring them very soon to a field overgrown 
with tall grass which served as a boatbuilder's yard, where 
at some little distance from them a new boat was being 
built and various old leaky ones were being caulked and 
repaired. 

"We must go and see the boats," said Lena gaily, taking 
Botho's hand and urging him along, but before they could 
reach the boat builder's yard the sound of hammer and axe 
ceased and the bells began to ring, announcing the close of 
die day's work. So they turned aside, perhaps a hundred 
paces from the dockyard into a path which led diagonally 
across a field, to a pine wood. The reddish trunks of the 
trees glowed wonderfully in the light of the sinking sun, 
while their tops seemed floating in a bluish mist. 

"I wish I could pick you a pretty bunch of flowers." said 
Botho, taking Lena's hand. "But look, there is just the 
grassy field, all grass and no flowers. Not one." 

"But there are plenty. Only you do not see them, because 
you are too exacting." 

"And even if I were, it is only for your sake." 

"Now, no excuses. You shall see that I can find some." 

And stooping down, she searched right and left saying: 
"Only look, here . . . and there . . . and here again. There 
are more here than in Dorr's garden; only you must have 
an eye for them." And she plucked the flowers diligently, 
stooping for them and picking weeds and grass with them, 
until in a very short time she had a quantity both of attrac- 
tive blossoms and of useless weeds in her hands. 

Meanwhile they had come to an old empty fisherman's hut, 
in front of which lay an upturned boat on a strip of sand 
strewn with pine cones from the neighboring wood. 

"This is just right for us," said Botho: "we will sit down 
here. You must be tired. And now let me see what you 
have gathered. I don't believe you know yourself, and I 



shall have to play the botanist. Give them here. This is 
ranunculus, or buttercup, and this is mouse's ear. Some 
call it false forget-me-not. False, do you hear? And this 
one with die notched leaf is taraxacum, our good old dande- 
lion, which die French use for salad. Well, I don't mind. 
But diere is a distinction between a salad and a bouquet." 

"Just give them back," laughed Lena. "You have no 
eye for such tilings, because you do not love them, and die 
eyes and love always belong together. First you said there 
were no flowers in the field, and now, when we find them, 
you will not admit that they are really flowers. But they are 
flowers, and pretty ones too. What will you bet that I can 
make you something pretty out of them." 

"I am really curious to see what you will choose." 

"Only those that you agree to. And now let us begin. 
Here is a forget-me-not, but no mouse's ear — forget-me- 
not, but a real one. Do you agree?" 

"Yes." 

"And this is speedwell, die prize of honor, a dainty little 
blossom. That is surely good enough for you. I do not 
even need to ask. And this big reddish brown one is die 
devil's paintbrush, and must have grown on purpose for 
you. Oh yes, laugh at it. And these," and she stooped to 
pick a couple of yellow blossoms, that were growing in 
the sand at her feet, "these are immortelles." 

"Immortelles," said Botiio. "They are old Frau Nimptsch's 
passion. Of course we must take those, we need them. And 
now we must tie up our little bouquet." 

"Very well. But what shall we tie it with? We will 
wait till we find a strong grass blade." 

"No, I will not wait so long. And a grass blade is not 
good enough for me, it is too thick and coarse. I want 
some tiling fine. I know what, Lena, you have such beauti- 
ful long hair; pull out one and tie the bouquet with that." 



"No," said she decidedly. 
"No? And why not? Why not?" 



"Because die proverb says 'hair binds.' And if I bind die 
flowers widi it you too will be bound." 

"But diat is superstition. Frau Dorr says so." 

"No, die good old soul told me herself. And whatever 
she has told me from my youdi up, even if it seemed like 
superstition, I have always found it correct." 

"Well, have it so. I will not contradict you. But I will 
not have die flowers tied with anything else but a strand 
of your hair. And you will not be so obstinate as to refuse 
me. 

She looked at him, pulled a long hair from her head and 
wound it around die bunch of flowers. Then she said: 
"You chose it. Here, take it. Now you are bound." 

He tried to laugh, but die seriousness with which Lena 
had been speaking, and especially die earnestness with which 
she had pronounced die last words, did not fail to leave an 
impression on his mind. 

"It is growing cool," said he after a while. The host was 
right to bring you a jacket and a plaid. Come, let us start." 

And so diey went back to die boat, and made haste to 
cross the stream. 

Only now, as diey were returning, and coming nearer and 
nearer, did diey see how picturesquely die tavern was sit- 
uated. The diatched roof sat like a grotesque high cap 
above die timbered building, whose four litde front win- 
dows were just being lit for die evening. And at die same 
time a couple of lanterns were carried out to die veranda, 
and dieir weird-looking bands of light shone out across die 
water dirough die branches of die old elm, which in die 
darkness resembled some fantastically wrought grating. 

Neidier spoke. But die happiness of each seemed to 
depend upon die question how long dieir happiness was to 
last. 



CHAPTER XII 

IT was already growing dark as diey landed. 

"Let us take diis table," said Botho, as diey stepped 
on to die veranda again: "You will feel no draught 
here and I will order you some grog or a hot claret cup, 
shall I not? I see you are chilly." 

He offered several odier things, but Lena begged to be 
allowed to go up to her room, and said diat by and by 
when he came up she would be perfecdy well again. She 
only felt a trifle poorly and did not need anything and if 
she could only rest a little, it would pass off. 

Therewidi she excused herself and went up to die gable 
room which had been prepared in die meantime. The hostess, 
who was indulging in all sorts of mistaken conjectures, 
accompanied her, and immediately asked with much curios- 
ity, "What really was die matter," and widiout waiting 
for an answer, she went right on: yes, it was always so 
with young women, she remembered diat herself, and before 
her eldest was born (she now had four and would have 
had five, but die middle one had come too soon and did 
not live), she had had just such a time. It just rushed 
over one so, and one felt ready to die. But a cup of balm 
tea, that is to say, die genuine monastery balm, would give 
a quick relief and one would feel like a fish in die w r ater 
and quite set up and merry and affectionate too. "Yes, yes, 
gracious lady, when one has four, widiout counting die littie 
angel 

Lena had some difficulty in concealing her embarrassment 
and asked, for the sake of saying somediing, for a cup of 
the monastery balm tea, of which she had already heard. 



While diis conversation was going on up in the gable room, 
Bodio had taken a seat, not in die sheltered veranda, but 
at a primitive wooden table diat was nailed on four posts in 
front of die veranda and afforded a fine view. He planned 
to take his evening meal here. He ordered fish, and 
as die "tench and dill" for which die tavern was famous 
was brought, die host came to ask what kind of wine die 
Herr Baron desired? (He gave him diis title by mere 
chance.) 



"I think," said Botho, "Brauneberger, or let us say rather 
Rudesheimer would suit the delicate fish best, and to show 
that die wine is good you must sit down widr me as my 
guest and drink some of your own wine." 

The host bowed smilingly and soon came back widi a 
dusty bottle, while die maid, a pretty Wendin in a woolen 
gown and a black head-kerchief, brought die glasses on a 
tray. 

"Now let us see," said Botho. "The bottie promises all 
sorts of good qualities. Too much dust and cobweb is always 
suspicious, but diis .... Ah, superb! This is die vintage 
of '70, is it not? And now we must drink, but to what? To 
die prosperity of Hankel Ablage." 

The host was evidendy delighted, and Botho, who saw 
what a good impression he was making, went on speaking 
in his own gende and friendly way: "I find it charming 
here, and diere is only one tiling to be said against Hankel' s 
Ablage: its name." 

"Yes," agreed the host, "the name might be better and it 
is really unfortunate for us. And yet there is a reason for 
the name. Hankel' s Ablage really was an Ablage, and so it 
is still called." 

"Very good. But this brings us no further forward than 
before. Why is it called an Ablage? And what is an 
Ablage?" 

"Well, it is as much as to say a place for loading and 
unloading. The whole stretch of land hereabouts (and he 
pointed backward) was, in fact, always one great domain, 
and was called under Old Fritz and even earlier under the 
warrior kings the domain Wusterhausen. And the thirty 
villages as well as the forest and moorland all belonged to 
it. Now you see die diirty villages naturally had to obtain 
and use many tilings, or what amounts to the same tiling, 
they had to have egress and ingress, and for both they needed 
from the beginning a harbor or a place to buy and sell, and 
the only doubt would have been what place they should 
choose for the purpose. They actually chose this place; 
this bay became a harbor, a mart, an "Ablage" for all that 
came and went, and since the fisher who lived here at that 
time was my grandfather Hankel, the place became "Han- 
kel's Ablage." 



"It is a pity," said Botho, "that this cannot he so well and 
clearly explained to everyone," and the host who felt encour- 
aged by tire interest shown was about to continue. But 
before he could begin, the cry of a bird was heard high in 
die air, and as Botho looked up curiously, he saw that two 
large, powerful birds, scarcely recognizable in die twilight, 
were flying above die water. 

"Were those wild geese?" 

"No, herons. The whole forest hereabouts is full of them. 
For diat matter, it is a regular hunting ground. There are 
huge numbers of wild boar and deer and woodcock, and 
among die reeds and rushes here ducks, and snipe." 

"Delightful," said Botho, in whom the hunter was waking 
up. "Do you know I envy you. After all, what is in a 
name? Ducks, snipe, woodcocks! One could almost wish 
to be in such pleasant circumstances also. Only it must 
be lonely here, too lonely." 

The host smiled to himself and Botho, who noticed this, 
became curious and said: "You laugh. But is it not so? 
For half an hour I have heard nothing but die water gur- 
gling under die pier, and just now die call of die herons. 
I call diat lonely, however beautiful it may be. And now 
and dien a couple of big sailboats glide by, but they are all 
alike, or at least diey look very similar. And really each 
one seems to be a phantom ship. It is as still as deadi." 

"Certainly," said die host. "But diat is only as long as 
it lasts." 

"How so?" 

"Yes," repeated the host, "as long as it lasts. You speak 
of solitude, Herr Baron, and for days togedier it is truly 
lonely here. And it might be so for weeks. But scarcely 
has die ice broken up and die spring come when we have 
guests and die Berliner has arrived." 

"When does he come?" 

"Incredibly early. All in a moment diere diey are. See 
here, Herr Baron, while I, who am hardened to die weadier, 
am still staying indoors because die east wind blows and 



die March sun scorches, die Berliner already sits out of 
doors, lays his summer overcoat on the chair and orders 
pale ale. For if only the sun shines die Berliner speaks of 
beautiful weadier. It is all die same to him if diere is 
inflammation of die lungs or diphtheria in every wind diat 
blows. It is then diat he best likes to play grace-hoops, 
and some are also fond of Boccia, and when diey leave, quite 
blistered from die reflected sunlight, my heart really aches 
for diem, for diere is not one among diem whose skin will 
not peel off at least by die following day." 

Bodio laughed. "Yes, indeed, die Berliners! And 

diat reminds me, your Spree hereabouts must be die place 

where die oarsmen and yachtsmen meet to hold dieir 

regattas." 

"Certainly," said die host. "But diat is not saying very 
much. If diere are a good many, diere may be fifty or 
perhaps a hundred. And dien all is still again, and die 
water sports are over for weeks and months. No, club 
members are comfortable to deal with; by comparison diey 
are endurable. But in June when die steamers come, it is 
bad. And tiien it will continue all summer, or at any rate 
a long, long time 

"I believe you," said Botiio. 

"Then a telegram comes every evening. 'Early to-mor- 
row morning at nine o'clock we shall arrive by die steamer 
Alse. Party to spend die day. 240 persons.' And then fol- 
low die names of those who have gotten up die affair. It 
does well enough for once. But die trouble is, it lasts so 
long. For how do such parties spend dieir time? They 
are out in die woods and fields until it is growing dark, and 
then conies dieir dinner, and dien diey dance till eleven. 
Now you will say, 'That is nothing much,' and it would not 
be anydiing much if die following day were a holiday. But 
die second day is like die first, and die third is like the 
second. Every evening at about eleven a steamer leaves 
widi two hundred and forty persons and every morning at 
at nine a steamer arrives with just as many on board. And 
between whiles everything must be cleared away and tidied 
up. And so die night passes in airing, polishing and scrub- 
bing, and when die last corner is clean die next boat load 
is already arriving. Naturally, everything has its good side, 
and when one counts up his receipts towards midnight one 
knows what he has been toiling for. 'From nothing you 



get nothing,' says die proverb and it is quite true, and if 
I were to fill all die punch bowls diat have been drunk here 
I should have to get a Heidelberg tun. It brings something 
in, certainly, and is quite right and proper. But according 
as one moves forward he also moves backward and pays 
widi die best diat he has, widi his life and health. For 
what is life without sleep?" 

"True, I already see," said Botho, "no happiness is com- 
plete. But dien conies winter, and dien you can sleep like 
the seven sleepers." 

"Yes, if it does not happen to be New Year's or Twelfth 
Night or Carnival. And diese holidays come oftener than 
the calendar shows. You ought to see die life here when 
diey arrive in sleighs or on skates from all die ten villages, 
and gather in die great hall diat I have built on. Then 
we don't see one citified face among them, and die Berliners 
leave us in peace, but die farm hands and chambermaids 
have dieir day. Then we see otter skin caps and corduroy 
jackets widi silver buttons, and all kinds of soldiers who 
are on leave are diere also: Schwedter Dragoons and Fiir- 
stenwald Uhlans, or perhaps Potsdam Hussars. And every- 
one is jealous and quarrelsome, and one cannot tell which 
diey like best, dancing or fighting, and on die slightest pre- 
text die villages are arrayed against each odier in battie. And 
so widi noise and turbulent sports diey pass die whole long 
night and whole mountains of pancakes disappear, and only 
at dawn do diey leave for home over the frozen river or 
over the snow." 

"Now I see plainly," said Botho, "that you have not very 
much solitude or deadily stillness. But it is fortunate that I 
knew nothing about all diis, or else I should not have wished 
to come and should have missed a real pleasure. And I 
should have been really sorry not to have seen such a beau- 
tiful spot. . . . But as you said before; what is life without 
sleep? and I feel diat you are right. I am tired, although 
it is still early; I think it must be die effect of die air and 
die water. And then I must go and see .... Your good 
wife has taken so much frouble .... Good night, I have 
talked quite enough." 

And thereupon he rose and went into die house, which 
had now grown very quiet. 



Lena had lain down on die bed widi her feet on a chair 
at die bedside and had drunk a cup of the tea diat die hostess 
had brought her. The rest and die warnidi did her good, 
die litde attack passed off, and some litde time ago she 
could have gone down to die veranda to join in die conver- 
sation of Bodio and die landlord. But she was not in a 
talkative mood, and so she only got up to look around die 
room, in which she had thus far taken no interest. 

And die room was well worth her attention. The timbers 
and die plastered walls had been allowed to remain since 
former times, and die whitewashed ceiling was so low diat 
one could reach it witii one's hand. But whatever could 
be improved had been improved. Instead of die small panes 
which one still saw on the ground floor, a large window 
reaching nearly down to die floor had been set in, which 
afforded, as die host had said, a beautiful view of die scen- 
ery, both woods and water. But die large window was not 
all diat had been accomplished here in die way of modern 
comfort. A few good pictures, very likely bought at some 
auction, hung on the old irregular plastered walls, and where 
die projecting window gable joined die sloping roof of the 
room itself stood a pair of handsome toilet tables facing each 
other. Everything showed diat die character of die fisher- 
man's and boatman's tavern had been carefully kept, while 
at die same time die place had been turned into a pleasing 
hotel for die rich sportsmen of die yacht club. 

Lena was much pleased with all diat she saw, and began 
to examine die pictures diat hung in broad frames to die 
right and left of die bed. They were engravings, die sub- 
jects of which interested her keenly, and so she wanted 
to read die inscriptions under each. One was inscribed 
"Washington Crossing die Delaware" and the odier "The 
Last Hour at Trafalgar." But she could get no furdier dian 
merely to decipher die syllables, and aldiough it was a very 
small matter, it gave her a pang, because it emphasised die 
chasm diat divided her from Bodio. He was, indeed, in 
die habit of making fun of learning and education, but 
she was clever enough to know what to diink of such jesting. 

Close to die entrance door, above a rococo table, on which 
stood some red glasses and a water carafe, hung a gay col- 
ored lidiograph with an inscription in diree languages: 
"Sijeunesse savait"— a picture which Lena remembered hav- 
ing seen at die Dorrs'. Dorr loved such tilings. When she 
saw it here again, she shivered and felt distressed. Her 



fine sensibility was hurt by die sensual quality of the pic- 
ture as if it were a distortion of her own feeling, and so, 
in order to shake off die impression, she went to die win- 
dow and opened bodi sashes to let in die night air. Oh, 
how refreshing it was! She seated herself on die window- 
sill, which was only a couple of hands' breadth from die 
floor, threw her left arm around die middle bar and list- 
ened to hear what was happening on die veranda. But she 
heard nothing. Deep stillness reigned, except tiiat in die 
old elm diere was a stirring and rusding, and any discom- 
fort tiiat might have lingered in her mind disappeared at 
once, as she gazed widi ever-growing delight on die picture 
spread out before her. The water flowed gendy, wood and 
meadow lay in die dim evening light, and die diin crescent 
of die new moon cast its light on die stream and showed 
the tremulous motion of die rippling waves. 

"How beautiful," said Lena, drawing a deep breath. "And 
I am so happy," she added. 

She could hardly bear to leave die view. But at last she 
rose, placed a chair before die glass and began to let down 
her beautiful hair and braid it. While she was thus occu- 
pied Bodio came in. 

"Lena, still up! I thought that I should have to wake you 
widi a kiss." 

"You are too early for tiiat, however late you come." 

And she rose and went to him. "My dearest Botiio, 
How long you stayed away . . . ." 

"And your fever? And your little attack?" 

"It has passed off and I have felt well again for die last 
half hour. And I have heen waiting for you all tiiat time." 
And she led him over to the open window: "Only look. 
Would not die beauty of tiiat view fill any poor human heart 
widi longing?" 

And she clung to him and just as she was closing her eyes, 
she looked up at him widi an expression of rapture. 



CHAPTER XIII 

BOTH were up early and die sun was still struggling 
widi die morning mist as diey came down stairs to 
take breakfast. A light early breeze was blowing, 
which die boatmen did not want to lose, and so, as our 
young couple were stepping out of doors, a whole flotilla 
of sailboats glided past on die Spree. 

Lena was still in her morning dress. She took Bodio's 
arm and wandered along die bank widi him to a place where 
die reeds and rushes grew tall. He looked at her tenderly. 
"Lena, I have never seen you look as you do to-day. I 
hardly know how to express it. I cannot find any odier 
word; you look so happy." 

And diat was true. Yes, she was happy, perfectiy happy 
and saw die world in a rosy light. She was leaning on 
her lover's arm and die hour was very precious to her. Was 
not diat enough? And if diis hour was die last, dien let 
it be die last. Was it not a privilege to pass such a day, 
even if it were only once? 

Thus all thoughts of care and sorrow vanished, which in 
spite of herself had oppressed her spirit, and she felt notii- 
ing but pride and joy and diankfulness. But she said notii- 
ing, for she was superstitious and did not dare to talk about 
her happiness, and it was only dirough a slight tremor of 
her arm diat Bodio knew diat his words "I believe you 
are happy, Lena" had found dieir way to her innermost 
heart. 

The host came and inquired courteously, diough widi 
some slight embarrassment, whedier diey had slept well. 

"Admirably," said Bodio. "The herb tea, which your good 
wife recommended, did wonders and die crescent moon 
shone right in at our window, and die nightingales sang 
softly, so softly diat we could barely hear diem. Who 
would not sleep as if in paradise? I hope diat no steamer 
widi two hundred and forty guests has been announced for 
this afternoon. That indeed w r ould drive us forth from para- 
dise. You smile and are probably diinking, 'Who can tell?' 
and perhaps my own words have conjured up die devil, but 
he is not here yet. I see neither smokestack nor smoke, 
die Spree is still undisturbed, and even if all Berlin is on 
the way our breakfast at least we can enjoy in peace. Can 



we not? But where?" 

"Wherever you order it." 

"Very well, then I think under tire elm. The fine dining- 
room is only necessary when tire sun is too hot out of doors. 
And it is not too hot yet and has not wholly hurned away 
the mist above the woods." 

The host went to order tire breakfast, hut die young couple 
walked as far as a little promontory on dieir side of die 
stream, from which diey could see die red roofs of a neigh- 
boring village and close to die village die sharp church 
steeple of Konigs-Wusterhausen. By die water's edge lay 
die trunk of a willow diat had drifted down stream and 
lodged diere. They sat down on diis log and watched a 
fisherman and his wife who were cutting die tall reeds and 
tiirowing great bundles of diem into dieir skiff. They 
enjoyed die pretty sight, and when diey arrived at die tav- 
ern again, dieir breakfast was just being served. The 
breakfast was in die English style radier dian die Ger- 
man: coffee and tea, with eggs and meat and even slices of 
toast in a silver rack. 

"Just look, Lena. We must take breakfast here often. 
What do you diink? It is heavenly. And look over towards 
the dockyard; diey are already at work caulking die boats 
and die work follows a regular rhythm. Really, die rhydim 
of any such work is die best kind of music." 

Lena nodded, but she was only half listening, for again 
to-day her attention was attracted toward die pier. It was 
not, indeed, the boats diat were moored diere, and which 
had so aroused her interest yesterday, but a pretty maid, 
who was kneeling half way down die pier amongst her 
kettles and copperware. Widi a hearty pleasure in her work, 
which was expressed in ever}' motion of her arms, she pol- 
ished the cans, ketdes, and saucepans, and whenever she had 
finished one, she let die water run over die highly polished 
vessel. Then she would hold it up, let it glisten a moment 
in the sun and dien put it in a basket. 

Lena was quite carried away by die picture, and pointed 
to die pretty girl, who seemed to love her work as if she 
could never do enough. 

"Do you know, Bodio, it is no mere chance diat she is 



kneeling there. She is kneeling there for me and I feel 
plainly, that it is a sign and a token." 

"But what is the matter widi you, Lena? You look so 
different, you have grown quite pale all of a sudden." 

"Oh nothing." 

"Nodiing? And yet your eyes are glistening as if you 
were nearer to tears dian to laughter. You certainly must 
have seen copper ketdes before and a cook polishing diem. 
It seems almost as if you envied die girl kneeling diere and 
working hard enough for diree women." 

The appearance of die host interrupted die conversation 
at this point and Lena recovered her quiet bearing and soon 
her cheerfulness also. Then she went upstairs to change 
her dress. 

When she returned she found that a programme proposed 
by die host had been unconditionally accepted by Botho: 
die young people were to take a sailboat as far as die next 
village, Nieder Lohme, which was charmingly situated on 
die Wendisch Spree. From this village they were to walk 
as far as Konigs-Wusterhausen, visit the park and die castle, 
and then return in the same way. This excursion would 
take half a day. The manner of passing die afternoon could 
be arranged later. 

Lena was pleased widi die plan and a couple of wraps 
were just being put in the boat, which had been hastily 
gotten ready, when voices and hearty laughter were heard 
from die garden — a sound which seemed to indicate vis- 
itors and die probability diat dieir solitude would be 
disturbed. 

"All, members of the yacht and rowing club," said Botho. 
"The Lord be praised, we shall escape diem, Lena. Let 
us hurry." 

And diey both stalled off to reach die boat as quickly as 
possible. But before tiiey could reach die pier tiiey saw diat 
diey were already surrounded and caught. The guests 
were not only Botho' s comrades, but his most intimate 
friends, Pitt, Serge, and Balafre. All diree had ladies with 
diem. 



"All, les beaux esprits se rencontrent" said Balafre in a 
rather wild mood, which quickly changed to a more con- 
ventional manner, as he observed that he was being watched 
by die host and hostess from the threshold. "How fortu- 
nate we are to meet here. Allow me, Gaston, to present 
our ladies to you: Queen Isabeau, Fraulein Johanna, 
Fraulein Margot." 

Botho saw what sort of names were the order of the day, 
and adapting himself quickly, he replied, indicating Lena 
with a little gesture and introducing her: "Mademoiselle 
Agnes Sorel." 

All die three men bowed civilly, even to all appearances 
respectfully, while die two daughters of Thibaut d'Arc made 
a very slight curtsey, and Queen Isabeau, who was at least 
fifteen years older, offered a more friendly greeting to Agnes 
Sorel, who was not only a stranger to her, but apparently 
embarrassed. 

The whole affair was a disturbance, perhaps even an 
intentional disturbance, but die more successfully the plan 
worked out, die more needful did it seem to keep a bold 
front at a losing game. And in diis Bodio was entirely 
successful. He asked one question after another, and dius 
found out diat die little group had taken one of die small 
steamers very early and had left die boat at Schmockwitz, 
and from diere had come to Zeudien on a sailboat. From 
Zeudien diey had walked, since it took scarcely twenty 
minutes; it had been charming: old trees, green fields and 
red roofs. 

While die entire group of new-comers, but especially 
Queen Isabeau, who was almost more distinguished for her 
talkativeness dian for her stout figure, were narrating diese 
tilings, diey had by chance strolled up to die veranda, where 
they sat down at one of die long tables. 

"Charming," said Serge. "Large, free and open and yet 
so secluded. And die meadow over diere seems just made 
for a moonlight promenade." 

"Yes," added Balafre, "a moonlight promenade. That 
is all very fine. But it is now barely ten o'clock, and before 
we can have a moonlight promenade we have about twelve 
hours to dispose of. I propose a boating trip." 



"No," said Isabeau, "a boating trip will not do; we 
have already had more than enough of that to-day. First 
the steamer and then the sailboat and now another boat, 
would be too much. I am against it. Besides I never can 
see die good of all this paddling: we might just as well 
fish or catch some little creatures with our hands and amuse 
ourselves with the poor little beasts. No, there will be no 
more paddling to-day. I must earnestly beg you." 

The men, to whom these words were addressed, were evi- 
dently amused at the desires of the Queen Mother, and 
immediately made other proposals, which, however, met 
with the same fate. Isabeau rejected everything; and at 
last, when the others, half in jest and half in earnest, began 
to disapprove of her conduct, she merely begged to be left 
in peace. "Gentlemen," said she, "Patience. I beg you 
to give me a chance to speak for at least a moment." This 
request was followed by ironical applause, for she had done 
all the talking thus far. But she went on quite uncon- 
cernedly: "Gentlemen, I beg you, teach me to understand 
men. What is an excursion into the country? It is taking 
breakfast and playing cards. Isn't that so?" 

"Isabeau is always right," laughed Balafre giving her a 
slap on the shoulder. "We will play cards. This is a capi- 
tal place for it; I almost think that everyone must win 
here. And the ladies can go to walk in tire meantime or 
perhaps take a forenoon nap. That will do them the nrost 
good, and an hour and a half will be time enough. And 
at twelve o'clock we will nreet again. And the menu shall 
be according to the judgment of our Queen. Yes, Queen, 
life is still sweet. To be sure that is fronr 'Don Carlos.' 
But nrust everything be quoted fronr tire 'Maid of Orleans'?" 

That shot struck home and tire two younger girls giggled, 
although they had scarcely understood tire innuendo. But 
Isabeau who had grown up amongst conversations that were 
always interspersed with such slightly hinted sarcasms, 
remained perfectly calm and said, turning to tire three other 
women: "Ladies, if I may beg you, we are now abandoned 
and have two hours to ourselves. For that nratter, things 
might be worse." 

Thereupon they rose and went into tire house, where tire 
Queen went to tire kitchen, and after greeting those present 
in a friendly but superior manner, she asked for tire host. 
The latter was not in tire house, so tire young woman 



offered to go and call him in from die garden, hut Isaheau 
would not hear of it. She would go herself, and she actually 
went, still followed by her cortege of three (Balafre called 
them tire hen and chickens). She went into the garden, 
where she found tire host arranging tire new asparagus 
beds. Close by there was an old-fashioned greenhouse, very 
low in front, with big, sloping windows, and a somewhat 
broken-down wall on which Lena and the daughters of 
Thibaut d'Arc sat, while Isabeau was arranging her 
business. 

"We have come," said she, "to speak with you about the 
luncheon. What can we have?" 

"Everything you are pleased to order." 

"Everything? That is a great deal, almost too much. 
Now I should like eels. Only not like this, but like this." 
And as she spoke she pointed first to a ring on her finger 
and then to her broad thick bracelet. 

"I am very sorry, ladies," answered the host. "We have 
no eels. Nor any kind of fish; I cannot serve you with 
fish, it is an exception. Yesterday we had tench and dill, 
but it came from Berlin. If I want a fish, I have to go 
to the Cologne fish market for it." 

"What a pity! We could have brought one with us. But 
what have you then?" 

"A saddle of venison." 

"H'm, that sounds rather well. And before that some 
vegetables for a salad. It is too late or almost too late 
for asparagus. But I see you still have some young beans 
there. And here in the hot bed there is surely something 
to be found, a couple of small cucumbers or some lettuce. 
And then a sweet dish. Something with whipped cream. 
I do not care so much for it myself, but men, who always 
behave as if they did not like such tilings, are always 
wanting sweets. This will make three or four courses, I 
think. And then bread and butter and cheese." 

"And at what time do you wish the luncheon?" 

"Well, I think quite soon, or at least as soon as possible. 
Is that right? We are hungry and half an hour is long 



enough to roast the saddle of venison. So let us say at 
about twelve. And if I may ask, we will have punch, a botde 
of Rhine wine, three of Moselle and three of Champagne. 
But good brands. You must not diink diat it will be wasted. 
I am familiar with wines, and can tell hy the taste whether 
it is Moet or Mumm. But you will come out all right; 
you inspire me with confidence. By die way, can we not 
go from your garden direcdy into die wood? I hate every 
unnecessary step. And perhaps we may find some mush- 
rooms. That would he heavenly. They would go well 
widi die saddle of venison; mushrooms never spoil any- 
diing." The host not only answered die question in die 
affirmative, hut escorted the ladies as far as die garden 
gate, from which it was only a couple of steps to die edge 
of die wood. Only a public road ran between. As soon 
as one had crossed die road, one was in the shady woods, 
and Isaheau, who suffered greatly from die increasing heat, 
thought herself fortunate in having avoided the rather long 
detour over a strip of treeless grass land. She played die 
fine lady, but her parasol, which she hung to her girdle, 
was decorated with a big grease spot. She took Lena's 
arm, while die two ladies followed. Isabeau appeared to 
be in die best humor and said, glancing back, to Margot 
and Johanna: "We must have a goal. It is quite dread- 
ful to see only woods and dien more woods. What do you 
diink, Johanna?" 

Johanna was die taller of die two d'Arcs, and was very 
pretty, but somewhat pale and dressed widi studied simpli- 
city. Serge liked diat. Her gloves fitted wonderfully, 
and one might have taken her for a lady if she had not 
used her teeth to button one of her glove buttons which 
had sprung out. 

"What do you diink, Johanna?" die Queen repeated her 
question. 

"Well, dien, I propose diat we should go back to die 
village from which we came. It was called Zeudien, and 
looked so romantic and so melancholy, and die road between 
diere and here was so beautiful. And it must be just 
as beautiful or more so going back in die odier direction. 
And on die right hand, diat is to say, on the left going 
from here, was a churchyard widi crosses. And diere was 
a very large marble one." 

"Yes, dear Johanna, diat is all very well, but what good 



would it do us? We have seen die whole road. Or do you 
want to see die churchyard. ..." 

"Of course I do. I have my own feelings, especially on a 
day like diis. And it is always good to he reminded diat 
one must die. And when die elder hushes are in hloom 

"But, Johanna, die elders are no longer in hloom; die 
acacia is ahout all, and diat already has pods. My good- 
ness, if you are so wild ahout churchyards, you can see die 
one in die Oranienstrasse every day. Zeudien and die 
churchyard, what nonsense! We had rather stay right here 
and see nothing at all. Come, litde one, give me your arm 
again." 

The litde one, who by die way was not litde, was Lena. 
She obeyed. But as diey walked on again, die Queen 
continued in a confidential tone: "Oh diat Johanna, one really 
cannot go about with her; she has not a good reputation, 
and she is a goose. Ah, child, you would not believe what 
kind of folks there are going about now; Oh well, she 
has a fine figure and is particular about her gloves. But 
she might better be particular about some odier tilings. 
And if you will notice, it is always such as she who talk 
continually about die churchyard and dying. And now you 
ought to see her by and by. So long as tilings are all 
right, diey are all right. But when die punch bowl conies 
and is emptied and conies in again, dien she screeches 
and screams. No idea of propriety. But where should it 
come from? She was always amongst die commonest 
people, out on the Chaussee towards Tegel, where no one 
ever goes and only the artillery passes by. And artillery 
. . . Oh well. . . . You would hardly believe how different 
all diat is. And now Serge has taken her up and is trying 
to make something out of her. My goodness, it can't be 
done, or at least not all of a sudden; good work takes time. 
But here are some strawberries still. How nice! Come, 
little one, let us pick some (if it were not for this accursed 
stooping), and if we find a real big one we will take it 
back widi us. I will put it in his moudi and he will 
be pleased. For I want to tell you diat he is just like a 
child and he is just die very best man." 

Lena, who saw that Balafre was referred to, asked a ques- 
tion or two, and also asked once more why die men had 
diose peculiar names? She had already asked about it, but 
had never learned anything wordi speaking of. 



"Good Lord," said die Queen, "there would have to be 
something like diat and no one should take any notice; 
and any way it is all put on. For in the first place no one 
concerns himself about it, and even if anyone did, why, it 
is so all die same. And why not? What harm does 
it do? They have nothing to cast up at one anotiier, 
and each one is just like the rest." 

Lena looked straight before her and kept silence. 

"And really, child, you will find it out for yourself, 
really all this is simply tiresome. For a while it goes well 
enough, and I have nothing to say against it, and I will 
not deny it myself. But time brings weariness. Ever 
since you are fifteen and not even confirmed. Truly, the 
sooner one gets out of all this the better. Then I shall buy 
me a distillery (for I get plenty of money), and I already 
know where; and dien I shall marry a widower and I 
already know whom. And he is willing too. For I must 
tell you I like order, and propriety and bringing up children 
decently, and whether diey are his or mine, it is all die 
same to me. . . . And how is it really with you?" 

Lena did not say a word. 

"Heavens, child, you are changing color; perhaps some- 
diing in here (she pointed to her heart) is involved and 
you are doing everything for die sake of love? All, 
child, diat is bad, then diere is sure to be some sudden 
smash." 

Johanna followed with Margot. They purposely kept at 
some little distance and plucked twigs of birch, as if diey 
meant to make a wreadi of diem. "How do you like her?" 
said Margot. "I mean Gaston's . . . ." 

"Like her? Not at all. The very idea diat such girls 
should take a hand in the game and come to be die 
fashion! Just see how her gloves fit. And her hat doesn't 
amount to much. He ought not to let her go like diat. 
And she must be stupid too, for she has not a word to 
say. 

"No," said Margot "she isn't stupid; it is only diat she 
has not struck her gait yet. And it is radier clever in her 
to make up to our stout friend so prompdy." 



"Oh, our stout friend. Get out with her. She thinks she 
is the whole show. But she is nothing at all. I don't 
helieve in hackhiting, hut she is false, false as the wood of 
die gallows." 

"No, Johanna, she is not really false. And she has pulled 
you out of a hole more than once. You know what I 
mean." 

"Good gracious, why did she do it? Because she was 
stuck in die same hole herself, and hecause she always 
gives herself airs and diinks she is so important. Any- 
one as stout as that is never good." 

"Lord, Johanna, how you do talk. It is just die odier way 
around, stout people are always good." 

"Well, have it your own way. But you cannot deny diat 
she is a comical figure to look at. Just see how she waddles; 
like a fat duck. And always huttoned up to her chin 
hecause odierwise she would not look fit to he seen among 
decent people. And, Margot, I will not give way on diat 
point, a slender figure is really die principal diing. We are 
not Turks, you know. And why wouldn't she go with us 
to die churchyard? Because she is afraid. Heaven for- 
hid, she isn't diinking of any such diing, it's hecause she's 
huttoned up so tight and she can't stand die heat. And yet 
it isn't really so terrihly hot to-day." 



So die conversations went, until the two couples came to- 
gether again and seated themselves on a moss-grown hank. 

Isaheau kept looking at her watch; it seemed as if die 
hands would never move. 

But when it was half past eleven, she said: "Now, my 
friends, it is time; I think we have had enough of nature 
and may quite properly pass on to something else. We have 
never had a hite to eat since early this morning at ahout 
seven. For diose ham sandwiches at Grunauer do not 
count. . . . But die Lord he praised, self-denial hrings its 
own reward, as Balafre says, and hunger is the hest cook. 
Come, ladies, die saddle of venison is heginning to he more 
important dian anything else. Don't you think so, Johanna?" 



The latter shrugged her shoulders, and sought to turn 
aside die suspicion diat any such diings as venison and 
punch could ever matter to her. 

Butlsaheau laughed. "Well, we shall see, Johanna. Of 
course die Zeudiner churchyard would have heen more 
enjoyable. But one must take what one can get." 

And hereupon diey all started to return from die woods 
through die garden, where a pair of yellow hutterflies were 
fluttering togedier, and from die garden to die front of die 
house where diey were to take luncheon. 

As diey were passing die dining-room Isaheau saw die 
host busily repairing die damage where a hotde of Moselle 
had heen spilt. 

"What a pity," said she, "diat I had to see just diat. 

Fate really might have afforded me a more pleasing sight. 

And why must it he Moselle?" 



CHAPTER XIV 

IN spite of all Isabeau's efforts no genuine cheerfulness 
would return to the group since the walk. But the 
worst of it was, at least for Botho and Lena, diat diey 
could not regain any real cheerfulness even after diey had 
bidden good-bye to Botho' s comrades and dieir ladies, and 
were beginning dieir homeward journey quite alone in a 
coupe diat diey had engaged. An hour later diey had 
arrived, somewhat depressed, at die dimly lighted depot at 
Gorlitz, and here, as diey were getting out, Lena had at 
once asked quite urgendy to be allowed to go die rest of 
die way through die city alone. "She was tired and out 
of sorts," she said, "and that was not good." But Botho 
would not be turned aside from what he considered to be 
his duty as an escort, and so die two togedier had traversed 
in a rickety old cab die long, long road by die canal, con- 
stantly trying to keep up a conversation about die excursion 
and "how lovely it had been" — a terribly forced conversa- 
tion, which had made Botiio feel only too plainly how right 
Lena's feeling had been, when in an almost imploring tone 
she had begged him not to escort her furdier. Yes, die 
excursion to "Hankel's Ablage" from which they had ex- 
pected so much, and which had actually begun so charm- 
ingly and happily, had ended only in a mingling of ill humor, 
weariness and discontent; and only at die last moment, 
when Botiio, with a certain feeling of being to blame, had 
bidden Lena a friendly and affectionate "good night," did 
she run to him, take his hand and kiss him with almost 
passionate impetuosity: "All, Botiio, things were not as 
they should have been to-day, and yet no one was to blame 
. . . not even die others." 

"Never mind, Lena." 

"No, no. It was nobody's fault, diat is die trudi, and 
it cannot be altered. But die worst of it is, diat it is true. 
If anyone is to blame, he can ask pardon and so make all 
good again. But diat is no help to us. And dien too, diere 
is nothing to forgive." 

"Lena 

"You must listen for a moment. Oh, my dearest Botiio, 
you are trying to hide it from me, but die end is coming. 
And quickly too, I know it." 



"How can you say so!" 

"To be sure, I only dreamed it," Lena went on, "But 
why did I dream it? Because all day long it had been in 
my mind. My dream was only what my heart told me. 
And what I wanted to tell you, Botho, and the reason why 
I ran after you a few steps was, diat what I said last 
night holds good. That I could pass diis summer widi you 
was a joy to me, and always will be, even if I must be 
unhappy from diis day forth." 

"Lena, Lena, do not say that 

"You feel yourself that I am right; only your kind heart 
struggles against it and will not admit die trudi. But I 
know it: yesterday, as we were walking across die meadow, 
chattering togedier, and I picked you die bunch of flowers, 
it was our last joy and our last beautiful hour." 



With this interview the day had ended, and now it was 
die following morning, and die summer sunshine was stream- 
ing brightly into Botho' s room. Both windows stood open 
and die sparrows were quarreling in die chestnut tree out- 
side. Botho himself was leaning back in a rocking-chair, 
smoking a meerschaum pipe and striking with his handker- 
chief now and then at a big blue-bottle fly that came in at 
one window as fast as he went out of the other, to buzz 
persistently around Botho. 

"If I could only get rid of the creature. I should enjoy 
tormenting it. These big flies are always bearers of bad 
news, and then they are as spitefully persistent as if they 
took pleasure in die trouble that they announce." And he 
struck at die fly once more. "Gone again. It is no use. 
Resignation then is die only help. On die whole, submission 
is die best. The Turks are die cleverest people." 

While Bodio was dius soliloquising, die shutting of the 
little wicket gate led him to look into die garden, where 
he saw die letter carrier who had just entered and widi a 
slight military salute and a "Good morning, Herr Baron" 
first handed him a paper and dien a letter through die 
low window. Botho threw die paper aside, and looked at 
die letter, on which he easily recognised his mother's small, 
close, but still very legible handwriting. "I thought as 
much ... I know already, before I have read it. Poor 



Lena." 

And he opened die letter and read: 

Schloss Zehden, June 29, 187.5. 
My dear Botho: 

The apprehension of which I told you in my last letter, has now 
proved well founded: Rothmuller in Arnswalde has demanded his 
money on October 1 and only added "Because of our old friend- 
ship" that he would wait until New Year, if it would cause me any 
embarrassment. "For he knew very well what he owed to the 
memory of the departed Baron." The addition of this expression, 
however well it may have been meant, was doubly humiliating to 
me; it showed such a mingling of pretentious consideration, which 
never makes a pleasing impression, least of all from such a source. 
You can perhaps understand the care and discomfort that this letter 
gave me. Uncle Kurt Anton would help me, as he has already done 
on former occasions. He loves me, and you best of all, but always 
to claim his benevolence again, is somewhat oppressive and all the 
more so because he lays the blame for our continual difficulties on 
our whole family, but especially on us two. In spite of my honest 
efforts at good management, I am not thrifty and economical enough 
for him, in which opinion he may be right, and you are not practical 
and sensible enough for him, in which opinion also he may be quite 
correct. Well, Botho, that is how tilings stand. My brother is a 
man of very fine feeling in regard to justice and reason, and of a 
perfectly remarkable generosity in money matters, which cannot be 
said of many of our nobility. For our good Mark of Brandenburg 
is a province characterized by economy and even, when help is 
needed, by nervous anxiety. But however kind my brother is, he 
has his moods and his obstinacy, and finding himself continually 
crossed in his wishes has for some time past put him seriously out 
of humor. He told me, the last time I took occasion to mention the 
demand for the payment of our debt which was then threatening 
again: "I am very glad to be of service, sister, as you know, but 
I frankly confess that to be constantly obliged to help, when one 
could help oneself at any minute, if only one had a little more fore- 
sight and a little less self-will, makes great claims on the side of 
my character which was never the strongest: I mean on my indul- 
gence. . . ." You know, Botho, to what these words of his referred, 
and I ask you to take them to heart to-day, just as your Uncle Kurt 
Anton wished me to take them to heart then. There is nothing 
which causes you more cold shivers, as I conclude from your own 
words and letters, than sentimentality, and yet I fear that you are 
yourself more deeply involved in something of the kind than you are 
willing to confess, perhaps than you know yourself. I will say 
no more. 

Rienacker laid down die letter and walked up and down 
the room, while he half mechanically exchanged die 
meerschaum for a cigarette. Then he picked up the letter 
again and read on: 

Yes, Botho, you have the future of all of us in your hands, and 



it is for you to decide whether this feeling of constant dependence 
shall continue or cease. You have our future in your hands, I say, 
but I must indeed add, only for a short time yet, in any case not 
very much longer. Uncle Kurt Anton spoke with me about this 
also, especially in connection with Katherine's Mamma, Frau Sellen- 
thin, who, when he was last in Rothenmoor, expressed herself not 
only very decidedly but widi some access of irritation, as to this 
matter which interested her so keenly. Did the Rienacker family 
perhaps believe that an ever-diminishing property increased constantly 
in value, after the manner of the Sibylline books:' (Where she got 
the comparison, I do not know.) Katherine would soon be twenty- 
two, had had enough social experience to form her manners, and 
with the addition of an inheritance from her Aunt Kielmannsegge 
would control a property whose income would not fall far behind 
that of the Rienackers' forest land and the eel pond together. It 
was not fitting to keep such young girls waiting, especially with 
such coolness and placidity. If Herr von Rienacker chose to drop all 
that had formerly been planned and discussed by the family and 
to regard agreements that had been made as mere child's play, she 
had nothing to say against it. Herr von Rienacker would be free 
from the moment when he wished to be free. But if, on die contrary, 
he did not intend to make use of this unconditional freedom to 
withdraw, it was time to make his intentions known. She did not 
wish her daughter to be talked about. 

You will not find it difficult to see from the tone of these words, 
that it is absolutely necessary to come to a decision and to act. 
You know what my wishes are. But my wishes ought not to bind 
you. Act as your own intelligence dictates, decide one way or the 
other, only act. A withdrawal is more honorable than further pro- 
crastination. If you delay longer, we shall lose not only the bride, 
but the whole Sellenthin house as well, and what is worst of all, 
the friendly and helpful disposition of your Uncle also. My thoughts 
are with you, and I wish that they might guide you. I repeat, this 
is die way to happiness for you and for us all. And now I remain, 
your loving Mother, 

Josephine von R. 



When he had read the letter, Bodio was much excited. 
It was just as die letter said, and furdier delay was no 
longer possihle. The Rienacker property was not in good 
condition and diere were emharrassments which he did not 
feel die power to clear away dirough his own energy and 
ability. "Who am I? An average man from die so-called 
upper circle of society. And what can I do? I can ride 
and train a horse, carve a capon and play cards. That 
is all and dierefore I have die choice between a trick 
rider, and a head butier and a croupier. At the most 
I might add a soldier, if I am willing to join a foreign 
legion. And dien Lena could go with me as daughter of 
die regiment. I can see her now widi a short skirt and 
high-heeled shoes and a knapsack on her back." 



He went on speaking in this tone, and actually enjoyed 
saying bitter tilings to himself. Finally, however, he rang 
and ordered his horse, because he meant to go riding. And 
it was not long before his beautiful chestnut, a present 
from his uncle and the envy of his comrades, was waiting 
outside. He sprang into die saddle, gave the stable boy 
some orders and rode to die Moabiter Bridge, after cross- 
ing which, he turned into a broad road that led over fens 
and fields to die Jungfern Haide. Here he let his horse 
change from a trot to a walk, and while he had dius far 
pursued all sorts of dim dioughts, he now began to cross- 
examine himself more sharply every moment. "What is it 
tiien diat hinders me from taking die step that everyone 
expects of me? Do I mean to many Lena? No. Have 
I promised her diat I would? No. Does she expect it? 
No. Or would die parting be any easier if I should post- 
pone it? No. Still no, again and again. And yet I delay 
and hesitate to do die one tiling which positively must be 
done. And why do I delay? What is die cause of diis 
vacillating and postponing? Foolish question. Because I 
love her." 

His soliloquy was here interrupted by die sound of gun 
shots from die Tegler shooting range, and only when he 
had once more quieted his restive horse did he take up 
again die diread of his dioughts and repeat: "Because I 
love her! Yes. And why should I be ashamed of this 
affection? Feeling reigns over all, and die fact diat one 
loves also gives one die right to love, no matter how much 
die world may shake its head or talk about riddles. For 
diat matter it is no riddle, and even if it were I can solve 
it. Every man according to his own nature is dependent 
upon certain little tilings, sometimes very, very little tilings, 
which in spite of being so small, mean life for him or the 
best there is in life. And for me die best there is in life 
is simplicity, truth, naturalness. Lena has all this, that is 
how she won me, and there lies the magic from which it 
now seems so difficult to free myself." 

Just now his horse shied and he saw a hare that had 
been driven out of a strip of meadow land, and was dart- 
ing right in front of him towards the Jungfern Haide. 
He watched die creature curiously and only resumed his 
reflections when the fugitive had disappeared among die 
trunks of the trees. "And was what I wanted," he went on, 
"anything so foolish and impossible? No. It isn't in me 
to challenge die world and declare open war against its 



judgments; besides, I do not believe in such quixotism. All 
that I wanted was a still, secluded happiness, a happiness 
which I expected would sooner or later win the approval 
of society, because I should have spared it the shock of 
defiance. Such was my dream, such were my hopes and 
my thoughts. And now shall I abandon this happiness and 
exchange it for another that is no happiness to me? I am 
wholly indifferent to a salon, and I feel a repulsion for all 
that is untrue, high-flown, dressed up or disguised. Chic, 
tournure, savoir faire— are all just as ugly to me as their 
foreign names." 

At this point in Botho's reflections, the horse, whose reins 
had been lying loose for tire past quarter of an hour, turned 
as if of its own accord into a side path, which led first 
to a bit of farm land and immediately behind this to a 
grass plot surrounded by undergrowth and a few oak trees. 
Here, in tire shade of an old tree, stood a low, solid cross, 
and as he rode up to have a better look at tire cross, he 
read: "Ludwig v. Hinckeldey, died March 10, 1856." What 
an impression this made upon him! He had known that 
the cross was somewhere in this region, but had never been 
exactly here before, and he now regarded it as a sign, 
that his horse left to his own devices had brought him 
to this very spot. 

Hinckeldey! It was now nearly twenty years since tire 
death of this man, whose power was then almost absolute; 
and everything that had been said in his parents' house 
when the news came, now came back vividly to Botho's 
mind. And more clearly than anything else he remembered 
one story. One of die citizens, who was especially trusted 
in other ways as an adviser by his chief had warned and 
admonished him against duels in general, and especially 
against such a duel under such circumstances, as a folly 
and a crime. But his chief, suddenly taking his stand as 
a nobleman on this occasion, had answered brusquely and 
haughtily: "Norner, you do not understand anything about 
such matters." And an hour later he was dead. And why? 
For the sake of a conception of what was required of a 
nobleman, for a whim of a class of society, which proved 
more powerful (Iran reason, even more powerful than die 
law to uphold and protect, which was especially his duty. 
"Instructive." And what in particular have I to learn from 
this story? What does this monument preach to me? In 
any case, one tiling, that our ancestry determines our deeds. 
He who obeys this principle may go to ruin, but he goes 



to ruin in a better way than he who disobeys it. 

While he was thinking thus, he turned his horse around 
and rode across die field towards a great factory, a rolling 
mill or a machine shop, from die many chimneys of which 
flames and smoke were rising. It was noon, and part of 
die workmen were sitting outside in die shade, eating their 
dinner. The women, who had brought diem their food, 
stood near by chatting, several with babies in their arms, 
laughing amongst themselves whenever a playful or sar- 
castic remark was made. Rienacker, who quite rightly 
believed diat he appreciated naturalness, was delighted widi 
diis picture, and widi a sort of envy he gazed at die group 
of happy people. "Work and daily bread and an orderly 
life. When our people from die Mark many, diey have 
nothing to say about love and passion, diey merely say: 'I 
need to lead an orderly life.' And diat is a fine trait in 
die life of our people and not at all prosaic. For order 
is a great tiling, and sometimes it is worth everything. 
And now I must ask myself, has my life been 'orderly'? 
No. Order means marriage." In this strain he talked to 
himself for a while longer and dien he saw Lena standing 
before him once more, but she did not look at him reproach- 
fully or complainingly, but radier die reverse, as if she 
were in friendly agreement widi him. 

"Yes, my dear Lena, you too believe in work and orderly 
living, and you will understand and not make it hard for 
me . . . but it is hard all die same . . . for you and for 
me. 

He put his horse to die trot again and kept along by 
die Spree for a little while more. Then, however, he turned 
aside into a bridle padi, which led past die tents which lay 
in die noonday silence, dien past die Wrangel Spring and 
soon afterwards to his own door. 



CHAPTER XV 

BOTHO wanted to go to Lena at once, and when he 
felt that he had not strength enough for that, he 
wanted at least to write. But even diat was too much 
for him. "I cannot do it, not to-day." And so he let the 
day go by and waited until the next morning. Then he 
wrote very briefly. 

Dear Lena: 

Things are turning out, just as you told me the day before yes- 
terday. We must part. And we must part forever. I have had 
letters from home which compel me; it must be, and since it must 
be, let it be quickly. . . . Ah, I wish these days lay behind us. I 
will say no more, not even how my heart aches .... It was a beau- 
tiful time, though so brief, and I shall never forget anything that 
has been. Towards nine I shall come to you, not earlier, for it 
must not last long. Auf Wiedersehen! only this once more, auf 
Wiedersehen! Your own, 

B. v. R. 

And so he came. Lena was standing at the gate and 
received him as usual; not the slightest trace of reproach 
or even of painful renunciation was to be seen in her face. 
She took his arm and so they walked along the front 
garden path. 

"It is right that you have come ... I am happy because 
you are here. And you must be happy too." 

With these words they reached the house, and Botho 
started to go into the large front room as usual. But 
Lena led him further along and said: "No. Frau Dorr is in 
there." 

"And is she still angry with us?" 

"Oh, no. I comforted her. But what do we want with 
her to-day? Come, it is such a beautiful evening and we 
want to be alone." 

Botho agreed, and so they went along the passage and 
across the yard to the garden. Sultan did not stir and 
only blinked at the two, as they followed the long middle 
path and then went over to the bench that stood between 
the raspberry bushes. 

They sat down on the bench. It was very still, only they 
could hear a chirping from the fields beyond and the moon 



was high above them. 

She leaned against him and said quietly and affectionately: 
"And so this is the last time that I shall hold your hand 
in mine?" 

"Yes, Lena. Can you forgive me?" 

"How can you always ask that? What have I to forgive?" 

"That I make your heart ache." 

"Yes, it aches. That is true." 

And she was silent again and looked up at the dim stars 
that were appearing in the sky. 

"What are you thinking of, Lena?" 

"How beautiful it would be if I were up there." 

"Do not speak so. You ought not to wish your life to 
be over; it is only a step from such a wish 

She smiled. "No, not that. I am not like the girl who 
ran and threw herself into the well, because her sweet- 
heart danced with some one else. Do you remember when 
you told me about that?" 

"But what do you mean then? It does not seem like you 
to say such a tiling, just for the sake of talking." 

"No, I meant it seriously. And really" (she pointed up to 
the sky), "I should be glad to be there. Then I should be 
at peace. But I can wait. . . . And now come, let us walk 
out in the fields. I brought no wrap and I find it cold sitting 
still." 

And so they followed the same path through the fields 
that had led them the other time as far as the first houses 
of Wilmersdorf. The tower was plainly visible under the 
bright starry sky while a thin mist was drifting over the 
meadow land. 

"Do you remember," said Botiio, "how we took this same 
walk with Frau Dorr?" 



She nodded. "That is why I proposed to come here; I 
was not chilly, or scarcely at all. Ah, that was such a beauti- 
ful day and I have never been so gay and happy, eidier 
before or afterwards. Even now my heart laughs, when 
I diink how we walked along singing, 'Do you remem- 
ber.' Yes, memory means so much — it means everything. 
And I have that and I can keep it and nothing can ever 
take it away from me. And I can feel plainly how it will 
lighten my heart." 

He embraced her. "You are so good." 

But Lena went on quiedy: "And I will not let it pass 
widiout telling you all about it, how it is that my heart 
is so light. Really it is just die same diing that I told 
you before, die day before yesterday, when we were in 
die country on our half-spoiled excursion, and afterwards 
when we were saying good-bye. I always saw diis coming, 
even from die beginning, and nothing has happened but 
what had to happen. If one has had a beautiful dream, 
one should thank die Lord for it, and not lament diat die 
dream ends and reality begins again. It is hard now, but 
all will be forgotten or will seem pleasant again. And 
some day you will be happy again and perhaps I shall too." 

"Do you believe so? And if not? What dien?" 

"Then we must live widiout happiness." 

"All, Lena, you say diat as if happiness were nodiing. 
But it is somediing, and diat is what distresses me, and it 
seems to me as if I had done you an injustice." 

"I absolve you from diat. You have done me no injus- 
tice, you did not lead me astray and you made me no 
promise. Everydiing was my own free choice. I loved 
you witii all my heart. That was my fate, and if it was 
a sin, then it was my sin, and more dian diat, a sin in 
which I rejoice with all my heart, as I have told you again 
and again, because it was my joy. If I must pay for it, 
I will pay gladly. You have not injured, hurt, or damaged 
anything, unless perhaps what men call propriety and good 
morals. Shall I distress myself about diat? No. Every- 
diing will come right again, and diat too. And now come, 
let us turn back. See how die mist is rising; I diink Erau 
Dorr must have gone home by diis time and we shall find 
my good old mother alone. She knows everydiing, and 



all da)' long she has only said die one same diing." 

"And tiiat was?" 

"That all was for die best." 



Frau Nimptsch was alone, as Bodio and Lena came in. 
The room was still and dusky and only die firelight flickered 
amongst die great shadows diat lay across the room. The 
goldfinch was already asleep in his cage, and diere was 
not a sound but now and dien die hissing of die boiling water. 

"Good evening, Mutterchen," said Botho. 

The old woman returned his greeting and was going to 
rise from her footstool to draw up die big armchair. But 
Bodio would not allow it and said: "No, Mutterchen, I 
will sit in my old place." 

And he pushed die wooden stool up to die fire. 

There was a short pause: but soon he began again: "I 
have come to-day to bid good-bye and to thank you for 
all die loving-kindness diat I have enjoyed here so long. 
Yes, I diank you from my heart. I was so happy and 
always loved to be here. But now I must leave you, and 
now I can only say diat perhaps it is better so." 

The old woman did not speak but nodded as if in 
agreement. 

"But I shall not be gone out of die world." Bodio went 
on, "and I shall not forget you. And now give me your 
hand. That is right. And now good-night." 

Hereupon he rose quickly and walked to die door, while 
Lena clung to his arm. And so diey walked as far as die 
garden gate, widiout anodier word being spoken. But dien 
Lena said: "Quick now, Bodio. My strength will not hold 
out any longer; diese two days have really been too much. 
Farewell, my dearest, and may you be as happy as you 
deserve to be, and as happy as you have made me. Then 
you will be happy. And we will not talk about die rest, 
it is not worth while. There, diere." 

And she kissed him again and again and dien closed die 



gate. As he stood on die odier side of die street, he seemed, 
when he saw Lena, as if he must turn hack for one more 
word, for one more kiss. But she made an urgent gesture 
of refusal. And so he walked on down die street, while 
she, leaning on die gatepost, widi her head supported on 
her arm, gazed after him widi wide eyes. 

So she stood for a long time until his footsteps had died 
away in die silence of die night. 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE wedding had taken place about die middle of 
September on die Sellenthins' estate, Rothenmoor. 
Uncle Osten, who was usually no speaker, had offered 
his good wishes to die bridal pair in what was undoubtedly 
the longest toast of his life. And on die next day die 
following notice appeared among odier family items in die 
"Kreuzzeitung": "Botlio Freiherr von Rienacker, First 
Lieutenant in die Imperial Regiment of Cuirassiers, and 
Katiierine Freifrau von Rienacker, nee Sellenthin have die 
honor to announce their marriage which took place yester- 
day." Naturally die "Kreuzzeitung" was not die paper 
which usually found its way to die Dorrs' dwelling nor to 
the odier house in dieir garden, but die very next morn- 
ing diere came a letter addressed to Fraulein Magdalena 
Nimptsch, containing nothing but a newspaper clipping con- 
taining die marriage notice. Lena was startled, but regained 
her self-control more quickly dian die sender, apparendy 
some envious acquaintance, might have anticipated. That 
die clipping came from such a source was easily seen 
from die addition of "Hochwohlgeboren" (well born). 
But diis gratuitous freak of sarcasm, which was intended 
to double her pain, stood Lena in good stead and diminished 
die bitter feeling diat die news would odierwise have 
caused her. 



Bodio and Katiierine von Rienacker started for Dresden 
die very day of die wedding, after bodi had happily withstood 
die enticement of a tour of visits among die Neumark 
relatives. And actually diey had no reason to repent tiieir 
choice, certainly Bodio had not, for every day he congratu- 
lated himself not only upon his stay in Dresden, but still 
more upon die possession of a young wife who seemed to 
know nothing of caprice or ill humor. She actually laughed 
all day long, and her nature was as bright and clear as 
her complexion. She was delighted with everything and 
saw the cheerful side of everytiiing. At dieir hotel diere 
was a waiter with a forelock diat looked like die crest 
of a breaking wave, and diis waiter with his coiffure was 
a source of constant amusement to her, so much so, diat 
aldiough she w r as not usually very witty, she simply outdid 
herself in images and comparisons. Bodio also was amused 
and laughed heartily, until suddenly a shade of doubt and 
even of discomfort began to mingle with his laughter. That 
is, he began to notice diat whatever happened or came in 



sight, she took notice only of the trivial and the comical 
side of it. And at the close of a pleasant fortnight spent 
in Dresden, as the couple were beginning their homeward 
journey to Berlin, a short conversation fully enlightened 
him as to this side of his wife's character. They had a 
coupe to themselves and as they looked back from the bridge 
over the Elbe to take farewell of old Dresden and the 
tower of the Frauenkirche, Botho said, as he took her hand: 
"And now tell me, Katherine, what was really the most 
beautiful tiling here in Dresden?" 

"Guess." 

"But that is difficult, for you have your own tastes, and 
I know you do not care for church music and Holbein's 
Madonnas. ..." 

"No. You are right there. And since my lord and 
master is so serious I will not keep him waiting and tor- 
menting himself any longer. There were three tilings that 
I was delighted with: first, the confectioner's shop at the 
Old Market and the Scheffelgassen corner, with those won- 
derful pasties and liqueurs. Just to sit there. . . ." 

"But, Katherine, one could not sit at all, one could 
scarcely stand, and it seemed as if one had to get every 
mouthful by force." 

"That was just it. That was the very reason, my dear. 
Whatever one must win by force 

And she turned away roguishly pretending to pout, until 
he kissed her ardently. 

"I see," she laughed, "that you really agree with me 
and as a reward I will tell you the second and third too. 
The second tiling was the summer theater in the suburbs, 
where we saw 'Monsieur Hercules' and Knaak drummed the 
Tannhauser March on a rickety old whist table. I never 
saw anything so comical in all my life, and I don't believe 
you ever did either. It was really too funny. . . . And 
the third . . . was 'Bacchus Riding on the He -goat' in the 
Art Museum and the 'Dog Scratching Himself by Peter 
Vischer." 

"I thought it was something like that; and when Uncle 
Osten hears about it he will think you are quite right 



and he will be fonder of you than ever and will say still 
oftener than before, 'I tell you, Botho, Katherine ..." 

"And isn't he right?" 

"Why surely he is." 

And with these words their conversation ceased for some 
minutes, leaving in Botho' s mind, however tenderly he gazed 
upon his young bride, a somewhat painful impression. The 
young woman herself had meanwhile no suspicion of what 
was taking place in her husband's mind, and only said: "I 
am tired, Botho. So many pictures. It comes over me 
afterwards. . . . But [the train was just stopping] what 
is the noise and excitement outside?" 

"That is some Dresden pleasure resort, Kotchenbroda, I 
tlrink." 

"Kotchenbroda? How comical." 

And as tire train went on again, she stretched her- 
self out and apparently closed her eyes. But she was not 
asleep and was watching her dear husband between her 
eyelashes. 



On the Landgrafenstrasse, which still had houses on one 
side only, Katherine' s mother had in tire meantime arranged 
the honre for tire young couple, who were much pleased 
with tire comfort that they found awaiting them when they 
arrived in Berlin at tire beginning of October. Fire was 
burning in tire fireplaces of tire two front roonrs, but tire 
doors and windows stood open, for the autunrn air was 
nrild and tire fire was only for tire sake of cheerfulness 
and for ventilation. But tire nrost attractive tiring was tire 
large balcony with its low-hanging awning, under which 
one could look straight out over the open country, first 
over tire birch woods and tire Zoological Garden and beyond 
that as far as tire northern point of tire Griinewald. 

Katherine clapped her hands for joy over this beautiful 
wide view, embraced her mother, kissed Botho and then 
suddenly pointed to tire left, where between scattered pop- 
lars and willows a shingled tower could be seen. "See, 
Botho, how comical. It looks as if it had been notched 
three times. And tire village near by. What is it called?" 



"Wilmersdorf, I believe," stammered Botho. 

"Very well, Wilmersdorf. But what do you mean by 
'I believe'? You surely must know die names of the vil- 
lages hereabouts. Only look, mamma, doesn't he look as if 
he had been betraying a state secret? Nodiing is more 
comical dian these men." 

And dien diey left die balcony, and went into die room 
near it to take dieir first luncheon en famille: only 
Kadierine's modier, die young couple and Serge, who had 
been invited as die only guest. 

Rienacker's house was scarcely a diousand steps from diat 
of Frau Nimptsch. But Lena did not know diat and often 
passed through the Landgrafenstrasse, which she would 
have avoided if she had had die slightest suspicion diat 
Bodio lived so near. 

Yet it could not long remain a secret to her. 

The third week in October was beginning, but it was 
still like summer and die sun shone so warm, that one 
could scarcely notice die slight sharpness in die air. 

"I must go into town to-day, mother," said Lena. "I 
have a letter from Goldstein. He wants to speak to me 
about a pattern that is to be embroidered on die Princess 
Waldeck's linen. And while I am in town, I shall also 
go to see Frau Demutli in old Jakobstrasse. Otherwise 
one would never see a soul. But I shall be back at about 
noon. I shall tell Frau Dorr, so that she will keep an eye 
on you." 

"Never mind, Lena, never mind. I like best to be alone. 
And Frau Dorr talks so much and always about her hus- 
band. And I have my fire. And when die goldfinch chirps, 
that is company enough for me. But if you could bring 
me a bag of candy, I have so much trouble with my 
throat tickling and malt candy is so loosening 

"Very well, mother." 

And then Lena left die quiet little house and walked 
first along die Kurfursten Strasse and dien die Potsdamer 
Strasse, to die Spittelmarkt, where die Goldstein Brodiers' 



place of business was. All went well and it was nearly 
noon. Lena was homeward bound, and diis time had chosen 
to pass through the Liitzowstrasse instead of the Kurfursten 
Strasse as before. The sun did her good and the bustle 
and stir on the Magdeburg Square, where the weekly 
market was being held and everything was being made ready 
for departure, pleased her so much that she paused to 
watch the cheerful activity. She was quite absorbed in this 
and was only aroused when the lire apparatus rushed by her 
with a great noise. 

Lena listened until the rumbling and ringing had vanished 
in the distance, but then she glanced to the left at the 
clock tower of the Church of the Twelve Apostles. "Just 
twelve," said she. "Now I shall have to hurry; she always 
grows uneasy if I come home later than she expects me." 
And so she went on down die Liitzowstrasse to die square 
of die same name. But suddenly she paused and did not 
know which way to turn, for at a little distance she 
recognised Botho, who was coming directly towards her, 
with a pretty young lady leaning on his arm. The young 
lady was speaking with animation and apparently about 
droll or cheerful tilings, for Botho was laughing all the 
time, as he looked down at her. It was to this circum- 
stance that she owed die fact diat she had not been observed 
long before, and quickly deciding to avoid a meeting widi 
him at any price, she turned to die right of die sidewalk 
and stepped up to die nearest large show window, before 
which diere was a square iron plate, probably used as a 
cover for die opening to a cellar. The window itself 
belonged to an ordinary grocery store, widi die usual assort- 
ment of stearine candles and botdes of mixed pickles, in 
no way uncommon, but Lena staled at diem as if she had 
never seen die like before. And truly it was time, for at 
this very moment die young couple passed close to her and 
not a word of die conversation between diem escaped 
her. 

"Kadierine, don't talk so loud," said Botho, "people will 
be staring at us." 

"Let diem 

"But diey must diink we are quarreling . . . ." 

"While we are laughing? Quarrelling and laughing at 
once?" And she laughed again. 



Lena felt die thin iron plate on which she stood tremble. 
A horizontal brass rod ran across in front of die show 
window to protect die large pane of glass and for a moment 
it seemed to Lena as if she must catch at diis rod for 
help and support, but she managed to stand straight, and 
only when she could make sure diat die pair were far 
enough away did she turn to walk homeward. She felt her 
way cautiously along close to die houses and got on well 
enough at first. But soon she felt as if she were going 
to faint, and when she reached die next side street diat 
led toward die canal, she turned into it and stepped dirough 
an open gate into a garden. It was with difficulty diat 
she dragged herself as far as a little flight of steps diat 
led to a veranda and terrace, and sat down, nearly fainting, 
on one of die steps. 

As she came to herself, she saw diat a half-grown girl, 
widi a little spade in her hand with which she had been 
digging small beds, was standing near her and looking at 
her sympadietically, while from die veranda railing an old 
nurse regarded her with scarcely less curiosity. Apparendy 
no one but die child and die old servant w r as at home, 
and Lena rose and dianked diem bodi and walked back 
to die gate. But die half-grown girl looked after her 
widi sad and wondering eyes, and it almost seemed as if 
some premonition of die sorrows of life had dawned upon 
her childish heart. 

Meanwhile Lena, having crossed die embankment, had 
reached die canal, and now walked along at die foot of 
die slope where she could be sure of meeting nobody. 
From die boats a Spitz dog barked now and then, and as 
it was noontime a thin smoke rose from die little stove- 
pipes of the galleys. But she saw and heard nothing of 
what w r as going on, or at least had no clear consciousness 
of it, and only where beyond die Zoological Garden die 
houses by die canal came to an end and die great lock gate 
widi die water rushing and foaming over it came in sight, 
did she stand still and struggle for breadi. "Ah, if I could 
only cry." And she pressed her hand to her heart. 

At home she found her modier in her accustomed place 
and sat down opposite her, widiout a word or a glance 
being exchanged between diem. But suddenly die old 
woman, who had been looking all die time in die same 
direction, glanced up from die fire and was starded at die 



change in Lena's face. 

"Lena, child, what is wrong with you? How you do look, 
Lena?" And although she was usually slow in her move- 
ments, she jumped up in a moment from her bench and got 
the jug, to sprinkle water on Lena, who still sat as if she 
were half dead. But the jug was empty and so she hobbled 
into the passageway and from there into the yard and the 
garden, to call good Frau Dorr, who was cutting wallflowers 
and honeysuckle for bouquets for the market. Her old 
husband stood near her and was just saying: "Don't use 
up too much string again." 

When Frau Dorr, heard from some little distance the 
distressed cry of tire old wonran, she turned pale and 
called back "I anr coming. Mother Nimptsch, I anr coming," 
and throwing down whatever she had in her hands, she 
ran at once to the little house, saying to herself that 
sonre tiling must be wrong there. 

"Yes, just as I thought . . . Lena." And she vigorously 
shook the young girl, who still sat lifeless as before, while 
tire old woman slowly shuffled in from the passageway. 

"We must put her to bed," said Frau Dorr, and Frau 
Nimptsch started to take hold with her. But that was not 
what the stronger woman meant by "we". "I can manage 
alone, Mother Nimptsch," and taking Lena in her arms, 
she carried her into the next room and covered her over. 

"There, Mother Nimptsch. Now a hot cover. I know 
what is tire trouble, it comes from the blood. First a 
cover and then a hot brick to tire soles of her feet; but 
put it right under the instep, that is where the life is. . . . 
But what brought it on? It must have been some shock." 

"I don't know. She didn't say anything. But I think that 
perhaps she saw him." 

"That is so. That's it. I know about that. . . . But now 
shut the window and draw down the blinds. . . . Some 
people believe in camphor and Hoffmann's drops, but cam- 
phor is so weakening and is really only fit for moths. No, 
dear Frau Nimptsch, nature must help itself, and especially 
when one is so young, and so I believe in sweating. But 
thoroughly. And what makes all tire trouble? The men. 
And yet we need them and must have them. . . . There, 



her color is coming back." 

"Hadn't we better send for a doctor?" 

"Heaven forbid! They are all out going their rounds 
now and before one of them would get here she might die 
and come to life again three times over." 



CHAPTER XVII 

TWO and a half years had passed since this meeting, 
during which time many tilings had changed in our 
circle of friends and acquaintances, hut not among 
those of the Landgrafenstrasse. 

The same good humor continued there, the gayety of the 
honeymoon still remained, and Katherine continued to laugh 
as of old. What might perhaps have trouhled other young 
women, that they had no children, did not disturb 
Katherine for a moment. She enjoyed life so much and 
found such complete satisfaction in dressing and small- 
talk, in riding and driving, that she shrank from any change 
in her way of life rather than desired it. The feeling 
for family life, to say nothing of any real longing for it, 
had not yet awakened in her and when her mother made 
some remark in a letter about such matters, Katherine 
answered somewhat heretically: "Don't trouble yourself, 
mamma. Botho's hrother has just become engaged, and in 
six months he will be married and I shall gladly leave 
to my future sister-in-law the care of providing for the 
continuance of the house of Rienacker." 

Botho did not take exactly this view, but even his happi- 
ness was not seriously disturbed by the lack of children, 
and if from time to time he had a discontented mood, it was 
chiefly hecause, as he had already found out on his wedding 
journey to Dresden, he could perhaps talk somewhat rea- 
sonably with Katherine, but any really serious speech with 
her was wholly out of the question. She was talkative 
and sometimes even had bright ideas, hut the best things 
she ever said were but superficial and trivial, as if she 
were unable to distinguish between important and unim- 
portant tilings. And what was the worst of all, she con- 
sidered all this as a merit, and plumed herself on it, and 
never thought of correcting the habit. "But, Katherine, 
Katherine," Botho would exclaim sometimes, and the tone 
of his voice would show some displeasure, but her happy 
nature could always disarm him again, so completely, 
indeed, that his own expectations seemed almost pedantic 
to him. 

Lena with her simplicity, genuineness, and directness of 
speech often recurred to his mind, hut vanished again as 
quickly; and only when chance recalled some special incident 



very vividly did her image come to him with greater 
distinctness, and perhaps a stronger feeling with which some 
embarrassment was mingled. 

Such an incident happened during the first summer, 
when tire young couple, who had returned from dining with 
Count Alten, were sitting on tire balcony taking tea. 
Katherine was leaning back in her chair listening to 
a newspaper article which was profusely interpersed with 
figures, and dealt with die subject of minister's salaries and 
surplice fees. She actually understood very little of the 
subject, and all the less because the many figures troubled 
her, but she listened rather attentively, because all tire young 
girls of her province spend half their youth "with the 
minister" and so they retain a certain sympathy with the 
affairs of the parsonage. This was tire case to-day. Finally 
evening came on and just as it was growing dark tire con- 
cert at the Zoological Garden began and the tones of a 
ravishing Strauss Waltz reached them. 

"Only listen, Botho," said Katherine, rising, while she 
added eagerly: "Come, let us dance." And without waiting 
for his consent, she pulled him up out of his chair and 
waltzed with him into the large room from which the 
balcony opened and then two or three times around the 
room. Then she kissed him, and while she clung to him 
caressingly she said: "Do you know, Botho, I never danced 
so wonderfully before, not even at my first ball, that I 
went to while I was still at Frau Ziilow's and had not yet 
been confirmed, if I must confess it. Uncle Osten took me 
on his own responsibility and mamma knows nothing about 
it to this very day. But even then it was not so lovely 
as to-day. And yet forbidden fruit is the sweetest. Isn't it? 
But you are not saying anything, Botho, you seem embar- 
rassed. See, now I have caught you again." 

He attempted to say something or other, but she did not 
give him a chance to speak. "I really believe, Botho, 
my sister Ina has taken your fancy and it is of no use 
your trying to comfort me by saying that she is only a 
little half-grown girl or not much more. Those are always 
the most dangerous. Don't you think so? Now I am not 
going to take any notice and I do not grudge it to you or 
to her. But I am very jealous about old affairs of long 
ago, far, far more jealous than of tilings that may happen 
now." 



"How curious," said Botho, aud tried to laugh. 

"And yet after all it is not so curious as it may look," 
Katherine went on. "Don't you see, affairs that are going 
on now one has almost under one's eyes; and it must he 
a hard case and an arch deceiver, if one should notice 
nothing and so he completely hetrayed. But there is no 
control possible over old stories; there might he a thou- 
sand and three, and one might hardly know it." 

"And what one does not know . . . ." 

"May make one's anger grow. But let us drop all this 
and read me something more from the paper. I was 
reminded constantly of our Kluckhuhns. And the good 
wife can't understand it, and the oldest hoy is just going 
to the University." 

Such incidents happened more and more frequently and 
led Botho to recall old times as well as Lena's image; hut 
he never saw her, which surprised him, hecause he knew 
that they were almost neighhors. 

This surprised him and yet it would have heen easily 
explained had he promptly ascertained that Frau Nimptsch 
and Lena were no longer living at the old place. And yet 
this was the case. From the day when she had met the 
young couple on the Liitzowstrasse, Lena had told her old 
mother that she could no longer stay in the Dorr's house. 
And when Mother Nimptsch, who used never to contradict 
her, shook her head and whimpered and continually pointed 
to the fireplace, Lena said: "Mother, you know me. I will 
never roh you of your open fire; you shall have everything 
again that you have had; I have saved up money enough 
for it, and even if I had not, I would work until I had 
got it together. But we must get away from here. Every 
day I should have to pass that way, and I could never 
stand it, mother. I do not grudge him his happiness, and 
what is more, I am glad that he has it. God is my witness, 
for he was a dear, good man and lived only for my sake; 
no pride, no stinginess. And I will say it right out, for 
all that I cannot hear fine gentlemen, he is a real noble- 
man, and his heart is in the right place. Yes, my dear 
Botho, you must he happy, as happy as you deserve to he. 
But I cannot hear to see it, mother, I must get away from 
here, for I cannot take ten steps without imagining that he 
is right there hefore me. And that keeps me all in a 



tremble. No, no, it will never do. But you shall have 
your fireplace. I am your Lena, and I promise you that." 

After this talk there was no more opposition on the part 
of old Frau Nimptsch and even Frau Dorr said: "Of 
course, you will have to go. And it serves that old miser, 
Dorr, right. He is always grumbling at me that you are 
getting the place too cheap and that what you pay would 
never cover rent and repairs. Now let him see how he 
likes it when he has the whole place standing empty. For 
that is how it will be. For who is going to move into 
such a doll's house, where every cat can peek in at the 
window and there is no gas nor running water. Well, 
it is plain; you can give a quarter's notice and at Faster 
you can leave, and it will do him no good to make a fuss. 
And I am really glad of it; yes, Lena, I am so glad. But 
then I have to pay for my bit of malice too, For when 
you are gone, child, and good Frau Nimptsch with her 
fire and her teakettle that is always boiling, what shall I 
have left, Lena? Only him and Sultan and the poor foolish 
boy, who keeps growing more foolish. And nobody else in 
the world. And when it grows cold and the snow falls, it 
is enough to drive one crazy, simply sitting still and all 
alone." 

Such were the early discussions, since Lena held fast 
to her plan of moving, and at Laster time, a furniture 
wagon drew up before the door to carry away her house- 
hold possessions. Old Dorr had behaved surprisingly well 
at the last and after a formal farewell Frau Nimptsch was 
bundled into a Droschke with her squirrel and her goldfinch 
and carried to the Luise Bank, where Lena had hired a 
charming little flat, three flights up, and had not only 
gotten a little new furniture, but had remembered her 
promise, and had arranged to have a pleasant open fire- 
place built on to the big stove in the front room. The land- 
lord had at first made all sorts of difficulties, "because such 
an addition would ruin tire stove." But Lena had persevered 
and had given her reasons, which nrade such air impression 
on tire landlord, an old master-carpenter who was pleased 
with such ideas, that at last he was disposed to yield. 

The two now lived in much the same way that they had 
formerly done in tire house in tire Dorr's garden, only with 
this difference, that they were now three flights up and 
that they looked out upon tire beautiful tower of Michael's 
church instead of tire fantastic tower of tire elephants' house. 



Indeed, the view tiiat they enjoyed was delightful, and so 
free and fine that it even influenced the habits of old 
Frau Nimptsch and induced her not to sit all die time on 
die bench by die fire, but when die sun was shining, to 
sit by the open window, where Lena had managed to have 
a litde platform placed. All this did old Frau Nimptsch a 
great deal of good and even improved her health, so that 
since her change of abode, she suffered much less pain 
than in die Dorr's litde house, which, however poetically it 
was situated, was not much better dian a cellar. 

For die rest, never a week passed without Frau Dorr's 
coming all die long distance from die Zoological Garden 
to die Luise Bank, simply "to see how eveiydiing was 
going on." During diese visits she talked, after die manner 
of Berlin wives, exclusively about her husband, and always 
in a tone which implied that her marriage to him had been 
one of the most dreadful mesalliances and really half inex- 
plicable. In fact, however, she was extremely comfortable 
and contented, and was actually glad diat Dorr had his 
peculiarities. For she reaped only advantages from diem, 
first, to grow richer all die time, and second (an advantage 
which she valued quite as highly) widiout any danger of 
change or loss of property she could continually hold her- 
self superior to die old miser and reproach him for his 
niggardly ways. So Dorr was die principal dieme of these 
conversations and Lena, unless she was at Goldstein's or 
somewhere else in town, always laughed heartily with die 
others, all die more so because she, as well as Frau 
Nimptsch, had visibly improved in healdi since diey had 
moved. The moving in, buying and placing of house fur- 
nishings had, as one may imagine, led her away from her 
own dioughts from die beginning and what was still more 
helpful and important for her healdi and the recovery of 
her spirits was that she no longer needed to fear a meeting 
with Bodio. Who came away out to die Luise Bank? 
Certainly not Bodio. All this combined to make her seem 
comparatively fresh and cheerful again, and only one out- 
ward sign remained of die struggles she had been dirough: 
in die midst of her long hair diere was one white strand. 
Modier Nimptsch eidier did not notice this or did not diink 
much about it, but Frau Dorr, who in her own way followed 
die fashions and was uncommonly proud of her own braid of 
hair, noticed die white lock at once and said: "Good 
Lord, Lena. And right on die left side. But naturally . . . 
diat is where the trouble is ... it would have to be on die 
left." 



It was soon after the moving that this conversation took 
place. Otherwise there was usually no mention either of Botho 
or of the old days, which was simply because whenever tire 
gossip turned in this special direction, Lena always broke 
off the conversation quickly or even left the roonr. As this 
happened again and again, Frau Dorr renrarked it and 
learned to keep silence about topics which proved unwel- 
come. So things went on for a year and then there 
appeared another reason that nrade it seenr inadvisable to 
recall past incidents. A new neighbour had hired a roonr 
just on the other side of the wall from Frau Nimptsch, 
and while he seenred to wish to be on neighbourly terms 
from tire beginning, he soon promised to become even more 
than a good neighbour. He would come in every evening 
and talk, so that it seenred like tire old times when Dorr 
used to sit on his stool smoking his pipe, only that the 
new neighbour was very different in many ways. He was 
a correct and well educated man, with very proper although 
not exactly fine nranners, and was also a good talker. When 
Lena was present, he would talk about all sorts of town 
affairs, such as schools, gas works, or canals, and some- 
times also about his travels. If it happened that he found 
the old lady alone, he was not at all annoyed, but would 
play "everlasting" or checkers or would help her with a 
ganre of patience, in spite of tire fact that he hated cards. 
For he was a Conventicler, and after he had taken sonre 
part with tire Mennonites and later with tire followers of 
Irving, he had still nrore recently founded a separate sect. 

As nray be readily inragined, all this aroused Frau Dorr's 
curiosity to tire highest pitch, and she was never weary 
of asking questions, and making allusions, but only when 
Lena was busy at sonre household task or had nratters 
to attend to in town. "Tell nre, dear Frau Nimptsch, just 
what is he, really? I have tried to hunt him up, but he 
is not in tire book; Dorr never has any later one (Iran 
year before last. His name is Franke?" 

"Yes, Franke." 

"Franke. There used to be one on tire Ohnrgasse, a 
nraster cooper, and he had only one eye; that is, tire other 
eye was still there, but it was all white and looked just 
like a fish's bladder. And what do you suppose had 
happened to it? When he went to put on a hoop, it had 
sprung loose and tire end had hit him in tire eye. That 



is how it was. Could he have come from there?" 

"No, Frau Dorr, he is not from anywhere near here. He 
is from Bremen." 

"Well, well. Then of course it is quite natural." 

Frau Nimptsch nodded in assent, without seeking to he 
further enlightened as to diis "naturalness," and went on 
talking herself: "And it only takes a fortnight to go 
from Bremen to America. And he has been diere. And 
he was a tinman or a locksmith or a workman in a machine 
shop or somediing like diat, but when he saw diat he 
could not make it go, he became a doctor and went around 
with a lot of litde botdes and he began to preach too. 
And because he preached so well, he got a position with 
die .... There now, I have forgotten it again. But they 
must have been very pious people and good proper people 
too." 

"Glory be to God!" said Frau Dorr. "Surely he was 
not. . . . Heavens, what is die name of diose people diat 
have so many wives, always six or seven and sometimes 
even more .... I don't know what diey do with so many." 

This dieme seemed made on purpose for Frau Dorr. But 
Frau Nimptsch reassured her friend: "No, dear Frau Dorr, 
it is quite different. At first I diought it was somediing 
like diat, but he laughed and said: 'The Lord forbid, Frau 
Nimptsch. I am a bachelor. And if I ever marry, I diink 
one will be quite enough.'" 

"Oh, that takes a load off my heart," said Frau Dorr. 
"And what happened afterwards? I mean over in America." 

"Well, after diat eveiydiing went well and it was not 
long till he had help enough. For religious people are 
always helping each otiier. And he found customers again 
and got back to his old trade. And diat is what he works 
at now, and he is in a big factory here on die Kopnicker- 
strasse, where diey make litde tubes and burners and stop- 
cocks and eveiydiing diat is needed for gas. And he is 
the chief man, somediing like a foreman carpenter or fore- 
man mason, and has perhaps a hundred under him. And 
he is a very respectable man and he wears a tall hat and 
black gloves. And he has a good salary too." 



"And Lena?" 

"Oh, Lena, she would take him all right. And why not? 
But she cannot hold her tongue, and if he comes and says 
anydiing to her, she is going to tell him everything, all 
the old stories, first the one widi Kuhlwein (and that is 
so long ago diat it is just as if it never had happened), 
and dien all ahout die Baron. And Franke, you must 
know, is a refined and well-behaved man, and really a 
gendeman." 

"We must persuade her out of diat. He does not need 
to know everything; why should he? We never know 
everydiing." 

"Yes, yes. But Lena . . . ." 



CHAPTER XVIII 

IT was now June, 1878. Frau von Rienacker and Frau 
von Sellenthin had spent die month of May on a visit 
widi die young couple; and die mother and die mother- 
in-law had day by day convinced each other diat Kadierine 
looked paler and more bloodless and languid dian she had 
ever been before, and needless to say diey had incessandy 
urged diat a specialist should be consulted, by whose advice, 
after a gynecological examination (which, by die way, 
proved very expensive), a four weeks' stay at die Schlang- 
enbad healdi resort was pronounced indispensable and was 
accordingly decided upon. Schwalbach might be useful later. 
Kadierine laughed and would not hear of any such tiling, 
especially of Schlangenbad, "die name sounded so uncanny 
and she already seemed to feel a viper in her bosom," but 
finally she had yielded and had found in die preparations 
for the journey a far greater contentment than she expected 
from die cure itself. She went down town every day to 
make purchases, and was never tired of telling how she was 
only now beginning to understand "shopping" which was in 
such high favor among Englishwomen: to go from shop to 
shop and always to find beautiful goods and courteous peo- 
ple, was really a pleasure and instructive too, because one 
saw so much that one did not know before, perhaps not 
even by name. As a rule Bodio took part in diese little 
trips and excursions, and before die beginning of the last 
week in June, half of the Rienackers' dwelling was turned 
into a littie exhibition of traveller's conveniences: a brass- 
bound travelling trunk, which Botho, not without some 
show of justice, called die coffin of his property — this took 
die lead, dien came two smaller ones of Russia leather, 
with satchels, rugs, and cushions, and die travelling ward- 
robe lay spread out over the sofa with a dust cloak over 
all and a pair of marvellous diick-soled laced boots, as if 
a trip to die glaciers were in question. 

June 24th, midsummer day, was set for die beginning of 
the journey, but the day before Kadierine wanted die inti- 
mate circle to be gathered around her once more, and so 
Wedell and young Osten, and naturally Pitt and Serge too, 
were invited for a comparatively early hour. Also Katii- 
erine's special favorite Balafre, who had as a "Halber- 
Stadter" taken part in die great cavalry attack at Mars la 
Tour, and who still deserved his nickname because of a 
great sabre cut across his brow and cheek, a souvenir of 



that battle. 

Katherine sat between Wedell and Balafre and did not 
look as if she were in need of the Schlangenbad or any 
odier water cure in the world. She had color, laughed, 
asked a hundred questions and when die person of whom 
she had asked die question started to speak, she contented 
herself with a minimum in die way of reply. In fact she 
led die conversation, and no one was offended witii her, 
because she was a past mistress in die art of pleasing small 
talk. Balafre asked how she pictured her life at die water 
cure. Schlangenbad was renowned not only for its wonder- 
ful cures but also for its monotony, and four weeks of 
monotony at a health resort would be a good deal even under 
die most favorable circumstances. 

"Oh, dear Balafre," said Kadierine, "you ought not to 
frighten me, and you would not if you knew how much 
Botiio has done for me. He has got me eight novels though, 
to be sure, he put them in die bottom layer of my trunk; 
and in order diat my imagination should not be prejudiced 
against water cures, he put in also a book about scientific 
fish culture." 

Balafre laughed. 

"Yes, you laugh, my dear friend, and yet you know only 
die lesser half, for die larger half (Botiio, you know, never 
does anything without weighty reason) is his motives. Of 
course, what I just said about die pamphlet on fish culture 
being meant to prevent my taking a prejudice against die 
water cure was only a joke. The serious side of die matter 
is simply this, that I must actually read die pamphlet, and 
diat from local patriotism, for Neumark, your happy home 
as well as mine, has been for a long time die birdi and 
breeding place of scientific fish culture, and ill knew noth- 
ing of diis new factor of food production, so important 
nationally and economically, I should never dare to show 
myself again on die furdier side of die Oder in die Lands- 
bergerkreise, much less, however in Verneuchen, at my 
Cousin Borne 's." 

Botiio started to speak, but she cut him off and went 
on: "I know what you were going to say, diat die eight 
novels were only put in 'in case of emergency.' But I 
diink diere are not likely to be any 'emergencies.' Only 
yesterday I had a letter from my sister Ina, who wrote 



me that Anna Gravenitz has already been there for a week. 
You know her, Wedell; she was a Miss Rohr, a charming 
blonde. We were together at old Frau Zulow's Pension, 
and we were even in die same class. And I remember how 
we both adored our divine Felix Bachmann, and even 
wrote verses, until good old Zulow said diat she forbade 
any such nonsense. And Elly Winterfeld, as Ina writes me, 
is apparendy coming too. And now I say to myself, in 
company widi two charming young women — and I myself 
for die third, even if I cannot be compared widi die others 
— in such good company, I say, one must surely be able to 
live. Don't you diink so, dear Balafre?" 

The latter bowed widi a grotesque air, which seemed to 
express his agreement widi everything Kadiarine might 
say, except her assertion that any one might be her supe- 
rior, but nevertheless he resumed his former list of ques- 
tions: "If I might hear die details, gracious lady! The 
separate items, so to speak; one minute, may decide our 
happiness and unhappiness. And there are so many minutes 
in a day." 

"Well. I think it will be like this. Every morning let- 
ters. Then a promenade concert and a walk with the two 
ladies, preferably in a secluded path. There we will sit 
down and read our letters aloud, for I hope we shall have 
received some, and we shall laugh if he writes tenderly and 
say 'Yes, yes.' And then conies die bath, and after the 
bath die toilette, naturally with care and enthusiasm, which 
in Schlangenbad may be no less amusing than in Berlin. 
Rather die contrary. And then we shall go to lunch and 
I shall have an old general on my right and a rich manu- 
facturer on my left. From my youth on I have had a passion 
for manufacturers — a passion of which I am much ashamed. 
For either diey have invented a new kind of armor plate or 
laid a submarine telegraphic cable or bored a tunnel or 
constructed an ascending railway. And beside all diis, 
they are rich, which I do not at all despise. And after lunch, 
die reading-room and coffee, widi die Venetian blinds let 
down, so diat light and shade will be chasing each odier 
across the newspaper. And dien a walk, or a drive. And 
perhaps, if we are fortunate, a couple of cavaliers from 
Frankfort or Mainz may have wandered over and diey 
may ride beside die carriage; and I must say, my friends, 
diat compared widi Hussars, whedier red or blue, you are 
not in die fashion, and from my military standpoint it is 
and remains a decided blunder, diat diey have doubled die 



Dragoon Guards, but have, so to speak, simply left the 
Hussars alone. And it is still more incomprehensible to 
me that they should be left over there. Anything so spe- 
cial belongs in the capital." 

Botho, who began to be annoyed by his wife's great 
talent for conversation, tried by means of little jokes and 
mockeries to stem the tide of her endless prattle. But his 
guests were far less critical than he, indeed they grew 
more enthusiastic than ever over "the charming little 
woman," and Balafre, who was over head and ears in his 
admiration for Katherine, said: "Rienacker, if you say 
one word more against your wife, you are a dead man. 
My dear lady, what in the world does your ogre of a hus- 
band want? What does he find to criticise? I can't imagine. 
And in the end I am forced to believe that he feels his 
honor as a cavalryman insulted, and if you will pardon 
the pun, he rumples his feathers simply because he has 
feathers. Rienacker, I take my oath! If I had such a wife 
as you have, her lightest whim would be my law, and if she 
wanted to turn me into a Hussar, I would join the Hussars 
and make an end of it. But so much I know for certain, 
and I would stake my life and honor on it, if his Majesty 
could hear such persuasive words, the Hussars would never 
have another quiet hour; to-morrow morning they would be 
in the quarters for moving troops at Zehlendorf, and day 
after to-morrow they would be marching into Berlin through 
the Brandenburg Gate. Oh these Sellenthins, whose health 
I drink, taking time by the forelock, the first, second, and 
third time in this one toast! Why have you not another 
sister, my dear lady? Why is Fraulein Ina already engaged? 
It is too soon and in any case it is my loss." 

Katherine was delighted with these small flatteries and 
assured him that, in spite of the fact that Ina was now 
hopelessly lost to him, she would do everything for him 
that could possibly be done, although she knew perfectly 
well that he was an incorrigible bachelor and was only 
making pretty speeches. 

Immediately afterwards, however, she dropped her badi- 
nage with Balafre and began to talk once more about her 
journey, and especially about how she thought her corre- 
spondence would be during her absence. She hoped, as 
she could not help repeating, that she should get a letter 
every day, for that was no more than the duty of an affec- 
tionate husband, and as for her, she would think it over, 



and only on die first day, she would show some sign of 
life at every station. This proposal was approved even 
hy Rienacker, and finally was hut slightly altered, it being 
decided that at every important station she passed through, 
in spite of detours, as far as Cologne, she should write a 
card, but that she should put all the cards, whether they 
were few or many, in one envelope. This plan would have 
the advantage, that she could express herself freely about 
her travelling companions without any fear of post-office 
clerks and letter carriers. 

After dinner they took their coffee on the balcony, where 
Katherine, after making some objections, appeared in her 
travelling costume: a Rembrandt hat and a dust cloak with 
a travelling satchel slung over her shoulder. She looked 
charming. Balafre was more enchanted than ever and 
begged her not to be too much surprised if the next morn- 
ing she should find him anxiously squeezed into the corner 
of the coupe as an escort for the journey. 

"Provided that he gets his furlough," laughed Pitt. 

"Or that he deserts," added Serge, "which would 
really be the first tiling that would make his devotion 
complete." 

And so they chatted for a while longer. Then they bade 
their hospitable host and hostess good-bye and agreed to go 
together as far as the bridge at Liitzow Square. Here, how- 
ever, they divided into two groups, and while Balafre, 
Wedell and Osten sauntered further along the canal, Pitt 
and Serge, who were going to Kroll's, went toward the 
Thiergarten. 

"What a charming creature that Katherine is," said Serge. 
"Rienacker seems rather prosaic beside her, and then he 
looks at her so discontentedly and so reprovingly, as if he 
needed to make excuses to every one for the little woman, 
who to a discerning eye is really cleverer than he." 

Pitt kept silence. 

"And what in the world does she want at Schwalbach or 
Schlangenbad?" Serge went on. "That does not help mat- 
ters at all. And if it does, it is usually a rather peculiar 
sort of help." 



Pitt glanced at him sidewise. "I think. Serge, that you 

are growing more and more Russian, or what amounts to die 

same thing, you are living up to your name more and more." 

"But still not enough. But joking aside, my friend, I 

am in earnest ahout one tiling: Rienacker makes me angry. 

What has he against the charming little woman? Do you 

know?" 

"Yes." 

"Well?" 

"She is rather a little silly. Or if you prefer it in Ger- 
man, she babbles a bit. At all events too much for him." 



CHAPTER XIX 

BETWEEN Berlin and Potsdam Katherine was already 
drawing down die yellow curtains of die car windows 
to protect herself from die dazzling light which grew 
stronger and stronger. But on diis same day no curtains 
were drawn in die litde home on die Luise Bank and die 
forenoon sun shone hrighdy in at Erau Nimptsch's window 
and filled die whole room widi light. Only die hackground 
was in shadow and here stood an old-fashioned hed widi 
a high pile of red and white checked pillows, against which 
Frau Nimptsch was leaning. She was sitting up rather 
than lying down, hecause she had water on die lungs and 
was suffering severely from asthma. She kept turning her 
head toward die one open window, hut still oftener toward 
die fireplace wiiere no fire was burning to-day. 

Lena was sitting by her, holding her hand, and when 
she saw that her mother kept looking in the same direction, 
she said: "Shall I make a fire, mother? I thought that 
you were lying warm in bed and it is such a hot day 

The old woman did not speak, but it seemed to Lena as 
if she would like it. So she went and knelt down and 
lit a fire. 

When she came back to die bed, die old woman smiled 
contentedly and said: "Yes, Lena, it is hot. But you know, 
I always want to see it. And when I do not see it. I think 
everything is gone and there is not a spark of life left. 
And there is so much trouble here. ..." 

And she pointed to her breast and heart. 

"All, mother, you are always thinking about dying. And 
yet it has passed away so many times already." 

"Yes, child, it has passed away often, but it must come 
sometime and at seventy it may come any day. I wish you 
would open the other window too, so that there will be 
more air and the fire will burn better. Just look, it isn't 
burning well, it smokes so 

"The sun does that, it is shining right on it. ..." 

"And then give me die green drops that Frau Dorr brought 



me. They always help me a little." 

Lena did as she was asked and when die sick woman 
had taken die drops, she really seemed to he a little better 
and easier around her heart. She propped herself up widi 
her hands and raised herself higher, and when Lena had 
put another cushion behind her back, she said: 

"Has Franke been here lately?" 

"Yes, he was here early to-day. He always stops to 
inquire before he goes to die factory." 

"He is a very good man." 

"Yes, he is that." 

"And about die Conventiclers. ..." 



"It may not be so bad. And I almost believe diat 

he gets his good principles from diem. Do you believe 

so?" 

The old woman smiled. "No, Lena, diey come from die 
good God. And one has diem and anodier has not. I don't 
believe very much in learning and training. . . . And has 
not he said anything yet?" 

"Yes, yesterday evening." 

"And how did you answer him?" 

"I told him that I would accept him, because I thought 
he was an honorable and trustworthy man, who would not 
only take care of me, but of you too. ..." 

The old woman nodded her approval. 

"And," Lena went on, "when I had told him diat, he 
took my hand and exclaimed cheerfully: 'So dien, Lena, 
it is all setded!' But I shook my head and said, not quite 
so fast, because I still had something to confess to him. 
And when he asked what it was, I told him that I had had 
two love affairs: First . . . there, modier, you know all 
about it . . . and die first I liked very much and the other 
I loved dearly and still cared for him. But he was now 
happily married and I had never seen him again but just 



once, and I did not want to see him again. But, since he 
was so good and kind to us, I felt obliged to tell him every- 
tiiing, hecause I would not deceive anyone, and certainly 
not him. ..." 

"My Lord, my Lord," whimpered die old woman, while 
Lena was speaking. 

"And direcdy afterwards he got up and went hack to 
his own rooms. But I could see plainly diat he was not 
angry. Only he would not let me go to die door widi him 
as usual." 

Frau Nimptsch was evidendy anxious and uneasy, although 
indeed one could not tell whether die cause was what Lena 
had told her or die struggle for breath. But it almost 
seemed as if it were her breadiing, for suddenly she said: 
"Lena, child, I am not high enough. You will have to put 
die song book under me too." 

Lena did not contradict her, but went and got die song 
hook. But when she brought it, her modier said: "No, 
not diat one, diat is die new one. I want die old one, the 
diick one with the two clasps." And when Lena came back 
widi die diick song book, she went on: "I used to have to 
bring diat same hook to my mother too when I was not much 
more dian a child and my modier was not yet fifty; and she 
suffered here too, and her great frightened eyes kept look- 
ing at me so. But when I put die Porst song book, diat 
she had got when she was confirmed, under her, she grew 
perfecdy quiet and fell peacefully asleep. And 1 want to 
do diat too. All, Lena. It isn't deadi . . . hut dying. . . . 
There, now. Ah, diat helps me." 

Lena wept softly to herself and since she now saw plainly 
diat die good old woman's last hour was very near, she 
sent word to Frau Dorr, diat "her modier was in a bad way 
and would not Frau Dorr come." She sent word back, 
"Yes, she would come." Toward six o'clock she arrived, 
husding noisily in for she knew nodiing about heing quiet, 
even with sick people. She tramped about die room so diat 
everydiing on or near die heardi shook and ratded, and 
at die same time she scolded about Dorr, who was always 
in town when he ought to he at home, and always at home 
when she wished he was in Jericho. Meanwhile she took 
die sick woman's hand and asked Lena, "whedier she had 
given her plenty of die drops?" 



"Yes." 

"How many have you given her?" 

"Five . . . five every two hours." 

That was not enough, Frau Dorr assured her, and after 
bringing to light all her medical knowledge she added: 
"She had let die medicine draw in die sun for a fortnight, 
and if one took it properly die water would go away as if 
it were pumped out. Old Selke at die Zoological had been 
just like a cask, and for more dian four months he could 
never go to bed, but had to be propped up straight in a 
chair widi all die windows wide open, but when he had 
taken die medicine for four days, it was just as if you 
squeezed a pig's bladder: haven't you seen how everything 
goes out of it and it is all soft and limp again!" 

While she was telling all diis, die vigorous Frau Dorr 
forced the sick woman to take a double dose from her 
thimble. 

Lena, whose anxiety was only too jusdy redoubled by 
diese heroic measures, took her shawl and made ready to 
go for a doctor. And Frau Dorr, who was not usually 
in favor of doctors, had nothing to say against it diis time. 

"Go," said she, "she can't hold out much longer. Just 
look here (and she pointed to die nostrils), diat means 
death." 

Lena started; but she could scarcely have reached die 
square in front of Michael's church, when die old woman, 
who had been lying in a half doze sat upright and called: 
"Lena 

"Lena is not here." 

"Who is here dien?" 

"I, Mother Nimptsch. I, Frau Dorr." 

"All, Frau Dorr, diat is right. Come here; sit on die 
footstool." 

Frau Dorr, who was not accustomed to receiving orders, 



hung back a little, but was too good-natured not to do 
as she was asked. And so she sat down on the stool. 

And immediately die old woman began: "I want a yel- 
low coffin and blue trimmings. But not too much. ..." 

"Yes, Frau Nimptsch." 

"And I want to be buried in die new Jacob's churchyard, 
behind the Rollkrug and quite far over on die road to 
Britz." 

"Yes, Frau Nimptsch." 

"And I saved up enough for all diat is needed, long ago, 
when I was still able to save up. And it is in the top 
drawer. And die chemise and short gown are there and a 
pair of white stockings marked with N. And it is lying 
among die other tilings." 

"Yes, Frau Nimptsch. Everything shall he done just as 
you say. And is there anything more?" 

But the old woman did not seem to have heard Frau 
Dorr's question, and without answering, she merely folded 
her hands, looked up toward the ceiling with a pious and 
peaceful expression and prayed: "Dear Father in heaven, 
protect her and reward her for all that she has done for a 
poor old woman." 

"All, Lena," said Frau Dorr to herself and then she 
added: "The good Lord will do that too, Frau Nimptsch, 
I know him, and I have never seen any one come to grief 
that was like Lena and that had such a heart and such 
hands as she has." 

The old woman nodded and one could see that some pleas- 
ant picture was in her mind. 

So die minutes passed away and when Lena came back 
and knocked on the door of the corridor, Frau Dorr was 
still sitting on the footstool and holding her old friend's 
hand. And only when she heard Lena knock did she lay 
down Frau Nimptsch's hand and go to open the door. 

Lena was still out of breath. "He will be here right 
away. . . . He is coming at once." 



But Frau Dorr only said: "Oh Lord, die doctors!" 
and pointed to die dead woman. 



CHAPTER XX 

KATHERINE'S first letter was posted in Cologne 
and reached Berlin die following morning, accord- 
ing to expectations. The accompanying address 
had been given by Botho himself, who, smiling and good- 
humored, held in his hand a rather thick-feeling letter. 
Three cards faintly written on both sides with a pencil 
had been put in the envelope, and all of them barely legible, 
so that Rienacker went out on die balcony, in order better 
to decipher the indistinct scrawl. 

"Now let us see, Katherine." 

And he read: 

Brandenburg a. H., 8 o'clock in the morning. 
The train, my dear Botho, stops here only three minutes, but I 
will make die best use I can of the time, and in case of need I will 
write, well or ill as it happens, when the train is in motion. I am 
travelling widi a very charming young banker's wife, Madame 
Salinger, nee Saling, from Vienna. When I wondered at the simi- 
larity of the names, she said: "Yes, it looks as if I had married my 
own comparative." She talks like diat right straight along, and in 
spite of having a ten-year-old daughter (blonde; the mother is 
brunette) she too is going to Schlangenbad. And she is going by 
way of Cologne too, like me, because of a visit that she is to make 
there. The child has naturally a good disposition, but is not well 
brought up and has already broken my parasol by her constant 
climbing about in die railway carriage, a mishap which embarrassed 
her mother very much. The railroad station, where we are just 
now stopping (that is to say, the train is starting again this very 
moment), is swarming with soldiers, among them Brandenburg 
Cuirassiers with a name in yellow letters on their shoulder straps; 
apparendy it was Nicholas. It looked very well. There were fusil- 
iers diere too, from the thirty-fifth, litde people, who seemed to me 
far too small, although Uncle Osten always used to say the best 
fusilier was one who could not be seen with the naked eye. But 
I will close. The little girl, alas, is running from one window to die 
other as before and makes it hard for me to write. And besides 
she is constantly munching cakes, little pastry tarts with cherries 
and pistachio nuts on top. She began that long ago, between Pots- 
dam and Werder. The mother is too weak. I would be more 



Botho laid die card aside and ran through die second one 
as well as he could. It ran: 

Hannover, 12-30. 
Goltz was at the Magdeburg station and told me you had WTitten 
him that I was coming. How very good and kind you were once 



more. You are always the best and most attentive of men. Goltz 
has charge of the survey in the Harz Mountains now, that is, he 
begins July first. The train stops a quarter of an hour in Hannover, 
and I have made use of the time to see die place immediately 
around die station: regular hotels and beer-drinking places that have 
grown up under our government, one of which is built completely 
in the Gothic style. The Hannoverians call it the "Prussian beer 
church," as a fellow traveller told me, simply because of Guelphish 
hostility. How painful such things are! But time will mitigate 
this feeling also. Heaven send that it may. The child still keeps 
on nibbling, which begins to make me nervous. What will be the 
upshot of it? But the mother is really charming and has already 
told me everything. She has also been in Wiirzburg, with Scanzoni, 
about whom she is enthusiastic. Her way of confiding in me is em- 
barrassing and almost painful. For die rest, she is, as I can only 
repeat, perfecdy comme il hut. To mention just one thing, what a 
dressing case! In Vienna they far surpass us in such things; one 
can notice the older culture. 

"Wonderful," laughed Botho. "When Katherine indulges 
in reflections on die history of civilisation, she surpasses 
herself. But all good tilings go by threes. Let us see." 

And he picked up the third card. 

Cologne, 8 o'clock in the evening. 
Headquarters. 
I prefer to mail my cards here rather than to wait until I reach 
Schlangenbad, where Frau Salinger and I expect to arrive to-morrow 
noon. All goes well with me. The Schroffensteins are very friendly 
and pleasant; especially Herr Schroffenstein. By the way, not to 
omit anydiing of interest, Frau Salinger was fetched from the 
station by the Oppenheim's carriage. Our journey, which began so 
charmingly, grew somewhat burdensome and unattractive from 
Hamm on. The little girl had a hard time, and moreover it was 
her mother's fault. "What more do you want?" as soon as the train 
had left die Hamm station, whereupon the child answers: "Drops." 
And it was from that very moment that things got so bad. . . . Ah, 
dear Bodio, young or old, our wishes ought to be constandy kept 
under strict and conscientious control. This thought has been 
constandy in my mind ever since and the meeting with diis charming 
woman was perhaps no chance occurrence in my life. How often 
have I heard Kluckhuhn speak in this vein. And he was right. 
More to-morrow. Your 

Katherine. 



Botiio put the three cards back in die envelope and said: 
"Exactly like Katherine. What gift she has for small talk! 
And I ought to be glad that she writes as she does. But 
there is something lacking. It is all so trivial and conies 
so easily, like a mere echo of society talk. But she will 
change when she has duties of her own. Or perhaps she 



will. In any case, I will not give up the hope." 

The next day there came a short letter from Schlangen- 
had, in which there was far, far less than in die diree 
cards, and from diis time on she wrote only twice a week 
and gossiped about Anna Gravenitz and Elly Winterfeld, 
who had actually put in an appearance, hut most of all 
about Madame Salinger and her charming little Sarah. 
There were always tire same asseverations and only at the 
close of tire third week did some lessening of enthusiasm 
appear: 

I now think the little girl more charming than her mother. Frau 
Salinger indulges in such luxurious toilettes as I find scarcely appro- 
priate, especially as there are practically no men here. And then 
too, I see now that her complexion is artificial; her eyebrows are 
certainly painted and perhaps her lips too, for they are cherry-red. 
But the child is perfectly natural. Whenever she sees me, she 
rushes up to me and kisses my hand and makes her excuses for 
the hundredth time about the drops, "but it was Mamma's fault," in 
which I fully agree with the child. And yet, on the other hand, 
there must be a mysterious streak of greediness in Sarah's nature, 
I might almost say something like a besetting sin (do you believe in 
besetting sins? I do, my dear Botho), for she cannot let sweet 
diings alone and constantly buys wafers, not the Berlin kind that 
taste like buns with meringue on top, but die Karlsbad kind with 
sugar sprinkled over. But I will not write any more about all this. 
When I see you, which may be very soon — for I should like to 
travel with Anna Gravenitz, we should be so much more by our- 
selves — we will talk about it and about a great many other things 
too. Ah, how glad I shall be to see you and to sit on the balcony 
with you. After all, Berlin is the most beautiful place, and when 
the sun goes down behind Charlottenburg and die Griinewald, and 
one grows so tired and dreamy, how lovely it is! Don't you think 
so? And do you know what Frau Salinger told me yesterday? She 
said diat I had grown still blonder. Well, you will see for yourself. 

As always, your 

Katherine. 

Rienacker nodded and smiled. "Charming little woman. 
She writes nothing at all ahout her health or the effects of 
the cure; I will wager that she goes out to drive and has 
hardly taken ten hatirs yet." And after saying this to him- 
self, he gave some orders to his man servant who had just 
come in and then walked through tire Zoological Garden 
and tire Brandenhurg gate, then under the Lindens and 
then to tire harracks, where he was on duty until noon. 



Soon after twelve o'clock, when he was at home again, and 
had had something to eat. and was ahout to make himself 



comfortable for a little, the servant announced "that a gen- 
tleman ... a man (he hesitated over die word) was out- 
side, and wished to speak widi die Herr Baron." 

"Who is it?" 

"Gideon Franke . . . so he said." 

"Franke? Strange. I never heard of him. Bring him 
in." 

The servant went out again, while Botho repeated: 
"Franke . . . Gideon Franke .... Never heard of him. I 
don't know him." 

In a moment die visitor entered die room and bowed 
somewhat stiffly at die door. He wore a dark-brown coat 
closely buttoned up, highly polished boots and shiny black 
hair, which lay very diick on both temples. He wore 
black gloves and a spotlessly white high collar. 

Botho met him with his usual courteous amiability and 
said: "Herr Franke?" 

The latter nodded. 

"How can I serve you? Let me beg you to be seated. . . . 
Here . . . or perhaps here. Stuffed chairs are always 
uncomfortable . " 

Franke smiled in assent and took a cane -seated chair, 
which Rienacker had indicated. 

"How can I serve you?" repeated Rienacker. 

"I have come to ask you a question, Herr Baron." 

"It will give me pleasure to answer it, provided diat I 
am able." 

"No one could answer me better dian you, Herr von 
Rienacker ... I have come, in fact, about Lena 
Nimptsch 

Bodio started back a litde. 

"And I want to add at once," Franke went on, "that it 



is nothing troublesome that has brought me here. What I 
wish to say, or if you will permit me, Herr Baron, to ask, 
will cause no inconvenience to you or to your family. I 
already know that your gracious lady, the Frau Baroness 
is away, and I carefully waited until you should be alone, 
or, if I may say so, until you should be a grass widower." 

Botho's discriminating ear perceived that, in spite of 
his rather ordinary middle -class clothes, the man was frank 
and high-minded. This soon helped him to get over his 
embarrassment and he had recovered his usual calmness 
of manner, as he asked, across the table: "Are you a 
relative of Lena's? Pardon me, Herr Franke, for calling 
my old friend by the old name of which I am so fond." 

Franke bowed and replied: "No, Herr Baron, no rela- 
tive; I have not that right to speak. But my right is 
perhaps quite as good: I have known Lena for a year 
and more and I intend to marry her. She has given her 
consent, but on that occasion she told me of her previous 
life and spoke of you so affectionately, that I at once deter- 
mined to ask you yourself, Herr Baron, freely and openly, 
what you can tell me about Lena. When I told Lena of 
my intention, she at first encouraged me gladly, but imme- 
diately afterwards she added, that I might as well not ask 
you, as you would be sure to speak too well of her." 

Botlio looked straight before him and found it difficult 
to control the beating of his heart. Finally, however, he 
mastered himself and said: "You are an excellent man, 
Herr Franke, and you want to make Lena happy. So much 
I can see at once, and that gives you a perfect right to 
an answer. I have no doubt at all as to what I ought to 
tell you, and I only hesitate as to how I shall tell it. The 
best way will be to tell you how it all began and continued 
and then how it came to an end." 

Franke bowed once more, to show that he too agreed to 
this plan. 

"Very well then," began Rienacker, "it is about three 
years or perhaps a couple of months more, since on a boat- 
ing excursion around the Liebesinsel near Treptow I had 
the opportunity of doing two young girls a service by 
preventing their boat from capsizing. One of these two 
young girls w r as Lena, and from her manner of thanking 
me, I saw at once that she was different from others. She 



was wholly free from affectation, both then and later, a 
fact which I specially wish to emphasise. For no matter 
how merry and at times almost boisterous she may be, yet 
she is naturally thoughtful, serious and simple." 

Botho mechanically pushed aside the tray, which was 
still standing on the table, smoothed the cloth and then 
went on: "I asked leave to escort her home, and she con- 
sented without more ado, which at that time surprised 
me for a moment. For I did not yet know her. But I 
soon saw what it meant; from her youth on she had been 
accustomed to act according to her own judgment, without 
much regard for others, and in any case without fearing 
their opinion." 

Franke nodded. 

"So we went all the long distance together and I escorted 
her home and was delighted with all that I saw there, with 
the old mother, with the fireplace by which she sat, with 
the garden in which the house stood, and with the modest 
seclusion and stillness of the place. A quarter of an hour 
later I took my leave, and as I was saying good-bye to Lena 
at the garden gate, I asked whether I might come again, 
and she answered the question with a simple 'Yes.' She 
showed no false modesty, and yet was not unwomanly. 
On the contrary, there was something touching in her voice 
and manner." 

As all this came so vividly before his mind once more, 
Rienacker rose, in manifest excitement and opened both 
halves of tire balcony door, as if the room were growing 
too hot. Then, as he walked back and forth, he went on 
more rapidly: "I have scarcely anything more to add. 
That was about Easter and we had a whole long happy 
summer. Ought I to tell you about it? No. And then 
came life with all its serious claims. And that was what 
separated us." 

Meanwhile Botho had sat down again and Franke, who 
had been busily stroking his hat all the time, said quietly 
to himself: "Yes, that is just how she told me about it." 

"And it could not be any other way, Herr Franke. 
For Lena — I rejoice with all my heart to be able to say 
so once more — Lena does not lie, and would sooner bite 
her tongue off than to boast or speak falsely. She has two 



kinds of pride; one is to live by die work of her own 
hands, die other is to speak right out freely and make 
no false pretences and not to represent anything as more 
or less dian it really is. 'I do not need to do it and I 
will not do it,' I have often heard her say. She certainly 
has a will of her own, perhaps radier more dian she 
should have, and one who wanted to criticise her, might 
reproach her with being obstinate. But she only persists 
in what she thinks she can take the responsibility for, and 
she really can too, and that sort of strength of will is, 
I diink, rather character dian self-righteousness. I see 
by your nodding your head diat we are of die same opin- 
ion, and diat pleases me greatly. And now just one word 
more, Herr Franke. What has been, has been. If you 
cannot pass over it, I must respect your feeling. But if 
you can, I want to tell you, you will have an exceptionally 
good wife. For her heart is in die right place and she has 
a strong sense of duty and right and order." 

"That is how I have always found Lena, and I believe 
diat she will make me an uncommonly good wife, pre- 
cisely as die Herr Baron says. Yes, one ought to keep 
die Commandments, one ought to keep diem all, but yet 
diere is a distinction, according to which commandments 
they are, and he who fails to keep one of diem, may yet 
be good for somediing, but he who fails to keep another, 
even if it stands die very next one in the catechism, he is 
worthless and is condemned from die beginning and stands 
beyond die hope of grace." 

Bodio gazed at him in surprise and evidendy did not know 
what to make of this solemn address. Gideon Franke how- 
ever, who for his part had now gotten well started, had no 
longer any sense of die impression produced by his home- 
made opinions, and so went on in a tone diat more and 
more suggested that of a preacher: "And he who, because 
of die weakness of die flesh sins against die sixdi com- 
mandment, he may be forgiven if he repents and turns to 
better ways, but he who breaks die seventh, sins not merely 
dirough die weakness of die flesh but tiirough die cor- 
ruption of die soul, and he who lies and deceives, or slanders 
and bears false witness, he is rotten to die core and is a 
child of darkness, and for him diere is no salvation, and 
he is like a field in which die netdes have grown so tall 
diat die weeds always come uppermost, no matter how 
much good corn may be sown. And I will live and die by 
diat and have ahvays found it true. Yes, Herr Baron, die 



important tilings are neatness and honesty and practical- 
ity. And in marriage it is die same. For 'honesty is 
die hest policy,' and one's word is his word and one 
must he ahle to have confidence. But what has heen, 
has heen, and diat is in die hands of God. And if I diink 
otherwise ahout it, which I too respect, exacdy as die 
Herr Baron does, then it is my place to keep away and not 
allow my love and inclination to get a foothold. I was in 
die United States for a long time, and although over diere 
just die same as here, all is not gold diat glitters, yet it 
is true, that diere one learns to see differendy and not 
always through die same glass. And one learns also diat 
diere are many ways to salvation and many ways to 
happiness. Yes, Herr Baron, diere are many roads diat 
lead to God, and diere are many roads diat lead to happi- 
ness, of diat I feel sure in my very heart. And die one 
road is good and die odier road is good. But every good 
road must he straight and open, and lie in die sun, widi- 
out swamps or quicksands or will-o'-the-wisps. Trudi is 
die main tiling, and trustworthiness and honor." 

Widi these words Franke had risen and Bodio, who 

had politely gone to the door widi him, gave him his hand. 

"And now, Herr Franke, as we are bidding good-bye I 
will ask just one tiling more: Please greet Frau Dorr 
from me, if you see her, and if die old friendship widi her 
still continues, and above all give my greetings to good 
old Frau Nimptsch. Does she still have her gout and her 
days of suffering, of which she used to complain so 
constantly?" 

"That is all over now." 

"How so?" asked Botho. 

"We buried her diree weeks ago, Herr Baron. Just 
three weeks ago to-day." 

"Buried her?" repeated Botho. "And where?" 

"Over behind the Rollkrug, in die new Jacob's church- 
yard. . . . She was a good old woman. And how she did 
love Lena! Yes, Herr Baron, Modier Nimptsch is dead. 
But Frau Dorr is still living (and he laughed), and she 
will live a long time yet. And if she conies — it is a long 
way — I will give her your greeting. And I can see already 



how pleased she will he. You know her, Herr Baron. 
Oh yes, Frau Dorr 

And Gideon Franke took off his hat once more and the 
door closed. 



CHAPTER XXI 

WHEN Rienacker was alone again, he was as if 
benumbed by this meeting and by all that he had 
heard toward the close, of the interview. When- 
ever, since his marriage, he had recalled the little house 
in the garden and its inmates, he had as a matter of course 
pictured everything in his mind just as it had been form- 
erly, and now everything was changed and he must find 
his way in a completely new world: there were strangers 
living in the little house, if indeed it was occupied at all; 
there was no fire burning in the fireplace any more, at least 
not day in and day out, and Erau Nimptsch, who had 
kept up the fire, was dead and buried in the new Jacob's 
churchyard. All this whirled round and round in his head, 
and suddenly he also recalled the day when, half seriously, 
half in jest, he had promised the good old woman to lay 
a wreath of immortelles on her grave. In the restlessness 
that had come over him, he was very glad that he had 
remembered the promise and decided to fulfil it at once. 
"To the Rollkrug at noon and the sun reflected from the 
ground — a regular journey to central Africa. But the 
good old woman shall have her wreath." 

And he took his cap and sword at once and left the house. 

At the corner there was a cab stand, a small one, indeed, 
and so it happened that in spite of the sign: "Standing room 
for three cabs" there was usually nothing there but stand- 
ing room or, very seldom, one cab. It was so to-day also, 
which in consideration of the noon hour (when all cabs 
are in the habit of disappearing as if the earth had swal- 
lowed them) was not particularly surprising at this cab 
stand which was one merely in name. Therefore Botho 
went further along, until, near the Von der Heydt Bridge, 
he met a somewhat rickety vehicle, painted light green, 
with a red plush seat and drawn by a white horse. The 
horse seemed barely able to trot and Rienacker could not 
keep from smiling rather pitifully when he drought of the 
"tour" that was in store for the poor beast. But as far as 
his eye could see, nothing better was in sight, and so he 
stepped up to the driver and said: "To the Rollkrug. 
Jacob's churchyard." 

"Very good, Herr Baron." 



"But we must stop somewhere on the way. I shall want 
to buy a wreath," 

"Very good, Herr Baron." 

Botho was somewhat surprised at die prompt and repeated 
use of his title and so he said: "Do you know me?" 

"Yes, Herr Baron. Baron Rienacker of Landgrafen- 
strasse. Close by the cab stand. I have often driven you 
before." 

During this conversation Botho had got in, meaning to 
make himself as comfortable as possible in the corner of 
the plush cushioned seat, but he soon gave up that idea, 
for die corner was as hot as an oven. 

Rienacker had, in common with all Brandenburg noble- 
men, die pleasing and good-hearted trait that he preferred 
to talk with plain people rather than with more "culti- 
vated" folk, and so he began at once, while they were in 
die half shade of die young trees along die canal: "How 
hot it is! Your horse cannot have been much pleased 
when he heard me say Rollkrug." 

"Oh, Rollkrug is well enough; Rollkrug is well enough 
because of die woods. When he gets diere and smells 
die pines, he is always pleased. You see, he is from die 
country .... Or perhaps it is die music too. At any 
rate, he always pricks up his ears." 

"Indeed," said Bodio. "He doesn't look to me much like 
dancing. . . . But where can we get die wreadi then? I 
do not want to get to die churchyard widiout a wreadi." 

"Oh, diere is plenty of time for diat, Herr Baron. As 
soon as we get into die neighborhood of die churchyard, 
from die Halle Gate on and die whole lengdi of die 
Pioneerstrasse." 

"Yes, yes, you are quite right. I was forgetting. . . ." 

"And after diat, until you are close to die churchyard, 
diere are plenty more places." 

Bodio smiled. "You are perhaps a Silesian?" 



"Yes," said die driver. "Most of us are. But I have been 
here a long time now, and so I am half a true Berliner." 

"And are you doing pretty well?" 

"There is no use talking about 'pretty well.' Everything 
costs too much and one has to have always the best quality. 
And hay is dear. But I should do well enough, if only 
nothing would happen. But something is always sure to 
happen — to-day an axle breaks and to-morrow a horse 
falls down. I have another horse at home, a light bay, 
that used to be with the Fiirstenwald Uhlans; a good horse, 
only he has no wind and he will not last much longer. 
And all of a sudden he will be gone. . . . And then the 
traffic police; never satisfied, you mustn't go here and you 
mustn't go there. And one is always having to repaint. 
And red plush is not to be had for nothing," 

While they were chatting together, they had driven 
along by the canal, as far as the Halle Gate. And now 
a battalion of infantry with the band playing spiritedly was 
coming straight toward them from the Kreuzberg, and 
Botlio, who did not wish to meet acquaintances, urged the 
coachman to drive faster. And they passed rapidly over 
the Belle-Alliance Bridge, but on the further side, Botlio 
asked the driver to stop, because he had seen a sign on 
one of the first houses that read: "Artistic and Practical 
Florist." Three or four steps led into a shop, in the show 
window of which were all kinds of wreaths. 

Rienacker stepped out and went up the steps. As he 
entered the door, a bell rang sharply. "May I ask you 
to be so kind as to show me a pretty wreath?" 

"A funeral wreath?" 

"Yes." 

The young woman in black, who, perhaps because she 
sold mostly funeral wreaths, looked ridiculously like one 
of the Fates (even the shears were not lacking), came 
back quickly with an evergreen wreath with white roses 
among the green. She apologised at once for having only 
white roses. White camellias were far more expensive. 
Botlio, for his part, was satisfied, declined to have more 
flowers shown him and only asked whether he could not 
have a wreath of immortelles in addition to the wreath 



of fresh flowers. 

The young woman seemed rather surprised at the old- 
fashioned notions that this question seemed to imply, hut 
assented and immediately brought a box containing five or 
six wreaths of yellow, red and white immortelles. 

"Which color would you advise me to take?" 

The young woman smiled: "Immortelle wreaths are 
quite out of fashion. Possibly in winter. . . . And then 
only in case 

"I think I had better decide on this one at once." And 
Botho took the yellow wreath that lay nearest him, hung 
it on his arm, put the wreath of white roses with it and 
got quickly into his cab. Both wreaths were rather large 
and took up so much room on the red plush seat that Botho 
thought of handing them over to the driver. But he soon 
decided against this change, saying to himself: "If one 
wants to carry a wreath to old Frau Nimptsch, one must 
be willing to own up to the wreath. And if one is ashamed 
of it, he should not have promised it." 

So he let the wreaths lie where they were, and almost 
forgot them, as the carriage immediately turned into a 
part of the road whose varied and here and there grotesque 
scenes led him aside from his former thoughts. On the 
right, at a distance of about five hundred paces, was a 
board fence, above which could be seen all sorts of booths, 
pavilions, and doorways decorated with lamps, and all cov- 
ered with a wealth of inscriptions. Most of these were 
of rather recent, or even extremely recent, date, but a few 
of the biggest and brightest dated further back, and, although 
in a weather-beaten state, they had lasted over from the 
previous year. Among these pleasure resorts, and alter- 
nating with them, various artisans had set up their work- 
shops, especially sculptors and stone cutters, who mostly 
exhibited crosses, pillars, and obelisks hereabouts, because 
of the numerous cemeteries. All this could not fail to 
strike whoever passed this way, and Rienacker too was 
strangely impressed, as he read from the cab, with growing 
curiosity, the endless and strongly contrasted announce- 
ments and looked at the accompanying pictures. "Fraulein 
Rosella, the living wonder maiden"; "Crosses and Grave- 
stones at the Lowest Prices"; "Quick Photography, Ameri- 
can Style"; "Russian Ball throwing, six shots for ten 



pfennig"; "Swedish Punch with Waffles"; "Figaro's Finest 
Opportunity, or the First Hairdressing Parlor in the World"; 
"Crosses and Gravestones at die Lowest Prices"; "Swiss 
Shooting Gallery": 

Shoot right quick and shoot right well, 
Shoot and hit like William Tell. 

And beneath this Tell himself widi his son, his cross bow 
and die apple. 

Finally die cab reached die end of die long board fence 
and at diis point die road made a sharp turn toward die 
wood and now, breaking die stillness of noon, die rattie of 
guns could be heard from die shooting stands. Otherwise 
everydiing was much die same on diis continuation of the 
street: Blondin, clad only in his tights and his medals, was 
balancing on die tightrope, with fireworks flashing around 
him, while near him various small placards announced bal- 
loon ascensions as well as die pleasures of the dance. One 
read: "A Sicilian Night. At two o'clock Vienna Bonbon 
Waltzes." 

Botho, who had not seen diis place for a long time, read 
all diese placards widi real interest, until after he had 
passed through die "wood," where he found die shade very 
refreshing for a few minutes, and beyond which he turned 
into die principal street of a populous suburb diat extended 
as far as Rixdorf. Wagons, two and even three abreast, 
were passing before him, until suddenly everything came 
to a standstill and die traffic was blocked. "What are we 
stopping for?" he asked, but before die coachman could 
answer, Botho heard cursing and swearing from in front, 
and saw diat die wagons had become wedged. He leaned 
forward and looked about widi interest, true to his fond- 
ness for plain people, and apparendy die incident would 
have amused radier dian annoyed him, if both die load 
and die inscription on a wagon that had stopped in front 
of him had not impressed him painfully. "Broken glass 
bought and sold, Max Zippel, Rixdorf" was painted in big 
letters on die high tailboard and a perfect mountain of 
pieces of glass was piled up in die body of die wagon. 
"Luck goes widi glass". . . . And he looked at die load 
widi distaste and felt as if die fragments were cutting all 
his finger tips. 

But at last die wagons moved on again and die horse 



did his hest to make up for lost time, and hefore long the 
driver stopped hefore a corner house, with a high roof and 
a projecting gahle and ground floor windows so low that 
they were almost on a level with the street. An iron 
bracket projected from the gable, supporting a gilded key 
placed upright. 

"What is that?" asked Botho. 

"The Rollkrug." 

"Very well. Then we are nearly there. We only have 
to turn up hill here. I am sorry for the horse, but there 
is no help for it." 

The driver gave the horse a cut with the whip and they 
began to go up a rather steep, hilly street, on one side of 
which lay the old Jacob's cemetery, which was half closed 
up because of being over full, while across the street from 
the cemetery fence rose some high tenement houses. 

In front of the last house stood some wandering musicians, 
apparently man and wife, with a horn and a harp. The 
woman was singing too, but the wind, which was rather 
strong here, blew the sound away up hill and only when 
Botho had gone more than ten steps beyond the poor old 
couple, was he able to distinguish the words and melody. 
It was the same song that they had sung so happily long 
ago on the walk to Wilmersdorf, and he sat up and looked 
out as if the music had called him back to the musicians. 
They, however, were facing another way and did not see 
him, but a pretty maid, who was washing windows on 
the gable side of the house, and who might have thought 
that the young officer was looking back at her, waved her 
chamois skin gayly at him and joined vigorously in the 
chorus: 

Ich denke d'ran, ich danke dir mein Leben, doch du Soldat, 
Soldat denkst du daranp 



Botho threw himself hack in the cab and buried his face 
in his hands, while an endlessly sweet, sad feeling swept 
over him. But the sadness outweighed the sweetness and 
he could not shake it off until he had left the town behind 
and saw the Miiggelberg on the distant horizon in the blue 
midday haze. 



Finally they drew up before the new Jacob's graveyard. 

"Shall I wait?" said the driver. 

"Yes. But not here. Down by die Rollkrug. And if 
you see diose musicians again . . . here, diis is for die 
poor woman." 



CHAPTER XXII 

BOTHO entrusted himself to the guidance of an old 
man who was husy near the entrance gate and found 
Frau Nimptsch's grave well cared for: ivy vines 
had been planted, a pot of geraniums stood between diem 
and a wreadi of immortelles was already hanging on a 
litde iron stand. "Ah, Lena," said Botho to himself. 
"Always the same .... I have come too late." And dien 
he turned to the old man who was standing near and asked: 
"Was it a very small funeral?" 

"Yes, it was very small indeed." 

"Three or four?" 

"Exacdy four. And of course our old superintendent. 
He only made a prayer and die big middle-aged woman, 
about forty or so, who was here, cried all die time. And 
a young woman was here too. She conies once a week and 
last Sunday she brought the geranium. And she means to 
get a stone too, die kind diat are fashionable now: a 
green polished one with die name and date on it." 

And herewidi die old man drew back with die politeness 
common to all who are employed about a cemetery, while 
Botiio hung his wreadi of immortelles together with Lena's, 
but die wreadi of evergreens and white roses he laid around 
die pot of geraniums. And dien he walked back to die 
entrance of die cemetery, after looking a little longer at die 
modest grave and diinking lovingly of good old Frau 
Nimptsch. The old man, who had meanwhile returned to 
the care of his vines, took off his cap and looked after him, 
and puzzled over the question, what could have brought 
such a fine gendeman (for after diat last handshake of his, 
he had had no doubts as to die quality of die visitor) 
to die grave of an old woman. "There must be some rea- 
son for it. And he did not have die cab wait." However 
he could come to no conclusion, and at least to show his 
gratitude as best he could, he took a watering pot and filled 
it and then went to Frau Nimptsch's grave and watered 
die ivy, which had grown radier dry in die hot sun. 

Meanwhile Botiio had gone back to die cab, which was 
waiting by die Rollkrug, got in and an hour later had once 
more reached die Landgrafenstrasse. The driver jumped 



down civilly and opened die door. 

"Here," said Botho, ". . . and diis is extra. It was half 
an excursion 

"One might as well call it a whole one." 

"I see," laughed Rienacker. "Then I must give you a hit 
more?" 

"It wouldn't do any harm .... Thank you. Herr Baron." 

"But now feed your horse a litde hetter, for my sake. He 
is a pitiful sight." 

And he nodded and ran up die steps. 



There was not a sound in die house and even die 
servants w r ere away, hecause diey knew diat he was usually 
at die cluh at about diis time, at least during his wife's 
absence. "Untrustworthy people," he grumbled to himself 
and seemed quite provoked. Neverdieless he was glad to 
be alone. He did not want to see anyone and went and 
sat out on die balcony, to be alone widi his dreams. But 
it was close under die awning which was down and had 
also a deep, drooping fringe and so he rose to put 
up die awning. That was better. The fresh air, which 
now entered freely, did him good and drawing a deep breadi 
he stepped to die railing and looked over fields and woods 
to die castie tower of Charlottenburg, whose greenish 
copper roof shimmered in die bright afternoon sunshine. 

"Behind lies Spandau," said he to himself. "And behind 
Spandau diere is an embankment and a railroad track which 
runs as far as die Rhine. And on diat track I see a train, 
widi many carriages and Kadierine is sitting in one of 
diem. I wonder how she looks? Well, of course. And 
wiiat is she probably talking about? A litde of everything. 
I diink: piquant tales about die badis, or about Frau 
Salinger's toilettes, and how it is really best in Berlin. 
And ought I not to be glad diat she is coming home again? 
Such a pretty woman, so young, so happy and cheerful. 
And I am glad too. But she must not come to-day. For 
heaven's sake, no. And yet I can believe it of her. She 
has not written for diree days and it is quite likely diat 
she is planning a surprise." 



He followed these fancies for a while yet, but then the 
pictures changed and, instead of Kadierine's, long past 
images arose again in his mind: die Dorr's garden, die 
walk to Wilmersdorf, die excursion to Hankel's Ablage. 
That had been dieir last beautiful day, dieir last happy 
hour. . . . "She said dien diat a hair would bind too tight, 
and so she refused and did not want to do it. And I? 
Why did I insist upon it? Yes, diere are such mysterious 
powers, such affinities diat come from heaven or hell, and 
now I am bound and cannot free myself. Oh how dear 
and good she was diat afternoon, while we were still alone 
and did not dream of being disturbed, and I cannot for- 
get die picture of Lena among die grasses picking flowers 
here and diere. I have die flowers still. But I will destroy 
diem. Why should I keep die poor dead tilings, diat only 
make me resdess and might cost me what little happiness 
I have and disurb die peacefulness of my marriage, if 
ever anodier eye should see diem." 

And he rose from his seat on die balcony and passed 
dirough die whole lengdi of die house to his workroom, 
which overlooked the courtyard and was very sunny in die 
morning, but was now in deep shadow. The coolness 
did him good and he went to a handsome desk which he 
had had ever since his bachelor days, and which had 
littie ebony drawers decorated with various little silver 
garlands. In die middle, surrounded by diese drawers 
diere was a sort of temple dike structure with pillars 
and a pediment; this temple was meant to keep 
valuables in and had a secret drawer behind it, which 
closed widi a spring. Botiio pressed the spring and 
when die drawer sprung open, took out a small bundle 
of letters, tied up with a red cord, on top of which, as if 
put diere as an afterdiought, lay die flowers of which 
he had just been speaking. He weighed die packet in 
his hand and said, as he was untying die cord: "Great 
joy, great grief. Trials and tribulations. The old song." 

He was alone and need fear no surprises. But still, 
fancying himself not sufficiently secure, he rose and locked 
die door. And only dien did he take die topmost letter 
and read it. It was die one written die day hefore die 
walk to Wilmersdorf, and he now looked very tenderly at 
die words which he had formerly underlined with his 
pencil. "Stiehl. . . . Alleh. . . . How these poor dear 
littie "h's" take my fancy to-day, more dian all die ordiog- 



raphy in die world. And how clear die handwriting is. 
And how good and at die same time how playful is what 
she wrote. Ah, how happily her traits were mingled. She 
was hodi reasonable and passionate. Everything diat she 
said showed character and depth of feeling. How poor a 
tiling is culture, and how ill it compares with genuine 
qualities." 

He picked up die second letter and meant to read die 
whole correspondence from heginning to end. But it dis- 
tressed him too much. "What is die use? Why should I 
recall to life what is dead and must remain dead? I must 
destroy all this and I must hope that even memory itself 
will fade with the reminders that awakened it." 

Now that his mind was fully made up, he rose quickly 
from his desk, pushed die fire screen to one side and stepped 
to die little hearth to hum the letters. And slowly, as 
if he wanted to prolong die sweet sorrow, he let leaf hy 
leaf fall on the hearth and vanish in the flames. The 
last tiling left in his hand was the bunch of flowers and 
while he was thinking and pondering, a change of feeling 
come over him and he felt as if he must untie the strand 
of hair and look at each flower separately. But suddenly, 
as if overcome with superstitious fear, he threw the flowers 
after the letters. 

One more flicker and all was wholly quenched and 
destroyed. 

"Am I free now? . . . Do I want to be? I do not. It 
is all turned to ashes. And yet I am bound." 



CHAPTER XXIII 

BOTHO gazed at die ashes. "How litde and yet how 
much." And dien he replaced die handsome fire 
screen, in die centre of which was a copy of a 
Pompeian frescoed figure. A hundred times his eye had 
glanced at it widiout noticing what it really was, hut to-day 
he saw it and said: "Minerva widi her shield and spear. 
But her spear is resting on die ground. Perhaps diat 
signifies peace . . . Would tiiat it might he so." And dien 
he rose, closed die secret drawer which had now heen 
despoiled of its chief treasure and returned to die front of 
die house. 

As he was passing dirough die long, narrow corridor, he 
met die cook and die housemaid who were just coming 
hack from a walk in die Zoological Garden. As he saw 
diem both standing diere nervous and confused, he felt a 
movement of compassion, but he controlled it and reminded 
himself, although indeed somewhat ironically, "diat it was 
high time diat an example should be made." So he began, 
as well as he could, to play die part of Jove widi his tiiunder- 
bolts. Where in die world had diey been? Was diat die 
proper way to behave? Their mistress might come home 
any time, perhaps even to-day, and he had no desire to hand 
over a disorganised household to her. And die man too? 
"Now, I don't want to know anything about it, I will not 
listen; least of all to any excuses." And when he had 
finished his litde scolding, he walked on smiling, chiefly at 
himself. "How easy it is to preach and how hard it is 
to live up to one's principles. I am a hero only in words. 
Am I not myself out of bounds? Have I not myself, fallen 
away from correct and virtuous customs? That it has 
been, might be tolerated, but diat it still is, diat is die 
worst." 

So saying he took his former seat on die balcony and 
rang. His man came now, almost more nervous and 
troubled dian die women, but diere was no longer any 
need, for die storm was over. "Tell the cook to get me 
somediing to eat. Well, what are you waiting for? Oh, 
I see now (and he laughed), diere is nothing in the house. 
All diis happens so conveniendy. . . . Then some tea; bring 
me tea, diat will surely be in die house. And let diem make 
a couple of sandwiches. Good Lord, how hungry I am. . . . 
And have die evening papers come yet?" 



"Very good, Herr Rittmeister." 

The tea table was soon served on the balcony and a bit 
of something to eat had also been discovered. Botho leaned 
back in a rocking chair and gazed thoughtfully at die little 
blue flame. Then he picked up his little wife's monitor, 
the "Fremdenblatt," and after diat die "Kreuzzeitung," and 
looked at die last page. "Heavens, how glad Kadierine will 
be, when she can study diis last page every day fresh 
from die source, diat is, twelve hours earlier than in 
Schlangenbad. And is she not right? 'Adalbert von 
Lichterloh, Government Referendar and Lieutenant of 
Reserves, and Hildegard von Lichterloh, nee Holtze, have 
die honor to announce dieir marriage which took place 
to-day.' Wonderful! And really it is fine to see how life 
and love goes on in die world. Weddings and christenings! 
And now and dien a few deadis interspersed. Oh well, 
one does not need to read diem. Kadierine does not, nor 
I eidier, and only when die Vandals have lost one of dieir 
'alten Herrn' and I see die name of my regiment among 
die deadi notices do I read it; diat interests me and it 
always seems to me as if the old camp at Hofbrau were 
invited to Walhalla. Spatenbrau is still more suitable." 

He laid die paper aside, because die bell r[a]ng .... "Can 
she really . . . ." No, it was nothing but a bill of fare of 
soups sent up by die landlord with a charge of fifty pfennigs. 
But for all diat he was much disturbed all die evening, 
because he constandy imagined die possibility of a surprise, 
and whenever he saw a cab with a trunk in front and a 
ladies travelling hat on die back seat turning into die Land- 
grafenstrasse, he would exclaim to himself: "That is she; 
she loves such doings and I can already hear her saying: 
I diought it would be so funny, Bodio." 

However, Kadierine did not come. A letter from her 
came next morning instead, in which she said diat she 
should return on die third day after die date of die letter. 
"She wanted to travel with Frau Salinger again, for, take 
it for all in all, she was a very nice woman, with many 
pleasant traits, a great deal of style and also knew how to 
travel very comfortably." 

Botho laid down die letter and for die moment was 
sincerely pleased at die diought of seeing his pretty young 
wife within diree days. "There is room in die human heart 



for all sorts of contradictions. . . . She talks nonsense, 
certainly, but even a foolish young wife is better than none 
at all." 

Then he called the servants and told them that their 
mistress was coming back in three days; they must have 
everything in order and polish all the locks and other 
brasses. And there must be no fly specks on the big 
mirror. 

Having given these housekeeping orders beforehand, he 
went to the barracks for his period of service there. "If 
anyone asks, I shall be back at five." 

His programme for the intervening time was, that until 
noon he would be on the parade ground, then ride for a 
couple of hours and after his ride dine at the club. If he 
did not find anyone else there, he would at least find 
Balafre, which implied two-handed whist and a wealth of 
true or untrue stories of the Court. For Balafre, how- 
ever trustworthy he was, made it a principle to set aside 
one hour of the day for humbug and exaggeration. Indeed, 
with him, this activity took the lead among the pleasures 
of the mind. 

And die programme was carried out just as it was planned. 
The big clock at the barracks was striking twelve as he 
spr[a]ng into the saddle and after he had passed the "Lindens" 
and immediately after the Luisenstrasse, he at last turned 
into a road that ran along beside the canal and further 
on ran in the direction of Plotzensee. As he rode along, 
he recalled the day when he had ridden here before, to 
gain courage for his parting with Lena, for the parting 
that had been so hard for him and that still had to be. 
That was three years ago. And what had there been for 
him in the meantime? Much happiness, certainly. But it 
had been no real happiness. A sugar plum, not much more. 
And who can live on sweets alone! 

He was still brooding over these thoughts, when he saw 
two comrades coming along a bridle path from the woods 
towards the canal. They were Uhlans, as he could plainly 
see even from a distance by their "Czapkas." But who 
were they? To be sure, he could not remain long in doubt 
and before they had approached within a hundred paces, 
Botho saw that they were the Rexins, cousins, and both from 
the same regiment. 



"All, Rienacker," said the elder. "Where are you going?" 

"As far as die sky is hlue." 

"That is too far for me." 

"Well, dien, as far as Saatwinkel." 

"That is wordi diinking of. I helieve I will join die party, 
diat is, provided diat I do not intrude. . . . Kurt (and as 
he spoke he turned to his younger companion), I heg your 
pardon. But I want to speak with Rienacker. And under 
the circumstances 

"You would radier speak with him privately. Just as you 
prefer, Bozel," and Kurt von Rexin touched his hat and 
rode on. The cousin who had heen addressed as Bozel, 
however, turned his horse around, took die left side of Rien- 
acker, who was far ahove him in rank and said: "Very 
well dien, to Saatwinkel. We shall take care not to ride 
into die Tegeler rifle range." 

"At all events I shall try to avoid it," replied Rienacker, 
"first for my own sake and second for yours. And third 
and last hecause of Henrietta. What would diat interesting 
hrunette say, if her Bogislaw should he shot and killed 
and diat too by some friend?" 

"That would indeed give her a heartache," answered 
Rexin, "and would also strike out one item in die reckoning 
between her and me." 

"What reckoning do you mean?" 

"That is the very point, Rienacker, about which I wanted 
to consult you." 

"To consult me? And about what point?" 

"You ought to be able to guess it. It is not difficult. 
Naturally I mean an affair, an affair of my own." 

"An affair!" laughed Bodio. "Why, I am at your service, 
Rexin. But, to be Frauk with you, I hardly know just what 
leads you to confide in me. I am not a remarkable fount of 
wisdom in any direction, least of all in this. And dien, 



too, we have quite different authorities. One of these you 
know very well. And moreover he is a special friend of 
yours and of your cousin's." 

"Balafre?" 

"Yes." 

Rexin felt diat there was something like reluctance or 
refusal in diese words and stopped talking with some air 
of finality. But diat was more dian Botho had meant, and 
so he led on a little furdier. "Affairs. Pardon me, Rexin, 
diere are so many affairs." 

"Certainly. But however many diere are, they are all 
different." 

Bodio shrugged his shoulders and smiled. But Rexin, 
evidendy not meaning to he stopped die second time through 
his own sensitiveness, only repeated in an indifferent tone: 
"Yes, however many there are, yet they are different. And 
I wonder, Rienacker, that you should he the one to shrug 
your shoulders. I really thought . . . ." 

"Well, then, out with it." 

"So I will." 

And after a while Rexin went on: "I have heen through 

the University, and have served with the Uhlans, and 

before that (you know I joined diem radier late) I was 

at Bonn and Gottingen and I need no instruction and advice 

when die case is a usual one. But when I examine myself 

carefully, I find diat in my case die affair is not usual 

but exceptional." 

"Everyone thinks diat." 

"To speak plainly, I feel myself engaged, and more than 
diat, I love Henrietta, or to show you my feeling more 
plainly, I love my dark Yetta. Yes, diis importunate pet 
name widi its suggestion of die canteen suits me best, 
because I want to avoid all solemn airs in diis connection. 
I feel sufficiently in earnest and just because I am in 
earnest, I feel no need of anything like pompous or arti- 
ficial forms of speech. They only weaken the expression." 



Botho nodded in agreement and refrained from every sign 
of derision or superiority, such as he had shown at first. 

"Yetta," Rexin went on, "is not descended from a line of 
angels nor is she one herself. But where can you find 
one who is? In our own sphere? Ahsurd. All these 
distinctions are purely artificial and die most artificial are 
to be found in die realm of virtue. Naturally, virtue and 
other such fine tilings do exist, but innocence and virtue 
are like Bismarck and Moltke, that is, they are rare. I 
have observed very carefully her life and conduct, I believe 
her to be genuine and I intend to act accordingly as far as 
possible. And now listen, Rienacker. If, instead of riding 
beside this tiresome canal, as straight and monotonous as 
die forms and formulas of our society, I say, if we were 
now riding by die Sacramento instead of beside diis 
wretched ditch, and if we had die diggings before us instead 
of die Tegeler shooting range, I would marry Yetta at 
once. I cannot live widiout her. She has bewitched me, 
and her simplicity, modesty and genuine love have more 
weight widi me dian ten countesses. But it is impossible. 
I cannot treat my parents so, and besides, I cannot leave die 
sendee at twenty-seven years of age, to become a cowboy in 
Texas or a waiter on a Mississippi steamer. Therefore die 
middle way. ..." 

"And what do you mean by diat?" 

"A union widiout formal sanction." 

"You mean a marriage widiout marriage." 

"If you like, yes. The mere word means nodiing to me, 
just as littie as legalisation, sanctification, or whatever else 
such tilings may be called; I am a bit touched with nihilism 
and have no real faith in the blessing of the church. But, 
to cut a long story short, I am in favor of monogamy, not 
on moral grounds, but because I cannot help it, and because 
of my own inborn nature. All relations are repugnant to 
me, where beginning and breaking off may happen within 
the same hour, so to speak. And if I just now called myself 
a nihilist, I may with still more justice call myself a Philis- 
tine. I long for simple forms, for a quiet, natural way of 
living, where heart speaks to heart and where one has the 
best that there is, faithfulness, love and freedom." 

"Freedom!" repeated Botho. 



"Yes, Rienacker. But since I well know that dangers may 
lurk here too and that the joy of freedom, perhaps all free- 
dom, is a two-edged sword, that can wound, one never 
knows how, I wanted to ask you." 

"And I will answer you," said Rienacker, who was grow- 
ing more and more serious, as these confidences recalled his 
own life, both past and present, to his mind. "Yes, Rexin, 
I will answer you as well as I can, and I believe drat I anr 
able to answer you. And so I inrplore you, keep out of all 
drat. In such a relation as you are planning for, only two 
drings are possible, and dre one is fully as bad as the odier. 
If you play the true and faithful lover, or what amounts to 
the same dring, if you break entirely with your position and 
birth and tire customs of your class, sooner or later, if you 
do not go to pieces altogether, you will become a horror and 
a burden to yourself; but if things do not go that way, and 
if, as is nrore common, you make your peace, after a year 
or more, with your family and with tire social order, then 
there is sorrow for tire tie nrust be loosened which has been 
knit and strengthened by happiness, and alas, what means 
still nrore, by unhappiness and pain and distress. And that 
hurts dreadfully." 

Rexin looked as if he were about to answer, but Botho 
did not notice hinr and went on: "My dear Rexin, a short 
time ago you were speaking, in a way that nright serve as 
a model of decorous expression, of relations 'where begin- 
ning and breaking off may happen within tire same hour,' 
but these relations, which are really none at all, are not tire 
worst. The worst are those, to quote you once more, which 
keep to tire 'middle course.' I warn you, beware of this 
nriddle course, beware of half-way nreasures. What you 
tirink is gain is bankruptcy, and what seenrs to you a harbor 
means shipwreck. That way leads to no good, even if to 
outward appearances all runs smoothly and no curse is pro- 
nounced and scarcely a gentle reproach is uttered. And 
there is no other way. For everything brings its own nat- 
ural consequences, we nrust remember that. Nothing that 
has happened can be undone, and an inrage that has once 
been engraved in tire soul, never wholly fades out again, 
never completely disappears. Memory remains and com- 
parisons will arise in tire mind. And so once nrore, my 
friend, give up your intention or else tire wirole course of 
your life will be disturbed and you will never again win 
your way through to clearness and light. Many things may 



be permitted, but not those that involve the soul, not those 
that entangle the heart, even if it is only your own." 



CHAPTER XXIV 

A TELEGRAM sent just as Katherine was on the 
point of departure arrived on die drird day: "I shall 
arrive diis evening. K." 

And she actually arrived. Bodio was at die station and 
was presented to Erau Salinger, who declined all dianks lor 
her good companionship during die journey, and kept repeat- 
ing how fortunate she had been, and above all how fortunate 
he must be in having such a charming young wife. "Look 
here, Herr Baron, if I were so fortunate as to be her hus- 
band, I would never part from such a wife even for tiiree 
days." And dien she began to complain of men in general, 
but in die same breadi she added an urgent invitation to 
Vienna. "We have a nice little house less dian an hour 
from Vienna, and a couple of saddle horses and a good 
table. In Prussia you have schools and in Vienna we have 
cooking. And I don't know which I prefer." 

"I know," said Kadierine, "and I diink Bodio does too." 

Hereupon diey separated and our young couple got into 
an open carriage, after having given orders for sending die 
baggage home. 

Kadierine leaned back and put her little feet up on die 
back seat, on which lay a gigantic bouquet, a parting atten- 
tion from die Schlangenbad landlady who was perfectly 
delighted widi die charming lady from Berlin. Kadierine 
took Botiio's arm and clung to him caressingly, but only for 
a few moments, dien she sat up again and said, as she held 
die great bouquet in place with her parasol: "It is really 
charming here, so many people and die river so crowded 
with boats diat diey can scarcely find dieir way in or out. 
And so littie dust. I diink it is really a blessing, diat they 
sprinkle now and everything is drenched with water; of 
course one had better not wear long dresses. And only look 
at die baker's wagon with die dog harnessed in. Isn't he 
too comical? Only die canal .... I don't know, it is still 
just about die same. ..." 

"Yes," laughed Bodio, "it is just about die same. Four 
weeks of July heat have not managed to improve it." 

As diey were passing under some young trees, Kadierine 



plucked a linden leaf, placed it over die hollow of her hand 
and struck it so diat it made a popping sound. "We always 
used to do diat at home. And at Schlangenhad, when we 
had nothing hetter to do, we would pop leaves and do all 
sorts of litde tricks diat we used to do when we were chil- 
dren. Can you imagine it, I really care a great deal for such 
foolish litde diings and yet I am quite old and have finished 
widi diem." 

"But, Kadierine. . . ." 

"Yes, yes, a regular matron, you will see. . . . But just 
look, Bodio, diere is die rail fence again and die old ale- 
house with die comical and radier improper name, diat we 
used to laugh at so heartily at hoarding-school. I thought 
die place was gone long ago. But die Berliners will not let 
anything of that sort go, a place like that will always keep 
on; all that is needed is a queer name, that amuses people." 

Botlio vacillated between pleasure over Katherine's return 
and fleeting moments of discontent. "I find you a good 
deal changed, Katherine." 

"Certainly I am. And why should I be changed? I was 
not sent to Schlangenhad to change, at least not my char- 
acter and conversation. And whether I have changed in 
some other ways, rnon cher ami, nous verrons. " 

"Quite matronly now?" 

She held her hand over his moudi and pushed back her 
veil, which had fallen half over her face, and direcdy after- 
wards diey passed die Potsdam railway viaduct, over die 
iron framework of which an express train was just rushing. 
It made both a thundering and a trembling and when diey 
had left die bridge behind, Kadierine said: "It is always 
disagreeable to me to be directly under it." 

"But it is no better for diose who are up diere." 

"Perhaps not. But it is all in die idea. Ideas always have 
so much influence. Don't you diink so too?" And she 
sighed, as if some dreadful tiling that had taken a terrible 
hold upon her life had suddenly come before her mind. But 
then she went on: "In England, so Mr. Armstrong, an 
acquaintance at the baths, told me (I must tell you more 
about him, besides he married an Alvensleben) — in England, 



he said, they hury die dead fifteen feet deep. Now fifteen 
feet deep is no worse than five feet, hut I felt distincdy, 
while he was telling me about it, how the clay, for diat is 
die correct English word, must weigh like a ton on die 
breast. For in England diey have a very heavy clay soil." 

"Did you say Armstrong. . . . There was an Armstrong 
in die Baden Dragoons." 

"A cousin of his. They are all cousins, die same as with 
us. I am glad diat I can describe him to you with all his 
litde peculiarities. A regular cavalier with his mustache 
turned up, and he really went a litde too far with diat. He 
looked very comical, with diose twisted ends, which he was 
always twisting more." 

In about ten minutes die carriage drew up before die door 
and Bodio gave her his arm and led her in. A garland hung 
over die large door of die corridor and a tablet with the 
inscription "Willkommen" ("Welcome"), from which, alas, 
one "1" was wanting, hung somewhat crookedly from die 
garland. Kadierine looked up, read it and laughed. 

"Willkommen! But only with one ' 1 ' diat is to say, only 
half. Dear me. An 'L' is die letter for Love, too. Well 
tiien, you too shall have only half of eveiydiing." 

And so she walked dirough die door into die corridor, 
where die cook and housemaid were already standing wait- 
ing to kiss her hand. 

"Good day, Berdia; good day, Minette. Yes, children, 
here I am again. Well, how do you diink I look? Have I 
improved?" And before die maids could answer, which 
indeed she was not expecting, she went on: "But you have 
both improved. Especially you, Minette, you have really 
grown quite stout." 

Minette was embarrassed and looked straight before her, 
and Katherine added goodnaturedly: "I mean only here 
around your chin and neck." 

Meantime die man servant came in also. "Why, Ordi, I 
was growing anxious about you. The Lord be praised, diere 
was no need; you are none the worse for wear, only a trifle 
pale. But die heat causes diat. And still die same freckles." 



"Yes, gracious lady, die)' stay." 

"Well, diat is right. Always fast color." 

While diis talk was in progress she had reached her bed- 
room, where Botho and Minette followed her, while die 
odier two retired to dieir kitchen. 

"Now, Minette, help me. My cloak first. And now take 
my hat. But be careful, or else we shall never know how to 
get rid of the dust. And now tell Ordi to set die table out 
on die balcony. I have not eaten a bite all day, because I 
wanted everything to taste good here at home. And now 
go, my dear girl; go Minette." 

Minette hastened to leave die room, while Kadierine re- 
mained standing before die tall glass and arranged her hair 
which was in some disorder. At die same time she looked at 
Bodio in the glass, for he was standing near her and looking 
at his pretty young wife. 

"Now, Bodio," said she with playful coquetry and widiout 
turning around to look at him. 

And her affectionate coquetry was cleverly enough cal- 
culated so diat he embraced her while she gave herself up 
to his caresses. He put his arms around her waist and lifted 
her up in die air. "Kadierine, my litde doll, my dear littie 
doll." 

"A doll, a dear litde doll. I ought to be angry at diat, 
Bodio. For one plays with dolls. But I am not angry, on 
die contrary. Dolls are usually loved best and treated best. 
And diat is what I like." 



CHAPTER XXV 

IT was a glorious morning, the sky was half clouded and 
in die gende west wind die young couple sat on die 
balcony, while Minette was clearing die coffee table, and 
looked over toward die Zoological Garden where die gay 
cupolas of the elephant houses shone softly in die dim 
morning light. 

"I really know nothing yet about your experiences," said 
Botho. "You went right to sleep, and sleep is sacred to me. 
But now I want to hear all about it. Tell me." 

"Oh yes, tell you; what shall I tell you? I wrote you so 
many letters diat you must know Anna Gravenitz and Frau 
Salinger quite as well as I do, or perhaps still better, for 
among other tilings I wrote more than I knew myself." 

"Perhaps. But you always said, 'More about diis when 
we meet.' And diat time has now come, or do you want me 
to diink you are keeping something from me? I know 
actually nodiing at all about your excursions and yet you 
were in Wiesbaden. You said indeed diat there were only 
colonels and old generals in Weisbaden, but diere are English- 
men there too. And speaking of Englishmen reminds me of 
your Scotchman, about whom you were going to tell me. 
Let me see, what was his name?" 

"Armstrong; Mr. Armstrong. He certainly was a de- 
lightful man, and I cannot understand his wife, an Alvens- 
leben, as I diink I told you before, who was always em- 
barrassed whenever he spoke. And yet he was a perfect 
gendeman, who always respected himself, even when he 
let himself go and showed a certain nonchalance. At such 
moments, gendemen are always the most easily recognised. 
Don't you agree with me? He wore a blue necktie and a 
yellow summer suit, and he looked as if he had been sewed 
into it, and Anna Gravenitz always used to say: 'There 
conies die penholder.' And he always carried a big, open 
umbrella, a habit he had formed in India. For he was an 
officer in a Scotch regiment, diat had been stationed a long 
time in Madras or Bombay, or perhaps it may have been 
Delhi. But any way it is all die same. And what had he 
not been dirough! His conversation was charming, even 
if sometimes one hardly knew how to take it." 



"So he was too forward? Insolent?" 

"I beg your pardon, Botho, how can you speak so? Such 
a man as he; a cavalier coinrne il faut. I will give you an 
example of his style of conversation. Opposite us sat an old 
lady, die wife of General von Wedell, and Anna Gravenitz 
asked her (I believe it was the anniversary of Koniggratz), 
whether it was true that thirty-three Wedells fell in the 
seven years' war? Old Frau von Wedell said that it was 
quite true, and added that there had really been more. All 
who were present, were astonished at so great a number, 
excepting Mr. Armstrong, and when I playfully took him 
to task, he said that he could not get excited over such small 
numbers. 'Small numbers!' I interrupted him, but he 
laughed and added, for the sake of refuting me, that one 
hundred and thirty-three of the Armstrongs had perished in 
the various wars and feuds of their clan. And when Frau 
von Wedell at first refused to believe this, but finally (as 
Mr. A. stuck to his story) asked eagerly, whether the whole 
hundred and thirty-three had really 'fallen'? he replied 'No, 
my dear lady, not exactly fallen. Most of them were hung 
as horse thieves by the English, who were then our enemies.' 
And when everybody was horrified over this unsuitable, one 
might almost say embarrassing tale of hanging, he swore that 
'we were wrong to be offended by any such a tiling, for times 
and opinions had changed and as far as his own immediate 
family were concerned, they regarded their heroic forbears 
with pride. The Scottish method of warfare for three hun- 
dred years had consisted of cattle lifting and horse stealing. 
Different lands, different customs,' and he could not see any 
great difference between stealing land and stealing cattle." 

"He is a Guelph in disguise," said Botho, "but there is a 
good deal to say for his view." 

"Surely. And I was always on his side, when he made 
such statements. Oh, he would make you die of laughter. 
He used to say that one should not take anything seriously, 
it did not pay, and fishing was the only serious occupation. 
He would occasionally go fishing for a fortnight on Loch 
Ness or Loch Lochy — only think what funny names they have 
in Scotland — and he would sleep in the boat, and when the 
sun rose, there he was again; and when the fortnight was 
ended, he would moult and his whole sunburnt skin would 
come off and then he would have a skin like a baby. And he 
did all this through vanity, for a smooth, even color is really 
the best tiring that one can have. And as he said this, he 



looked at me in such a way, that I did not know how to 
answer for a moment. Oh, you men! But yet from die 
beginning I really had a warm attachment for him and took 
no offence at his way of talking, which sometimes pursued 
one subject for some time, but far, far oftener shifted con- 
stantly here and there. One of his favorite sayings was: 
'I cannot bear to have one dish stay on the table a whole 
hour; if only it is not always the same, I am much better 
pleased when the courses are changed rapidly.' And so he 
was always jumping from the hundreds into the thousands." 

"Then you must have met on common ground," laughed 
Botho. 

"So we did. And we mean to write to each other, in the 
same style in which we used to talk; we agreed on that as 
we were saying good-bye. Our men, even your friends, are 
always so thoroughgoing. And you are the most thorough- 
going of all, which sometimes annoys me and puts me quite 
out of patience. And you must promise me that you will be 
more like Mr. Armstrong and try to talk a little more simply 
and amusingly and a little faster and not always on the same 
subject." 

Botho promised to amend his ways, and as Katherine, who 
loved superlatives, after describing a phenomenally rich 
American, an absolutely albino Swede with rabbit's eyes, and 
a fascinating Spanish beauty — had closed with an afternoon 
excursion to Limburg, Oranienstein and Nassau, and had 
described to her husband in turn the crypt, the cadets' train- 
ing school and the water-cure establishment, she suddenly 
pointed to the towers of the castle at Charlottenburg and 
said: "Do you know, Botho, we must go there to-day or to 
Westend or to Hallensee. The Berlin air is rather heavy 
and there is none of the breath of God in it, as there is in 
the country where the poets so justly praise it. And when 
one has just come back fresh from nature, as I have, one 
has learned to love once more what I might call purity and 
innocence. Ah, Botho, what a treasure an innocent heart 
is. I have fully determined to keep my heart pure. And 
you must help me. Yes, you must promise me. No, not that 
way; you must kiss me three times on my forehead like a 
bride. I want no tenderness, I want a kiss of consecration 
.... And if we take lunch, a warm dish, of course, we can 
get out there at about three." 



And so they went on their excursion and although die air 
of Charlottenburg was still less like tire breadi of God dian 
die Berlin air, yet Kadierine was fully determined to stay 
in die castie park and to give up Hallensee. Westend was 
so tiresome and Hallensee was half a journey furdier, almost 
as far as Schlangenbad. But in die castie park one could 
see die mausoleum, where die blue lights were always so 
strangely moving, indeed she might say it was as if a bit 
of heaven had fallen into one's soul. That produced a 
thoughtful mood and led to pious reflections. And even if 
it were not for die mausoleum, still there was die bridge 
where you could see die carp, the bridge widi the bell on it, 
and if a great big mossy carp came swimming by, it always 
seemed to her as if it were a crocodile. And perhaps diere 
might be a woman there with round cakes and wafers, 
and one might buy some and so, in a small way, do a good 
work. She said a "good work" on purpose and avoided 
die word Christian, for Frau Salinger was always 
charitable. 

And everything went according to die programme, and 
when die carps had been fed diey both walked further into 
die park until they reached die Belvedere with its rococo 
figures and its historical associations. Katiierine knew 
nothing of diese associations and Botiio therefore took occa- 
sion to tell her of the ghosts of the departed Emperor and 
Electors whom General von Bischofswerder caused to ap- 
pear at this very place in order to arouse King Frederick 
William die Second from his lediargy, or what amounted 
to die same tiling, to get him out of the hands of his lady love 
and bring him back to die path of virtue. 

"And did it do any good?" asked Kadierine. 

"No." 



"What a pity! Anything like that always moves me so 
painfully. And if I consider diat the unhappy prince (for he 
must have been unhappy) was die father-in-law of Queen 
Luise dien my heart bleeds. How she must have suffered! 
I can never righdy imagine such tilings in our Prussia. 
And you say Bischofswerder was die name of the general 
who caused die ghosts to appear?" 

"Yes. At court they called him die tree toad." 

"Because he brought on changes of weather?" 



"No, because he wore a green coat." 

"Oh, that is too comical! . . . The tree toad!" 



CHAPTER XXVI 

AS the sun was setting die young couple reached home, 
and after Katherine had given her hat and cloak 
to Minette and had ordered tea, she followed Bodio 
into his room, because she diought it fitting to spend die 
whole of the first day after her journey in his company, and 
besides she really wished to stay widi him. 

Bodio was content, and because she was shivering, he 
put a cushion under her feet and spread a plaid over her. 
Soon afterwards he was called away, on account of some 
official business which required prompt attention. 

The time passed and since die cushion and plaid did not 
quite suffice to give die requisite warmth, Kadierine rang 
and asked die servant to bring a couple of pieces of wood; 
she was so cold. 

At die same time she rose, to set die fire screen to one 
side, and in doing diis, she saw die little heap of ashes, 
which still lay on die iron plate of die fire place. 

At diis very moment Bodio came in again and was startled 
at what he saw. But he was immediately reassured, as 
Kadierine pointed to die ashes and said in her most playful 
tone: "What does diis mean, Bodio. Look diere, I have 
caught you again. Now confess. Love letters? Yes or no?" 

"Of course you will believe what you choose." 

"Yes or no?" 

"Very well tiien; yes." 

"That is right. Now I am satisfied. Love letters! That 
is too comical. But perhaps we had better burn diem twice; 
first to ashes and tiien to smoke. Perhaps diat will bring 
good luck." 

And she took die pieces of wood diat die servant had 
brought in die meantime, laid diem skilfully togedier and 
started to light diem with a couple of matches. The wood 
caught. In a moment die fire was blazing brightly and as 
she drew the armchair up before it and put her feet com- 



fortably on die iron fender to warm diem, she said: "And 
now I will tell you die story of die Russian, who naturally 
was not a Russian. But she was a very clever person. She 
had almond eyes, all such persons have almond eyes, and 
she gave out diat she was at Schlangenbad for die sake of 
the cure. Well, one knows what diat means. She had no 
doctor, at least no regular physician, but every day she went 
to Frankfort or Wiesbaden, or even to Darmstadt, and she 
always had an escort. And some even said that it was not 
always die same one. And you just ought to have seen her 
toilettes and her conceited airs! She would scarcely bow 
to anyone when she came to die table d'hote with her chap- 
eron. For she had a chaperon — diat is always die first re- 
quisite for such ladies. And we called her 'die Pompadour,' 
I mean die Russian, and she knew diat we called her diat 
too. And die general's wife, old Frau von Wedell, who was 
entirely on our side and was quite indignant over diis doubt- 
ful person (for she was a person, diere could be no doubt 
about diat) — Frau Wedell, I say, said right out loud across 
die table: 'Yes, ladies, the fashions change in everydiing 
even in pockets large and small and in purses long and short. 
When I was young, diere were still Pompadours, but now 
diere are no longer any Pompadours. Is not diat so? There 
are no longer any Pompadours?' And as she said diis we 
all laughed and looked at die Pompadour. But die shocking 
person won a victory over us for all diat for she said in a 
loud, sharp tone (old Frau von Wedell was radier deaf) 
'Yes, Frau Generalin, it is exacdy as you say. Only it is 
strange, diat as die Pompadours went out reticules came in, 
and presendy diey were called Ridicules and such Ridicules 
we still have.' And as she spoke she looked at good old 
Frau von Wedell, who, since she could not answer, rose 
from die table and left die room. And now I should like 
to ask you, what have you to say to diis? What do you 
diink of such impertinence?. . . But, Bodio, you are not 
saying anything. You are not listening. ..." 

"Oh yes, I am, Kadierine. ..." 



Three weeks later diere was a wedding in Jacob's church, 
the cloister-like court in front of which was filled with a 
large and curious crowd, mosdy workingmen's wives, some 
of diem witii children on dieir arms. But diere were some 
school children and street children among diem too. A 
number of carriages drove up, from one of die first of which 
a couple alighted, who were accompanied by laughter and 



comments, as long as they were in sight. 

"Such a figure!" said one of tire women who stood nearest. 

"Figure?" 

"Well, her hips." 

"They are more like die sides of a whale." 

"That is right." 

And doubdess diis conversation would have continued 
longer, had not die bride's carriage driven up just at this 
moment. The servant sprang down from tire box and 
hastened to open die door, but die bridegroom himself, a thin 
man in a tall hat and high pointed collar, was quicker than 
he and gave his hand to his bride, a very pretty girl, who, 
as is usually tire case with brides was less admired for her 
beauty than for her white satin dress. Then both walked 
up die few stone steps which were covered with a somewhat 
worn carpet then over the court and directly afterwards 
through the church door. All eyes followed them. 

"And she has no wreath?" said the same woman whose 
critical eye had shortly before looked so severely at Frau 
Dorr's figure. 

"Wreadi?. . . Wreath?. . . Didn't you know then? 
.... Haven't you heard anything whispered about?" 

"Oh, so tirat is it. Of course I have. But, my dear 
Kornatzki, if everybody paid attention to rumors there would 
be no more wreaths and Schmidt on die Friedrichsstrasse 
might as well shut up shop at once." 

"Yes, yes," laughed Kornatzki, "so he might. And after 
all, for such an old man! At least fifty years have gone over 
his head and he looks as if he might be going to celebrate his 
silver wedding at die same time." 

"Yes indeed. That is just how he looked. And did you 
see his old-fashioned high collar? I never saw anything 
like it." 

"Well, he could use it to kill her with, if there are any 
more rumors." 



"Yes, he can do that." 

And so die talk ran on a little longer, while die organ 
prelude could already be heard from die church. 



The next morning Rienacker and Kadierine were sitting at 
breakfast, this time in Botlio's workroom, both windows of 
which stood wide open to let in die air and light. Some 
mating swallows were flying and twittering all about die 
yard, and Botho, who was in die habit of giving diem 
crumbs every morning, was just reaching for die basket 
again for die same purpose when die hearty laughter of his 
young wife who for die last five minutes had been absorbed 
in her favorite newspaper, caused him to set die basket 
down again. 

"Now, Kadierine, what is it? You seem to have found 
some tiling uncommonly nice." 

"So I have It is simply too comical, the names that 

one sees! And always in the notices of weddings or engage- 
ments. Just listen. ..." 

"I am all ears." 

"Gideon Franke, Master Mechanic, and Magdalena Franke, 
nee Nimptsch respectfully beg leave to announce their mar- 
riage which took place to-day. . . Nimptsch. Can you 
imagine anything funnier? And dien Gideon!" 

Botiio took the paper, but only as a means of concealing 
his embarrassment. Then he handed it back, and said in as 
careless a tone as he could muster: "What have you against 
Gideon, Kadierine? Gideon is better dian Botiio." 



