Joseph Conrad: A Personal Remembrance (Ford Madox Ford, 1924)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1925 Bobbs-Merrill edition (https://archive.org/details/bwb_P8-BNP-022)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ID 

JOSEPH CONRAD: 

A Personal 
Remembrance 

om 

By FORD MADOX FORD 

(FORD MADOX HUEFFER) 

x IDABEL DIDI ID CT 
ILIV 

XUIDCIDIDIIDSII DIDI DID TDD 

100 

JOSEPH CONRAD 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 

https://archive.org/details/owb_P8-BNP-022 — 

JOSEPH CONRAD 

A PrErsonaL REMEMBRANCE 

By 
FORD MADOX FORD 

(FORD MADOX HUEFFER) 

JOINT AUTHOR WITH JOSEPH CONRAD OF “ROMANCE”, 

“THE INHERITORS”, “THE NATURE OF A CRIME”, ETC., ETC. 

‘¢ For it would be delightful to catch the echo of the desperate, 
earnest and funny quarrels which enlivened those old days.’’ 
JosrpH Conrap. 

BOSTON 
LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY 

Copyright, 1924, 
By Forp Mapox Forp. 
All rights reserved 

Published December, 1924, 
by arrangement with the Editor and Proprietors 
of the Transatlantic Review. 

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

PREFACE 

Nine years ago the writer had occasion to make 
a hasty will, Since one of the provisions of this 
document appointed Conrad the writer's literary 
executor, we fell to discussing the question of lit- 
erary biographies in general and our own in par- 
ticular. We hit, as we generally did, very quickly 
upon a formula, both having a very great aversion 
to the usual official biography for men of letters 
whose lives are generally uneventful. But we 
agreed that should a writer's life have interests 
beyond the mere writing upon which he had em- 
ployed himself, this life might well be the subject 
of a monograph. It should then be written by an 
artist and be a work of art. To write: “Joseph 
Conrad Korzeniowski was born on such a day of 
such a year in the town of ‘So and So’ in the Gov- 
ernment of Kieff”’, and so to continue would not 
conduce to such a rendering as this great man 
desired. So, here, to the measure of the ability 

vi PREFACE 

vouchsafed, you have a projection of Joseph Con- 
rad as, little by little, he revealed himself to a 
human being during many years of close intimacy. 
It is so that, by degrees, Lord Jim appeared to 
Marlowe, or that every human soul by degrees 
appears to every other human soul. For, accord- 
ing to our view of the thing, a novel should 
be the biography of a man or of an affair, and 
a biography, whether of a man or an affair, should 
be a novel, both being, tf they are efficiently per- 
formed, renderings of such affairs as are our hu- 
man lives. 

This then is a novel, not a monograph, a por- 
trait, not a narration: for what tt shall prove to be 
worth, a work of art, not a compilation. It is con- 
ducted exactly along the lines laid down by us, both 
for the novel which is biography and for the biog- 
raphy which is a novel. It 1s the rendering of an 
affair intended first of all to make you see the sub- 
jectin his scenery. It contains no documentation at 
all, for it no dates have been looked up; even all the 
quotations but two have been left unverified, com- 
ing from the writer’s memory. It is the writer’s 
impression of a writer who avowed himself im- 
pressionist. Where the writer’s memory has 
proved to be at fault over a detail afterwards out 
of curiosity looked up, the writer has allowed the 
fault to remain on the page, but as to the truth of 

PREFACE Vil 

the impression as a whole, the writer believes that 
no man would care—or dare—to impugn it. It 
was that that Joseph Conrad asked for: the task 
has been accomplished with the most pious scru- 
pulosity. For something human was to him dearer 
than the wealth of the Indies. 

GUERMANTES, SEINE ET MARNE, August. 
Bruces, October, 1924. 

CONTENTS 

PREFACE 
PART I 

‘““C’EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE”’ 
PART 

EXCELLENCY, A FEw Goats. . . 
PART III 

Ir is ABOVE ALL TO MAKE You SEE... . 
PART IV 

THAT, TOO, IS ROMANCE... . 
PART V 

THE END 

APPENDIX 

PAGE 

I21 

175 

224 

251 

269 

Part I 
“C’EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE” 

LAN 

led i 
Te eo 
hee 

I 

HE was small rather than large in height; very 
broad in the shoulder and long in the arm; dark 
in complexion with black hair and a clipped black 
beard. He had the gestures of a Frenchman who 
shrugs hhis shoulders frequently. When you had 
really secured his attention he would insert a mon- 
ocle into his right eye and scrutinise your face 
from very near as a watchmaker looks into the 
works of a watch. He entered a room with his 
head held high, rather stiffly and with a haughty 
manner, moving his head once semicircularly. In 
this one movement he had expressed to himself 
the room and its contents; his haughtiness was due 
to his determination to master that room, not to 
dominate its occupants, his chief passion. being the 
realisation of aspects to himself. 
x 

In the Pent Farm, beneath the South Downs, 
there was a great kitchen with a wavy brick floor. 
On this floor sat a great many cats; they were 
needed to keep down rats and they got some milk 
of a morning. Every morning a wild robin with 

4 JOSEPH CONRAD 

a red breast and greenish-khaki body would hop, 
not fly, across the floor of the kitchen between the 
waiting cats. The cats would avert their glances, 
pulsing their sheathed claws in and out. The robin 
would hop through the inner doorway of the 
kitchen, across an angle of the low dining-room 
and so up the bedroom stairs. When the maid 
with the morning letters and the tea tray opened 
the bedroom door the robin would fly through the 
low, dark room and perch on a comb, stuck into 
a brush on the dressing table, against the long, low, 
leaded windows. It awaited crumbs of bread and 
tiny morsels of lump sugar from the tea tray. It 
had never been taught to go on these adventures. 
This robin attended at the opening of the first 
letter that, more than a quarter of a century ago, 
the writer received from Joseph Conrad. The 
robin watched with its beady eyes the sheet of | 
blue-grey paper with the large rather ornamental 
handwriting. . . . It was afterwards drowned in 
a cream jug which took away from its aspect of 
a supernatural visitant. 
i 

Above the large kitchen was the large Men’s 
Room where the hinds of the farm had been used 
to sleep. It was entered by a ladder which was 
removed at night so that the hinds should not 
murder the farmer or do worse to the farmer’s | 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 5 

wife. The low windows of this low room were 
leaded in diamond shapes, the glass frosted with 
the green of great age. One of these windows had 
inscribed upon it, no doubt by a diamond, the 
name John Kemp and the date 1822. Conrad al- 
ways objected to John Kemp as a name not suffi- 
ciently aristocratic for the hero of “Romance”, 
who was the grandson of an earl, but the writer 
liked it and it remained so in the book. 

Years before that, looking through the pages of 
Dickens’s “All the Year Round” for woodcuts 
contributed by Ford Madox Brown, upon whose 
biography he had been engaged, the writer had 
come upon a short rendering of the official ac- 
count of the trial of Aaron Smith. This had been 
the last trial for piracy that had ever been held at 
the Old Bailey and the prisoner was acquitted. 
The story told by him in the dock was sufficiently 
that of “Romance”, as it now stands. It struck 
the writer at once after the reading of the first 
few paragraphs—that here indeed was what we 
used to call a subject, with a tone of voice as if the 
word had been italicised. For certain subjects 
will grip you with a force almost supernatural, 
as if something came from behind the printed, 
the written or the spoken word, or from within 
the aura of the observed incident in actual life, 

6 JOSEPH CONRAD 

and caught you by the throat, really saying: “Treat 
me.” So in the dusky air of the British Museum 
Reading Room, whilst that first perusal was being 
made, it was almost as if the genie of the place 
exclaimed, “Treat this subject.” If you do it will 
mean fortune; if not, lifelong ill-luck. It brought 
fortune. 
as; 

The first treatment of that story by the writer 
was of an incredible thinness. It was like the 
whisper of a nonagenarian and the writer had 
tried to make it like the whisper of a nonagenarian. 
It was finished just before, in 1898 or so, Conrad 
first came to see the writer at Limpsfield. . . - 
Why the writer should ever have thought of writ- 
ing of pirates, heaven knows, or why, having de- 
termined to write of pirates it should have been 
_ his ambition to treat them as if in terms of a very 
faded manuscript of a Greek play! But that was 
certainly his ambition and, as it proved, his am- 
bition was certainly granted to him to achieve. 
Every sentence had a dying fall and every para- 
graph faded out. The last sentences of that orig- 
inal draft ran: Above our heads a nightingale 
(did something; poured out its soul, as like as not, 
or poured out its melody on the summer air, the 
cadence calling there for eleven syllables). 4s it 

was June it sang a trifle hoarsely. . . . The reader 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 7 

will observe that the writer had then already read 
his “’T’rois Contes”’, just as the first words of Con- 
rad’s first book were pencilled on the flyleaves 
and margins of “Madame Bovary.” The last 
cadences, then, of Herodias run: “ Et tous trois, 
ayant pris la téte de Jokanaan s’en allaient vers 
Galilé. Comme elle était trés lourde, ils la por- 
taient alternativement.” .. . As cadence the later 
sentences are an exact pastiche of the former. In 
each the first contains nineteen syllables; the con- 
cluding one commences with “ As it was”, and is 
distinguished by the u sounds of “June” and 
“lourd” and the or sounds of “hoarse” and 
“portaient.”’ It was in that way that, before the 
writer and Conrad met, they had studied their 
Biaubert.: .:. 
at aa 

Conrad came round the corner of the house 
carrying a small child; that did not impede his 
slightly stiff gait and the semicircular motion of 
his head as he took in the odd residence, the let- 
tuces protected by wire netting from the rabbits, 
or the immense view that lay before the cottage. 
He was conducted by Mr. Edward Garnett. In 
those days the writer had been overcome by one 
of those fits of agricultural enthusiasm that ‘have 
overwhelmed him every few years, so that such 
descriptive writers as have attended to him have 

8 JOSEPH CONRAD 

given you his picture in a startling alternation as 
a Piccadilly dude in top hat, morning coat and 
spats, and as an extremely dirty agricultural 
labourer. Mr. Garnett lived an acre or so up the 
hill; Mr. Conrad and his family were staying on 
Limpsfield Chart. It was in those days Mr. Gar- 
nett’s ambition to appear what the French call 
lézardé: he might have been a very, a very long 
lizard, indistinguishable, save for his spectacles, 
from the monstrous stones of his cavernous and 
troglodytic residence. From his mansion the 
writer’s two-roomed cottage might have been a 
volcanic fragment, thrown off. Mr. Garnett fre- 
quently reproved the writer for wearing dark 
grey frieze. It caused, he said, a blot on the 
Limpsfield hillside into whose tones one should 
sink. The writer was engrossed in carrying out 
experiments, suggested by Professor Gressent of 
the Sorbonne in Paris. He was trying to make 
ten lettuces grow where before had been ten thou- 
sand nettles and was writing articles for the Out- 
look on the usage of the potato as an extirpator 
of thistles, in sand. That is accepted as good 
farming now. 
ope 

Upon the writer Conrad made no impression 
at all. Mr. Conrad was the author of ‘‘ Almayer’s 
Folly”, a great book of a romantic fashion, but 

CEST TOI QUE-DORS DANS L’OMBRE 9 

written too much in the style of Alphonse Daudet, 
whom the writer had outgrown at school, know- 
ing the “ Lettres de Mon Moulin” at eighteen by 
heart. A great, new writer then. But as to great 
writers or artists this writer even then en avait 
soupé, cradled in the proof sheets of Rossetti, 
with Swinburne, Watts-Dunton, Hall Caine (Sir 
Something Hall Caine) and all the Pre-Raph- 
aelites for the commonest objects of his landscape. 
And Mr. Garnett used to lead the Great New, 
one by one, to poke up the writer as if he had 
been a mangey lion. The writer no doubt roared. 
In that way Mr. Garnett led up Stephen Crane, 
Conrad, Lord Ollivier, now H.B.M. Minister for 
India, the wife of the Secretary of the Fabian 
Society, the Secretary of the Fabian Society... . 
A whole procession; precisely as if one had been 
a mangey lion in a travelling menagerie. Or per- 
haps a man at the zoo! And Mr. Garnett would 
do the poking up, telling the distinguished that 
the writer was possessed of too much individuality 
ever to find readers. . . . It was the most depres- 
sing period of a life not lacking in depressing 
periods. 
= 

The writer perhaps roared. Obviously the 
writer roared on that occasion, but he certainly 
rather disliked Conrad as you dislike those who 

10 JOSEPH CONRAD 

pass before your cage and get you poked up. We 
went afterwards with several children up to the 
sloping lawn of Mr. Garnett’s residence. It is at 
that point that a real remembrance of this beauti- 
ful genius comes to the writer. . . . One of the 
children crawled over the sloping grass as weak 
new-born kittens crawl; another, on the other 
hand, with an engrossed face, a little older, whilst 
Conrad stuck his eyeglass into his eye, progressed 
for all the world like a cul de jatte of our Paris 
streets. T'wo fists stuck into the ground, one short 
leg projected, the other curled underneath, blonde 
and determined, it levered itself over the grass 
with its hands and between its arms. And Conrad 
threw back his head and laughed; his eyeglass fell 
out; he stuck it in his eye again and gazed at the 
child; threw back his head and roared, and uttered 
odd words in Marseilles French. . . . Immedi- 
ately afterwards Mr. Garnett assured Mr. Con- 
rad for the third time that the writer was too in- 
dividual ever to have a public for his writings. 
It was of course high praise. . 

So the writer left Limpsfield and returned to 
the Pent Farm. A complete veil dropped between 
himself and Conrad. And then suddenly came 
the letter at whose reading the robin attended. 
The writer had indeed roared at Limpsfield. Ob- 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 11 

viously he had told Conrad the story of John- 
Kemp-Aaron-Smith, for Conrad asked him to con- 
sider the idea of a collaboration over that story — 
which Mr. Garnett had told him was too indi- 
vidual ever to find even a publisher. It would 
otherwise have been an impertinence on the part 
of Conrad. And Conrad was never impertinent. 
His politeness even to his grocer was always 
Oriental. 
—* 

The writer’s answer was the obvious one that 
Conrad had better come and see for himself what 
he had let himself in for. And Conrad came. 
But that time Conrad came. ... He was like 
the Sultan of the True Believers walking into a 
slave market. And for the writer that he re- 
mained until his lamentable death. He was a 
gentleman-adventurer who had sailed with Drake. 
Elizabethan: it was that that he was. He has 
been called Slav; he has been: called Oriental; 
he has been called a Romantic. He was none of 
these except on the surface, to his grocer; a man 
has to have a surface to present to his grocer or 
to afternoon callers. He himself was just Man: 
homo europeaus sapiens, attuned to the late six- 
teenth century. In all the world he would have 
loved nothing better than to singe the King of 
Spain’s beard if it had not been to write a good 

12 JOSEPH CONRAD 

book. Well, he outwitted the Dutch navy in Malay- 
sia and wrote the greatest books in the world. 
a 

He had an extraordinary old mare with such 
long ears that you took her for a mule. She was 
called Nancy. And a black wickerwork chaise. 
And he cared for these things with the lively pas- 
sion of a man; what he had must be shipshape: 
reins, bit, headstall, feed. . . . I remember once 
in an inn yard at Winchelsea an enormous, fat, 
six-feet-two, lousy, greyish scoundrel of a stable- 
man; leaning back against a wall he was, his face 
quivering, the colour of billsticker’s paste. He 
panted, “I’ve heard tell of the British liaon; but 
protect me from the Rooshian bear... .” Rus- 
sian being as near as he could get to Polish. Con- 
rad had been talking to him; he had been stealing 
the’mare sticed of oatss. 7, 

_ 

With a hyper-sensitiveness to impressions the 
writer, too, remembers Conrad throwing teacups 
into the fireplace during a discussion over the 
divine right of kings—a discussion with a lady 
who alleged light-heartedly that Marie Antoi- 
nette had been guilty of treason to France. The 
whole of the discussion the writer did not hear 
because he was discoursing to a very deaf gentle- 
man on the genealogical tree of the Dering family. 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 13 

Nor indeed can Conrad have thrown the teacups 
into the fire since on going away the lady said, 
‘What a charming man Mr. Conrad is! I must 
see him often.” 
"i 

It was in short the passion of Conrad that you 
noticed first and that passion he applied to his 
writing: his darkness, his wide gestures, his eyes 
in which the light was like the glow of a volcano. 
This is not over-writing; his personality deserved 
these tributes. It was chivalry too. After his 
discussion with the lady over the divine right of 
kings he was pale, exhausted, panting almost. 
That was because he remembered Marie Antoi- 
nette in the Conciergerie, so ill-clad, so deprived 
of her children, so pallid and unkempt that to 
him she was real and he remembered her. And 
she was dead and a cheerfully heartless fine 
lady should not make fun—which was what it 
amounted to—of dead queens. Dog should not 
eat dog; fine ladies in silks should not gnaw the 
reputations of ladies fine that once wore finer 
silks and were now dead. It was the want of 
imagination in all humanity, thus in little summed 
up and presented to him, that aroused in him such 
passion and called for such self-control. For it 
is to be hoped that it is apparent that it was only 
to the writer that the impression remained of tea- 

14 JOSEPH CONRAD 

cups thrown into the fireplace. The writer has 
seen Conrad just so enraged when the Bishop of 
London, returning from St. Petersburg after 
Bloody Monday, remarked that Russians would 
always have troubles until they were inculcated 
with the hearty British love of field games! He 
detested Russians; his passion was rather for Bona- 
partists than for the Bourbons, but that imbecili- 
ties should be uttered as to the lot of the suffering 

maddened him. oe 

It is characteristic of Conrad —it is most char- 
acteristic of Conrad —that when, after five years, 
he and the writer got to the last paragraphs of 
“Romance” and when the writer had written, 
“For suffering is the lot of man”, Conrad should 
have added, “ but not inevitable failure or worth- 
less despair which is without end: suffering the 
mark of manhood which bears within its pain the 
hope of felicity, like a jewel set in iron.’ He had 
the mark of manhood! 

x 

He came then to the Pent to see what he was 
in for. He came in for passion—and suffering. 
The writer has seldom seen such suffering as was 
gone through by Conrad during the reading of 
that first draft of “Romance.” Conrad had ex- 
pected a drama of Cuban pirates, immense and 

CEST TOI QUIL-DORS DANS L'OMBRE 15 

gloomy, like “Salammbo”, with a reddish illumi- 
nation, passing as it were upon a distant stage. .. . 
For the first chapter or two— those passing at the 
Pent Farm—he was silent. Then he became— 
silent. For he seemed to have about him a ca- 
pacity for as it were degrees of intensity of his 
silence. No doubt he listened to the first pages 
with a movement or so to light a cigarette, with a 
relaxing of the limbs or a change in the position 
in the chair. These must gradually have ceased. 
Ir 

The parlour at the Pent was a deep room with 
a beam across the middle of the low ceiling; 
small, pink monthly roses always showed insignif- 
icant blooms that looked over the window sills. 
An immense tythe barn with a great, thatched, 
black mossy roof filled in the whole view if you 
sat by the fireplace; occasionally you would see 
a rat progressing musingly over this surface. If 
you approached the window you saw a narrow 
lawn running to a low brick wall after which 
the level dropped to a great stockyard floored 
usually with straw and not unusually with a bul- 
lock or two in it. Conrad and the writer planted 
an orange tree, grown from a pip, under the low 
north wall of this narrow garden. It was still 
alive in nineteen-seventeen, growing just up to 
the coping of the low wall where its progress was 

16 JOSEPH CONRAD 

cut off by the north wind. It was a very quiet, 
simple room. 

The writer sat in the grandfather’s chair, his 
back to the window, beside the fireplace, reading, 
his manuscript held up to the light; Conrad sat 
forward on a rush-bottomed armchair, listening 
intently. (For how many years did the writer 
and Conrad not sit there like that!) 

—* 

We began that reading after lunch of a shortish 
day; the lamps were brought in along with the 
tea. During that interval Conrad showed nervous 
and depressed; sunk in on himself and hardly 
answering questions. Conrad being then almost 
a stranger, this was the writer’s first experience 
of to what Conrad’s depression over an artistic 
problem could amount: it was like a strong cur- 
rent that operated on a whole roomful... . 
With his back, then, to the lamp, and Conrad 
completely in the shadow, the writer read on, 
just having the impression that his hearer’s limbs 
were all bunched together in his chair and that 
they contracted gradually. There were many 
strong shadows in the low room where most of 
the light was on the ceiling. 

i 

Conrad began to groan. ... It was by then 
fairly apparent to the writer that Conrad dis- 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 17 

approved of the treatment of the adventures of 
John Kemp; at any rate in Cuba; and the writer 
had a sufficient sense already of Conrad’s tempera- 
ment to be disinclined to ask whether his guest 
were ill. He feels now the sense of as it were 
dumb obstinacy with which he read on into those 
now vocal shadows in the fireside warmth... . 
The interruptions grew in length of ejaculation. 
Whey-became, Ol Ol: ... O» Goda my: dear 
Piicitery 7... 194. And-towards the end...) 
God, my dear faller, how is it possible... .” 
The writer finished with the statement that, as it 
‘was June, the nightingale sang a trifle hoarsely. 
This zodlogical observation, in spite of the ca- 
dence, gave the final touch to Conrad’s dejection. 
The writer’s voice having stopped he exclaimed, 
“What? What? What’s that?” When he heard 
that that was the end he groaned and said, ‘‘ Good 
God/”’—for the last time. There are writers — 
French writers— who can keep the final revelation 
of a whole long novel back until the last three 
words. For this he had hoped. The writer would 
rather have died than have so machined a book. 
x 

Conrad was the most unrivalled hatcher of 
schemes for sudden and unlimited wealth or for 
swift and undying glory. ‘To see him go upon 
one of these adventures was heartening in itself. 

18 JOSEPH CONRAD 

His face lit up, his muscles tautened, he first ex- 
patiated on his idea and then set out. Obviously 
his training as a master mariner inveigling unwill- 
ing Eastern traders into shipping cargoes that they 
did not want to consign, at prices that they did not 
want to pay, to bottoms commanded by Conrad, 
for one reason or another unsuited to their mer- 
chandise—this training helped him with direct 
human negotiations. To see him, leaning over a 
counter, persuading the stolid Mr. Dan West, 
grocer of Hythe, to grant him credit unheard of 
in that market town, was a singular study in fas- 
cination. The bearded, blinking and very excel- 
lent grocer—I wish I knew his equal elsewhere 
—understood possibly the transaction which con- 
tained in its essence bills at three months, mort- 
gages I daresay on life insurances— heaven knows 
what!— and then a triumphant progress to the 
White Hart where the benign, dark, statuesque 
and really beautiful Miss Cobay presided in the 
dimmer recess of that very old tavern... . And 
there sat the grocer, benevolent, pleased, blinking 
a little, a solid, wealthy, fiftyish man, several times 
mayor of his ancient town, with great knowledge 
of men, quietly indulgent to the romantic visitor 
who had descended upon him. ... For all the 
world he might have been the Stein of ‘Lord 
Jim” contemplating the hero of that wonderful 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 19 

work and saying within himself, “Romantic! .. . 
That’s what he is—romantic!” ... And the 
beautiful, statuesque, slow-moving Miss Cobay, in- 
variably silent. The writer at least never heard 
her utter one word, except that, years after, motor- 
ing through that ancient Cinque Port, the writer, 
for old sake’s sake, took a drink at the bar of the 
White Hart, and Miss Cobay with her enigmatic 
gaze asked after Mr. Conrad, then many years 
gone from the Pent, for all the world like one of 
the silent women of Conrad’s early books: the 
heroine of “ Falk.’ who never utters one word.... 

The writer, alas, alas, seems to become Marlowe. 
at ome 

Conrad was Conrad because he was his books. 
It was not that he made literature: he was litera- 
ture, the literature of the Elizabethan Gentleman 
Adventurer. . . . Think of setting out in an old 
wickerwork chaise drawn by what appeared to be 
a mule to persuade a Hythe grocer to give you 
three years’ credit. . . . Think of setting out from 
Stamford-le-Hope, a safe harbour where at least 
there was contact with ships, estuaries, tideways, 
islands, into an unknown hinterland of savage and 
unknown populations, of bare downs, out of sight 
of the refuge of the sea, to persuade an unknown 
wielder of the pen, the finest stylist in England, 
to surrender his liberty to a sailing partnership — 

20° JOSEPH CONRAD 

to surrender too his glamourous “subject”, for 
all the world as if you had adventured into the 
hinterlands behind Palembang to ask some one 
only just known to give up to you for joint work- 
ing the secret of one of those mysterious creeks 
where gold is found. An adventure like that of 
“Victory” itself.... And then to insult the 
owner of the creek with groans, sighs, O God’s, 
contortions. ... Well, all we who supported 
Conrad to his final, so great victory, were the sub- 
ordinate characters of his books, putting up with 
his extortionate demands for credit, for patience 
or for subjects. ... The Steins, the Whalleys, 
the captain MacWhirrs . . . and now the Mar- 
lowes! 
i 

For, for some hours of that distant day of our 
“Romance”, the reader may be assured that the 
question of the very existence of that work hung 
in the balance. It was truly as if Rumpelstiltkin 
had come to carry off the Queen’s child. (The 
dwarf, Conrad quotes Grimm in his epigraph, 
answered, ‘“No, something human is dearer to me 
than all the wealth of the Indies!”) ‘The writer, 
please let the reader be assured, has always been 
supremely indifferent to the fate of his books; to 
the estimation in which they were held—by any 
soul but Joseph Conrad; to such things as career; 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE a1 

personal reputation and the rest. Conrad could 
hardly have selected a better discoverer of creeks 
to whom to go. But the writer was not then 
ignorant of the vicissitudes of human life and of 
literary partnerships. The terrible wrangles be- 
tween Henley and the relicts and executors of 
Stevenson were at that moment filling the press. 
Or one might remember the effects on Johnson’s 
fame, of Boswell. To do what Conrad then im- 
periously desired, to surrender the creek to a joint 
partnership was . . . asking for it! 

It hung then in the balance. But there gradu- 
ally appeared after dinner, through a long farm- 
house night until two in the morning, the magic. 
It was magic! ‘There had been disclosures. Con- 
rad had artlessly expounded his desires. Hearing, 
at Limpsfield, the writer develop his miraculous 
“subject” —of Aaron Smith, last pirate ever to 
be tried at the Old Bailey, of the Creek with Rio 
Media at the bottom of it and the pirate schooners 
with Nikola el Escoces in command sailing out to 
the sack of brig Victoria with her cargo of log- 
wood, rum, raw sugar and dyes—Conrad had 
imagined a robust book, with every drop of the 
subject squeezed out of it. Whereas it was char- 
acteristic of the writer that though in the trial 
Aaron Smith had deposed to a lady bearing the 

22 JOSEPH CONRAD 

glamourous name of Seraphina Riego, daughter 
of a juez de la premiera instancia, known as the 
Star of Cuban Law, and inhabiting the pirate city 
of Rio Media in Cuba, the writer had very care- 
fully left out this lady in the first draft of his book, 
the lady with whom John Kemp sat under the 
hoarse nightingale having been a carefully dimmed 
figure with bare shoulders and a handkerchief, 
called Veronica... 2: Conrad “had expected to 
hear a reading by the finest stylist in England 
of a work, far-flung in popularity as “Treasure 
Island” but as “written” as “Salammbo”, by the 
addition to which of a few touches of description, 
sea atmosphere, mists, riggings and the like, in a 
fortnight, fortune should lie at the feet of the 
adventurers. .. . It was another of those magic 
enterprises. . . . Alas, after five years’ work there 
was “Romance” with its succés d’estime. Not 
much of that, even, for the critics of our favoured 
land do not believe in collaboration. 
mr 

Conrad’s marvellous play and change of features 
came now into the story. Ruffled, the writer, even 
before dinner had explained the nature of the tour 
de force he had attempted. This was the narra- 
tive of a very old man, looking back upon that 
day of his romance —as to-day this narrator looks 
back. You are getting the real first draft of 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 23 

“Romance” now. This is how in truth it comes 
out according to the technical scheme then laid 
down by us two. 

Before dinner, then, Conrad listened to the 
writer’s apologia with a certain frigid deference. 
Of course if that was the way of it, no doubt... . 
But why choose such a subject? ... A man of 
Simty-twors 2-2 Yes;s-yes, of course: .1.. ~ Her re- 
mained however shut up in the depth of his dis- 
appointment and still more in his reprobation of 
the criminal who could take hold of such a theme 
and not, gripping it by the throat, extract from it 
every drop of blood and glamour. ... He dis- 
liked the writer as a criminal, fortune thrown 
away, a Book turned into the dry bone of a tech- 
nical feat. He exclaimed, “Let me look at it. 
Let me look at the manuscript”; shuffled the 
leaves distastefully as if they had been the evidence 

of a crime. ... To throw away fortune—that 
was not shipshape: to murder a subject— that was 
murder, foul, unnatural.... The dinner bell 
Pane ideas 

i 

At dinner there were ladies; gradually the de- 
pressed Conrad became Conrad. Pepper came 
under discussion. He declaimed as to how the 
greatest wars in the world had been fought for 
pepper. The Spice Islands, the East, came into 

24 JOSEPH CONRAD 

the room for a little while, with Wapping Old 
Stairs, the tents of the army over Constantinople 
at the end of the Russo-Turkish War with Conrad 
as a sailor before the mast on the deck of a Mes- 
sageries Maritimes transport. ‘There ensued a 
desperate wrangle as to whether saffron had any 
flavour—in the course of the consumption of 
curry. Conrad declared that saffron had no flav- 
our; the writer, that saffron was one of the most 
strongly flavoured of all possible herbs. Conrad 
swore that he had carried whole cargoes of saffron; 
he had spent his life in carrying cargoes of saffron; 
he had known no other pursuits. The writer on 
the other hand had given more saffron to diseased 
poultry than ever Conrad had carried and had in 
addition reproved cooks enough to make ships’ 
crews for not putting sufficient saffron into poule 
au riz. . . . Conrad declared that that was merely 
to give the rice an agreeable colour. The writer 
called it a most disagreeable, an offensive col- 
our. . . . Conrad’s eyes flashed dangerously; his 
teeth white under his drawn-back moustache. We 
both contemplated Calais Sands. . . . Some one 
changed the conversation to pearls. . | 
—— 

In all our ten thousand conversations down 
the years we had only these two themes over 
which we quarrelled: as to the taste of saffron and 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 2s 

as to whether one sheep is distinguishable from 
another. 
pati 

After that first dinner Conrad talked, there 
being people present whom he found sympa- 
thetic. . . . When he talked on such occasions he 
was like his “The Mirror of the Sea.” Indeed, a 
great part of his “The Mirror of the Sea” was 
just his talk which the writer took down in a short- 
hand of his own extemporising, recalling to Con- 
rad, who was then in a state of great depression, 
various passages of his own relating. . . . Alas, 
three weeks ago, the writer drove in a black, 
shaken, hooded contrivance, over a country of 
commonplace downlands, the continuation of the 
Kentish downs, beyond the Channel. He went, 
jolted behind an extravagant female quadruped, 
between fields of wheat that small winds ruffled 
into cat’s-paws. And the parallel was so inti- 
mately exact that the writer found himself saying 
to himself, “Well, Ford, mon vieux, how would 
you render that field of wheat?” . . . The reader 
must take this record of a coincidence as a sin- 

Cerity.@ ss 
-K 

For the days have been innumerable upon 

which, behind the amiable mare of Conrad’s or 
a far less amiable Exmoor pony of the writer’s, 

26 JOSEPH CONRAD 

we drove—say between 1898 and 1905—over a 
country of commonplace downlands and asked 
ourselves how we should render a field of ripe 
corn, a ten-acre patch of blue-purple cabbage. 
We would try the words in French: sillonné, bleu- 
foncé, bleu-du-roi; we would try back into Eng- 
lish; cast around in the back of our minds for 
other French words to which to assimilate our 
English and thus continue for quiet hours. 
i 

So, three weeks ago to-day—thus does one re- 
turn to one’s old loves!—the writer drove from 
just such a ramshackle, commonplace farm build- 
ing in an undistinguished country over slight hills 
on a flinty bye-road and heard Conrad saying to 
him, “‘ Well, Ford, mon vieux, how would you 
render that field of wheat?” . . . Unless you have 
these details you cannot know how immensely 
strong an impression this beautiful genius made 
on a mind not vastly impressionable or prone to 
forming affections. . . . So the writer continued 
turning the matter over. 

He went on thinking first of French and then 
of English: “ Champs de blés que les vents faibles 
sillonnaient. . . . Cornfields. .. . No, not corn- 
fields, because that, to Americans, signifies maize. 
sxe» Wheat-fields..:.... Fields of -wheatethatetne 
weak .. tééble\.,.. «light. 2a wihratesoresot 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 27 

winds, breezes, airs... .” There is no occupa- 

tion more agreeable on a still day: it is more rest- 
ful, really, than fishing in a pond. ... “Fields 
of wheat that small winds ruffled into cat’s-paws. 
tae eat isp Or Course, too literary. *, 222 
at al 

These considerations remained in the front of 
his mind as he was jolted over the abominable 
granite setts of a small market town, to the dilapi- 
dated station. He continued to think of wheat, 
dusty, bronzed, golden, as if running away over a 
small hillside—whilst he purchased tickets of a 
disagreeable woman behind a grille, whilst he pur- 
chased an English paper of a very agreeable woman 
in a blue pinafore. On the railway platform he 
said, “Dont les vents faibles sillonnaient les sur 
faces roussatres, . . .” whilst looking at black cap- 
ital letters in the paper that his companion held 
folded. It struck him at once, “This is a bad 
joke. ... That paper is of the sort that makes 
bad jokes. . . . He was speaking to me. Not five, 
not thtee. . . minutes, .°2-. Not‘ thrée ‘seconds: 
just now on this platform . . . the duskyish voice 
with the brown accent, rather caressing. .. .” 

oe 

The writér”éxclaimed, “Look! Zook/”)... 
His companion unfolded the paper. The an- 
nouncement went across two columns in black, 

28 JOSEPH CONRAD 

leaded caps. ... SUDDEN DEATH OF JOSEPH 
CONRAD. They were demolishing an anti- 
quated waiting room on the opposite platform, 
three white-dusty men with pickaxes; a wall 
was all in broken zigzags. The writer said to 
himself, ‘C’est le mur d’un silence éternel qut 
descend devant vous!” ‘There descended across 
the dusty wall a curtain of moonlight, thrown 
across by the black shadows of oak trees. We 
were on a verandah that had a glass roof. Under 
the glass roof climbed passion flowers, and vine 
tendrils strangled them. We were sitting in deck 
chairs. It was one o’clock in the morning. Con- 
rad was standing in front of us, talking. Talking 
on and on, in the patches of moonlight and patches 
of shadow from the passion flowers and vines! 
The little town in which we were dominated the 
English channel from a low hilltop. He was 
wearing a dark reefer coat and white trousers. 
‘_ 

He was talking of Malaysia, palm trees, the 
little wives of rajahs in coloured sarongs—or per- 
haps not sarongs?—crouched round him on the 
ground; he himself cross-legged on the ground 
teaching the little wives of rajahs to use sewing 
machines! Moored to a rotting quay —as it might 
have been Palembang, but of course it was not 
Palembang—was his schooner. His schooner 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 29 

had in its hold half a cargo of rifles under half a 
cargo of sewing machines. The rajahs, husbands 
of the little wives, did not like their Dutch suze- 
rains and in that country the War has lasted not 
five but three hundred and fifty-five years... . 
That then was Conrad on the occasions when 
he talked as he did on that first evening after 
dinner. His voice was then usually low, rather 
intimate and caressing. He began by speaking 
slowly, but later on he spoke very fast. His accent 
was precise, rather dusky, the accent of dark rather 
than fair races. He impressed the writer at first 
as a pure Marseilles Frenchman; he spoke Eng- 
lish with great fluency and distinction, with cor- 
rectitude in his syntax, his words absolutely exact 
as to meaning but his accentuation so faulty that he 
was at times difficult to understand and his use of 
adverbs as often as not eccentric. He used “shall” 
and “will” very arbitrarily. He gesticulated with 
his hands and shoulders when he wished to be 
emphatic, but when he forgot himself in the excite- 
ment of talking he gesticulated with his whole 
body, throwing himself about in his chair, moving 
his chair nearer to yours. Finally he would spring 
up, go to a distance, and walk back and forth 
across the end of the room. When the writer 
talked he was a very good listener, sitting rather 

30 JOSEPH CONRAD 

curled up whilst the writer walked unceasingly 
back and forth along the patterned border of the - 
carpet. 

ae 

We talked like that from about ten, when the 
ladies had gone to bed, until half-past two in the 
morning. We talked about Flaubert and Mau- 
passant—sounding each other, really. Conrad 
was still then inclined to have a feeling for Daudet 
— for such books as “ Jack.” This the writer con- 
temned with the sort of air of the superior person 
who tells you that Hermitage is no longer a wine 
for a gentleman. We talked of Turgenev—the 
greatest of all poets; “ Byelshin Prairie” from the 
“Letters of a Sportsman”, the greatest of all 
pieces of writing; Turgenev wrapped in a cloak 
lying on the prairie at night, at a little distance 
from a great fire, beside which the boy horse- 
tenders talked desultorily about the Roosalki of 
the forests with the green hair and water nymphs 
that drag you down to drown in the river. 

‘_ 

We agreed that a poem was not that which was 
written in verse but that, either prose or verse, 
that had constructive beauty. We agreed that the 
writing of novels was the one thing of importance 
that remained to the world and that what the 
novel needed was the New Form. We confessed 

C'EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 31 

that each of us desired one day to write Absolute 

Prose. 
Art. ae 

But that which really brought us together was 
a devotion to Flaubert and Maupassant. We dis- 
covered that we both had “Felicite”, “St.-Julien 
V Hospitalier”, immense passages of “Madame 
Bovary”, “La Nuit”, “Ce Cochon de Morin” and 
immense passages of “ Une Vie” by heart. Or so 
nearly by heart that what the one faltered over the 
other could take up. And indeed, on the last occa- 
sion when we met, in May of this year, agreeing 
that we had altered very little, surprisingly little 
—oh, not the least in the world!—the writer 
began, “La nuit, balancé par louragan . . .” and 
Conrad went on, “‘tandis que le feu grégeois ruts- 
selait,” right down to, “ Et comme il était trés fort, 
hard, courageux et avisé. .. .” 

Cy aa 

Before we went on that earlier night to bed 
Conrad confessed to the writer that previous to 
suggesting a collaboration he had consulted a num- 
ber of men of letters as to its advisability. He 
said that he had put before them his difficulties 
with the language, the slowness with which he 
wrote and the increased fluency that he might 
acquire in the process of going minutely into words 
with an acknowledged master of English. The 

22 JOSEPH CONRAD 

writer imagines that he had actually consulted Mr. 
Edward Garnett, W. E. Henley and Mr. Marriott 
Watson. Of these the only one that Conrad men- 
tioned was W. E. Henley. He stated succinctly 
and carefully that he had said to Henley — Hen- 
ley had published “The Nigger of the Narcissus” 
in his Review—‘‘ Look here. I write with such 
difficulty: my intimate, automatic, less expressed 
thoughts are in Polish; when I express myself with 
care I do it in French. When I write I think in 
French and then translate the words of my thoughts 
into English. This is an impossible process for one 
desiring to make a living by writing in the Eng- 
lish language. .. .” And Henley, according to 
Conrad on that evening, had said, “Why don’t 
you ask H. to collaborate with you. He is the 
finest stylist in the English language of to-day....” 
The writer, it should be remembered, though by 
ten or fifteen years the junior of Conrad was by 
some years his senior, at any rate as a published 
author, and was rather the more successful of the 
two as far as sales went. 
xe 

Henley obviously had said nothing of the sort. 
Indeed, as the writer has elsewhere related, on the 
occasion of a verbal duel that he had later with 
Henley, that violent-mouthed personality remarked 
to him, “Who the hell are you? I never even 

C'EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 33 

heard your name!” or words to that effect. It 
probably does not very much matter. What had 
no doubt happened was that Conrad had men- 
tioned the writer’s name to Henley and Henley 
had answered, “TI daresay he’ll do as well as any 
one else.” No, it probably does not matter, except 
as a light on the character and methods of Conrad, 
and as to his ability to get his own way... . 

For it was obviously une émotion forte that the 
writer received in those small hours in a suff- 
ciently dim farmhouse room. In such affairs 
Conrad’s caressing, rather dragging voice would 
take on a more Polish intonation and would drop. 
His face would light up; it was as if he whispered ; 
as if we both whispered in a conspiracy against a 
sleeping world. And no doubt that was what it 
was. The world certainly did not want us, not at 
that date; and to be reputed the finest English 
stylist was enough, nearly, to get you sent to gaol. 
Something foreign, that was what it was. . 

~~ 

At any rate when, with a flat candlestick, the 
writer at last showed his guest into a shadowy, 
palely papered, coldish bedroom and closed the 
door on him, he felt as if a king were enclosed 
within those walls. A king-conspirator: a sover- 
eign-Pretender; Don Carlos of a world whose 
subjects are shadows. 

IT 

As for what happened immediately to the his- 
tory of “Romance”, the book, the writer’s mind 
preserves a complete blank! It might be easy to 
construct images out of probabilities or by con- 
sultation with one person or another. But that 
would not be within the spirit of the bond; this 
is the record of the impression made by Conrad 
the Impressionist upon another writer, impres- 
sionist also. It is an offering In Memoriam con- 
structed solely out of memory. 

Ke 

Some years ago Mr. H. G. Wells took occasion 
to write to the papers. He stated that the writer 
had visited him and informed him that he had 
persuaded Conrad to collaborate with himself. 
Mr. Wells’ memory must almost certainly have 
betrayed him, though the matter is of no great 
importance. What does remain in the writer’s 
mind very clearly is this... . | 

a 

The writer and Conrad made several choppings 
and changings in their occupation of the Pent: 
the writer occupied it for several years; Conrad 

C’EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 35 

then lived in it with the writer’s spare furniture 
which was mostly of Pre-Raphaelite origin. It 
pleased Conrad to write at a Chippendale bureau 
on which Christina Rossetti had once written or 
at another which had once belonged to Thomas 
Carlyle: one got in those days those small, cheer- 
ful pleasures out of life. Then Conrad occupied 
the Pent altogether, the mournful house under 
the bare downs exercising a great fascination over 
him. When you went out of the front door— 
Mr. Walter Crane, who during one of our mov- 
ings about Kent and Sussex took the house fur- 
nished, had painted a Japanese crane and some 
verses on that door—when you went out, then, the 
narrow garden giving on to the stockyard had a 
short brick path running under the windows and 
it was very soothing to see the flattish lines of the 
country running away for a great distance, one 
convolution going into another. The brick path 
dried up very quickly in the wettest of weathers; 
up and down it, as if on a quarterdeck, Conrad 
would pace for hours and hours, the lines of the 
country soothing him. In that part of England 
the words of Charles II are most true; what with 
the shelter of the downs and the position near the 
sea, there is there scarcely any day upon which a 
man may not go abroad —at any rate to the extent 
of a brick path under his windows. The great 

36 JOSEPH CONRAD 

barn closed in the scene immediately to the front, 
but you saw the fields to the right, so it was a very 
quiet and private place. . . . And indeed, during 
the last of our conversations, this year, Conrad 
alluded to the fact that, for the first time in his 
life, he had, in his vastly more arranged residence 
of that day, a study to himself. And he added, 
“Ah, but it isn’t the Pent/” He said too that the 
great tythe barn had been burned down during 
threshing. 
ee 

We used in our day to take great entertainment 
out of shooting rats with a Flobert rifle from the 
brick path. There were channels made by these 
animals in the black-green thatch of the barn and 
you would see them proceeding leisurely from end 
to end of the great expanse in broad daylight. 
Then. . . . Whiff would go the Flobert and the 
small bullet pinging into the thatch would send 
a rat bounding away over the corrugations in the 
old straw into some hole, for all the world with 
the action of a tiger bounding over watercourses. 
As far as memory serves we never hit a rat: but 
one notable success was scored to the writer. Fired 
at from an incredible distance—ninety yards or 
so, something gigantic!—a great old grey rat 
crossing a road collapsed feebly. We ran forward 
and dispatched it with the butt. That was ever 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 37 

afterwards scored to the writer as an immense feat 
of marksmanship, often referred to. If any one 
talked of shooting Conrad would say, “ Ah, but 
you should have seen Ford’s shot at the rat! .. .” 
Actually the writer, with a little more farm knowl- 
edge, was sure that the rat was dying of old age 
before it was fired at, the bullet never reaching it. 
But he has kept his own counsel to this day of con- 
fession. . . . No, we were not high-brow there at 
the Pent. We played dominoes, Conrad with pas- 
sion and the skill of a master. Indeed, in how 
many city Meccas and Belgian cafés must we not 
have rattled the black and white bones over round, 
white marble table tops! We played écarté or, 
when very serious, chess, but usually dominoes, at 
which the writer never remembers to have won a 
game. Sometimes the writer knocked a golf ball 
about the fields, Conrad, standing on the brick 
path, regarding the occupation with the contempt, 
say, that his collaborator bestowed on Daudet. 
Once the writer seriously sat down to describe in 
words the satisfaction you feel when you have 
brought off a good drive and see the white ball 
lyrically against the blue sky. It was a careful 
piece of writing, mots justes and all. Conrad 
looked at it with attention and then slowly, blankly 
raised his shoulders and eyebrows, we returning 
to dominoes. 

Ti 

On one of those days, then, we drove in state 
from the Pent to pay a call on Mr. Wells at Sand- 
gate. There was a curious incident. As we stood 
on the doorstep of Mr. Wells’ villa, in the hesitant 
mind of those paying a state call, behold, the elec- 
tric bell-push, all of itself, went in and the bell 
sounded ss)ss Conrad’ exclaimed: -* Tiens/ ae 
The Invisible Man!” and burst into incredible 
and incredulous laughter. In the midst of it the 
door opened before grave faces. 

i 

We paid our call. Whether we were taken to 
be drunk or no only the owners of those grave faces 
can say. I suppose that we were. But the incident 
of the bell-pull was of a nature that had a peculiar 
appeal to Conrad’s humour. For years after, a 
translation of Mr. Wells’ book having appeared 
in Italian, you could never mention that au- 
thor’s name without Conrad saying, “Tiens! . . . 
L’Uomo Invisible!” . . . Indeed, during a visit 
in an interval of our long separation caused by 
European vicissitudes and their sequele Conrad 
asked the writer, ““Do you ever see Wells now?” 

C'EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 39 

and added, “L’Uomo Invisible. . . . Do you re- 

member?” 
— 

But Mr. Wells’ “The Invisible Man” made an 
extremely marked impression on Conrad, as indeed 
it did on the writer. So it deserved to. Indeed, 
as far as memory serves, “The Invisible Man”, 
the end of the ““Sea Lady” and some phrases that 
that book contained, and two short stories called 
“The Man Who Could Work Miracles” and 
“Fear”, made up at that date all the English 
writing that, acting as it were as a junta, we ab- 
solutely admired. Later there came the stories 
of Mr. Cunninghame Graham, the writing of 
W. H. Hudson and—with reservations on the 
part of Conrad for the later novels —the work of 
Henry James. 

It was as if, when we considered any other Eng- 
lish writer’s work, we always in the end said, “ Ah, 
but do you remember ‘Ce Cochon de Morin’?” or 
the casquette of Charles Bovary, according to the 
type of work undergoing commendation. After 
reading the passage, say, of the pavior striking 
with the spade at the invisibility flying past him 
from ‘The Invisible Man”, or the episode of the 
turning over of the lamp and the burning down- 
wards, from “The Man Who Could Work Mira- 

40 JOSEPH CONRAD 

cles”, we recalled no French masterpiece. .. . 
These pieces were authentic, in construction, in 
language and in the architectural position occu- 
pied by them in the book or story — in the progres- 

sion of the effect! 
i 

Mr. Wells has recorded that he was aware that 
at this date there was a conspiracy going on at the 
Pent against himself and against British literature. 
Against British literature there was, if you choose 
to call it so; against Mr. Wells the extent of our 
machinations is as recorded above. 

i 

Conrad had odd, formal notions of how one 
should proceed in the life literary. As far as he 
was concerned the purpose of our call on Mr. 
Wells was to announce to the world of letters that 
we were engaged in collaboration. To the writer 
this was just exactly a matter of indifference ex- 
cept for a not materially pronounced disinclination 
to pay calls anywhere or at any time. But Con- 
rad liked proceedings of a State nature. He would 
have liked the driving in a barouche to pay calls 
on Academicians such as is practised by candidates 
for membership of the French Academy. And 
exceedingly vivid in the writer’s mind is the feel- 
ing he had, as we drove down the sloping railway 
bridge above Sandling Junction. He was like a 

CEST TOI QUI-DORS DANS L’OMBRE 41 

brown paper parcel on a seat beside a functionary 
in a green uniform, decorated with golden palm 
leaves and a feathered cocked hat. . 
ar ae 

We were then going over the third draft of the 
second part of “Romance” and had at last finally 
and psychologically decided that the book would 
eventually go on. Of this the writer is certain. 
He is certain because the exact image and air of 
that time came back to him suddenly whilst mak- 
ing a very minute recension of the text of the 
French translation of “Romance.” The writer 
was in mid-ocean on the deck of a liner, reading 
very meticulously the translation of an episode 
which related how, on a blue night in Kingston 
Vale, John Kemp knocked down, in the presence 
of the Admigal of the Fleet in the Jamaica waters, 
a Mr. Topnambo, member of the Governor’s 
‘Council, who wore white trousers that glimmered 
in the half-light. . . . There were on that upper 
deck in the sunlight a number of New York Jews 
playing pinocle and a number of Washington 
flappers reading novels. But the writer heard his 
own voice as, in the low parlour of the Pent, he 
read aloud the passage that concerned Mr. Top- 
nambo, the blue night, the white trousers, the 
barouches standing in the moonlight waiting for 
Admiral Rowley and his intoxicated following to 

42 JOSEPH CONRAD 

take the road. And then Conrad, interrupting. ... 
“By Jove,” he said, “it’s a third person who is 
writing!” 
ee 

The psychology of that moment is perfectly 
plain to the writer. Conrad interrupted with a 
note of relief in his voice. He had found a formula 
to justify collaboration in general and our collabo- 
ration. Until then we had struggled tacitly each 
for our own note in writing. With the coming of 
blue nights, the moon, palms and the brilliant lights 
of the inn reflected down the river, Conrad saw the 
possibilities that there were for his own exotic note 
in the story. Above all, with the coming of politics; 
for John Kemp, in coming to blows with Mr. Top- 
nambo, member of the Governor’s Council, then 
and there identified himself with the party in the 
island of Jamaica that at that date desired annexa- 
tion by the United States. 

yr 

This at once made our leading character handle- 
able by Conrad. John Kemp merely kidnapped 
by pirates and misjudged by the judicial bench of 
our country was not so vastly attractive, but a John 
Kemp who was in addition a political refugee, 
suspect of High Treason and victim of West India 
merchants. . . . That was squeezing the last drop 
of blood out of the subject... . : 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 43 

The differences in our temperaments were suffi- 
ciently well marked. Conrad was brave: he was 
for inclusion and hang the consequences. The 
writer, more circumspect, was for ever on the 
watch to suppress the melodramatic incident and 
the sounding phrase. So, till that psychological 
moment, the writer doing most of the first drafting, 
Conrad had been perpetually crying, ‘“ Give! 
Give!” The writer was to give one more, and one 
more, and again one more turn to the screw that 
sent the rather listless John Kemp towards an in- 
evitable gallows. The actual provision of intrigue 
in 1820 between England and Jamaica was the 
writer’s business. Conrad contented himself with 
saying, “ You must invent. You have got to make 
that fellow live perpetually under the shadow of 
the gallows.” In the original draft of the book John 
Kemp had been the mere second mate of a mer- 
chant ship going out to Jamaica in the ordinary 
course of his business of following the sea. But in 
the second draft he was mixed up with smugglers 
and fled from Hythe beach in the moonlight with 
the Bow Street runners hot on his trail— already 
a candidate for the professional attentions of the 
hangman. In that second draft, however, he was 
in Jamaica, still merely a planter’s apprentice — 
insufficiently hangable. There had to be more 
inevitability in the shape of invention. The writer 

44 JOSEPH CONRAD 

therefore set to work to read a vast number of 
Jamaica newspapers of. the twenties and, finding 
that that island was then an ant-heap of intrigue 
by what were called Secessionists, it was an easy 
task to identify Kemp hangably with those traitors 
to the British crown. Conrad, however, was a 
Loyalist: a Loyalist to every régime that ever ex- 
isted but passionately a Loyalist to Great Britain. 
It was therefore necessary to give the screw one 
turn more: Kemp had to be made a misjudged 
man, betrayed by the stupid cruelty of merchants 
and the administration. He thus became exactly 
a figure for Conrad to handle. For, if Conrad 
were the eternal Loyalist, nevertheless the unim- 
aginative and cruel stupidity of Crown and Goy- 
ernment officials was an essential part of his creed. 
He was a politician— but a politician of the im- 
passe. The British Empire was for him the per- 
fection of human perfections, but a// its politicians, 
all its public officials, police, military officers of 
the Crown, gaolers, pilots, port admirals and 
policies were of an imbecility that put them in in- 
telligence below the first lieutenant of the French 
navy that you could come across... . 
—_ 

So, by that moment, we had worked John Kemp 
into a position that can have been occupied by very 
few unjustly accused heroes of romance. When 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 45 

he stood in the Old Bailey Dock he had the whole 
legal, the whole political, the whole naval forces 
of the Crown, the whole influence at once of the 
City of London and of the Kingdom of Spain de- 
termined to hang him. And the writer is bound 
to confess that on reading “ Romance”’, after an in- 
terval of twenty years—and in a French transla- 
tion!—the hairs really did rise on his scalp over 
the predicament of John Kemp on his trial. And 
he wondered at the melodramatic genius that had 
been possessed by that third writer that was neither 
himself nor Conrad... . 

For having got hold of that comforting theory 
Conrad never abandoned it. At intervals during 
our readings aloud that lasted for years he would 
say, always as if it were a trouvaille, that that was 
certainly the writing of a third party. It had not 
been long before he had given up all hope of swift 
fortune coming with the speedy finishing of that 
book. For the writer the pleasure of eternal tech- 
nical discussion with Conrad was a sufficient 
motive for continuing our labours. But for Con- 
rad, with his stern sense of the necessity for mak- 
ing a career, that was not enough. He had to find 
at least an artistic justification for going on. We 
were both extremely unaccepted writers, but we 
could both write. What was the sense of not 

46 JOSEPH CONRAD 

writing apart if there were no commercial gain? 
He found it in the esthetically comforting thought 
that the world of letters was enriched by yet a 
third artist. he third artist had neither his cour- 
age nor his gorgeousness; he himself had none of 
his collaborator’s literary circumspection or verbal 
puritanism. So the combination was at least... 
different. 
ary 

Thus came about our drive to the Lower Sand- 
gate Road. Conrad considered it appropriate that 
we should make an official announcement. The 
collaboration was determined upon. For the re- 
ceiving of this official communication no one could 
have been more appropriate than the author of 
“The Invisible Man.” Conrad had in those days 
a very strong sense that those who had taken part 
in his launching as a writer had the right to have 
communicated to them any crucial determination 
at which he arrived. It was a fine trait in his 
character. He had originally consulted Mr. Hen- 
ley, Mr. Marriott Watson and, the writer pre- 
sumes, Mr. Edward Garnett, these having been, 
as it were, his chief backers behind the scenes. 
Mr. Wells had been his chief backer before the 
public—as Reviewer. All the reviews that 
‘“ Almayer’s Folly” had received had amounted to 
a mountain of praise; the most tremendous and 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 47 

moving commendation had been that contributed 
by Mr. Wells to the Saturday Review, an organ 
that was then almost miraculously regarded, under 
the editorship of Mr. Frank Harris. Mr. Wells 
then, living in our neighbourhood, to whom better 
could this junta have proceeded? So at least 
Conrad thought and the writer offered no active 
objection. 

Mr. Wells apparently thought the same. Of 
what happened at that villa in the Lower Sand- 
gate Road, except that the back garden had, de- 
scending to the sea-beach, a stepladder up and 
down which several charming creatures were dis- 
porting themselves with the Channel as back- 
ground, the writer carries in his memory now only 
the conversation of Bob Stevenson and the remem- 
brance of Conrad, talking to Mrs. Wells with 
enormous animation about the great storm in 
which for the first time he came up the Channel, 
passing that point. The writer was engaged in 
remembering that great storm. He had been at 
school at Folkestone on the cliff almost perpendic- 
ularly above where we then sat. In the morning 
after the gale had blown itself out we looked 
down in sunlight from the edge of the Leas. The 
whole sickle of Dungeness Bay had a fleet ashore 
on its beaches— innumerable smacks and coasting 

48 JOSEPH CONRAD 

vessels, large international sailing ships and two 
East Indiamen, the Plassy and the Clive, with 
their towering black and white sides, all heeling 
over, rigging and canvas hanging down like cur- 
tains right round the bay, unforgettable and help- 
less. . . . Bob Stevenson was engaged in telling 
the writer with animation almost equal to that of 
Conrad that Ford Madox Brown could not paint. 
The writer was wishing himself with the group 
round Conrad and Mrs. Wells. The crossing of 
the voices of those two brilliant conversationalists 
remains still in these ears, and the odd mixture of 

feelings. . 

On the next day Mr. Wells bicycled up to Ald- 
ington Knoll, where at about seven miles distant 
from the Pent the writer was once again leading 
an agricultural life of the severer type —%in a cot- 
tage of the most minute, the Conrads occupying 
the Pent. The writer was, indeed, engaging him- 
self on the invention of a new species of potato in 
the intervals of contriving the gallows for John 
Kemp. Mr. Wells came to persuade the writer 
not to collaborate with Conrad. With an extreme 
earnestness he pleaded with the writer not to spoil 
Conrad’s style. “The wonderful Oriental style. 
. . . It’s as delicate as clockwork and you’ll only 
ruin it by sticking your fingers in it.” The writer 

C'EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 49 

answered that Conrad wanted a collaboration and 
as far as the writer was concerned Conrad was 
going to get what he wanted. He can still see the 
dispirited action of Mr. Wells as he mounted his 
bicycle by the rear step and rode away along that 
ridge of little hills. . . . No more than those two 
speeches had been exchanged. 

IV 

Into the still, depressed note of the Pent there 
had introduced itself the tremendous panorama 
of sea and sky that showed from Aldington with 
its Knoll. We passed our time driving the ami- 
able mare or the infamous Exmoor pony between 
one and the other. We went out of a sunshiny 
morning with bits of manuscript; we returned 
through bitter rain-storms, the mud splashing up 
visibly before the dim lanthorns, the manuscript 
read aloud, commented on, docketed for altera- 
tion. . . . It comes back as a time of great tran- 
quillity, though the high skies of Aldington, with 
the sickle-shaped, painted marsh and the flat Chan- 
nel ending with the pink cliffs of Boulogne, seem 
cracked as the surface of an old, bright painting 
will be cracked— with the agonies of Conrad’s 
poverty, unsuccess, negotiations and misgivings. 

a 

Still, a time of great tranquillities, and, at inter- 
vals, there were triumphs. Pinker, a blinking 
Bramah in the shape of Destiny, would grant an 
unimaginable advance; William Heinemann — 
the most generous and wise of publishers, a Jew 

CEST TOI QUIL-DORS DANS L’'OMBRE 51 

at that—would hand out an unexpected cheque 
on the top floor of Number 31 Bedford Street 
whilst the writer kept Pawling—a blond Chris- 
tian but much more like a publisher than his 
Semitic partner— interested as well as he might 
with a description of the plot of ‘The Inheritors”, 
a thin collaboration with no plot in particular that 
Heinemanns eventually published. ‘Then Conrad 
would come in, buttoning his overcoat over the 
cheque; Mr. Pawling would throw up his hands 
and exclaim to the writer, “ You’ve let him get at 
that ass William again. By God, that is not 
cricket!” . .. And the two conspirators against 
the peace of mind of Number 31 Bedford Street 
would proceed to the famous Bodega just out of 
the Strand. There, with Sir Henry Irving and 
Nellie Farren at adjoining tables, over smoked 
salmon and champagne in small tumblers, they 
would play dominoes until the last train for 
Sandling Junction, with its quiet lines of scenery, 
its fresh breath of air, and the mare in charge of 
the stable boy who would be just lighting the 
lamps of the trap — that last train leaving Charing 
Cross at 4.50 and getting down just at dusk. .. . 
i 

There is something conducive to writing in low 
rooms, in a commonplace downland country, with 
nearly level fields that run into quiet convolutions, 

52 JOSEPH CONRAD 

away to a distance. Let the direct lighting be 
modified by a barn, the illumination coming from 
the peak of the sky: let there be a quarterdeck 
walk up and down which Conrad may turn in his 
pyjamas and dressing gown occasionally, getting 
relief from his thoughts in a glance at the quiet 
fields amongst which the writer will be practising 
golf strokes. . . . Well, in just such a room with 
a barn to block the direct light, with a miniature 
stockyard, in a commonplace downland country 
the writer—sits writing! And you dare to tell 
him that he cannot go out and, in the rain, catch 
his dangerous pony that swings round and kicks 
the inviting sieve of corn out of your hand, just 
missing your chest. . . . He cannot drive the seven 
miles to the Pent to ask Conrad what he thinks of 
Colonel Marchand and Fashoda! .. . You must 
surely be lying. . . . Or you mean to tell him that 
in half an hour Conrad, in the dilapidated motor 
hired from the White Hart at Stamford, won’t be 
coming in to ask what we are to think of Fashoda 
and Colonel Marchand and what we shall do if 
there is really war with France. . . . We get the 
London papers only by the second post at 4.30, and 
do not as a rule look at them until to-morrow at 
breakfast time. But in these exciting times, with 
Colonel Marchand crossing the Sahara and hoist- 
ing the French flag in a position which Kitchener 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 53 

of Khartoum has stated to be the key-point of the 
British Empire in Africa and consequently on the 
road to India. ... And the French with their 
extraordinary .75 quick-firer field gun... . It all 
turns on what the Germans will do, the Russians 
having their hands full in the Far East... . 

It was like that, when we were not discussing 
the desirability of the word bleu-foncé as an ad- 
jective to apply to cabbages in a field, or when we 
were not moved to queer enthusiasms over the use 
of words by Christina Rossetti... . But if you 
tell me that I cannot put in Tommy and drive 
through the rain to the candle-lit Pent—no Eau, 
Gaz, Electricité in that gentleman’s residence — 
well, if you tell me that, I suppose you are 
right... . “C'est le mur d’un silence eternel qui 
descend devant vous, mon vieux!” ... For the 
feeling, through a large part of a century, was for 
the writer very strong that Conrad was there, who 
might be consulted about a difficulty —in politics, 
in the architecture of a story, over an English 
word, or about the French for Romance— for 
which there is no French! 

a 

The irresistible feeling that one had about him 
was that he was practical, that the last thing that 
he was was Slav. For the Slav, to be true Slav, 

54 JOSEPH CONRAD 

must be as helpless before the vicissitudes of this 
world—as helpless as is a new-born kitten, a 
greyish, sprawling object, mostly jelly. A sort of 
Dostoievsky! If you asked Conrad how to cir- 
cumvent a banker he would have an expedient. 
If you asked him whether women ought to have 
a vote he would say, No! with decision. And 
then, remembering the part played by women in 
keeping alive the national feeling of his country, 
Poland, where all the men took to drunkenness 
or lechery or listnessness after the abortive revolu- 
tion of 1862, he would say that the only creature 
that ought to be paid the compliment of having a 
vote, a thing always useless, was such a woman as 
his mother, Mme. Korzeniowski, or his aunt, 
Mme. Paradowski. Or any other woman! But, 
as his private expedient, he said to women in 
the words of the Mohammedan ranee of Palem- 
bang, ‘‘Why should you strive for domination 
during the day? . . . Your power is of the night, 
during which, with a whisper, you shall destroy 
empires!” 
_ 

The dominant attraction of Conrad’s mind was 
the firmness with which he held ideas after he had 
contemplated a sufficient number of facts or docu- 
ments. He had had great experience of the life 
of normal men; his reading had been amazingly 

C'EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 

wide and his memory was amazingly retentive. 
Amazingly, even to the writer, whose memory is 
sufficiently retentive and whose reading wide if 
desultory. Yet Conrad never presented any ap- 
pearance of being a bookish, or even a reading 
man. He might have been anything else; you 
could have taken fifty guesses at his occupation, 
from, precisely, ship’s captain to, say, financier, but 
poet or even student would never have been among 
them and he would have passed without observa- 
tion in any crowd. He was frequently taken for 
a horse fancier. He liked that. 
—s 

His ambition was to be taken for—to be!— 
an English country gentleman of the time of Lord 
Palmerston. There might have been worse am- 
bitions. To understand how a Pole, born in the 
Government of Kiev, infinitely far from even the 
sea, should have desired to be that—and should 
have desired it with passion—the reader must 
keep in mind two things if not three, one of them 
a vivid picture in the mind of the writer. During 
the last century, if you went down to Tilbury 
Dock, you would see families of Jewish-Poland 
emigrants landing. As soon as they landed they 
fell on their hands and knees and kissed the soil 
of the land of freedom. For Conrad there was 
another side. Asa child he lived in a great house 

56 JOSEPH CONRAD 

in Poland: a great house with wide avenues and 
many lights at night. One night all the lights 
went out, the avenues were deserted; a sledge 
without bells came before the portico. A figure, 
cloaked and muffled to the hat rim, came up the 
steps and was closeted for long with the master 
of the house. Then drove away over the snow. 
Conrad said he could imagine that he heard the 
voice of l’or de la perfide Albion jingling in great 
bags as the sledge went away. 

For this was the emissary of Lord Palmerston, 
sowing gold all over Poland so that the Polish 
revolutionary spirit might be kept alive and Rus- 
sia embarrassed in her encroachments on Pera or 
Afghanistan. 

For that was England of Conrad’s early vision: 
an immense power standing for liberty and hospi- 
tality for refugees; vigilant over a pax Britannica 
that embraced the world. With an all-powerful 
navy she had an all-powerful purse. She was 
stable, reasonable, disciplined, her hierarchies 
standing in their orders, her classes settled, her 
services capable and instinct with an adequate 
tradition. And ready to face Russia with fleet 
or purse when or wherever they should meet. 
The first English music-hall song that Conrad 
heard was: 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 57 

We don’t want to fight but, by Jingo, if we do, 

We've got the ships, we’ve got the men, we’ve got the 
money too. 

We've fought the bear before and so we will again, 

The Russians shall not have Constantinople. . . . 

A Pole of last century—and above all things 
Conrad was a Pole of last century—could ask 
nothing better. 

IT 

And, above all things else, as the writer has 
somewhere pointed out, Conrad was a politician. 
He loved the contemplation of humanity pulling 
away at the tangled skeins of parties or of alli- 
ances. Until, suddenly, a strand gave, a position 
cleared up, a ministry was solidly formed, a 
dynasty emerged. He was, that is to say, a stu- 
dent of politics, without prescription, without 
dogma, and, as a Papist, with a profound dis- 
belief in the perfectibility of ‘human institutions. 
The writer never saw Conrad read any book of 
memoirs except those of Maxime Ducamp and the 
Correspondence of Flaubert; those we read daily 
together over a space of years. But somewhere in 
the past Conrad had read every imaginable and 
unimaginable volume of politician’s memoirs, 
Mme. de Campan, the Duc d’Audiffret Pasquier, 
Benjamin Constant, Karoline Bauer, Sir Horace 
Rumbold, Napoleon the Great, Napoleon III, 

58 JOSEPH CONRAD 

Benjamin Franklin, Assheton Smith, Pitt, Chat- 
ham, Palmerston, Parnell, the late Queen Victoria, 
Dilke, Morley. . . . There was no memoir of all 
these that he had missed or forgotten—down to 
‘“‘T] Principe” or the letters of Thomas Cromwell. 
He could suddenly produce an incident from the 
life of Lord Shaftesbury and work it into “‘ Nos- 
tromo”’, which was the political history of an 
imagined South American Republic. That was 
one of the secrets of his greatness. 
Cae 

But certainly he had no prescription. Revolu- 
tions were to him always anathema since, he was 
accustomed to declare, al// revolutions always have 
been, always must be, nothing more in the end 
than palace intrigues — intrigues either for power 
within, or for the occupancy of, a palace. The 
journalist’s bar in the palace of the Luxemburg, 
where sits the present Senate of the Third Re- 
public, was once the bedchamber of Marie de 
Medicis. 

That is not to say that Conrad actively de- 
sired the restoration of the Bourbons; he would 
have preferred the journalists to remain where 
they were rather than have any revolution at all. 
All revolutions are an interruption of the proc- 
esses of thought and of the discovery of a New 
Form, .. .. for’ the ‘novel: 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 59 

Indeed, almost the only revolution that he con- 
templated with enthusiasm was one by which a 
successful adventurer seized the reins of power. 
Anywhere! Some King Tom! It was not that 
his visions were Napoleonic. His favourite 
modern ruler was Louis Napoleon, Napoleon I 
being too big, too rhetorical, too portentous for 
any intimacy. We planned for many years, and 
even wrote one scene of, a historical novel dealing 
with First Empire figures. But the First Empire 
was gone; the subject was the attempts made to 
save Ney from execution; the chapter showed 
Louis XVIII a bewildered figure, forced to sleep 
and receive petitioners in a corridor between two 
doors, the Protocol providing lavish rooms for in- 
numerable peers of France, lackeys and parasites, 
but none at all for God’s anointed whose handker- 
chief was always dangling halfway out of his hip 
pocket. That was how we—or rather how Con- 
rad, for the writer never had any political views 
of any strength at all—regarded restored Legiti- 
macy. Yet he was fit to throw the teacups into the 
fire if you derided the doctrine of the divine right 
of kings. 

No, on the whole, his favourite political char- 
acter was Louis Napoleon as Adventurer, and 
even Napoleon III, Emperor of the French, 

60 JOSEPH CONRAD 

roused some of his admiration. He liked gilt 
Third Empire furniture, all other gilding, re- 
views, uniforms, la Montijo, mirrors, fraudulent 
financiers, the Duc de Morny, the Mexican ad- 
venturer. He liked the mournful, cynical sover- 
eign surrounded by the crowd of adventurers, 
escrocs, rastacoueres and prostitutes in high places 
that brought down the Empire. He admired 
Napoleon III for his dream of a Latin Union, 
which Conrad found practicable and to be de- 
sired. That was probably his idea of human- 
ity, a realm in which the solitary, cynical, not 
impracticable dreamer is brought down by 
his womankind, his relations, his servants, his 
hangers-on, his household. He saw the same mi- 
crocosm in the bankruptcy and ruin of a Court 
perfumer—or of the captain of a coastwise trad- 
ing ship. He prized fidelity, especially to adven- 
turers, above all human virtues and saw very little 
of it in this world. 
x 

His favourite political anecdote, that which he 
repeated the most often, was of the Maire of the 
XIIIth Arrondissement who sent to Morny, then 
his half-brother’s Minister and taking the waters 
at Spa, a telegram to the effect that the whole 
Rue de la Glaciére was in a state of insurrection. 
It ended, “Que faire?” And Morny replied. ... 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 61 

But we are writing for Anglo-Saxons. This not 
‘very edifying anecdote was Conrad’s favourite but 
it is not to be taken as implying that Conrad’s 
mind was unedified. It simply showed his con- 
tempt for the way in which human affairs are 
conducted. It was as if he said, ‘All politicians 
are such fools that you might as well conduct the 
high businesses of state in the spirit of Morny. 
You will only find Maires of the XIIIth Arron- 

dissement to carry out your orders.” 
a 

He desired a stable world in which you could 
think and develop the New Form. And because 
at no phase of the world’s history has there seemed 
to be a portion of the world more stable than was 
England under the ruling classes of Lord Pal- 
merston’s time, he desired to be of the type of a 
member of the ruling classes of England in Lord 
Palmerston’s day. He lived as such, and as such 
he died. We are so far from those days; it seems 
hardly likely that any one’s withers will be wrung 
if we say that he might have had a meaner ideal. 

We come thus to Captain Marryatt. It would 
be too much to say that Marryatt had any influ- 
ence at all on Conrad as writer — though Conrad 
was of opinion that Marryatt had profoundly in- 
fluenced his writing— but the effect of Marryatt 

62 JOSEPH CONRAD 

on Conrad as philosopher te/ que/, and as English 
gentleman, could not be too much stated. In- 
deed, in the course of our last meeting, the writer 
reminded Conrad that almost the first literary 
opinion Conrad ever uttered at the Pent was in 
eulogy of Marryatt. Conrad replied that he re- 
mained exactly of that opinion: Marryatt was, 
after Shakespeare, the greatest novelist as delinea- 
tor of character, that England has produced. ‘The 
opinion must be limited to what it covers, and that 
strictly. Conrad was not saying that Marryatt 
was, say, nearly as great a poet as Shakespeare; he 
‘was saying that Marryatt observed English char- 
acter with exactitude and rendered it without ex- 
aggeration, all other English novelists getting 

their effects by more or less of caricature. 
~_ 

The books of the author of “Midshipman Easy” 
are so relegated to oblivion, being considered as 
boys’ books, that this pronouncement may appear 
strange. It may, however, be recommended to 
the reader’s serious attention as the measured opin- 
ion of no mean critic. What we are about at the 
moment is considering the effect of Marryatt upon 
the character and psychology of Conrad. 

i 

That influence at least was profound and life- 

long, like the undertone of a song. During all the 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 63 

years of our collaboration it was always as if Con- 
rad were saying, “Ah: but wait till I get to my 
Napoleonic novel, with the frigates in the Medi- 
terranean.” ‘That was the golden age for such 
English as are held by the sea. And during those 
years we planned rather elaborately a collabora- 
tion set in late Napoleonic to Restoration days, the 
central figures being Ney, and an English milor 
with the spleen, but the narrator a frigate-lieu- 
tenant, protégé of the mi/or who, coming from the 
Mediterranean and gallant service with the frig- 
ates, should introduce—the Marryatt touch!... 
We spent a great deal of time over memoirs of the 
period, the writer occupying himself with Dun- 
donald, English mz/ors and the part taken by the 
Tsar in the execution of Ney, Conrad getting his 
information as to the Restoration period in a way 
that was rather mysterious to the writer, so did 
Conrad seem to have all those figures in his 
iisidae s 3: 
eae 

We discussed this novel till very late indeed in 
our association. On an occasion in July, 1916, 
Conrad said to the writer, “Well, you’ll be able 
to bring something back for the Ney book, about 
campaigning in France,” as we shook hands. . . . 
Alas! that which wiped out so many little villages 
under our eyes wiped out that book too, the writer 

64 JOSEPH CONRAD 

abandoning for many years all idea of writing — 
losing indeed all ability to write. And Conrad 
continued alone...) 0 bhusiin The Roverein 
the offing, you have the vigilant and capable frigate 
captain! . . . And on the day of his death Conrad 
was occupied—with Napoleon at Elba and the 
frigate service of the Mediterranean, seeking to 
live again the glamour that the English sea- 
novelist had cast over his young years in Poland. 
So tenacious are the glamours of our youth! 
a 

Yes! That influence at least was profound. 
He looked at the world of human affairs with the 
eyes of Jack Easy and affronted difficulties with 
the coolness of Percival Keene. At that state- 
ment the reader should not smile. The tradition 
of the frigate service of Dundonald and the rest 
was no mean one; its influence on the British 
character was far-reaching, was all-important. 
And the achievement and tradition of England 
during the last century cannot be ignored by those 
who can be interested in the achievements and 
traditions of mankind. 

_s 

The writer has said too much in other places 
of the influence of Marryatt on the writer him- 
self and on Conrad to go picturesquely once more 
over the matter. But there are those who have 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 65 

read neither Marryatt nor the writer. Marryatt 
concerned himself mainly, then, with the frigate 
warfare of Napoleonic times. And the frigate 
warfare of Napoleonic times was, compared with 
the line of battle warfare for which stand the 
names of Nelson and his great captains, as some- 
thing obscure, anonymous, desperate and very 
gallant. For thousands who shall know the names 
of Nelson, Howe, or St. Vincent there will be 
hardly one that has heard tell of Cochrane. Yet 
this little service was incessant, pursued under 
desperate conditions of weather and of inshore 
work, the frigates being only upon occasion the 
mere eyes of the fleet, the great fleets with the 
great first-raters rolling majestically from ocean 
to ocean, half the world over and then back again 
to fight now and then a Trafalgar or an Aboukir. 
But the frigates were at it every day in the Medi- 
terranean. 
ae 

Such a service, without comfort, without ad- 
vertisement, almost without the glory of the King’s 
uniform, for its officers dressed like sweeps, re- 
mained midshipmen to the age of forty and were 
betallowed to the elbow—was the meaning of 
England to Conrad, as to the writer during his 
younger years. One saw the self-sacrifice, the 
patience, the fidelity. And if Conrad in later 

66 JOSEPH CONRAD 

years wrote of fidelity as the key-word of his 
“message”, it was of this fidelity that he was 
thinking. Of fidelity not to a realm from which 
they were for so long absent, and not to a royal 
countenance which never shone upon them, but 
of fidelity to an idea, to a service. 

—— 

The idea was this: In the first place came the 
sea, the sea not as a bitter element, but as an in- 
strument by means of which the frigates battled 
against inefficiency, strange customs, the eating of 
frogs, wooden shoes. Upon the sea were only 
the English—and the French; the English as the 
representatives of that Almighty which holds the 
sea in the hollow of His hand, the English, blond, 
hardy, cunning, vigilant, each one six foot and 
over, jolly, in the exact image of their Maker, 
cordial. ‘The French, the subordinates, repre- 
sentatives of Satan, perpetually driven off the sea 
to hide behind the moles of Toulon or of Cher- 
bourg, perpetually creeping out as do bedbugs 
from crevices in walls. . . . One Englishman was 
worth one, three, seventeen, twenty-seven French- 
men. .. . There was the sea, then, and that its 

business, its function. 
a aa 

Presumably the frigates did succeed in their 
work, though if you read French textbooks you 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 67 

would hardly think so, any more than when read- 
ing the Americans you will hear much about 
. the Shannon and the Chesapeake. According to the 
French it was lor de la perfide Albion that did the 
trick. In that way Conrad got it both ways, since 
he liked a nation that had both its sea service and 
its gold. Gold also is sterling, incorruptible, and 
has its fidelities. In the meantime, there had 
grown up another service with a tradition almost 
identical —that of the British mercantile marine, 
of ships not too vast to be impermeable to the 
weather, making, by means of the caprices and 
brutalities of the winds, engrossed and perpetual 
departures and landfalls round dangerous head- 
lands. Nowadays you will find little enough dif- 
ference between the coastwise men of any nation 
but in the seventies and eighties of last century 
Conrad, by dint of experience, found in that serv- 
ice, muted but almost more patient and engrossed, 
the tradition of Marryatt’s frigates. It was fidelity 
to an ideal, the ideal of the British merchant serv- 
ice; it was still more a tradition working efficiently. 
For in that service, all going to make up the rec- 
ord of British-owned bottoms, even if they sailed 
under the flag of Siam, all going to contribute to 
the long story of what is the shipshape, are hun- 
dreds of Dagoes, Lascars, Swedes, Danes, Finns, 
Negroes, Americans, Kruboys. ... And one Pole. 

68 JOSEPH CONRAD 

Conrad then, in his misty youth that seemed 
to pass in great houses or in the prison yards of 
the exiled child, and mostly at night or at night- 
fall, read with engrossment Marryatt and Feni- 
more Cooper, and so sowed the seeds of his 
devotion to England. He had his devotion to his 
art and his devotion to his second country. In 
the end his devotion to his second country over- 
came his devotion to his art. The only occasion 
on which the writer ever questioned the actions 
of Conrad —and it is the truth that this was the 
only occasion on which any action of Conrad’s 
known to the writer was ever even questionable! 
— was when that writer accepted membership of 
the British Academy. This as a writer he should 
not have done, nor as an artist. The body was 
without venerability, committed to courses of 
propaganda, and of a habit, to be destructive to 
the art by which Conrad had made his name, to 
which he owed fidelity. 

at ae 

Accordingly on a given occasion the writer re- 
monstrated against this questionable action. It 
was during sad times for the nation, in a gloomy 
room of the most architecturally lugubrious build- 
ings that are to be found near the Marble Arch 
in London. Conrad was depressed; there was no 
one that was then not depressed. The writer, the 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 69 

occasion being one for clearings-up of everything 
that could be cleared up, put the question as to — 
why Conrad had, how Conrad could have, thus 
denied the gods of his manhood. A knighthood 
yes! Any sort of Order, yes! A C.B.; an O.B.E.! 
... It had not been ten years or much more since, 
when talking of the possibilities of such a founda- 
tion, Conrad had said that were he offered its 
insignia he would wear them on the seat of his 
trousers—a gibe which we immediately intro- 
duced into “The Inheritors.” 

The reader should understand that this matter 
is one which divides forever—into sheep and 
goats—the world of the arts. There are some few 
artists who will accept Academic honours; to the 
majority of those who are really artists the idea 
is abhorrent, and those who accept such honours 
betray their brothers. To this majority Conrad 
had enthusiastically belonged. You had Flaubert 
who refused, you had Zola who all his life sought, 
academic distinction. For Conrad there had used 
to be no question as to which to follow. Now he 
had followed Zola. 

— 

Conrad answered with mildness. And nothing 
could have been more unlike Conrad. Both of 
us being upholders of the duel, we had always 

70 JOSEPH CONRAD 

lived together under a sort of standard of for- 
mality. Except upon Belgian railways when Con- 
rad would refuse with fire to show his ticket to 
collectors because he was an Englishman and they 
some sort of Dagoes, the writer never remembers 
otherwise to have remonstrated with the author 
of “Heart of Darkness.” . .. But Conrad an- 
swered with heavy and depressed mildness. .. . 
Yes, to have accepted that honour might have the 
aspect of denying the gods of his youth. That 
was a thing to be regarded with depression. On 
the other hand England had offered him hospital- 
ity; he had been granted fame in England and the 
opportunity to live in Kent where the lines of the 
fields run quietly one into the other. England was 
desirous of founding an institution that should, as 
a part of its functions, do some sort of honour to 
the trade of authorship. The company in which 
he found himself, admirable as it was, was not 
exactly that which could have been expected. But, 
if it was a question of his private principles as 
against any honour he could show the English 
State, his private principles must go by the board. 

It was a point of view. 

Vv 

The most English of the English, Conrad was 
the most South French of the South French. He 
was born in Beaucaire, beside the Rhone; read 
Marryatt in the shadow of the castle of the good 
king Réné, Daudet on the Cannebiére of Mar- 
seilles, Gautier in the tufts of lavender and rose- 
mary of the little forests between Marseilles and 
Toulon, Maupassant on the French torpedo boats 
on which he served and Flaubert on the French 
flagship, Ville d’Ompteda. With the Sabran- 
Penthievres and other Macmahonists he painted 
red the port of Marseilles, intrigued for Napoleon 
ITI, hired, since there was nothing else to be hired, 
an unpainted four-in-hand from a coachbuilder’s 
yard and drove, buried in actresses and the opera 
chorus, to the races. So he made the French navy 
too hot to hold him. That, however, is also the 
spirit of the traditional British navy. The writer 
is never tired of reciting the terms of the offence 
for which his great-uncle, Tristram Madox, was 
cashiered: in that, whilst drunk, he swam ashore 
from the flagship without leave and riotously 
assaulted Mr. Peter Parker of Valetta, tobacconist. 

aes JOSEPH CONRAD 

The one offence is more French, the other more 
Bnglishitee x 
Ct ae 

As above, however, Conrad again and again 
recounted his Marseilles exploit. No doubt with 
the fall of Macmahon and the disappearance of 
any hope for the Bonapartists the chance of a 
career for Conrad in the French navy so dimin- 
ished as to leave that service with few attractions. 
Conrad’s influence and attachés in France were 
all Third Empire. He would relate the instance 
of the unvarnished coach with great energy and 
fire and then, dropping his hands with mock 
senility, exclaim, “Alas, tel que vous me voyez. 
=. ..Now lam an‘extinct-yolcano.. <.” 

—* 

It was not, however, that. It was merely that 
diminished circumstances had reduced the team 
of four to the old mare or some remplacant. We 
would drive down to Hythe or hire a motor that 
broke down eight times in eighteen miles and go 
between the shallow downs up the Elham valley — 
at the top of which he died —to Canterbury. And 
at once Conrad was the sailor ashore. He had 
to find a bar and have a drink, the writer, with the 
prudishness of the Englishman in his own county, 
waiting outside. For you must not have a drink 
in the bar of your own county town. A lunch at 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 73 

the farmer’s ordinary with five pints of beer; tea 
in the smoking room with whiskies brought in on 
the tray! But in the bar, never! The point is a 
fine one. But Conrad, though at home he was the 
English country gentleman and other things per- 
mitting, would have bred shorthorns and worn 
leggings, threw, in his Jack-ashore frame of mind, 
these considerations to the wind. A drink in the 
bar was provided for in King’s Regulations. You 
might not be thirsty: it had to be. 
x 

Conrad’s biography as narrated in those days 
to, and in presence of, the writer, might as well 
here come in. . . . We have arrived, at any rate 
in the writer’s mind, at about the time when we 
dropped, ostensibly for good, any hope of bring- 
ing “Romance” to a finish and took to collab- 
orating on “The Inheritors.” By that date the 
writer had heard enough of Conrad’s autobiog- 
raphy, sufficiently repeated, to have a rounded 
image of his past—such an image at any rate 
as Conrad desired to convey. For, like every 
inspired raconteur Conrad modified his stories 
subtly, so as to get in sympathy with his listener. 
He did it not so much with modifications of fact 
as with gestures of the hand, droppings of the 
voice, droopings of the eyelid and letting fall his 
monocle— and of course with some modifications 

74 JOSEPH CONRAD 

of the facts. So the story, afterwards used in “A 
Smile of Fortune”, told to the writer alone was one 
thing and told to his sprightly, very intelligent 
aunt, Mme. Paradowski, was something quite dif- 
ferent. It would be thinner, less underlined, more 
of a business-like subject for treatment if told to 
the writer alone; when told to the French lady — 
who was also a novelist—it would be much live- 
lier, much more punctuated with gestures and 
laughs— much more pimenté, in fact, the story of 
a sailor’s bonne fortune. 

It was the only story of a bonne fortune that 
the writer ever heard told by Conrad. And the 
note may as well here be made that in all our ex- 
treme intimacy, lasting for many years, neither 
of us ever told what is called a smoking-room 
story. We never even discussed the relations of 
the sexes. 

jr 

So, at the turn of the century—for “The In- 
heritors” must have been published about 1go1 
and, having been written rather fast, must have 
been begun in 1900—the history of Conrad ap- 
peared much as follows to the writer. He was 
born—not, of course, physically in Beaucaire, 
but in that part of Poland which lay within the 
government of Kiev—in Ukrainia, in the Black 
Lands where the soil is very fertile. He was born 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 75 

around 1858. At any rate he was old enough to 
remember the effects of the Polish Revolution of 
the early sixties—say 1862. The oldest—the 
first— memory of his life was of being in a prison 
yard on the road to the Russian exile station of the 
Wologda. ‘The Kossacks of the escort,” these 
are Conrad’s exact words repeated over and over 
again, “were riding slowly up and down under 
the snowflakes that fell on women in furs and 
women in rags. The Russians had put the men 
into barracks, the windows of which were tal- 
lowed. They fed them on red herrings and gave 
them no water to drink. My father was among 

them.” 
—* 

(The implication is of course that Conrad’s 
father died of thirst behind those windows that 
were tallowed so that the men should not look 
out and see their womenfolk. Actually, of course, 
Conrad’s father did not die in these circumstances, 
but it was not until quite lately that the writer was 
aware of his misapprehension. ... This, how- 
ever, is the exact history of a relationship.) 

Vr a 

Conrad remained with his mother in exile until 
he was nine or ten, then, his mother being threat- 
ened with an immediate death from tuberculosis, 
they were allowed to return to Poland. Conrad’s 

76 JOSEPH CONRAD 

mother was a woman of great beauty of physique 
and of character. Her face was oval, her black 
hair braided round it, her eyes intent, her manner 
quiet but spirited. His father was less effectual, 
the prime mover of an abortive revolution, a fact 
which Conrad deprecated. His father was not so 
dark as his mother; untidy, bearded, with high 
cheek bones, he was the proprietor, not profession- 
ally but as a revolutionist, of a famous newspaper 
in which he wrote a great deal. He was constantly 
writing: his style was not very distinguished. 
sr 

Of his father Conrad spoke always depreca- 
torily. This was partly politeness. Whoever you 
were, his interlocutor, all that pertained to you— 
your father and all your ancestors—must be su- 
perior to his. It was his poor little books, his 
poor little brains, his poor little exploits set against 
all your splendours. Partly, too, it really pained 
him to think that his father had been a revolu- 
tionary—and an unsuccessful revolutionary at 
that; as if he had been prenatally connected with 
something not shipshape! For his mother he had 
on the other hand that passionate adoration that 
is felt by the inhabitants of Latin and Western 
Slav countries for their mothers and that seems so 
“foreign” to the Anglo-Saxon. Oddly but com- 
prehensibly, when he spoke of his mother as revo- 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 77 

lutionary he was full of enthusiasm. For him the 
Polish national spirit had been kept alive by such 
women as his mother: the men were hopeless. 
Again not shipshape. This was not difficult to 
understand. The men were prohibited from living 
a life of their own. The only career that the 
Russians allowed them to study for was that of 
the law. So they were all either lawyers or bab- 
blers—or both—and without any practical train- 
ing. This for generations and generations... . 
As for class—the Korzeniowskis were country 
gentlemen, for all the world like an English 
County Family, with land lived on and owned 
since the darkest ages, untitled, but aristocrats to 
the backbone; what is called in England ‘‘ Good 
people”, a term which is untranslatable into any 
other language and incomprehensible even to 
Americans. ‘This made Conrad feel at home in 
Kent; many times he said so. The feudal spirit 
survived in the territories of the great landowners. 
Conrad had an uncle— Paradowski— who was 
a great Pan, guardian to the children of half the 
noble families of that Government. He had a 
longish—as if squared—face, a long nose, medita- 
tive hands that were always pausing in some action 
and long brownish hair that fell rather Germanly 

78 JOSEPH CONRAD 

over the collar of a velvet coat. It was to his 
great country house that the emissary of Palm- 
erston had come. (The writer’s friend Count 
Potocki tells the writer that the name of this uncle 
must have been Bibrowski. Thename Paradowski 
remains, however, very firmly in the writer’s mind. 
Conrad was inordinately proud and fond of this 
uncle and fully four fifths of his conversation 
when it referred to his Polish days concerned 
itself with this relative: there were, for instance, 
the Paradowski dragoons, a famous Russian regi- 
ment named after him or his ancestors. Similarly 
in early days Conrad always wrote and pronounced 
his patronymic as ‘“‘ Kurzeniowski’’; the correct 
transliteration would appear to be “ Korzeniow- 
ski.” It does not seem to matter much.) 
ae 

This uncle stood well with the Russians. Be- 
fore that abortive revolution he had been a close 
friend of one of the Grand Dukes and had had 
a part in drafting the constitution that the Czar 
had proposed to grant to Poland. In the revolu- 
tion he had taken no part, not because he was 
indifferent to the interests of Poland but because 
he knew it must prove abortive and cause much 
suffering and persecution to the Russian Poles. 
Besides, it brought about the rescinding of the 
constitution. After the revolution he busied him- 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 79 

self with alleviating the sufferings of his compa- 
triots; he fed legions of the starving dispossessed ; 
he secured the return of their patrimonies to the 
children of the exiled. Amongst these last was 
Conrad: his uncle secured the return to him of 
half the great confiscated estate of his father and 
got him permission to reside in Russian Poland, 
in his own great house. (The emissary of Palm- 
erston had by the by been sent away with a flea 
in his ear.) 

Here for years and years Conrad read Marryatt 
—and Fenimore Cooper. And it was one of the 
little ingenuous pleasures of Conrad to remember 
that in Paris after Waterloo, as recorded in the 
Memoirs, more crowds followed Sir Walter Scott 
and Fenimore Cooper on the boulevards than ever 
followed the King of Prussia. It pleased him to 
find one of his early heroes thus blessed by Fame 
of the bronze lungs. To this information the 
writer added the other that in that same Paris of 
that same date Assheton Smith, the milor of in- 
credible wealth and spleen was, according to the 
journals, followed about by crowds even greater 
than attached themselves to the Czar of Russia. 
Out of a sort of tacit politeness we never tried to 
decide whether the King of Prussia or the Czar 
of Russia had the larger following. But Assheton 

80 JOSEPH CONRAD 

Smith was to have been the central figure of our 
novel about the execution of Ney—the mulor 
with the spleen intervening nearly successfully to 
save the beau sabreur. ‘This, not because he felt 
any sympathy for Ney but because he desired to 
put a spoke in the wheel of Wellington and 
Blicher and all the fighting fellows who were be- 
ginning to think themselves of much too much im- 
portance, though merely younger sons. However, 
he made too much progress in the affections of the 
Czar’s Egeria, so Ney was shot by the Czar’s 
orders, just opposite the Closerie des Lilas on a 
spot occupied now by a station of the Seaux Rail- 
way ... to spite Assheton Smith. 
a‘ 

The writer never understood why it was always 
night in Poland; so, however, it remains for him: 
a long white house, in the dark, with silver beeches 
in an avenue or, ghostly, in groups. Indoors 
was Conrad, right through adolescence, forever 
reading in the candlelight of an immense, stately 
library, with busts on white plinths and alternate 
groups of statuary in bronze. His uncle would be 
in a rather subterranean study at the other end of 
the vast house — writing his memoirs. When these 
two ever met the writer never knew; of meals or 
even of bed he heard nothing; it was a perpetual 
reading. As for the uncle’s memoirs. . . . Years 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 81 

after, not so long ago, the writer found Conrad in 
a state of extreme perturbation. He said, “My 
dear faller, you must go with me to Boulogne! 
You'll have to fight the second, of course. It’s 
always done in Polish duelling!” It is part of 
what gives vagueness to this narrative that Conrad 
always credited the writer with an almost super- 
natural prescience as to his, Conrad’s, most re- 
mote or most immediate past. He would say, 
“You remember when I was on the Flower of 
Surabaya, old Corvin, the supercargo, had that 
shaving set that I lost on the Duke of Suther- 
land . . .” naming two ships and a supercargo of 
whom the writer had never yet heard... . So on 
this occasion the writer naturally agreed to go to 
Boulogne and pictured an immense, black mous- 
tached opponent in a busby, a frogged dolman, 
top boots and a cavalry sabre whose bare blade 
he caressed with his left hand. ... And it was 
not for several days, during which we made prep- 
arations for the journey, that the reason for our 
journey itself was made clear to the writer. Con- 
rad was too distressed to talk about it. 
ae 

It appeared that the uncle Paradowski, almost 
viceroy of Russian Poland and guardian to half 
the sons and daughters of the Polish nobility of 
his province, had had unheard-of opportunities of 

82 JOSEPH CONRAD 

learning all the matrimonial and family scandals 
of his neighbours. All these he had set down 
in his journal—and this journal had just been 
published. It had caused the wildest consterna- 
tion in Poland and as Conrad was the legal heir 
of M. Paradowski the responsibility for the pub- 
lication was considered to be his. The son of one 
of the most horribly aspersed couples had there- 
fore challenged Conrad and was coming to Bou- 
logne. Conrad was horrified to the point of 
madness; and he was justified. That poor fellow 
shot himself in despair over the revelations, in the 
railway carriage, on the journey. So we never 
Fought. Vo. 
at iad 

Conrad emerges then from the glamourous 
shadows of Poland, making the Grand Tour with 
a lively young tutor. For the first time, in Venice, 
from a window, he saw in the Giudecca a ship — 
a British schooner. 

As to biography during the next few years the 
writer becomes hazy. Conrad himself perhaps 
wished to throw a haze over a part of his life that 
was for him a period of indecisions. At one time 
he would say that he had determined to go to sea, 
years before, when first reading Marryatt; at an- 
other, that a blaze of desire sprang up in him on 

C'EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 83 

sight of that British schooner with the emotional 
lines of her hull; at one time that he rushed back 
to Poland to communicate his decision to his uncle; 
at another that he finished the Grand Tour on the 
conventional lines, but arguing with his tutor and 
at last finally breaking very gradually the news to 
his uncle. His uncle thought him mad; there need 
be no doubt about that; no Pole had ever gone to 
sea; all Poles had always been lawyers; Conrad 
must not go to sea but must study for the law. At 
the university of — was it?p— Lemberg. 
—* 

Conrad at any rate went to Marseilles, and 
entered the French navy. By the influence of his 
uncle — the Poles have always had great influence 
in the chancelleries and ministries of Europe— 
he was granted a commission in that service. In 
it he remained an indefinite time, leaving with the 
rank—he was specific as to that—of Lieutenant 
de Torpilleurs de la Marine Militaire Francaise. 
During that time, on the French flagship Ville 
d’Ompteda, he had witnessed the bombardment of 
a South American town. The town comes back to 
the writer as Caracas; but apparently Caracas is in- 
land, so the flagship can hardly have bombarded it. 
Perhaps Conrad went with a landing party inland 
to that capital. In that way he saw the landscape 
of the track to the silver mine of “ Nostromo.” 

84 JOSEPH CONRAD 

There followed the period of sailor-ashorishness 
in Marseilles with the Bonapartist aristocracy. 
After the episode of the unvarnished coach loaded 
with actresses Conrad telegraphed to his uncle 
to come and pay his debt and embarked on his 
Carlist adventure. This is told sufficiently, as Con- 
rad used to tell it by word of mouth, in the episode 
of the Tremolino in “The Mirror of the Sea.” 
When taking this episode down from Conrad’s 
dictation—as indeed when taking others of his 
personal recollections down from dictation at times 
when Conrad was too crippled by gout and too de- 
pressed to write— the writer noticed that Conrad 
sensibly modified aspects and facts of his word-of- 
mouth narrations. ‘The outlines remained much 
the same, the details would differ. 

As told by Conrad —and the writer must have 
heard all Conrad’s stories five times and his 
favourite ones much more often—the Carlist 
adventure was as follows: At the date of his leav- 
ing the French service the Carlist War was being 
desultorily waged in the North of Spain. (The 
Carlists were the supporters of Don Carlos, the 
legitimist Pretender to the Spanish throne.) The 
cause of the Carlists sufficiently appealed to Con- 
rad; it was Legitimist; it was picturesque and car- 
ried on with at least some little efficiency. It 
offered a chance of adventure. In company with 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 85 

like-minded friends, then, Conrad set to work at 
providing rifles for the army of the Pretender. 
They purchased a small, fast sailing ship—the 
Tremolino, beautiful name. And of all the craft 
on which Conrad sailed this was the most beloved 
by him. In our early days her name was seldom 
off his tongue and, when he mentioned her, his 
face lit up. Nay, it lit up before he mentioned 
her, the smile coming, before the name, to his lips. 
The writer never heard, in those days, what 
make of ship she was. He was expected to know 
that. Conrad would say, ‘You know how the 
Tremolino used to come round....” So the 
writer imagined her as a felucca, with high, 
bowed, white sails against storm clouds and rust- 
coloured cliffs. She was the beautiful ship—as 
Turgenev was the beautiful Russian genius. 
Pacing up and down Conrad would relate how 
they ran those rifles. The method was this: They 
would load the Tremolino, at Marseilles, with 
oranges, bound ostensibly for Bordeaux or any 
up-channel port. Thus, “If any Spanish gun-boat 
accosted us we would have a perfectly good bill of 
lading. Out in the Channel we would meet a 
British schooner and throwing the oranges over- 
board we would load up with rifles. . . .” Those 

86 JOSEPH CONRAD 

particular sentences, with their slightly unusual 
use of the word “would”, Conrad never varied. 
. . » He would have begun his story, unemotion- 
ally, with such historic explanations as his hearer 
seemed to need. Then he would come to the 
Tremolino and his face would light up. This 
emotion would last him for a minute or two. At, 
as it were, the angle where Spain turns down from 
France in the Mediterranean, as if the T’remolino 
had got thus far and was just going through the 
blue water with her burden of oranges, he would 
render his voice dry to say either, ‘The method 
was this... .”’ Or, “Our modus operandi was as 
follows. ...” And then, after taking a breath, 
“Out in the Channel we... .” He would then 
go on to explain the necessities they had when 
making that landfall. “You could bribe any 
Spanish guarda costa on land with a few pesetas 
or a bottle or two of rum... .” But the officers 
of the gunboats that patrolled the coast were in- 
corruptible. . . 
ox 

‘So one night the landlord of the inn omitted to 
show the agreed-on light. He was drunk. In the 
morning we saw a Spanish gunboat steaming back 
and forth in the narrow offing. The bay was a 
funnel, like this. . . . We ran the Tremolino on a 
rock, set fire to her. Swam ashore and got country 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 87 

clothes for a disguise and proceeded to Marseilles 
as best we could. Penniless, Without a penny.” 
a 

In telling these stories Conrad would thus occa- 
sionally duplicate his words, trying the effect of 
them. Then we would debate: What is the prac- 
tical, literary difference between “ Penniless” and 
“Without a penny”? You wish to give the effect, 
with the severest economy of words, that the disap- 
pearance of the Tremolino had ruined them, per- 
manently, for many years. . . . Do you say then, 
penniless, or without a penny? ... You say Sans 
le sou: that is fairly permanent. Un sans le sou 
is a fellow with no money in the bank, not merely 
temporarily penniless. But “without a penny” 
almost always carries with it, “in our pockets.” 
If we say then “without a penny”, that connoting 
the other, ‘“We arrived in Marseilles without a 
penny in our pockets.” . . . Well, that would be 
rather a joke: as if at the end of a continental tour 
you had got back to town with only enough just to 
pay your cab-fare home. Then you would go to 
the bank. So it had better be “ penniless.” That 
indicates more a state than a temporary condition. 
. . . Or would it be better to spend a word or two 
more on the exposition? That would make the 
paragraph rather long and so dull the edge of the 
story. ..: 

88 JOSEPH CONRAD 

It was with these endless discussions as to the 
exact incidence of words in the common spoken 
language — not the literary language—that Con- 
rad’s stories always came over to the writer. Some- 
times the story stopped and the discussion went on 
all day; sometimes the discussion was shelved for 
adayortwo. There were words that we discussed 
for years. One problem was, as has already been 
hinted at: How would you translate bleu-foncé 
as applied to a field of cattle cabbage: the large 
Jersey sort, of whose stalks varnished walking 
sticks are made? Or bleu-du-roi? And again, 
what are the plurals of those adjectives in French 
— asa side issue. . . . That problem we discussed 
at intervals for ten years—the problem of the field 
of cabbages, not of course the plurals... . Now 
we shall never solve it... . 

a 

Conrad, then, again telegraphed to his uncle 
to come and pay his debts. . . . The writer used 
to have a great-uncle whose one expedient in life 
was to take acab. One day this gentleman, walk- 
ing past Exeter Hall, met a lion. Exeter Hall in 
the sixties was a menagerie. When he was asked, 
“What did you do?” he would reply in tones of 
mild disgust at the questioner’s want of savoir 
faire, “Dot Why 1 tookvancabl7 se Lnitne 
same way Conrad used to telegraph to his uncle 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 89 

to pay his debts and to come to Marseilles to 
do it! 
—-_ 

He embarked in a French messageries steamer 
as a hand before the mast and, as has been said, 
made one voyage to Constantinople, seeing tents 
on the hills above the European city. He re- 
turned to Marseilles. Perhaps his uncle had not 
yet arrived to pay his debts or did so only just 
after. Or perhaps he came three times to Mar- 
seilles. Conrad used occasionally to let drop that, 
as the writer knew, he had run through three 
fortunes in his life. At any rate the image re- 
maining to the writer is that, as Conrad sailed 
away, a ship’s boy, in a British brig bound for 
Lowestoft, Pan Paradowski stood on the edge of 
the Cannebiere, like a great land lion, lamenting 
on the brink of the water his beloved, ugly duck- 
ling of a nephew who should have become a seal. 

¥pesea lion... 

VI 

Lowestoft has always seemed to the writer to 
be a queer, bleak, whitewashed little old place 
from which to begin the conquest of a language, 
a conspiracy against a literature, a career of fame 
that became world-wide. It used at any rate to 
be all that: queer, bleak, whitewashed, with flag- 
staffs, coast guards, high skies and northeast wind. 
The writer must have been there first at the age of 
five or six, and, by stretching a point or so and 
ignoring a couple of years, we used to arrive at the 
theory that coincidence had brought us together 
thus early. That cannot actually have been the 
case. When Conrad first heard or spoke an Eng- 
lish word the writer cannot have been much more 
than three: so we may be said to have learnt 
grown-up English in about the same year... . 
But we used to keep a slight haze over our respec- 
tive ages. Conrad was a little sensitive about his 
years, towards forty-five, and the writer did not 

then care. 
ae 

Besides, Conrad liked coincidences—in our 
playtime. He liked to amuse himself with re- 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 91 

semblances between himself and other great men 
— Johnson collected orange peel and dried it; so 
at one time Conrad had done. Or he would find 
in memoirs accidental traits of resemblance be- 
tween himself and Napoleon, Louis XVIII, 
- Theophile Gautier or General Gallifet. He 
would look up from his book and read the passage 
out with hilarious pleasure. He liked, as has been 
said, to think that at one of the Chippendale desks 
that we had at the Pent Christina Rossetti had 
written and at another, given to the writer’s father 
as a wedding present, Carlyle, who was its donor. 
He would say that “Heart of Darkness” was 
written on the same wood as: 

Rest, rest, a perfect rest, 

Shed over brow and breast, 

Her face is towards the West, 

The peaceful land. 

She shall not see the grain 

Ripen on hill and plain, 

She shall not feel the rain 
Upon her hand.... 

and “The End of the Tether” before the glass 
bookshelves that had seen Carlyle write ‘The 
French Revolution.” It did not matter that Chris- 
tina wrote most usually on the corner of her wash- 
stand or that Carlyle had bought the desk at a 
second-hand dealer’s in the street next Tite Street, 
Chelsea. It made indeed no difference that he 

92 JOSEPH CONRAD 

disliked the work of Carlyle or thought Christina 
the greatest master of words in verse. The lines 
just cited were the only English poetry that the 
writer ever heard Conrad quote. He had liter- 
ally no ear’ for “English verse.“ = Bute there 
“Heart of Darkness” had to have been written, 
and there the poem; here “The End of the 
Tether”, and here “The French Revolution.” 
... It was like building retrospective castles in 
Spain; it was squeezing the last drop out of the 

subject. a 

So with our coincidental careers. The coinci- 
dences had to be there for moments of elation. 
The writer, after our visit to Mr. Wells, happened 
to ask whether the great storm in which Conrad 
had come up the Channel for the first time had 
been identical with the great gale that had wrecked 
the Plassy. And immediately it had to be. It 
could not have been by seven years or so. But it 
was. ... For the rest of our lives it had to be. 
It shall. So with Lowestoft. Conrad could bring 
himself to remember there a little boy with long, 
golden hair, a bucket and a spade, who used to 
march up to the young able seaman and ask him 
questions in an unintelligible tongue... . And 
indeed, in moments of great effusiveness, patting 
the writer on the shoulder, Conrad used to assert 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 93 

that it was one of the writer’s books, seen on the 
bookstall of Geneva railway station, that had first 
turned his thoughts to writing English as a possi- 
bility. That might indeed have happened. But 
one detail of Conrad’s narration was too much for 
the writer’s bibliophilic prudishness— though he 
would connive at any time at the twisting of man- 
ageable years between two friends. But several 
times before the discovery of this immense coin- 
cidence Conrad had related how he had stood on the 
Geneva railway platform, looking at the bookstall 
and idly wondering what he was going to do next 
with his life. He had been recovering from an 
illness, in the same hydrotherapy as that in which 
Maupassant died. Another coincidence. He had 
seen a row of small, canary-yellow— remember 
the canary yellow—volumes. ‘They were the 
books of the Pseudonym Library that Mr. Garnett 
had fathered—about the colour and not much 
larger they were than a packet of Maryland cig- 
arettes at1 fr.50. But they were famous through- 
out Europe. There was no railway bookstall on 
which you did not find them. . . . And looking 
at them Conrad said, “ Why should I not write, 
tooP” .. . The writer’s third book had been pub- 
lished in that very year, fathered too by Mr. Gar- 
nett, issued by the same firm in a series called the 
Independent Library. ...It might very well 

94 JOSEPH CONRAD 

have been on the bookstall, the series having been 
intended for foreign circulation. There was noth- 
ing to make the thing inherently even improbable. 
. .. Alas! The writer’s work was bound in a sort 
of decayed liver colour: the most hideous that the 
writer has ever even imagined. “So it couldn’t 
be me,” as the old mare said. But nothing would 
have pleased Conrad’s generous and effusive moods 
better than to claim the writer as his literary god- 
father. He was like that. 

Years later, the writer having landed in this 
country at Rouen, it occurred to him as his heel 
struck the quay: Conrad began to write “ Al- 
mayer’s Folly” in the stateroom of a ship moored 
in this very port. When he looked up from his 
desk, through the porthole, he used to see the inn 
at which Emma Bovary met her lover. Is that 
then this very spot? Do I then begin where Con- 
rad began that other battle? . . . In an interval 
the writer asked Conrad whether these spots could 
be coincidental. He at once began to be very ani- 
mated on a drooping occasion. ‘Yes, yes,” he said. 
“Opposite the very spot. . . . Two doors to the 
left of the road that goes up to the Poste Cen- 
trale. .. . My dear Ford. . . . The very spot.” 
That coincidence the writer will not attempt to 
disturb. 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 95 

Conrad landed, then, at Lowestoft when the 
writer was about three, and Conrad himself not 
much more than twenty, the writer is fairly cer- 
tain, in 1877. Here he heard his first English 
words, to recognise them. They were: “ Eggs and 
bacon or marmalade?” He was sitting in the bar 
of a public-house he had been taken to by an old 
gentleman who eventually invited him to stay. 
Every morning at breakfast the old gentleman 
uttered the above morning shibboleth of England 
and then went to his business. He was the pro- 
prietor of the famous Lowestoft pottery works, 
so eventually Conrad served his time as a Boy on 
a brig owned by the pottery proprietor. It made 
fortnightly voyages to Newcastle for coal needed 
by the pottery. In such coastwise service he passed 
the time necessary for him to become by turn A.B., 
second mate and master. He became a naturalised 
British subject just before passing for master... . 

-*K- 

It was during all these years that he read. Men 
at sea read an inordinate amount. During the 
watches when they are off duty they can, if they 
are so minded, sit about by the hour with books, 
engrossed, like children. A large percentage of 
the letters received by writers from readers come 
from sailors either in the King’s or the merchant 
service. Conrad had a great many such corre- 

96 JOSEPH CONRAD 

spondents; one of his own, a naval officer, the writer 
curiously shared with Conrad. As each of our 
books came out he would write to its author, from 
off Gibraltar, from the China seas, from some 
Pacific station—very good letters. He seemed to 
have no idea of any relationship between his two 
addressees, but as he never gave the name of a ship 
neither of us ever wrote to him. His letters ceased 
after 1914. fe 

It was Conrad’s great good luck to be spared the 
usual literature that attends on the upbringing of 
the British writer. He read such dog-eared books 
as are found in the professional quarters of ships’ 
crews. He read Mrs. Henry Wood, Miss Brad- 
don—above all Miss Braddon!—the Family 
Herald, rarely even going as high as the late Wil- 
liam Black or the pseudo-literary writers of his 
day. He once or twice said that going down Rat- 
cliffe Highway he was jumped out at from a door- 
way by a gentleman who presented him with a 
pocket copy of the English Bible. This was 
printed on rice paper. He used the leaves for roll- 
ing cigarettes, but before smoking always read the 
page. So, he said, he learned English. The writer 
has always imagined this story to be one of Con- 
rad’s mystifications. Normally he would express 
the deepest gratitude to the writers of the Family 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 97 

Herald —a compilation of monthly novelettes, the 
grammar of which was very efficiently censored 
by its sub-editors—and above all to Miss Brad- 
don. She wrote very good, very sound English; 
machined her plots inoffensively and well; was 
absolutely workmanlike, her best novels being the 
later and less-known ones. Long after this period 
of seamanship Conrad read “The Orange Girl”, 
a novel placed in the time of Charles II. He 
recognised in it, so he then said, all the qualities 
that he had found in this novelist’s work when he 
had been before the mast. Miss Braddon learned 
Greek at the age of eighty in order to read Homer 
in the original. She died only very lately. 

From that time, for ten years, Conrad followed 
the sea. The deep sea, reading all sorts of books. 
Once an officer with quarters of his own he re- 
sumed his reading of French along with the Eng- 
lish popular works. He read with the greatest 
veneration Flaubert and Maupassant; with less, 
Daudet and Gautier; with much less Pierre Loti. 
Tormented with the curiosity of words, even at 
sea, on the margins of the French books, he made 
notes for the translation of phrases. The writer 
has seen several of these old books of Conrad, 
notably an annotated copy of “ Pecheur d’Islande” 
—and of course the copy of “Madame Bovary” 

98 JOSEPH CONRAD 

upon the end papers and margins of which “ Al- 
mayer’s Folly” was begun. 
a \ 
Of Conrad’s deep-sea life the writer proposes 
to say next to nothing. Intimately mixed up as 
he was with the writing of so many of Conrad’s 
sea stories he could not disentangle to his own 
satisfaction which version of a semiautobio- 
graphic story, like ‘“‘Heart of Darkness”, was the 
printed story, which the preparation for the 
printed story, as Conrad told it to the writer, which 
the version that Conrad told for the pleasure of 
chance hearers and which was, as it were, the 
official autobiographic account. Occasionally, as 
in his account of his meeting with Roger Casement 
on the fringe of the bush outside Boma, Conrad 
would turn to the writer and say, “You’ll keep 
that, mon vieux, for my biography, . . .” speak- 
ing semijocularly. 
“re 
However, by a curious fatality, during the late 
war the writer happened to come across a largish 
body of writing in the form of letters written by 
Conrad from aboard ship to a compatriot. By 
Conrad as politician, not as seaman! It was pre- 
cisely a body of writing, since each of the letters 
was a sort of essay on international politics, and 
it was curious in that it was to all intents and pur- 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 99 

poses completely uninteresting. It was in a sense 
passionate in that it was filled with aspirations that 
Great Britain should join in one combination or 
another against Russia. She was to join Germany, 
Austria, France—any one, so long only as she 
fought the Bear. But all these letters were written 
with a fluency, such that, had they come before the 
writer editorially, he would at once have thrown 
them into the waste-paper basket. It was as if 
Lord Macaulay had been writing leaders for a 
popular paper. . . . Before that one of Conrad’s 
relatives had showed the writer a number of letters 
that Conrad had written to the Indépendance 
Belge. These were quite another matter—ad- 
mirably written, intensely emotional. As if Pierre 
Loti had had some heart! They had in fact, as 
is to be expected, a great deal of the body and 
substance of “ Heart of Darkness.” 
—*- 

At both of these documents however, the writer 
did no more than glance. The lady had treasured 
up as cuttings her nephew’s correspondence and, 
when Conrad was out of the room, presented the 
bundle to Conrad’s ami le poéte. He read them 
for perhaps half an hour before Conrad came in 
again; then their author exhibited so much per- 
turbation that the writer desisted. The Pecbabiliy 
is that Conrad burned the bundle... . It was 

100 * JOSEPH CONRAD. 

very similar with the other letters. They were 
lent to the writer by their addressee at a time when 
the writer was extremely occupied; he glanced at 
them for long enough to form the opinion ex- 
pressed above and then put them away. Before he 
had had time to look at them again it occurred to 
him that Conrad might prefer him not to read 
them. He accordingly wrote to Conrad and re- 
ceived the answer that Conrad would extremely 
prefer that the letters should not be reread and 
the author returned them to their owner. It is to 
be hoped that they will not be disinterred. 
Be 

It should not be inferred that Conrad had any- 
thing to hide. He disliked the writer’s reading 
his early works out of the shyness that attends the 
maturity of every author. This writer would give 
a good deal if the shelf in the British Museum that 
contains his early writings could be burned, and 
Conrad would occasionally say that the idea of the 
writer or any one else reading certain of the 
stories of ‘““The Outpost of Progress” or even 
certain paragraphs of his later work caused him 
to have chair de poule all down his spine. It is 
like a feeling of physical modesty. 

ae 

However, in moments more robust he would 

declare that the articles in the form of letters 

C'EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 101 

were remarkable productions. He would’ remind 
the writer of his aunt’s expressed opinion that 
those letters formed magnificent prose; and in 
moments of depression over his then work he 
would declare that what he had written in French 
before ever trying English was infinitely above 
anything he could do in the inexact, half-baked 
language that English was. He put it that the 
idea of really writing English—an English that 
should have an abiding value—never appeared 
to him practical whilst he was at sea. He would 
write essays and long letters with the idea of im- 
proving his vocabulary for social occasions. Then, 
one day, writing an imaginary letter to the Times 
about some matter professional to the British 
Mercantile Marine, he felt as if he had really 
‘bitten into hisspen,”’*. . 2 The earlier letters: at 
which the writer glanced sufficiently confirmed 
- this. It was not that they were bad: they were 
just glib. 
— 

At what moment of writing or reading on the 
bridge, in what harbour Conrad thus found the 
religion of English prose the writer does not re- 
member. It was probably in Sydney during a 
period in a convalescent home. It comes back 
that this is what Conrad said, but that may very 
well be a mistake. . . . Conrad, however, used to 

102 JOSEPH CONRAD 

say that in that convalescent home they were fed 
on tomatoes and milk, a horrible combination; 
occasionally also he used to say that his early work 
was like tomatoes and milk taken together. A 
horrible combination! he would add. .. . Or, of 
course, the revelation of his powers may have come 
to him in Rouen. 
as 

Anyhow, somewhere on the dark waters Con- 

rad found religion. 
a 

We had left Lowestoft and passed for master. 
. . . We made the voyage in the Judea, Do or 
Die—actually the Palestine —that you find nar- 
rated in “Youth.” In the East we passed so and 
so many years. You find the trace of them in 
“The End of the Tether”’, to go no further outside 
“The Youth” volume. We commanded the 
Congo Free State navy —for the sake of “ Heart 
of Darkness.” So we have the whole gamut of 
youth, of fidelity and of human imbecility... . 
And if the writer write “we’’—that is how it 
feels. For it was not possible to be taken im- 
periously through Conrad’s life, in those unchrono- 
logical and burning passages of phraseology, and 
not to feel—even to believe —that one had had, 
oneself, that experience. And the feeling was 
heightened by Conrad’s affecting to believe that 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’?OMBRE 103 

one had, at least to the extent of knowing at all 
times where he had been, what seen, and what 
performed. se 

The scenes of Conrad’s life as afterwards ren- 
dered, say in “ Heart of Darkness”, are really as 
vivid in the writer’s mind from what Conrad said 
as from what Conrad there wrote. It is a curious 
affair. Actually under the writer’s eyes are the 
bright, lit-up keys of a typewriter. Yet perfectly 
definitely he sees both the interior and the outside 
of a palm-leaf hut, daylight shining through the 
interstices. A man lies on the floor of the hut, 
reaching towards a pile of condensed milk tins. 
The man is half in shadow—half Conrad, half 
the writer; too tall for Conrad; stretched out a 
full eight feet, trunk and arms. Outside an im- 
mense grey tide, the other shore hardly visible: 
a few darkish trees of irregular outline. And a 
man—coming. In a planter’s dress: breeches, 
leggings, a flannel shirt, a sombrero. . . . Some 
time before he had lifted up the branches of the 
forest on the opposite shore and looked across at 
our hut. . . . He makes a fire and gives us some 
soup. . . . He comes once a fortnight. . 

— 

We had been at the sources of the Congo: 
nearly to Fashoda, says the ungeographical part 

104 JOSEPH CONRAD 

of our minds that once pored over a map of 
Africa to see everywhere Terra Incognita—in the 
eighties—and that has never again looked at a 
map of Africa. We had belonged to the Humani- 
tarian Party. The Humanitarian Party did not 
approve of feeding our black troops on black 
prisoners; the Conservatives did. So the Con- 
servatives had poisoned us or something the 
equivalent. And had put our quasi corpse in 
charge of native bearers to take us, dead or alive, 
down to Boma on the coast. It was all one to 
the natives whether at Boma they delivered us 
quick or dead: they were paid the same. 

Half down the Congo they had dumped us in 
a hut that was a cache for condensed milk. They 
had gone away for a fortnight to their own vil- 
lage. . . . We extracted the condensed milk from 
the tins by suction, having first pierced them with 
a pocket knife. . . . The condensed milk was the 
very antidote for the poison! ... The bearers, 
black, their white teeth protruding, come back, 
not displeased to find us alive. Not pleased... . 
Astonished! . . . They carried Conrad down to 
Boma, a sweltering collection of tin huts. The 
Bomese took great pains to keep you alive: you 
must die at sea, otherwise the death rate of the 
Congo Free State rises by one... . 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 105 

At Boma then, listless from the abominable 
huts, we strolled out one day along the coast, 
between the satin sea and the steaming trees. A 
man, with the sunlight on his face, in white tennis 
shoes, with two bulldogs at his heels, stepped out 
of the dark forest. He said Hullo! He had 
strolled across Africa from the Zanzibar side in 
his tennis shoes, with no bearers, no escort but 
his bulldogs, no arms. He had such a fascination 
for the black fellows. That was Roger Casement. 
. . . There was a great deal of light, the sky blue, 
the sea dove-coloured and oily, the forest black- 
green, a wall; the beach pink; the bulldogs crashed 
over it to sniff at our heels... . 

It was in pictures like that that the writer had 
Conrad’s life, up to about the time when we en- 
gaged on “The Inheritors.” Half of it came in 
a shyish way, for biography, half in pictures, the 
result of stray anecdotes. Thus if one or other 
of us happened to be nervous from overwork and 
we talked of nerves Conrad would say, “‘ By Jove, 
after I came out of the Ospedale Italiano and went 
into the City to draw some pay, I was so frightened 
at the racket on the Underground that I had to 
lie down on the floor of the compartment. Nerves 
all to pieces. . . .” So the writer has his picture 
of Conrad lying between the seats on the things 

106 JOSEPH CONRAD 

like duckboards that used to floor the old Under- 
ground carriages; it was only by conjunctions be- 
fore and after that he pieced together that Conrad 
went into the Italian Hospital for Seamen in 
London after coming back from Boma and that 
from there he went to Switzerland, to the hydro- 
therapy near Geneva in which Maupassant died. 

== 

All to pieces as he then was he had to think 
of how he was going to employ the rest of his life. 
For following the sea he imagined that he would 
be no longer fit. When he was a little better he 
saw on the bookstall of Geneva Station those 
yellow volumes. The sight of them and the 
thought of Maupassant made him say, “ By Jove! 
Why not write?” When he had settled that he 
might write he had to settle in which language 
his writing should be. There were French and 
English. In English there were no stylists —or 
very rare ones. French bristled with them. When 
he made the decision to write in English the writer 
does not know. He used to say that it was in 
Rouen harbour, opposite the hotel in which Emma 
Bovary had been accustomed to meet Rodolphe. 

Here, looking out of his porthole across the 
frozen ground at the inn door, he began trans- 
lating phrases from the scene between Rodolphe 

C'EST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 107 

and Emma at the cattle show. He said that he 
began with Rodolphe’s formal phrases of romantic 
love that were whispered between the announce- 
ments of prizes for bullocks and so, working out- 
wards, reached the blanker pages of cover, title 
and half-title pages. On these he began “ Al- 
mayer’s Folly.” He was reading at the time 
Daudet’s “ Jack” which immensely fascinated him 
though he found it trop chargé—as who should 

say, too harrowing. oon 

What stands in the two paragraphs above Con- 
rad told the writer over and over and over again. 

— 

In the sad years for Europe, Conrad wrote a 
passage contradicting the statement made by some 
one somewhere in print that he had had to choose 
between writing in French or English. He stated 
that from the first English had jumped at him and 
held him. This was a politeness to England at 
a time when extravagantly patriotic pronounce- 
ments were called for from persons of foreign 
origin: Henry James imagined the beau geste of 
naturalising himself as a British subject practically 
on his deathbed, Conrad this other. From the 
national point of view it was desirable, from the 
point of view of literary precision, to be regretted. 
For it is obvious that any one who contemplates 

108 JOSEPH CONRAD 

writing and is practically bi-lingual must from 
time to time hesitate as to in which language he 
will write. The writer has to make the choice 
every morning. He had to make the choice on 
the morning after the day on which he learned 
of Conrad’s death. That was a choice a little more 
definite than that Conrad made—but not much 
more. His relations and connections in Belgium 
certainly pressed him to write in French before he 
even thought of writing in English. Of that the 
writer was assured by Conrad’s aunt, who regretted 
to the last that Conrad chose to write in a language 
that rendered him inaccessible to what she con- 
sidered to be the civilised world. She herself 
wrote several novels, notably for the Revue des 
deux Mondes. 
_ 

The point is of no great importance. Obvi- 
ously if, as Conrad frequently asserted, the first 
English words that he ever heard were the verses 
containing the pious aspiration, ““We’ve fought the 
Bear before, and so we will again, the Russians 
shall not have Constantinople!” Those words 
might well jump at a young Pole, sick to take 
part in politics. What is material is that Conrad 
always knew French much better than he knew 
English. This only enhances the glory of his 
achievements in our language. In French he was 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 109 

perfectly fluent, in English never; abroad he was 
constantly taken for a Frenchman; no one could 
ever have imagined him English from his speech 
or bearing. Those points again are of no impor- 
tance: what is miraculous is that he took English, 
as it were by the throat and, wrestling till the dawn, 
made it obedient to him as it has been obedient 
to few other men. The fact is extraordinary, but 
not incomprehensible. The writer writes French 
better than he does English, not because he knows 
French better, but precisely because he knows 
French worse; in English he can go gaily on 
exulting in his absolute command of the tongue. 
He can write like the late Mr. Ruskin or like the 
late Charles Garvice, at will. In writing, but not 
in speaking French, he must pause for a word; it 
is in pausing for a word that lies the salvation of 
all writers. ‘The proof of prose is in the percentage 
of right words. Not the precious word; not even 
the startlingly real word. 
ten 

We once discussed for a long time whether Con- 
rad should write of a certain character’s oaken 
resolution. As a picturesque adjective “oaken”’ 
has its attractions. You imagine a foursquare, 
lumpish fellow, inarticulate and apt to be mulish, 
but of good conscience. The writer must obvi- 
ously have suggested the adjective. We turned it 

110 JOSEPH CONRAD 

down after a good deal of discussion, the writer 
being against, Conrad for, its use. Conrad liked 
its picturesqueness and was always apt to be polite 
to the writer’s suggestions. He could afford to 
be. We decided for “stolidity” which is more 
quiet in the phrase. Eventually the whole sentence 
went. . . . The story was Conrad’s “Gaspar 
Ruiz.” That is a fairly exact specimen of the way 
we worked during many years.... 
so 

Conrad then, in Rouen harbour, decided that 
he would write books in English. From that point 
the following episodes come back to the writer 
from Conrad’s recounted autobiography. He lay 
for long in that port, because the ship upon which 
he found himself as master had been seized by the 
sheriff’s officers, for debt. Not of course for Con- 
tad’s debt. The ship was one of a projected 
French Rouen-to-New York line that never got 
beyond that one ship, and that one ship lay there 
for a long time, the financier having failed to 
raise capital enough. .. . There comes in here 
another rather curious coincidence between the 
career of Conrad and the writer; it cannot un- 
fortunately be narrated for the moment, one of the 
parties concerned being out of reach and probably 
still alive. . . . Presumably, however, if two peo- 
ple knock about the world in similar districts for 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 111 

a number of years before acquaintanceship, they 
will come very near touching hands several times 
all unconsciously. . . . 
oes 

Gradually, then, Conrad seemed to lose touch 
with the open sea. There opened up more and 
more glimpses of shore careers, so that of those 
relatively later days the record would seem to be 
one of abortive voyages... . Thus the writer 
remembers with peculiar vividness a telegram 
coming to Captain Conrad, telling him to assume 
command of a ship taking in cargo in Antwerp 
harbour, and a journey out in midwinter.... 
But it is only a vignette of a wintry port with icy 
arc lamps amongst bare trees over black water: 
the stowing was being done all wrong, the ship 
being a bad one to shift her cargo. That was 
apparently why Conrad had been called in. 
Whether she ever went to sea remains as a blank 
in the writer’s mind. 

ane 

By all accounts Conrad was a very efficient 
master —but extravagantly nervous about details. 
All the several officers who once sailed with him 
have narrated the same thing to the writer. 
Conrad would indulge in extremely dangerous 
manceuvres, going about within knife-blades of 
deadly shores whilst his officers and crew shivered ; 

riz JOSEPH CONRAD 

but over very small details of thé stowing of 
spars and the like he would go out of his mind 
and swear the ship to pieces. In the same way, 
in writing he would attack subjects almost impos- 
sible and go mad over a sentence; or, in driving, 
he would shave stone posts like a madman, and then 
curse the stable-boy for letting him come out with 
the old instead of the new whip. . . . You get an 
account of a going-about in “The Secret Sharer.” 
It is, however, possible that the minuteness of de- 
tail on which, according to his officers, Conrad so 
insisted on board was not so very minute. 

There is for instance the story of the Conway 
boy. This Conrad was fond of relating as an 
instance of the complete want of any sense of 
responsibility in the character of the English — 
or at any rate of the English when young. Con- 
rad had then with him on a vessel in Table Bay 
a third mate, or perhaps an apprentice, who had 
just come from the Conway training ship. Bad 
weather appeared to be coming on and Conrad 
asked the boy if he ‘had seen the cables properly 
stowed. The boy answered that he had. The ex- 
pected gale came on, blowing in-shore. It was 
necessary to let go another anchor. As the cable 
ran out one of its links jammed. . . . The writer 
does not profess to understand this technical de- 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 113 

tail. ... The ship at any rate was in imminent 
danger owing to the neglect— the sheer irresponsi- 
bility—of that Conway boy. The Conway boy, 
at frightful risk, jumped on the cable and kicked 
the link into place, saving the ship. . . . Conrad 
used to comment that it was unimaginable that any 
French boy would have neglected the supervision 
of that cable; had he done, however, the impos- 
sible, and so neglected, he would probably not have 
jumped on the cable. He would have committed 
suicide, out of shame and knowing that his career 
was ended. . . . It might have been better to have 
jumped on the cable first, and then committed 
suicide. The matter under consideration was, 
however, responsibility. ... 

If then one of the officers who had sailed with 
Conrad and afterwards talked with the writer 
happened —as the writer strongly suspected —to 
have been that Conway boy it is not unlikely that 
he would enlarge on Conrad’s hypercritical atten- 
tion to detail. The people you have strafed —and 
Conrad said he strafed that boy until he precious 
nearly wanted to commit suicide — well, they take 
it out of you like that afterwards. That is only 
human nature. 

== 

At any rate Conrad, by all accounts, was a very 

114 JOSEPH CONRAD 

admirable officer. Yet he hated the sea... . 
Over and over again he related how overwhelm- 
ing, with his small stature, he found negotiations 
with heavy spars, stubborn cordage and black 
weather. He used to say, half raising his arms, 

“Took at me. ... How was I made for such 
imbecilities? Besides, my nerves were for ever 
on the racket... .” And he would recount how, 

when he had been running up the Channel on a 
moonlight night, suddenly, right under the foot of 
the Torrens, there had appeared the ghostly sails 
of asmall vessel. It was, he used to say, something 
supernatural, something of the sort that was al- 
ways happening at sea. He said it wasn’t so much 
that his heart was in his mouth for the seconds it 
took that vessel to clear; it remained in his mouth 
for months after. It was there yet when he thought 
Otite 

On the outward voyage of the Torrens he had 
had as a passenger Mr. Galsworthy, going to the 
Cape. They had confided in each other shyly — 
each of them was writing! . . . From that sprang 
up a friendship that was lifelong. . . . The bustle 
that arose in the Pent when Conrad, opening a 
letter, exclaimed, “Hurray . .. Jack’s coming 
down!” The mare would have to go down to 
Dan West’s at Hythe half a dozen times that day. 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 11s 

. .. Once Mr. Galsworthy, arriving at Sandling 
Junction, found the trap too loaded. He ran 
beside it all the two and a half uphill miles to the 
Pent, talking pleasantly as he trotted. The writer 
has never seen anything so effortless, for Nancy 
went quite well, long ears and all. ... That 
became one of the legendary feats of the Pent 
along with the writer’s long shot at the rat... . 
It was the better performance. .. . It is a pity 
that there is no feat of Mr. Robert Bontine 
Cunninghame Graham’s to set beside it. That 
mighty horseman also, with a letter announcing 
a visit, could wake up the studious Pent as a 
junction springs into life at the coming of a great 
mail train. . . . Conrad had very good friends. 
Other departures from the sea of which Con- 
rad liked to talk and which the writer could never 
chronologically disentangle were his caretaking of 
a warehouse on the Thames beside one of the 
bridges. .. . London Bridge probably ... and 
his floating with Mr. Fountain Hope of a South 
African gold mine. ... Why Conrad should 
have found the superintending of a warehouse 
that transshipped tinned meat attractive the writer 
does not know. Or perhaps he does. At any 
rate, Conrad talked of that time with enthusiasm 
as a period of fun. He had been found the job 

116 JOSEPH CONRAD 

whilst waiting for a ship by a friend with a name 
like Krieger, with whom he afterwards lost con- 
tact. Occasionally Conrad would ask, ‘‘What’s 
become of Krieger?” ... They enjoyed them- 
selves together in a jack-ashore way, going to the 
Royal Aquarium in the evenings or sitting on 
barrels in the tobacconist’s shop just near Fen- 
church Street Station—a great place to hear of 
a ship. Once when we were going to see Captain 
Hope—another good friend of Conrad’s—at 
Stanford le Hope, Conrad pointed out to the writer 
marks that he alleged his feet had kicked in that 
tobacconist’s counter-front. .. . No doubt other 
sea captains awaiting ships had borne their part. 
KK 

In Fenchurch Street and particularly in the 
Station, Conrad was a different man—with his 
echoes! The gloomy light framed him very 
appropriately; truculences came into his voice; 
he knew all the bars and became at once the city- 
man gentleman-adventurer with an eye for a skirt 
that hadn’t disturbed the dust that twenty years. 
He had to have from that tobacconist a handful 
of cigars—he who never smoked anything but 
innumerable half cigarettes from year’s end to 
year’s end, lighting up and almost immediately 
throwing away to light up again. There is no 
station like Fenchurch Street on the road to Til- 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L’OMBRE 117 

bury. Conrad could tell you where every husky 
earringed fellow with a blue, white-spotted hand- 
kerchief under his arm was going to.... It 
most impressed the writer that in the station bar- 
ber’s shop was a placard that read: Teeth scaled 
two shillings, extractions sixpence. ... To come 
home from the great waters to that! 

In that mood must have been Conrad’s city ad- 
venture. It was perhaps the third fortune that he 
lost. He, Mr. Hope and a brother— Mr. Hope 
may well correct the details: this is the saga told 
in Fenchurch Street. (Do you know the story of 
Grunbaum who asks Klosterholm: Is it true the 
story that I hear that Solomons made forty thou- 
sand dollars in St. Louis in the retail clothing trade? 
Well, replies Klosterholm, the story is true, it’s 
the details are wrong. It wasn’t in St. Louis but in 
Chicago. It wasn’t in the retail trade but in the 
wholesale. It wasn’t forty thousand dollars, but 
a hundred and forty thousand. It wasn’t his 
money, but mine. And he didn’t make it; he lost 
it.) Conrad, then, Mr. Hope and a brother had 
staked out in the South African gold fields a 
claim to about a third of what is now the De 
Beers Mine. They came to London to float a 
company at the time of the boom in South Afri- 
cans. Their solicitor, to begin with, with all the 

118 JOSEPH CONRAD 

deeds, was lost in the Kinfauns Castle. Before 
they could get others the boom was on the decline; 
by the time they were ready for flotation the bottom 
dropped out of the market. One of the black- 
mailing bucket-shopkeepers, who seem indispens- 
able as members of the British and all other 
Parliaments, turned his attention to Conrad and 
Company. He demanded money as the price of 
a good report in his blackmailing sheet. The ad- 
venturers told him to go to hell. The prospectus 
of their mine was printed by the same firm as 
printed the blackmailing sheet. When the pro- 
spectus came out the little red patch on the map 
that should have showed the Conrad-Hope prop- 
erty was well away in the territory of another 
company. The blackmailer in his sheet jubilantly 
pointed out that the mine must be bogus... . 
They went nevertheless to flotation. ... 
= 

Conrad used to describe how, having issued 
their prospectus on the day of flotation, they sailed 
the Thames, jubilant in a steam launch with cigars, 
champagne, plovers’ eggs in aspic. ... God 
knows what. They were to step ashore million- 
aires. .. . [hey stepped ashore to find the flota- 
tion a disastrous failure. Only one hundred and 
eighty—some fabulously small number — shares 
had been subscribed by the public. 

CEST TOI QUI DORS DANS L°OMBRE 11g 

That was Conrad’s last commercial venture. 
Whether he telegraphed again to his uncle he 
never said... . Let us imagine for a moment’s 
pause what would have become of British Litera- 
fure if that flotation had succeeded... . For 
Conrad was certainly a magnificent business man 
of the imaginative type. It might well have been 
Park Lane instead of the Pent. For Conrad hated 
writing more than he hated the sea... . Le vrai 
métier de chien! 

~ u) 
Toe) teat Ob Agee 
pom eh he 
i ai ir) 

pe ; a whe: 
fi a i cies 

oo x r 

ie M8 (RO Nd Mom: ae = 
{ NCAT DA GE TS aay Soe 

Po lat) he Fee). a) ae is 
f aN ae 7g De! ce hal d — 

Part IT 
EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS.... 

eer 
on 
rule 

abe 

I 
WE come thus to the life purely literary. 
*" 

After two and a half years we had abandoned 
“Romance”: the problem of how to get John 
Kemp out of Cuba had grown too difficult. The 
writer’s invention at any rate had failed and Con- 
rad was too involved with his own work to do any 
inventing. Looking back, the period in which 
slowly we dragged out that preposterous series of 
fatalities seems one of long bush-fighting: as if 
we were clearing a piece of land in which the 
vegetation grew faster than could be dealt with 
by such cutting instruments as we had. 

iM 

It is not to be imagined that we spent the whole 
of our times upon this enterprise; we each at inter- 
vals carried on work of our own. Then we would 
drop it, have another month’s try at “ Romance.” 
Then drop that again. . . . Or sometimes one of 
us would write his own work in the morning; the 
other would write away at “Romance”; in the 
evenings and till far into the night we would join 
up. We pursued this monstrous undertaking all 

124 JOSEPH CONRAD 

over the shores and near-shores of the British 
Channel: at) the. Pent, near Elythe in =Kent<at 
Aldington; at Winchelsea in Sussex; in Bruges. 
... The most terrible struggles of all took place 
in a windy hotel at Knocke on the Belgian coast, 
with a contralto from Bayreuth practising in the 
basement. Her voice literally shook the flimsy 
house. Whilst we wrote or groaned on the fourth 
floor the glasses on a tray jarred together in sym- 
pathy with the contralto passages of “‘ Die Goetter- 
daemmerung.” ... And there was a child very 
ill, with only Belgian doctors; abscesses in the jaw 
and no dentist; gout; frigid rooms into which blew 
the sands from Holland; intolerable winds; in- 
terminable gusts of rain. . . . It is thus the world 
gets its masterpieces. Conrad was then beginning 
“Nostromo” in the mornings: it was going to be 
a slight book and very quickly finished —to make 
a little money. 
x 

It was, however, before that that we abandoned 
“Romance.” We took up “The Inheritors”, a 
queer, thin book which the writer has always re- 
garded with an intense dislike. Or no, with hatred 
and dread having nothing to do with literature. 
What they have to do with he cannot say; some 
obscure nervous first cause, no doubt, that could 
not interest any one but a psychopathic expert. 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS. ... 125 

Conrad had none of these feelings apparently. 
The writer’s dislike for the book began as soon 
as the last word was written, so that he managed 
to shift the burden of proof-correcting— which 
Conrad rather liked—on to his collaborator’s 
shoulders and from that day to this has never 
looked at the book. When then, during the early 
days of the late European struggle we met finally 
to settle up various matters, and when Conrad said, 
‘“As to collaborations, when it comes to our col- 
lected editions, you had better take ‘The Inheri- 
tors’ because it is practically all yours, and that 
will leave me ‘Romance’—not that ‘Romance’ 
isn’t practically all yours too” (Conrad talked 
like that!), the writer was very pleased. His in- 
tention was to suppress the book. He imagined 
that Conrad disliked it as much as he did himself, 
and was just turning it over with polite contempt. 
So it would never have appeared in either of our 
collected editions and would remain unobtainable 
until, with the expiration of copyright, some Ger- 
man research-worker might dig it up and make a 
pamphlet out of it. 

i 

However, a little later, Pinker, having been in- 
formed that the writer was dead or in an asylum, 
made in America a contract for the collected edi- 
tion of Conrad, including all our collaborations 

126 _ JOSEPH CONRAD 

past and to come. Thus, before the writer knew 
anything about it, there “The Inheritors” was, 
out again, not merely in one, but in three editions. 
He happened then, rather with regret, to mention 
the republication to Conrad as a thing that he sup- 
posed Conrad had not been able to prevent. 
Authors are forced by agents and publishers into 
the republication of all sorts of works they may 
wish to suppress—in the interests of a sacred 
“completeness.” Conrad, however, remarked 
with a great deal of feeling—vwith more feeling 
than the writer otherwise remembers in him— 
“Why not? Why not republish it? It’s a good 
book, isn’t it? It’s a damn good book!” And the 
writer let the matter go at that— rather than imply 
that Conrad would have set his name to a book 
that he did not consider good, or even damn good. 
He had intended to raise the matter later so as 
absolutely to assure himself as to what really was 
Conrad’s view of this work. But that is too late 
now. It must remain as Conrad’s opinion that the 
book is a damn good one. 
ee 

That being so we had better go on a little to 
consider the exegesis of this work. .. . We had 
abandoned “Romance”; the writer had just fin- 
ished a preposterous work purporting to be a his- 
tory of the Cinque Ports in elephant folio. In 

\ 

EXCEBEENCY caer WAGOATS.. ¢.< 127 

revenge it was written completely in sentences of 
not more than ten syllables. The South African 
War was there—or thereabouts, the writer being 
an excited Pacifist whose hat was from time to 
time bashed in by still more excited patriots. 
Conrad was engaged with the end of “Heart of 
Darkness”, with thinking out “Typhoon” and 
with writing “Amy Foster”, a short story origi- 
nally by the writer which Conrad took over and 
entirely rewrote. The writer, in common with 
Conrad, had a great admiration for Mr. Balfour; 
the writer at least had a profound detestation for 
the late Mr. Chamberlain who, off his own bat, 
had caused the war. How Conrad felt towards 
the late Mr. Chamberlain the writer does not re- 
member. He was certainly more Imperialistic 
than the writer... . 
i 

Since it may seem odd to the reader that one 
author, living in close intimacy with another 
author, should not know what were his friend’s 
views upon a point of politics so important as a 
war it might be as well to say a word or two upon 
how we did live together. Our relationships 
were, then, curiously impersonal: never once did 
the writer ask Conrad a question as to his past, 
his ethical or religious outlook or as to any in- 
timate point of his feelings or life. Never once 

128 JOSEPH CONRAD 

did Conrad ask the writer any such question. 
Never once did we discuss any political matter. 

xe 

We met at first as two English gentlemen do in 
a club: upon that footing we continued. We took 
it for granted that each was a gentleman, with the 
feelings, views of the world and composure of a 
member of the ruling classes of the days of Lord 
Palmerston— tempered of course with such eccen- 
tricities as go with the spleen of the milor anglais. 
Such eccentricities we allowed each to the other, 
but without question. Thus during the South 
African War, as has been said, the writer was an 
active and sometimes uproarious Pacifist. Not a 
pro-Boer; he would have hanged President Kruger 
on the same gallows as Mr. Chamberlain. Or, 
later, with an equal enthusiasm he supported Miss 
Christabel Pankhurst and the Suffragettes. Now 
and then on idle occasions after lunch he would 
declaim about either of these causes. Conrad 

would listen. pe 

From time to time, particularly whilst writing 
“Heart of Darkness”, Conrad would declaim pas- 
sionately about the gloomy imbecility and cruelty 
of the Belgians in the Congo Free State. Still 
more would he so declaim, now and then, after 
he had been up to London and had met Case- 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS. ... 129 

ment, who had been British Commissioner on the 
Congo and was passionately the champion of the 
natives. Then the writer would listen. 
ae 

If Conrad differed from the writer he never 
argued, nor did the writer ever argue with Con- 
rad. Once in his hotter youth— though he would 
do the same in his sober age! —the writer put his 
name down as willing to go with a crack-brained 
expedition to German Poland in order to fight the 
Prussians, and Conrad never so much as remon- 
strated, though he expressed gloomy anticipations 
as to what would happen to that expedition. The 
writer’s ambition, however, was to fight the Prus- 
sians; to that Conrad offered no objection. . . 

“~ 

Or, again, the writer never in his life uttered 
one word of personal affection towards Conrad. 
What his affection was or was not here appears. 
And Conrad never uttered one word of affection 
towards the writer: what his affection was or 
was not will never now be known. Conrad was 
infinitely the more lavish of praise of his collab- 
orator’s books: so lavish that at times the writer 
would feel like a fatuous Buddhist idol whilst 
Conrad went on. The writer on the other hand 
supposes that Conrad gathered somehow how 
deeply his work was admired by his companion. 

130 JOSEPH CONRAD 

Perhaps he did, perhaps he did not; that, too, will 
never now be known. The writer cannot remem- 
ber ever to have addressed any particularly moving 
praise to Conrad as to his work—except in his 

last letter but one... . 
—s 

It is that that makes life the queer, solitary thing 
that it iss You may live with another for years 
and years in a condition of the closest daily in- 
timacy and never know what, at the bottom of the 
heart, goes on in your companion. Not really. 

Re 

So there we lived, the two English gentlemen, 
the one bobbing stiffly to the other, like mandarins. 
. . . Our politics were what they were; our creeds 
were what they were. Out of the loyalty that is 
demanded of gentlemen we were both papists— 
but not the faintest glimmer of an idea is in the 
writer’s mind as to what might have been the 
religious condition of Joseph Conrad, except that, 
when out driving, he would turn back rather than 
meet two priests. That is a Polish superstition. 
Once in our lives the writer addressed a remon- 
strance —a reproach—to Conrad. That has been 
already related. Once Conrad did the same to the 
writer. = 

That was very characteristic. Conrad had very 
strongly the idea of the Career. A career was 

EXCELEENCY SA FEW GOATS... . -a3t 

for him something a little sacred: any career. It 
was part of his belief in the shipshape. (The 
reader must not believe that, though we did not 
question each other, we did not voluntarily and 
at times the one to the other express our passionate 
beliefs.) A career was a thing to be carried 
through tidily, without mistakes, as a ship is taken 
through a voyage and stowed away safely in a port. 
So one day, when the writer had both started a 
Review and permitted some one to make a very 
indifferent play out of one of his novels that was 
then being boomed by an enthusiastic Press, Con- 
rad positively addressed a letter of serious and 
formal remonstrance to the writer. 
Eee 

But Conrad had certainly intensely disliked the 
English Review, if not for its contents of conduct, 
then for its effect on the writer’s career. With a 
great deal of perspicacity he pointed out that it is 
ruin for any imaginative writer to edit any sort of 
periodical. In the first place it is a waste of time; 
in the second place it raises for you such hordes of 
enemies that eventually they will bring you down 
—or very nearly. All the writers you discover or 
benefit will become your bitterest enemies, as soon 
as your connection with a public organ ceases — 
orsooner! Thatis human nature. Even Benjamin 
Franklin observes that his eminently successful 

132 JOSEPH CONRAD 

career was made by very carefully putting himself 
in a position to receive—as often as not—un- 
needed benefits. He thus made for himself so 
many patrons who gave him friendly shoves on 
the way, whenever the opportunity occurred. And, 
by never conferring benefits, or by very skilfully 
obscuring the origin of such benefits as the did 
confer, he made for himself no enemies at all... . 
In addition, Conrad continued, every soul who has 
ever written a favourable note about you will 
deluge you with his manuscripts. You will be un- 
able to print them; you will have so many thou- 
sands to call you base ingrate in private and to 
stone your work before the public— again, as soon 
as you have no organ of your own in which to 
revenge yourself... . 

But even conducting a review was as nothing 
to the sin of allowing an indifferent play, made 
from one of your novels, to be produced. In that 
day, in England, all novelists were obsessed by the 
idea that if they could only get a play produced, 
fame, fortune and eternal tranquillity, beyond the 
range of all temporal griefs, would be for ever 
theirs. A novel may earn its hundreds. A play— 
even an unsuccessful play—vwvill earn thousands; 
the receipts for a successful play run into the tens 
and hundreds of thousands. In addition, in Eng- 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS.... 133 

land at that date there was a glamour of its own 
attaching to the Play. Even the Lord Chamber- 
lain’s censorship was nearly almost abolished. 
There was something sacred about it. 

~~ 

The writer was practically the only British nov- 
elist who did not catch that malady. It poisoned 
the whole of Henry James’s after life; even Con- 
rad was not immune. The writer was—and he 
got it in the neck, as the phrase is. There was 
never—there was never such a debacle as was 
that novel dramatised. It contained five acts, each 
of innumerable scenes; the curtain was down for 
twice as long as it was up; it played from 8 till 12.15. 
Not ten people remained till the end. The Press 
next day was livid with rage at the writer for dar- 
ing to write a play without having studied the 
technique of the drama. The writer’s connection 
with the English Review had just come to an end. 
He had had nothing to do with that play. It had 
been extracted from his novel by a dramatist. The 
writer had never even seen a rehearsal. 

— 

The writer did not mind; Conrad did. He 
minded ‘horribly. Coming down from Town the 
day after he had received that letter, the writer 
just mentioned its reception, and left it at that. 
Conrad did not. He repeated the contents of the 

134 JOSEPH CONRAD 

letter all over again: the writer was ruining his 
career. The writer said that he did not care. 
At that Conrad suffered really as much as he had 
suffered during the reading of the first draft of 
“Romance.” It was in the same department of 
suffering. He sat, rather curled up in the corner 
of a sofa, sick-looking and wincing, flushed, and 
his eyebrows contracted downwards. 
at al 

A frame of mind, a conception of life, accord- 
ing to which a man did not take stock of the results 
of his actions upon himself, as it were at long 
range, was something that he had never contem- 
plated. As he saw life, you wrote a book, lived 
circumspectly, avoided making enemies, meddled 
only with what immediately concerned you; or you 
passed for second mate, lived circumspectly, 
avoided making enemies, concerned yourself only 
with your ship and ship’s company. . . . Then you 
could foresee that in ten years’ time, in fifteen, 
in twenty, you would be promoted to the command 
of the Torrens, the finest sailing ship afloat; to be 
commodore of a great line; to be an elder brother 
of the Trinity House. .. . Or the Times would 
salute you as a great light in the literary firmament; 
you would become the doyen of British letters and 
an honorary member of the French Academy; 
you would have a memorial service in Westminster 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS.... 135 

Abbey. Or even be buried there: an aspiration the 
fulfilment of which was forbidden to Nelson... . 
He desired the shipshape life. 

he 

That any one—any soul—could be indifferent 
to these honours was new to him, and terribly 
painful. He had taken it as so for granted that 
all proper men deserved this tranquil and as 
if British peacefulness! ...In the same way 
in His Majesty’s Army it has to be taken for 
granted that every officer desires promotion to 
the rank, eventually, of honorary Colonel com- 
manding his regiment. Life could not otherwise 
goon. ‘That any officer should be indifferent to 
promotion then becomes painful: as if you should 
not care about the dressing of the men of your unit 
upon inspection by the Field Marshal Command- 
ing-in-Chief. . . . It is, in effect, the same crime 
as not squeezing the last drop of blood out of your 
subject when you are writing a book: the real 
crime against the Holy Ghost. 

For that crime presumably is neither more nor 
less than to be out of harmony with the universe, 
and for Conrad the universe was the shipshape. 
Any soul wandering outside that corral in the 
abyss was for him a matter purely of gloomy in- 
difference. ... ‘The fellow simply does not 

136 JOSEPH CONRAD 

exist!” That was the formula. ... That any 
one with whom he was on terms of intimacy 
should, all unsuspected, hold such a philosophy 
was to him unspeakably painful—as if it were a 
treachery to the British flag. It was as unspeak- 
ably painful to him when later Casement, loath- 
ing the Belgians so much for their treatment of 
the natives on the Congo, took up arms against his 
own country and was, to our eternal discredit, 
hanged, rather than shot in the attempt to escape. 
... We might have achieved that effort of our 
wooden imaginations. .. . 
oe 

It will be as well to attempt here some sort of 
chronology. ‘This is a novel exactly on the lines 
of the formula that Conrad and the writer evolved. 
For it became very early evident to us that what 
was the matter with the Novel, and the British 
novel in particular, was that it went straight for- 
ward, whereas in your gradual making acquain- 
tanceship with your fellows you never do go 
straight forward. You meet an English gentle- 
man at your golf club. He is beefy, full of health, 
the moral of the boy from an English Public 
School of the finest type. You discover, gradually, 
that he is hopelessly neurasthenic, dishonest in 
matters of small change, but unexpectedly self- 
sacrificing, a dreadful liar, but a most painfully 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS.... 137 

careful student of lepidoptera and, finally, from 
the public prints, a bigamist who was once, under 
another name, hammered on the Stock Exchange. 
... Still, there he is, the beefy, full-fed fellow, 
moral of an English Public School product. To 
get such a man in fiction you could not begin at 
his beginning and work his life chronologically 
to the end. You must first get him in with a strong 
impression, and then work backwards and _ for- 
wards over his past. . . . That theory at least we 
gradually evolved. 

At the beginning, then, of this chapter we had 
arrived at the year 1900 or so. We went to Knocke 
in Belgium and took up “Romance” once more, 
probably a year or so later; but Conrad’s letter 
as to an endangered career was not written until 
about 1908. It comes in here as a light upon 
what did, upon what can have induced Con- 
rad to desire to take a hand in the production of 
the. book called “The Inheritors.” . ... 

x 

Since the beginning of this chapter the writer 
has read a sufficiency of that work to satisfy him 
as to what it was all about. The process was 
distasteful, but the subordinating of one’s nerves 
to duty is the first step towards a career or even 
towards the writing of a novel. And what made 

138 JOSEPH CONRAD 

Conrad passionately desirous of laying hands on 

the writer’s then subject was a sentence. One 

sentence coming after an effective couple or so of 

sentences with which the manuscript had opened. 
—* 

The scene of that barratry is perfectly vivid to 
the writer at this moment. He had driven over 
to the Pent rather shyly with the manuscript of 
the opening chapters of the novel in his pocket. 
Conrad was as yet unaware that a novel was in 
progress. He was sitting in the parlour of the 
Pent with the monthly roses peeping just above the 
window sill. After he had seen to the unharnes- 
sing of the disgraceful Exmoor pony—who had 
only one accomplishment, that of undoing the bolt 
of his oat chest with his teeth, which was a damna- 
ble inconvenience, for the animal would fill itself 
full to the lips with oats and then have to be walked 
for seven or eight hours to save its life, and usually 
in the dead of the night—after, then, the writer 
had seen to the unharnessing of that plague, with 
the aid of a disreputable, aged ex-time-serving 
soldier called Hunt, who had had sunstroke, ague 
and malaria in Quetta with the Buffs, who claimed 
to be heir, in Chancery, of half the County of Kent, 
who had always sore feet, hobbled, and whose 
proximity resembled that of a rum-keg, and who 
acted as our outdoor factotum and gardener, the 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS.... 139 

writer went into the parlour. Conrad was sit- 
ting reflecting and, beyond his saying, “My 
dear faller . . .” we did not speak. We were so 
constantly about each other’s houses that quite 
often we could meet after driving over without 
any particular greeting, as if one of us had just 
come down from washing his hands in the bed- 

OXON OA A Bing 
= 

Conrad, then, was sitting gloomily reflecting — 
upon his career, upon the almost impossibility 
of wrestling any longer with the English that 
shall describe lagoons, shallows, brigs reflected 
in breathless water, upon the possibility that he 
would have to get over neck into debt before he . 
should have finished “The Rescue’—a slight 
book almost no longer than a novelette, which was 
already mortgaged to Heinemann, that decent fel- 
low who never worried his authors to complete 
their manuscripts. And there was the beginnings 
of another attack of gout in the right wrist; and 
Nancy needed shoeing. ... 

air 

The writer then came in, and before sitting 
down drew the manuscript of the first chapter of 
“The Inheritors” from his pocket. Conrad said, 
“ Another story ... Donne! Donne!” Conrad 
had no particular admiration for the writer’s 

140 JOSEPH CONRAD 

short stories. He had simply taken “ Amy Foster” 
from the writer, with no particular apology, and 
had just rewritten it—introducing Amy herself, 
who had not existed in the writer’s draft. This, 
however, was a novel, not a short story, and in- 
stead of giving the manuscript to Conrad, who 
would merely have glanced at it perfunctorily and, 
dropping it, would have returned to the contem- 
plation of his debts and gout, the writer sat down 
and began to read aloud. 

oer 

At the end of the first paragraph Conrad said, 
“Mais mon cher, cest trés chic! What is it?” 
At the end of a sentence on the sixth page he was 
exclaiming, “But what is this? What the devil 
is this? It is tres, tres, trés chic! It is épatant. 
That’s magnificent.” And already the writer 
knew that either he was in for another collabora- 
tion or that he would hand over the manuscript 
altogether. 

ee, 

The sentence was: 

I recovered my equanimity with the thought 
that I had been visited by some stroke of an ob- 
scure and unimportant physical kind. 

The opening paragraphs had run: 

“ Tdeas,”’ she said: “Oh, as for ideas——” 
“Well,” Ihazarded, “as for ideas——” 

EXCBELLENCY, ‘A FEW GOATS.... 141 

We went through the old gateway and I cast 
a glance over my shoulder. The noon sun was 
shining over the masonry, over the little saints’ 
effigies, over the little fretted canopies, the grime 
and the white streaks of bird-dropping. .. . 

it 

And as soon as the writer had let Conrad know 
that this was a novel, not a short story, he knew 
that he was in for another collaboration. Every 
word spoken added to that conviction. . . . The 
novel was to be a political work, rather allegori- 
cally backing Mr. Balfour in the then Govern- 
ment; the villain was to be Joseph Chamberlain 
who had made the war. The sub-villain was to 
be Leopold II, King of the Belgians, the foul — 
and incidentally lecherous—beast who had cre- 
ated the Congo Free State in order to grease the 
wheels of his harems with the blood of murdered 
negroes and to decorate them with fretted ivory 
cut from stolen tusks in the deep forests. . . . For 
the writer, until that moment, it had appeared to 
be an allegorico-realist romance; it showed the 
superseding of previous generations and codes by 
the merciless young who are always alien and 
without remorse. ... But the moment Conrad 
spoke, he spoke with the voice of the Conrad who 
was avid of political subjects to treat and the writer 
knew that this indeed was the Conrad subject. . 

II 

“The Inheritors” is a work of seventy-five thou- 
sand words, as nearly as possible. In the whole 
of it there cannot be more than a thousand — cer- 
tainly there cannot be two—of Conrad’s writing; 
these crepitate from the emasculated prose like 
firecrackers amongst ladies’ skirts. 

I had looked at her before; now I cast a side- 
ways, critical glance at her. I came out of my 
moodiness to wonder what type this was. She had 
good hair, good eyes, and some charm. Yes. And 
something besides—a something—a something 
that was not an attribute of her beauty. ‘The 
modelling of her face was so perfect as to produce 
an effect of transparency, yet there was no sug- 
gestion of frailness; her glance had an extra- 
ordinary strength of life. Her hair was fair and 
gleaming, her cheeks coloured as if a warm light 
had fallen on them from somewhere. She was fa- 
miliar till it occurred to you that she was strange. 

ie 

Do you not hear Conrad saying, “ Damn Ford’s 
women,” and putting in, ‘She ‘had good hair, 
good eyes and some charm.” And do you not see 
the writer, at twenty-six, hitching and fitching with 

EACERERNGY ADHEW .GOATS) «5.45 143 

“a something—a something—a something—” 

to get an effect of delicacy, and Conrad saying, 
“Oh, hang it all, do let’s get some definite par- 
ticulars about the young woman?” 

That was how, normally, we collaborated. But 
in this volume that is the only discoverable pas- 
sage with which Conrad notably interfered. Oc- 
casionally he wrote in a whole speech that made 
a situation. The difference between our methods 
in those days was this: We both desired to get 
into situations, at any rate when any one was 
speaking, the sort of indefiniteness that is char- 
acteristic of all ‘human conversations, and par- 
ticularly of all English conversations that are 
almost always conducted entirely by means of 
allusions and unfinished sentences. If you listen 
to two Englishmen communicating by means of 
words, for you can hardly call it conversing, you 
will find that their speeches are little more than 
this: A. says, “ What sort of a fellow is... you 
know) “cb. replies, Oh, he’s.a'sort-of a 22” 
and A. exclaims, “Ah, I always thought so... . 
This is caused partly by sheer lack of vocabulary, 
partly by dislike for uttering any definite state- 
ment at all. For anything that you say you may 
be called to account. The writer really had a con- 
nection who said to one of her nieces, “My dear, 

” 

144 JOSEPH CONRAD 

never keep a diary. It may one day be used 
against you,” and that thought has a profound in- 
fluence on English life and speech. 

1 =e" 

The writer used to try to get that effect by al- 
most directly rendering speeches that, practically, 
never ended, so that the original draft of “The 
Inheritors” consisted of a series of vague scenes in 
which nothing definite was ever said. These 
scenes melted one into the other until the whole 
book, in the end, came to be nothing but a series 
of the very vaguest hints. The writer hoped by 
this means to get an effect of a sort of silverpoint: 
a delicacy. No doubt he succeeded. But the 
strain of reading him must have been intolerable. 

at aa 

Conrad’s function in “The Inheritors” as it 
to-day stands was to give to each scene a final tap; 
these, in a great many cases, brought the whole 
meaning of the scene to the reader’s mind. Look- 
ing through the book the writer comes upon 
instance after instance of these completions of 
scenes by a speech of Conrad’s. Here you have 
the— quite unbearably vague—hero talking to 
the royal financier about the supernatural-adven- 
turess heroine. Originally the speeches ran: 

“You don’t understand. ...She. ... She 
Wille: ets 

EXCERLENCY, A FEW GOATS. . 2° 145 

He said: “Ah! Ah!” in an intolerable tone of 
royal badinage. 

I said again: “You don’t understand. . . . Even 
for your own sake... .” 

He swayed a little on his feet and said: 

“Bravo. ... Bravissimo. ... You propose to 
Prioliten. cic. 
I looked at his great bulk of a body. . . . Peo- 

ple began to pass, muffled up, on their way out of 
the place, 
Ke 
The scene died away in that tone. In the book 
as it stands it runs, with Conrad’s addition itali- 
cised : 

“Tf you do not” (cease persecuting her had 
been implied several speeches before), I said, “I 
shall forbid you to see her. And I shall... .” 

“Oh, oh!” he interjected with the intonation of 
a reveller at a farce. ‘‘We are at that—we are 
the excellent brother—” He paused and then 
added: “Well, go to the devil, you and your 
forbidding.” He spoke with the greatest good 
humour. 

“I am in-earnest,”” I said, “very much* in 
earnest. The thing has gone too far. And even 
for your own sake you had better. . . .” 

He said<““Ah,. ah!” im the tone of ‘his “Oh, 
oh!” 

“She is no friend to you,” I struggled on, “she 
is playing with you for her own purposes; you 
“all Gaceasers 

146 JOSEPH CONRAD 

He swayed a little on his feet and said: ‘“‘ Bravo 
... bravissimo. If we can’t forbid him we will 
frighten him. Go on, my good fellow. . . .” and 
then, ‘‘ Come, go on.” 

I looked at his great bulk of a body. ... 

“You absolutely refuse to pay any attention?” 
I said. 

“Oh, absolutely,” he answered. 

-—h 

At that point Conrad cut out a page or two of 
writing which was transferred to later in the book 
and came straight on to: 

‘Baron Halderschrodt has committed suicide,” 
which the writer for greater delicacy had ren- 
dered, “ Baron Halderschrodt has... .” Conrad, 
however, added still further to the effect by add- 

ing: 

Half sentences came to our ears from groups 
that passed us: 4 very old man with a nose that 
almost touched his thick lips was saying: 

“Shot himself. ... Through the left temple. 
2 idan Dieu!” 

If the reader asks how the writer identifies 
which was his writing and which Conrad’s in a 
book nearly twenty-five years old, the answer is 
very simple. Partly the writer remembers. This 
was the only scene in the book at which we really 
hammered away for any time and the way we 

BXCELGENCY, A PEW GOATS... 6 0447 

did it is fresh still in his mind. Partly it is knowl- 
edge; Conrad would never have written “a very 
old man” or “almost.” He would have supplied 
an image for the old man’s nose and would have 
given him an exact age, just as he had to precise 
the fact that Halderschrodt had shot himself, and 
through the left temple at that. 

=—s 

The only other passage in the book that the 
writer can quite definitely identify as Conrad’s 
is what follows. For the sake of the adventuress- 
heroine and an income the lugubrious hero— 
and this is the point—has betrayed to Mr. Cham- 
berlain and the powers of evil, Mr. Balfour, Lord 
Northcliffe, Leopold of Belgium, sound finance, 
the small investor and the past. He is alone at 
four in the morning with the drunken journalist, 
the actual writer of the leader that produces these 
sweeping results. The whole passage, which is 
solid Conrad, is a matter of two pages. Here is 
the most characteristic portion. 

x ouscan t frichten mee. -said.. . .cNo 
one can frighten me now.” A sense of my in- 
accessibility was the first taste of an achieved 
triumph. I had done with fear. The poor devil 
before me appeared infinitely remote. He was 
lost; but he was only one of the lost: one of those 
that I could see already overwhelmed by the rush 

148 JOSEPH CONRAD 

from the floodgates opened at my touch. He 
would be destroyed in good company; swept 
out of my sight together with the past they had 
known and with the future they had waited for. 
But he was odious. “I am done with you,” I 
said. 

“Eh, what? . . . Who wants to frighten? ... 
I wanted to know what’s your pet vice... . 
Won't tell? You might safely—I’m off.... 
Weant.me- to; tell miner «1... No times. bo 
off. . . . Ask the policeman .. . crossing sweeper 
willdo-..%. Im going,’ 

“You will have to,” I said. 

“What. ... Dismiss me? . . . Throw the in- 
dispensable Soane overboard like a squeezed 

letnonee << What would” Fox isayr... 1 an 
But you can’t, my boy. Not you. Tell you... 
Cant <2, —sbetorehand: with: yous. --.-sick of "it. 
elem Of .. . to the islands... ..the islands 

of the Blest. . . . Come too . . . dismiss yourself 
out of all this. Warm sand, warm, mind you. You 
won't?” He-‘had an injured expression. ‘“ Well, 
I’m off. See me into the cab, old chap, you’re 
a-decent fellow after all—»... not.one of these 
beggars who would sell their best friend . . . for 
alittle money .. . orsome woman. Well, see me 
off.” 

. . . | went downstairs and watched him march 
up the street with a slight stagger under the pallid 
dawn. . . . The echo of my footsteps on the flag- 
stones accompanied me, filling the empty earth 
with the sound of my footsteps. 

EXCELEBNCY, A FEW GOATS... 2° {149 

That occurs nearly at the end of the book. 
There is one other passage of complete Conrad 
two pages further on: 

I turned towards the river and on the broad 
embankment the sunshine enveloped me, friendly, 
familiar, warm like the care of an old friend. A 
black dumb-barge drifted, clumsy and empty, and 
the solitary man in it wrestled with the heavy 
sweep, straining his arms, throwing his face up to 
the sky at every effort. ... 

The barge with the man still straining at the 
oar has gone out of sight under the arch of the 
bridge, as through a gate into another world. A 
bizarre sense of solitude stole upon me and I 
turned my back upon the river as empty as my day. 
Hansoms, broughams, streamed with a continu- 
ous muffled roll of wheels and a beat of hoofs. A 
big dray put in a note of thunder and a clank of 
ehains. 6s. 

Ct 

Those two passages are practically all the Con- 
rad writing that there is in the book. We must 
have had a severe struggle over those six or seven 
pages. That the writer realises because ‘he re- 
members still the sense of relief that attended his 
writing the tremendously sentimental last scene, 
his wallowing in his own juvenile prose and his 
own dreadful sentences. As thus: 

I had had my eyes on the ground all this while; 
now I looked at her, trying to realise that I should 

150 JOSEPH CONRAD 

never see her again. It was impossible. There 
was that intense beauty, that shadowlessness that 
was like translucence. And there was her voice. 
It was impossible to understand that I was never 
to see her again, never to hear her voice after 
this. 

She was silent for a long time and I said nothing 
—nothing at all... . At last she said: “There 
is no hope. We have to go our ways; you yours, 
I mine. And then if you will—if you cannot 
forget—you may remember that I cared; that, 
for a moment, in between two breaths, I thought 
Ol 2, Of failing... Lhatis all_licanedo «1.4. 00u 
your sake.” .... I had not looked at her; but 
stood with my eyes averted, very conscious of her 
standing before me; of ‘her great beauty, her great . 
glory. 

The punctuation of this passage is that of the 
uniform edition of the “Collected Works of Joseph 
Conrad”, the cover of which gives the book to 
Joseph Conrad alone. The punctuation and the 
misprints, which are very many, are American and 
not the writer’s. The rest is. 

KN 

Having achieved this ending the writer carried 
it over to the Pent. Conrad glanced at two or 
three pages of the manuscript, exclaimed, “ Mar- 
vellous! My dear boy....My dear Ford. 
Mon vieux, I don’t know how you do it!” and 

EXCEELENC YA PEW:GOATS. 2 0.5151 

put the manuscript down on the table. The whole 
went that afternoon to the printers. 
—- 

It has sometimes occurred to the writer to won- 
der whether Conrad ever read —ever could have 
read —that passage. If he never did the omission 
would have been all right. There was for excuse 
the extreme fatigue of our struggle of wills that 
went on whenever we really got down to a diffi- 
cult passage; there was also the fact that the writer 
was supposed to handle all the women in the books 
we wrote together. . . . Conrad, however, assured 
the writer that he had very carefully corrected the 
proofs of the English Collected Edition of the 
book, at a time when the writer was elsewhere em- 
ployed. This was when he also asserted that “The 
Inheritors” was a damn good book. And if we 
add that he did let his name as sole author remain 
on the cover of the book we must imagine that he 
regarded it with some satisfaction. That his name 
so appeared was of course no doing of Conrad’s 
but was due to the business talents of the late Mr. 
Pinker and the publishers. (An author as a rule 
is not shown the cover of his book before publi- 
cation. And this is naturally more especially the 
case when it is a matter of all the volumes of a 
collected edition.) But Conrad offered to have 
all the copies of “The Inheritors” and ‘‘Romance” 

152 JOSEPH CONRAD 

called in and the covers altered. The writer, 
however, said that it did not matter; as far as he 
was concerned Conrad might have signed all his 
books. He might still. So the edition was left 
alone. But at least Conrad did not mind the 
attribution. 

Nevertheless the writer prefers to believe that 
Conrad never read the last chapter of “The In- 
heritors.” The factor of fatigue would be quite 
enough to excuse it. The writer is ready to con- 
fess that there are a few passages of “ Romance” 
that he himself has only read in French. . . . And 
it was permitted to Conrad not to read the pas- 
sages concerning what he called “ Ford’s women.” 
It had been only with something like nausea that 
he had brought himself to approach this lady for 
long enough to introduce the “she had good hair, 
good eyes and some charm” of the opening quota- 
tion of this chapter. It was only with difficulty 
that he was restrained from adding good teeth to 
the catalogue. He said with perfect seriousness, 
‘““Why not good teeth? Good teeth in a woman 
are part of her charm. Think of when she laughs. 
You would not have her not have good teeth. They 
are a sign of health. Your damn woman has to 
be healthy, doesn’t she?” The writer, however, 
stopped that... . To-day he would not. 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS.... 153 

Still the writer would rather believe that Con- 
rad lied about the reading, about the proof- 
correcting, about anything; he would rather 
Conrad had robbed an alms box than that he 
should have read that dreadful prose and have 
called itdamn good. The rest of the book is badly 
written but not so dreadfully. Still it is bad 
enough: a medley of prose conceived in the spirit 
of Christina Rossetti with imitations of the late 
Henry James; inspired by the sentimentality of 
a pre-Raphaelite actor in love scenes— precisely 
by Sir Johnston Forbes Robertson dyspeptically 
playing Romeo to Mrs. Patrick Campbell’s Juliet; 
cadenced like Flaubert and full of little half-lines 
dragged in from the writer’s own verses of that 
day. He was only twenty-six at the time and was 
very late in maturing... . 

It runs like this: country atmosphere, romantic 
place-names and all: 

We were sauntering along the forgotten valley 
that lies between Hardres and Stelling Minnis; 
we had been silent for several minutes. For me at 
least the silence was pregnant with . . . unde- 
finable emotions. . . . There was something of the 
past world about the hanging woods, the little veils 
of unmoving mist—as if Time did not exist in 
those furrows of the great world; and one was so 
absolutely alone; (Conrad suddenly put in here: 

154 JOSEPH CONRAD 

anything might have happened. But the writer 
went on bravely.) I was silent. The birds were 
singing the sun down. It was very dark among the 
branches and from minute to minute the colours 
of the world deepened and grew sombre... . I 
was silent. A June nightingale began to sing, a 
triflemiogtscly..1.6. 

You perceive: the writer got his nightingale in 
after all: a marvel of oaken persistency. It may 
have been out of sheer agony that Conrad burst 
in here: 

I stretched out my, hand and it touched hers. 
I seized it without an instant of hesitation. “ How 
could I resist you?” I said, and heard my own 
whisper with a sort of amazement at its emo- 
HONS ar. 

Do not be alarmed. Anything might have hap- 
pened. But the writer was there to save the young 
woman. Positively he remarks: 

I did not know what it might lead to: I remem- 
bered that I did not know even who she was... . 
I let her hand fall. “We must be getting on,” I 
said a trifle hoarsely. ... 

HK 

What then attracted Conrad to this farrago of 
nonsense? Partly no doubt it was the idea of 
getting a book finished quickly; here was another 
unexplored creek with possible gold in its shallows 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS. ... 155 

or its huts. But it was only very partially that. 
There was some mysterious attraction; Conrad’s 
manner was too animated, his enthusiasm too great 
at the first reading. It may have been partly be- 
cause the manuscript was read. The rhetorical 
will pass when it comes in a human voice. The 
writer has very frequently found good manu- 
scripts that young men read to him, only to be 
appalled by their ornamentation—or their bald- 
ness, even!—when he afterwards read them for 
himself. . . . Yet it cannot have been wholly that; 
Conrad had opportunities enough of going through 
the manuscript before the book was finished. Or 
it may have been affection; Conrad may really 
have had an affection for the writer. Yet it can 
hardly have been that. . . 
aes 

The writer has sometimes imagined that, how- 
ever much we might have scoffed at jewels five 
words long that, on the stretched forefinger of old 
time, sparkle for ever . . . however much we 
might have scoffed, it was half-sentences of the 
writer’s that, inscrutably, jumped out of the prose 
and caught Conrad by the throat. At the head of 
this chapter stands the mysterious phrase, “ Ex- 
cellency, a few goats... .” The writer imagined 
this. He wrote it in a quite commonplace frame 
of mind, much as you might write an order for a 

156 JOSEPH CONRAD 

hoe when sending a list of agricultural instruments 
that you required to your ironmonger. He wanted 
to provide an obscure Lugareno with a plausible 
occupation. But no sooner had he got the words 
on the paper than Conrad burst into one of his 
roars of ecstasy. “This,” he shouted when he was 
in a condition to speak, “is genius!” And out of 
breath, exhausted and rolling on the sofa, he con- 
tinued to gasp, “Genius! . . . This is genius... . 
That's. what: it is.. Pure genius... .. Genius,2 
tell you!” The writer agreed that it was genius 
—for the sake of peace! And for twenty years 
afterwards, in every second or third letter to the 
writer Conrad returned to the charge. ‘“ Excel- 
lency, a few goats... .” he would write. “Do 
you remember?” Even this year in a letter to 
the Transatlantic Review, allotting parts of ‘‘ Ro- 
mance” to its various authors, he wrote, “ Fifth 
Part, practically all yours, including the famous 
sentence at which we both exclaimed: This is 
genius! (Do you remember what it is?) with per- 
haps half a dozen lines by me. . . .” 
i 

In a subsequent number of the periodical in 
question the writer offered its readers as a prize 
a copy of “Romance” if any one of them could 
identify that passage of genius. A great many 
replies were received from readers offering pas- 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS. ... 157 

sages of what, on the surface, looks more like 
genius. . . . Butmovone offered, “ Excellency, a 
few goats... .” It is perhaps genius. But, fre- 
quently on receiving a “Don’t you remember the 
few goats?” letter from Conrad the writer has felt 
as if he were getting credit for another immensely 
long shot ata rat... . 

—_ 

In “The Inheritors”, then, there were several 
sentences which Conrad applauded almost as rap- 
turously. There was the one already quoted about 
the stroke of an obscure and unimportant physical 
kind. . . . In that Conrad would like the words 
“obscure and unimportant.’ Another—it came 
after the passage concerning the suicide already 
quoted — is altogether the writer’s and was in the 
first draft: 

De Mersch walked slowly along the long corri- 
dor away from us. There was an extraordinary 
stiffness in his gait, as if he were trying to emu- 
late the goose step of his old days in the Prus- 
sian Guard. My companion looked after him as 
though she wished to gauge the extent of his 
despair. : 

“You would say ‘Habet’, wouldn’t you?” she 
asked me. 

This last sentence Conrad also called genius. 
Perhaps it may be. 

158 JOSEPH CONRAD 

“The Inheritors” appeared. It caused no ex- 
citement; even to ourselves it caused so little that 
the writer cannot so much as remember opening 
the parcel that contained the first copies. By that 
time Conrad had got over believing in its salable 
qualities; the writer had never had any delusions. 
He had been too well drilled by Mr. Edward 
Garnett. 

_s 

It was received by the English critics with a 
pean of abuse for the number of dots it contained. 
. . . One ingenious gentleman even suggested that 
we had cheated Mr. Heinemann and the public 
who had paid for a full six-shilling novel with 
words all solid on the page. In America it at- 
tracted even less attention, but the publishers, hav- 
ing issued the book with, as far as the writer can 
remember, a fault on the title page, or possibly 
on the cover, it was withdrawn after only four 
copies had been sold, and then reissued. These 
four copies are said to command an exorbitant 
price from collectors. The writer never remem- 
bers to have seen one. 

III 

Wesreturned then.to: “ Romance.” 3... 

It has been asserted that the writer paid Conrad 
large sums for the honour of collaborating with 
him, this being Conrad’s inducement for continu- 
ing those very arduous labours. This was not the 
case. Even to lend money to Conrad was always 
a very difficult operation. Frequently it was a 
very painful one, seeing the agony of mind Con- 
rad would be in over his debts or his complication 
of affairs; so that to be refused the ease to oneself 
of making a small loan had almost the aspect of a 
cruelty—as if a patient in great pain should re- 
fuse, for the sake of conscience, the alleviation of 
an anesthetic. From the writer Conrad, except 
in one extreme case, never accepted any loan that 
he did not see his way plain to returning shortly 
and with an exact punctuality —and he always re- 
paid on the date thus appointed by himself. The 
exception was a case of one of those complicated 
disasters that from time to time overwhelm those 
who have no means of making a livelihood, other 
than the frail, thin point of the pen. Conrad had 

160 JOSEPH CONRAD 

been ill, there had been illness in his household. 
On top of it there came a bank smash, and Conrad 
was faced either with paying immediately a fairly 
substantial sum, or with being sold up. This sum 
the writer advanced to Conrad; it was in due time 
repaid. 
at 

Illness and the anticipation of illness, debt, and 
still more the vision of the approach of a time 
when he must inevitably incur debt are, because 
of his necessary powers of the imagination, more 
terrible to the novelist than to any other human 
creature. As regards illness: In a society that has 
gradually become self-protectively organised the 
vocations or professions are very few in which the 
illness of a worker means entire cessation of in- 
come. The shopkeeper’s shop will go on— per- 
haps it will be less efficiently conducted if its head 
is absent for any long period; and so with the busi- 
ness of the merchant or the financier. The doctor, 
the parson and the lawyer can find locos tenentes 
of course at some expense. The working man has 
his insurance; the serving class are to some extent 
protected by law. The literary man has nothing. 
Even insurance against illness is for him a very 
poor expedient since the things that will stop him 
working are as frequently as not diseases in no way 
diagnosable. The writer once suffered from a 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS. ... 161 

nervous breakdown that lasted for two years and 
over, during which he was withdrawn from prac- 
tically all human activities, except taking the 
waters at various German Spas. He was com- 
pletely unable to write. He had been insured 
against illness with a large and reputable society 
for a considerable time; yet all that he was able 
to recover, by way of a compromise, from that 
society was a sum a little less than a quarter of the 
instalments he had paid. There was no redress: 
apparently the laws of England hold that diseases 
of the nerves are not illnesses. 
at ae 

Yet they will stop you writing. And to so 
admirable a family man as was Conrad, half of 
whose mind at least was given to the matter of 
securing comfort and permanent provision for 
those dependent on him, whose agonies over this 
department of his life were sempiternal and over- 
whelming, the mere illness of a member of his 
family was sufficient to maim his working mind 
for long periods. For the author’s mind jumps 
very fast to extreme apprehensions, and only too 
frequently he knows a great deal too much, for his 
peace of mind, of the progress of illnesses. He is 
forced to that by the very necessities of his profes- 
sion in the course of which he must, from time to 
time at least, describe the progress of one illness or 

162 JOSEPH CONRAD 

another. Indeed, he writes because his memory 
is more tenacious and more vivid in its function- 
ings than that of other men. That causes the 
anticipation of all misfortunes to weigh more 
heavily on him. 
a 

That is if possible even more the case with the 
facing of debts or the anticipation of debts. The 
layman incurs debts as a part of the necessary 
business of life without which commercial opera- 
tions cannot be conducted. As often as not his 
creditors are great corporations, unfeeling it is 
true, but immune from personal suffering. If he 
himself goes bankrupt it is nowadays usually in 
the form of a firm or a public company, and he 
will go on much as before. To the novelist a debt 
is a sword in the hands of an individual who him- 
self may starve if he do not receive his due, who 
is also an executioner, who is also a mysterious 
and dreaded force of evil, unknown in his function- 
ings. Unknown, particularly. ... What happens 
if you are county-courted? What sort of faces 
have broker’s men? Do they despise or reprove 
you for having dared to incur a debt that you can- 
not discharge? . . . The pictured horrors of the 
situation are infinite: you imagine your infant 
child turned out of its cot by rough men like the 
murderers in the Tower, or still more terribly, 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS.... 163 

you imagine your child old enough to appreciate 
deprivations, squalors, and the disgrace. . . . 
wt a 

Almost the most vivid emotion that the writer 
can remember in his whole life was caused by the 
first visit one of the greatest of writers paid to the 
Pent. It has been already described in a book of 
the writer’s; but as no one discoverable ever read 
it it may come in here again. We were sitting 
then on a quiet sunlit day in the parlour of the 
Pent. Conrad was at the round table in the middle 
of the room, writing, his face to the window; his 
collaborator was reading some pages of corrected 
manuscript, facing into the room. A shadow went 
over those pages from the window behind. Con- 
rad exclaimed, “Good God!” in an accent of such 
agony and terror that the writer’s heart actually 
stopped as he swung round to the window to 
follow the direction of his companion’s ap- 
palled glance. It went through his mind, “This 
must be the bailiff... . He has debts of which 
I do not know. ... What’s to be doner... 
Are all the doors bolted? ... What does one 
dope” 

An extremely tall man with a disproportionately 
small, grave head was stalking past the window, 
examining the ‘house front with suspicion... . 
The family were all out driving. How could 

164 JOSEPH CONRAD 

they be got in if all the doors had to be bolted? 
Through the window? But if a window is used 
as a place of ingress surely a bailiff can use it too. 
.. . One imagines that immense, grave fellow, 
in a pepper-and-salt gamekeeper’s coat with tails, 
putting one knee over the window sill as a small 
boy is handed in. ... Surely an execution for 
debt cannot take place after sunset? . .. Then 
they will have to remain out till then. Or per- 
haps that is obsolete law. . . . They could go into 
the great barn. . . . It is always warm and still 
there, with the scent of hay: like an immense 
church. 

The house was perfectly still. The tall figure 
with the aspect of a Spanish alcalde disappeared 
from above the monthly roses. He had been 
stalking, very slowly, like a man in a grave 
pageant—a stork. Suddenly Conrad exclaimed 
in a voice that was like a shout of joy, ‘‘ By Jove! 
. . » It’s the man come about the mare!” Conrad 
was almost always going through some compli- 
cated horse dealings with that mare of his. He was 
going to exchange her for a pair of Shetland ponies 
and a chaff-cutting machine; he was going to sell 
her in Ashford market as against part of the price 
of a stout Irish cob, the remainder to be paid by 
the loaning of her during hay-making to the farmer 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS. ... 16s 

who hired the lands of the Pent; she was to be 
exchanged with a horse dealer who was shortly 
going out of business and had a most admirable 
roll-top desk and a really good typewriter. Traps 
could be hired from the Drum Inn at Stam- 
Potd? y=. 
i 

Conrad’s conviction restored life to the fainting 
Pent; it breathed once more; the cat jumped off 
the window sill; the clock struck four. . . . The 
writer hurried, a little tremulous still, to open the 

front door. . . . The tall, thin, grave man looked 
gravely at him. The writer exclaimed hurriedly, 
“ihe “mare's outedriving: .°.-.” ~He-added, 

“With the ladies!” It’s a great thing to be able 
to prove to a horse dealer that your mare can really 
be driven by a lady. The man—he resembled a 
sundial—said in the slow voice a sundial must 
have, ‘I’m Hudson!” The writer said, “‘ Yes, yes. 
The mare’s out with the ladies.” Getting into 
his voice the resonance of a great bell, the tall 
man with the Spanish sort of beard said, “I’m 
pe ees EL de ee) sone. ewarntaa 
see Conrad. You are not Conrad, are your You 
afte Fiuetier,”».; 
aes 

The writer may very well have psychologised 

Conrad wrongly, though he remains strongly un- 

166 JOSEPH CONRAD 

der the impression that after that king of men 
had gone Conrad said, “By Jove, I thought he 
was a bailiff!” But the occupation of writing to 
such a nature as Conrad’s is terribly engrossing. 
To be suddenly disturbed is apt to cause a second’s 
real madness. . .. We were once going up to 
Town in order to take some proofs to a publisher, 
and halfway between Sandling and Charing Cross 
Conrad remembered some phrase that he had for- 
gotten to attend to in the proofs. He tried to 
correct them with a pencil, but the train jolted so 
badly that writing, sitting on a seat, was impossible. 
Conrad got down on the floor of the carriage and 
lying on his stomach went on writing. Naturally 
when the one phrase was corrected twenty other 
necessities for correction stuck out of the page. 
We were alone in the carriage. The train passed 
Paddock Wood, passed Orpington, rushed through 
the suburbs. The writer said, “ We’re getting into 
Town!” Conrad never moved except to write. 
The house roofs of London whirled in perspective 
round us; the shadow of Cannon Street Station 
was over us. Conrad wrote. The final shadow 
of Charing Cross was over us. It must have been 
very difficult to see down there. He never moved. 
... Mildly shocked at the idea that a porter 
might open the carriage door and think us pe- 
culiar, the writer touched Conrad on the shoulder 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS. . 7 167 

and said, “We’re there!” Conrad’s face was 
most extraordinary—suffused and madly vicious. 
He sprang to his feet and straight at the writer’s 
throaty... 

“ee 

The lay reader —say an officer of His Maijesty’s 
Army—should not here say, “ Ah, these literary 
men!” ... Let him think of his own feelings 
when he is trying to write some particularly com- 
plicated lie in an excuse to Orderly Room over 
something or other. . . . The writer once saw a 
colonel— and a deuced smart colonel at that—in 
Orderly Room, snatch up a revolver and damn 
near shoot an orderly who had interrupted him in 
a literary composition. The Quartermaster whose 
job it was, the Adjutant, and the writer, who had 
been called in, having all failed, the C.O. was him- 
self trying to explain to garrison headquarters why 
the regiment’s washing was given to the Riverdale 
Laundry Company instead of to some firm recom- 
mended by G. H. Z. You could almost swear his 
tongue followed his pen round and round in his 
mouth in the effort of composition. ... 

— 

Well, the lay reader should understand that our 
tongues really do follow our pens when we are 
engaged in writing the specious lies on which our 
existence depends. And if our lies are not con- 

168 JOSEPH CONRAD 

vincing, we, even as he, shall starve. And we are 
at it all the time whilst he gives on an average not 
more than five minutes a day for five days of the 
week to composing the misleading documents that 
save him from having to resign his commission. 
And he has only one Orderly Room and only one 
Assistant Adjutant to deceive: we lie to thousands. 
If we are lucky, to tens of thousands! So we are 
engrossed. . . . It is not more easy for us to put 
words together; it is more difficult because we have 
more sense of words. And we who go at it with 
persistence, undespairing, in the face of inevitable 
failure . . . are the gallant spirits. 
x 

Conrad at least was. It has to be remembered 
that he had to wrestle, not with one language only, 
but with three. Or, say with two and the ghost 
of one, for it happened to him occasionally to say, 
“There’s a word so and so in Polish to express 
what I want.” But that happened only very sel- 
dom. All the rest of the time he got an effect to 
satisfy himself in French. This was of course the 
case preponderantly in passages of some nicety of 
thought and expression. He could naturally write, 
“Will you have a cup of tea?” or “ He is dead,” 
without first expressing himself to himself in 
French. But when he wrote a set of phrases like 
“the gift of expression”, ‘the bewildering”, “the 

EXCELUENCY A FEW GOATS: .: 27> 169 

illuminating”, “the most exalted”’, “ the most con- 
temptible”, “the pulsating stream of light”, or 
‘the deceitful flow from the heart of an impene- 
trable darkness”, he was translating directly from 
the French in his mind. Or when he wrote, “Their 
glance was guileless, profound, confident and trust- 
ing’, or, “The offing was barred by a black bank 
of clouds, and the tranquil waterway leading to the 
uttermost ends of the earth flowed sombre under 
an overcast sky— seemed to lead into the heart of 
an immense darkness.” Naturally, as a British 
master mariner, he did not have to think of the 
offing as “Je large”, but when he was trying the 
sound of that sentence for his final cadence he 
did first say “le large” and then said, “The open 
sea; the way to the open sea. No, the offing.” 
That the writer very well remembers. . . . Con- 
rad moreover had for long intended to end the 
story with the words, “The horror! The horror!” 
“T’horreur!” having been the last words of Kurtz; 
but he gave that up. The accentuation of the 
English word was different from the French; 
the shade of meaning, too. And the device of such 
an ending, which would have been quite normal in 
a French story, would have been what we used to 
call chargé—a word meaning something between 
harrowing, melodramatic, and rhetorical, for 
which there is no English equivalent. Perhaps 

170 JOSEPH CONRAD 

“overloaded with sentiment” would come as near 
it as you can get: but that is clumsy... . 
oe 

But the mere direct translation from imagined 
French into English was just child’s play. It was 
when you came to the transposing precisely, of 
such a word as chargé from French into English, 
that difficulties began. ‘The writer remembers 
Conrad spending nearly a whole day over one 
word in two or three sentences of proofs for the 
Blackwood volume called “Youth.” It was two 
words, perhaps—serene and azure. Certainly it 
was azure. “And she crawled on, do or die, in 
the serene weather. The sky was a miracle of 
purity, a miracle of azure.” Conrad said, azure, 
the writer aysure—or more exactly aysyeh. This 
worried Conrad a good deal since he wanted azure 
for his cadence. He read the sentence over and 
over again to see how it sounded. 

—* 

The point was that he was perfectly aware that 
azure was a French word, or in English almost 
exclusively a term of heraldry, and his whole en- 
deavour was given to using only such words as are 
found in the normal English vernacular—or 
thereabouts, for he never could be got really to 
believe how poverty-stricken a thing the normal 
English vernacular is. The vocabulary that he 

EXCELLENCY, A FEW GOATS.... 171 

used in speaking English was enormous and he 
regarded it as a want of patriotism to think that 
the average Englishman knew his language less 
well than himself. 
eae 

Mr. Henry James used to call Marlowe, the 
usual narrator for many years of Conrad’s stories, 
“that preposterous master mariner.” He meant 
precisely that Marlowe was more of a philosopher 
and had a vocabulary vastly larger and more 
varied than you could possibly credit to the master 
mariner as a class. Conrad, however, persisted 
that Marlowe was little above the average of the 
ship’s officer in either particular, and presumably 
he knew his former service mates better than did 
Mr. James—or the rest of us... . Still he did 
think that the word azure would be outside the 
ordinary conversational vocabulary of a ship’s 
Captains «2. 

oe 

We talked about it then for a whole day. ... 
Why not say simply “blue”? Because really, it 
is not blue. Blue is something coarser in the grain; 
you imagine it the product of the French Impres- 
sionist painter —or of a house painter—with the 
brush strokes showing. Or you think so of blue 
after you have thought of azure. Azure is more 
transparent... . 

172 JOSEPH CONRAD 

Or again the word “serene.” ... Why not 
calm? Why not quiet? ... Well, quiet as ap- 
plied to weather is—or perhaps it is only was— 
part of the “little language” that was being used 
by the last Pre-Raphaelite poets. That ruled 
quiet out. Calm on the other hand is, to a master 
mariner, almost too normal and too technically in- 
clusive. Calm is in a log-book almost any weather 
that would not be agitating to a landsman—or 
thereabouts. Dead calm is—again to a seaman — 
too technical. Dead calmness precludes even the 
faintest ruffle of wind, even the faintest cat’s-paw 
on the unbroken surface of the sea. 

i 

The writer has heard it objected that Conrad 
was pernicketty; why should he not use technical 
sea terms and let the reader make what he could 
of it? But Conrad’s sea is more real than the sea 
of any other sea writer; and it is more real, be- 
cause he avoided the technical word. 

ae 2 

The whole passage of “ Youth” under considera- 
tion is as follows—the writer is quoting from 
memory, but as far as this passage is concerned 
he is fairly ready to back his memory against the 
printed page: 

And she crawled on, do or die, in the serene 
weather. ‘The sky was a miracle of purity, a 

EACHELERNGYs AUKEW GOATS: ..-— 273 

miracle of azure. The sea was polished, was blue, 
was pellucid, was sparkling like a precious stone, 
extending on all sides, all round to the horizon. 
As if the whole terrestrial globe had been one 
jewel, one colossal sapphire. And on the lustre 
of the great calm waters the Judea moved im- 
perceptibly, enveloped in languid and unclean 
vapours. ... 

That is as far as the writer’s memory will carry 
him, though the paragraph ends with the words, 
“The splendour of sea and sky.” 

-~_ 

This then is almost the perfection of sea writing 
of its type. (Stephen Crane could achieve another 
perfection by writing of the waves as barbarous 
and abrupt: but that in the end is no less anthropo- 
morphic.) And the words serene and azure re- 
mained after an infinite amount of talking so that 
the whole passage might retain its note of the 
personality of Destiny that watched inscrutably 
behind the sky. It was Destiny that was serene, 
that had purity, that was azure ... and that 
ironically set that smudge of oily vapour from the 
burning vessel across the serenity of the miracu- 
lous sapphire — so that youth might be enlightened 
as to the nature of the cosmos, even whilst in 
process of being impressed with its splendours. 

a 

“Serene” as applied to weather; “azure” as 

174 JOSEPH CONRAD 

applied to the sky are over-writing a shade, are 
a shade chargés if they apply merely to the sea 
and merely to the sky. . . . But Conrad was ob- 
sessed by the idea of a Destiny omnipresent be- 
hind things; of a Destiny that was august, blind, 
inscrutable, just, and above all passionless, that has 
decreed that the outside things—the sea, the sky, 
the earth, love, merchandising, the winds— shall 
make youth seem tenderly ridiculous and all the 
other ages of men gloomy, imbecile, thwarted — 
and possibly heroic. . . . Had the central char- 
acter of this story been a fortyish man you would 
have had, added to the burning ship with its fumes, 
dirty weather, dripping clothes, the squalid at- 
tributes of the bitter sea. As it was an affair of 
youth you have serene weather and a miracle of 
purity, to enhance the irony of Destiny. 

Part III 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE 
MADURO ie. ss 

T 
THE time has come, then, for some sort of critical 
estimate of this author. Critical, not philosoph- 
ical. For the philosophy of Joseph Conrad was a 
very simple one; you might sum it all up in the 
maxim of Herrick’s: To live merrily and trust to 
good letters. Himself he summed it up in the 
great word “Fidelity”, and his last great novel 
turned upon a breach of trust by his typical hero, 
his King Tom. It is the misfortune of morality 
that the greatest thrills that men can get from life 
come from the contemplation of its breaches! 
at oma 

About Conrad there was, however, as little of 
the moralist as there was of the philosopher. 
When he had said that every work of art has— 
must have—a profound moral purpose, and he 
said that every day and all day long, he had done 
with the subject. So that the writer has always 
wished that Conrad had never written his famous 
message on Fidelity. Truly, those who read him 
knew his conviction that the world, the temporal 
world, rests on a very few simple ideas—and it 
might have been left at that. For it was the very 

178 JOSEPH CONRAD 

basis of all Conrad’s work that the fable must 
not have the moral tacked on to its end. If the 
fable has not driven its message home the fable 
has failed, must be scrapped and must give place 
to another one. 

i 

But the impulse to moralise, to pontify, is a very 
strong one, and comes in many treacherous guises. 
One may so easily do it unawares: and instances 
of Conrad’s pontifications are far enough to seek, 
considering the temporal eminence. to which he 
attained. He let, otherwise, his light so shine be- 
fore men that few would be inclined to claim him 
amongst the preachers. 

* 

He was before all things the artist and his chief 
message to mankind is set at the head of this 
chapter. ... “It is above all things to make you 
see... .” Seeing is believing for all the doubters 
of this planet, from Thomas to the end: if you can 
make humanity see the few very simple things 
upon which this temporal world rests you will 
make mankind believe such eternal truths as are 
Universal-- sc. 

-x— 

That message, that the province of written art 
is above all things to make you see, was given be- 
fore we met; it was because that same belief was 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 179 

previously and so profoundly held by the writer 
that we could work for so long together. We had 
the same aims and we had all the time the same 
aims. Our attributes were no doubt different. 
The writer probably knew more about words, but 
Conrad had certainly an infinitely greater hold 
over the architectonics of the novel, over the way 
a story should be built up so that its interest pro- 
gresses and grows up to the last word. Whether 
in the case of our officially collaborated work or 
in the work officially independent in which we 
each modified the other with almost as much en- 
thusiasm and devotion as we gave to work done 
together, the only instance that comes to the 
writer’s mind in which he of his own volition 
altered the structure of any work occurred in the 
opening chapters of “The Rescue.” 
ar al 

Of that book Conrad made many drafts, over 
a very great number of years. ‘The writer seems 
to remember, but is not quite certain, having 
heard Conrad say that he had meant to take up 
the story of “The Rescue” immediately after the 
publication or the finishing of “ Almayer’s Folly.” 
And it obviously belongs to the group of subjects 
set in Malaysia or thereabouts, of the date, say, of 
“Karain” from “ Tales of Unrest”, or “ The La- 
goon”, that was published in the same volume, 

180 JOSEPH CONRAD 

dated 1898. (In the matter of books published in 
London in the nineties, dates of publication, if 
these are of any importance, are sometimes hazy. 
Thus the writer’s first book was published in 1891, 
but the date given on the title page is 1892. The 
ingenious publisher, who was also Conrad’s, hit on 
this stratagem, afterwards imitated by American 
magazines, with the idea of beguiling the possible 
buyer into the belief that he was purchasing a 
brand new book eighteen months or so after it had 
been published.) ‘‘Karain”, then, the one of his 
early short stories that Conrad liked best, was pub- 
lished in Blackwood’s in 1897 and then in a volume 
that is dated 1898. It was, as far as the writer’s 
memory serves him, written in 1896. 

The relationship of “‘ Karain” to “The Rescue” 
is obvious. For two years Conrad carried the idea 
of the novel about with him and then, after the 
publication of “The Nigger of the Narcissus” by 
Heinemann in 1898, he definitely sketched the plot 
of “The Rescue” to Heinemann himself. On 
this sketch he obtained one of his advances from 
that kindly man. Immediately afterwards he 
began his first draft of the novel... . 

ir 

That advance remained an old man of the 

mountain for years and years. ‘There were the 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 181 

glorious schemes for finishing off such and such 
a book by such and such a date and then quickly 
writing two or three stories like ‘‘Gaspar Ruiz” 
for a periodical that paid great prices, thus get- 
ting free forever of indebtedness! . . . Then there 
came always the grim remembrance, “'There’s that 
advance of Heinemann’s on ‘The Rescue.’ .. .” 
That no doubt rather hypnotised his will when 
he attacked, as he constantly did, that particular 
book. He made at least six separate beginnings 
of a chapter, or a chapter and a half each, with 
every different kind of arrangement of paragraphs 
and openings. At last, towards 1906, Conrad, in 
one of his crises of rearrangement had got his 
affairs nearly straightened out. He then once 
more remembered with despair Heinemann’s ad- 
vance which, together with “The Rescue”? itself, 
had remained out of sight for four or five years. 
So the writer said to Conrad, “ You’d better give 
me those manuscripts and let me put together 
some sort of a beginning for you.” Conrad was 
then wrestling with the opening chapter of 
“Chance” which he expected with any luck to 
finish, slight affair as it was going to be, in about 
three months. It was actually finished seven years 
later. 

or 5 ame 

Openings for us, as for most writers, were 

182 JOSEPH CONRAD 

matters of great importance, but probably we 
more than most writers realised of what primary 
importance they were. A real short story must 
open with a breathless sentence; a long-short story 
may begin with an “as” ora “since” and some lei- 
surely phrases. At any rate the opening paragraph 
of book or story should be of the tempo of the 
whole performance. That is the régle generale. 
Moreover, the reader’s attention must be gripped 
by that first paragraph. So our ideal novel must 
begin either with a dramatic scene or with a note 
that should suggest the whole book. “The Nigger 
of the Narcissus” begins: 

Mr. Baker, chief mate of the Narcissus, stepped 

in one stride out of his lighted cabin into the dark- 
ness of the quarter deck. .. . 

balhessectet eent ~: 

Mr. Verloc, going out in the morning, left 
his shop nominally in charge of his brother-in- 
Law. 5 

“The End of the Tether”: 

For a long time after the course of the steamer 
Sophala had been altered... . 

this last being the most fitting beginning for the 
long-short story that “’The End of the Tether”? is. 
“Romance”, on the other hand begins: 
To yesterday and to to-day I say my polite 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 183 

vaya usted con dios. What are those days to me? 
But that far-off day of my romance, when from 
between the blue and white bales in Don Ramon’s 
darkened store room in Kingston. .. . 

an opening for a long novel in which the dominant 
interest lies far back in the story and the note must 
be struck at once. 

“The Inheritors” first lines are: 
p-ideas’’ sheisaid; 6 Oh,as:for ideas. 2 

an opening for a short novel. 
—" 

Conrad’s tendency and desire made for the 
dramatic opening; the writer’s as a rule for the 
more pensive approach; but we each, as a book 
would go on, were apt to find that we must modify 
our openings. ‘This was more often the case with 
Conrad than with the writer, since Conrad’s books 
depended much more on the working out of an 
intrigue which he would develop as the book was 
in writing: the writer has seldom begun on a book 
without having, at least, the intrigue, the “affair”’, 
completely settled in his mind. 

at ae 

The disadvantage of the dramatic opening is 
that after the dramatic passage is done you have 
to go back to getting your characters in, a proceed- 
ing that the reader is apt to dislike. The danger 
with the reflective opening is that the reader is apt 

184 JOSEPH CONRAD 

to miss being gripped at once by the story. Open- 
ings are therefore of necessity always affairs of 
compromise. 
ie 
The note should here be struck that in all the 
conspiracies that went on at the Pent or round 
the shores of the Channel there was absolutely no 
mystery. We thought just simply of the reader. 
Would this passage grip hime If not it must go. 
Will this word make him pause and so slow down 
the story? If there is any danger of that, away 
with it. That is all that is meant by the dangerous 
word technique. 
i 
Tremendous readers, both of us, we tried to 
gather from the books we had read what made 
one book readable and the other not. English 
gentlemen of the Palmerston days, there was no 
nonsense about us; we tried to turn out the sort 
of book that, from ‘Lady Audley’s Secret” to 
Boswell’s “Johnson”, and from “ Midshipman 
Easy” to “Education Sentimentale”, the English 
gentleman might read: in his library, with the 
cedar trees on the lawn outside it—or the flag 
lieutenant, in harbour, during the dogwatches. 
i 
We had the intimate conviction that two and 
only two classes of books are of universal appeal: 

If IS ABOVE’ALL’ TO MAKE YOU SEE 185 

the very best and the very worst. The very worst, 
securing immediate attention by way of some trick, 
gradually fade from the public memories; the 
very best, being solid and shipshape productions 
of solid and shipshape men with no nonsense about 
them, remain. We attempted then to turn out 
solid and shipshape books. 

— 

There was really nothing more to it, Conrad 
being the more solid, the more shipshape and the 
more determined of the two, the writer being the 
more tenacious. .. . “You have a perfect right 
to say that you are rather unchangeable,” Conrad 
wrote not long before his end, ‘“‘ Unlike the serpent 
(which is Wise) you will die in your original 
skin.” . . . That is to say that the writer never 
made concessions. We elaborated certain prin- 
ciples and the writer saw to it that we did work 
along those lines. Conrad would occasionally try 
to rush a position, being worn out by the long drag 
of work. That is why the ends of his books have 
sometimes the air of being rather slight compared 
with the immense fabrics to which they are the 
appendages. In effect, Conrad was the more de- 
termined—to get something done; the writer, 
more listless, never cared much whether a thing 
were done or not. He insisted, however, that if it 
were done it should be done to contract. 

186 JOSEPH CONRAD 

It was a combination not really unfortunate. 
The cases must be rare in which one man of 
letters can have had at his disposal for a number 
of years the whole brain of another man of letters 
of an unpliant disposition. Conrad so had the 
writer’s. For it was quite definitely the writer’s 
conviction that the only occupation fitting for 
a proper man in these centuries is the writing of 
novels— and that no novel worth much could be 
written by himself or any other man—at any rate, 
by himself—before he has reached the age of 
forty. So till he had attained that age the writer 
was determined never to attempt the production 
of anything that was not either a pastiche or a tour 
de force —just for practice in writing. One must 
roll one’s hump around the world first. . . . Thus, 
rather listlessly and a little disdainfully, from time 
to time the writer turned out historical novels — 
which were received with very great acclamations 
—and books of connected essays that were received 
with acclamations almost greater. But the writer 
was not disturbed; a historical novel even at the 
best is nothing more than a tour de force, a fake 
more or less genuine in inspiration and workman- 
ship, but none the less a fake. Even “Salammbo” 
is that. A book of connected essays . . . well, it 
is not a novel! In addition the writer did at- 
tempt two pastiches in the manner of Mr. Henry 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 187 

James, written, one of them, as a variation on a 
book of essays to give the effect of a tour in the 
United States—an international affair. The other 
was the product of an emotion, as you get over 
things by writing them down in your diary. 
at 

From time to time gentlemen of the Press anx- 
ious to depreciate the writer have said that he 
imitated the work of Conrad. This was not the 
case. It is a curious characteristic of the work of 
‘Conrad that, not only can you not recognisably 
imitate it, you hardly ever feel even the impulse 
to do so, and the one writer who really sedulously 
be-aped the more exotic romances of the author 
of “An Outpost of Progress” achieved perform- 
ances so lugubrious that he seems to have warned 
off any other imitators of his example. ‘The fact is 
that Conrad, like Turgenev, is very little man- 
nered; his temperament had no eccentricities that 
could be easily imitated; his vocabulary was as 
much the result of difficulties as of arbitrary selec- 
tion; his cadences were so intimately his own that 
they were practically unimitable. The writer 
probably more than any other man must have had 
opportunities of studying the way prose came to 
Conrad but the writer does not remember more 
than three sentences that he ever wrote—apart 
from sentences that he actually composed for Con- 

188 JOSEPH CONRAD 

rad himself —in which he either consciously tried 
for some purpose or other to get the cadence of a 
sentence of Conrad’s, or as to which he felt, after 
having written them, the satisfaction which he 
might imagine himself feeling if he had written 
a Conrad sentence. If the accusation had been of 
imitation of Mr. Henry James it might have been 
just enough, though a pastiche is not exactly the 
same thing as an imitation, being an exercise in 
the manner of a writer rather than an attempt to 
make a living by concealed plagiarism. .. . 
odes 

Still, whatever may have been the writer’s oc- 
cupations, he was ready to be pulled off them at 
any moment at the instance of Conrad’s necessities. 
And this probably was of service to the author of 
‘The Rescue.” ... As regards the opening of 
that book the writer very well remembers how the 
rearrangement was made... . In all Conrad’s 
drafts the opening was dramatic. In most of them 
it began with a speech of Tom Lingard’s, one of 
them with the words, “You’ve been sleeping — 
you. Shift the helm. She has got stern way on 
her.” One version even began as far back, in the 
book as it stands at present, as an interview between 
Lingard and Mrs. Travers. ... Conrad had 
meant that to be the dramatic opening; in that case 
he would have had to introduce an immense retro- 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 189° 

spection giving the biographies of Lingard, of 
Carter, of the Travers, of Jaffir, of the Malay 
serangs . . . of everybody and everything. 

On the impracticability of that we both agreed 
and the writer took the various drafts away to 
Aldington to study. A good many of the drafts 
that the writer made opened with a passage of 
description, “Out of the level blue of a shallow 
sea Carimata raises a lofty barrenness of grey and 
yellow tints, the drab eminence of its arid heights,” 
the writer thinking that a slow passage of geo- 
graphical significance ought, logically, to open 
what seemed likely to be a very long book. Then 
one day it occurred to him to ask, ‘“‘ Why, after all, 
not have a historical opening and so avoid, later 
on, the necessity to slow the story down in order to 
get in the history?” So at the opening, at any rate 
of one draft, of chapter two, he found the passage 
beginning, “The shallow sea that foams and mur- 
murs on the shores of the thousand islands, big and 
little, which make up the Malay Archipelago has 
been for centuries the scene of adventurous under- 
takings.” 

i 

And all this passage seeming to him to be ad- 
mirable, beautiful and engrossing prose, it struck 
him that it might be relied on at once to grip 

190 JOSEPH CONRAD 

the reader’s attention and to give the note of the 
coming story. So in “The Rescue” you have the 
opening historical passage, the geographical pas- 
sage and then Lingard’s words: 

‘““You’ve been sleeping—you. Shift the helm. 
She has got stern way on her.” 

II 

It might be as well here to put down under 
separate headings, such as “Construction”, “ De- 
velopment”’, and the like, what were the formule 
for the writing of the novel at which Conrad and 
the writer had arrived, say in 1902 or so, before 
we finally took up and finished “ Romance.” The 
reader will say that that is to depart from the 
form of the novel in which form this book pre- 
tends to be written. But that is not the case. The 
novel more or less gradually, more or less devi- 
ously, lets you into the secrets of the characters of 
the men with whom it deals. Then, having got 
them in, it sets them finally to work. Some novels, 
and still more short stories, will get a character in 
with a stroke or two as does Maupassant in the 
celebrated sentence in the “Reine Hortense” 
which Conrad and the writer were never tired of 
—quite intentionally—misquoting: “‘C’était un 
monsieur & favoris rouges qui entratt toujours le 
premier....” He was a gentleman with red 
whiskers who always went first through a door- 
way. ... That gentleman is so sufficiently got in 
that you need know no more of him to understand 

192 JOSEPH CONRAD 

how he will act. He has been “got in” and can 
get to work at once. That is called by the official 
British critics the static method and is, for some 
reason or other, contemned in England. 
Cora 

Other novels, however, will take much, much 
longer to develop their characters. Some—and 
this one is an example—will take almost a whole 
book to really get their characters in and will then 
dispose of the “action” with a chapter, a line, or 
even a word—or two. ‘The most wonderful in- 
stance of all of that is the ending of the most 
wonderful of all Maupassant’s stories, ‘“‘Champs 
d’Oliviers”, which, if the reader has not read, he 
should read at once. Let us now take a heading. 
(This method has the advantage that the lay reader 
who cannot interest himself in literary methods 
and the Critic-Annalist whose one passion is to cut 
the cackle and come to the horses can skip the 
whole chapter, certain that he will miss none of 
the spicy titbits. ) 

GENERAL EFFECT 
We agreed that the general effect of a novel 
must be the general effect that life makes on man- 
kind. A novel must therefore not be a narration, 
a report. Life does not say to you: In 1914 my 
next-door neighbour, Mr. Slack, erected a green- 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 193 

house and painted it with Cox’s green aluminum 
paint. .. . If you think about the matter you will 
remember, in various unordered pictures, how one 
day Mr. Slack appeared in his garden and con- 
templated the wall of his house. You will then try 
to remember the year of that occurrence and you 
will fix it as August, 1914, because having had the 
foresight to bear the municipal stock of the City of 
Liége you were able to afford a first-class season 
ticket for the first time in your life. You will 
remember Mr. Slack—then much thinner be- 
cause it was before he found out where to buy that 
cheap Burgundy of which he has since drunk an 
inordinate quantity, though whisky you think 
would be much better for him! Mr. Slack again 
came into his garden, this time with a pale, 
weaselly-faced fellow, who touched his cap from 
time to time. Mr. Slack will point to his house 
wall several times at different points, the weaselly 
fellow touching his cap at each pointing. Some 
days after, coming back from business, you will 
have observed against Mr. Slack’s wall. ... At 
this point you will remember that you were then 
the manager of the fresh-fish branch of Messrs. 
Catlin and Clovis in Fenchurch Street... . What 
a change since then! Millicent had not yet put 
her hair up. . . . You will remember how Milli- 
cent’s hair looked, rather pale and burnished in 

194 JOSEPH CONRAD 

plaits. You will remember how it now looks, 
henna’d; and you will see in one corner of your 
mind’s eye a little picture of Mr. Mills the vicar 
talking —oh, very kindly—to Millicent after she 
has come back from Brighton. .. . But perhaps 
you had better not risk that. You remember some 
of the things said by means of which Millicent 
has made you cringe—and her expression! .. . 
Cox’s Aluminum Paint! . . . You remember the 
half-empty tin that Mr. Slack showed you—he 
had a most undignified cold —with the name in a 
’ horseshoe over a blue circle that contained a red 
lion asleep in front of a real-gold sun... . 

And, if that is how the building of your neigh- 
bour’s greenhouse comes back to you, just imagine 
how it will be with your love affairs that are so 
much more complicated... . 

IMPRESSIONISM 

We accepted without much protest the stigma 
“Impressionists” that was thrown at us. In those 
days Impressionists were still considered to be bad 
people: Atheists, Reds, wearing red ties with which 
to frighten householders. But we accepted the 
name because Life appearing to us much as the 
building of Mr. Slack’s greenhouse comes back 
to you, we saw that Life did not narrate, but made 
impressions on our brains. We in turn, if we 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 195 

wished to produce on you an effect of life, must 
not narrate but render impressions. 

SELECTION 

We agreed that the whole of Art consists in se- 
lection. ‘To render your remembrance of your 
career as a fish salesman might enhance the story 
of Mr. Slack’s greenhouse, or it might not. A 
little image of iridescent, blue-striped, black- 
striped, white fish on a white marble slab with 
water trickling down to them round a huge mass 
of orange salmon roe; a vivid description of a hor- 
rible smell caused by a cat having stolen and 
hidden in the thick of your pelargoniums a cod’s 
head that you had brought back as a perquisite, you 
having subsequently killed the cat with a hammer, 
but long, long before you had rediscovered her 
fishy booty. . . . Such little impressions might be 
useful as contributing to illustrate your character 
—one should not kill a cat with ahammer! They 
might illustrate your sense of the beautiful—or 
your fortitude under affliction—or the disagree- 
ableness of Mr. Slack, who had a delicate sense of 
smell —or the point of view of your only daughter, 
Millicent. 

We should then have to consider whether your 
sense of the beautiful or your fortitude could in 

196 JOSEPH CONRAD 

our rendering carry the story forward or interest 
the reader. If it did we should include it; if in 
our opinion it was not likely to, we should leave it 
out. Or the story of the cat might in itself seem 
sufficiently amusing to be inserted as a purposed 
longueur, so as to give the idea of the passage of 
time. .. . It may be more amusing to read the 
story of a cat with your missing dinner than to 
read, “A fortnight elapsed. . . .” Or it might be 
better after all to write boldly, “Mr. Slack, after 
a fortnight had elapsed, remarked one day very 
querulously, ‘That smell seems to get worse in- 
stead of better.’” 

SELECTION (SPEECHES) 

That last would be compromise, for it would 
be narration instead of rendering: it would be far 
better to give an idea of the passage of time by 
picturing a cat with a cod’s head, but the length 
of the story must be considered. Sometimes to 
render anything at all in a given space will take 
up too much room —even to render the effect and 
delivery of a speech. Then just boldly and re- 
morselessly you must relate and risk the introduc- 
tion of yourself as author, with the danger that you 
may destroy all the illusion of the story. 

Conrad and the writer would have agreed that 

It is ABOVE-ALE TO MAKE YOU: SEE. 197 

the ideal rendering of Mr. Slack’s emotions would 
be as follows: 

A scrawny, dark-brown neck, with an immense 
Adam’s apple quivering over the blue stripes of 
a collar, erected itself between the sunflower stems 
above the thin oaken flats of the dividing fence. 
An unbelievably long, thin gap of a mouth opened 
itself beneath a black-spotted handkerchief, to say 
that the unspeakable odour was sufficient to slay 
all the porters in Covent Garden. Last week it 
was only bad enough to drive a regiment of dra- 
goons into a faint. The night before the people 
whom he had had to supper—I wondered who 
could eat any supper with any appetite under the 
gaze of those yellow eyes— people, mind you, to 
whom he had hoped to sell a little bit of property 
in the neighbourhood. Good people. With more 
than a little bit in the bank. People whose resi- 
dence would give the whole neighbourhood a lift. 
They had asked if he liked going out alone at night 
with so many undiscovered murders about... . 
“Undiscovered murders!” he went on repeating, 
as if the words gave him an intimate sense of relief. 
He concluded with the phrase, “I don’t think!” 

Ke 

That would be a very fair rendering of part of 
an episode: it would have the use of getting quite 
a lot of Mr. Slack in; but you might want to get 
on towards recounting how you had the lucky idea 
of purchasing shares in a newspaper against which 

198 JOSEPH CONRAD | 
Mr. Slack had counselled you. ... And you 

might have got Mr. Slack in already! 

The rendering in fact of speeches gave Conrad 
and the writer more trouble than any other de- 
partment of the novel whatever. It introduced at 
once the whole immense subject of under what 
convention the novel is to be written. For whether 
you tell it direct and as author — which is the more 
difficult way—or whether you put it into the 
mouth of a character —which is easier by far but 
much more cumbersome — the question of report- 
ing or rendering speeches has to be faced. To 
pretend that any character or any author writing 
directly can remember whole speeches with all 
their words for a matter of twenty-four hours, let 
alone twenty-four years, is absurd. The most that 
the normal person carries away of a conversation 
after even a couple of hours is just a salient or 
characteristic phrase or two, and a mannerism of 
the speaker. Yet, if the reader stops to think at all, 
or has any acuteness whatever, to render Mr. 
Slack’s speech directly, “Thet there odour is 
enough to do all the porters in Common Gorden 
in. Lorst week it wouldn’ no more ’n ’v sent a ole 
squad of tinwiskets barmy on the crumpet.. .” 
and so on through an entire monologue of a page 
and a half, must set the reader at some point or 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 199 

other wondering how the author or the narrator 
can possibly, even if they were present, have re- 
membered every word of Mr. Slack’s long speech. 
Yet the object of the novelist is to keep the reader 
entirely oblivious of the fact that the author exists 
—even of the fact that he is reading a book. This 
is of course not possible to the bitter end, but a 
reader can be rendered very engrossed, and the 
nearer you can come to making him entirely in- 
sensitive to his surroundings, the more you will 
have succeeded. 
es 

Then again, directly reported speeches in a book 
do move very slowly; by the use of indirect locu- 
tions, together with the rendering of the effects 
of other portions of speech, you can get a great 
deal more into a given space. There is a type of 
reader that likes what is called conversations — 
but that type is rather the reader in an undeveloped 
state than the reader who has read much. So, 
wherever practicable, we used to arrange speeches 
much as in the paragraph devoted to Mr. Slack 
above. But quite often we compromised and gave 
passages of direct enough speech. 

ae 

This was one of the matters as to which the 
writer was moze uncompromising than was Con- 
rad. In the novel which he did at last begin on 

200 JOSEPH CONRAD 

his forty-first birthday there will be found to be 
hardly any direct speech at all, and probably none 
that is more than a couple of lines in length. Con- 
rad indeed later arrived at the conclusion that, a 
novel being in the end a matter of convention— 
and in the beginning too, for the matter of that, 
since what are type, paper, bindings and all the 
rest, but matters of agreement and convenience — 
you might as well stretch convention a little farther, 
and postulate that your author or your narrator is a 
person of a prodigious memory for the spoken. 
He had one minute passion with regard to con- 
versations: he could not bear the repetition of “‘he 
said’s” and “she said’s”’, and would spend agitated 
hours in chasing those locutions out of his or our 
pages and substituting “he replied”’, “she ejacu- 
lated”, “answered Mr. Verloc” and the like. 
The writer was less moved by this consideration; 
it seemed to him that you could employ the words 
“he said” as often as you like, accepting them as 
being unnoticeable, like “a”, “the”, “his”, “her 
or “very.” 

CONVERSATIONS 
One unalterable rule that we had for the render- 
ing of conversations—for genuine conversations 
that are an exchange of thought, not interrogatories 
or statements of fact—was that no speech of one 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 2o0r 

character should ever answer the speech that goes 
before it. This is almost invariably the case in 
real life where few people listen, because they are 
always preparing their own next speeches. When, 
of a Saturday evening, you are conversing over the 
fence with your friend Mr. Slack, you hardly 
notice that he tells you he has seen an incredibly 
coloured petunia at a market gardener’s, because 
you are dying to tell him that you have determined 
to turn author to the extent of writing a letter on 
local politics to the newspaper of which, against 
his advice, you have become a large shareholder. 

He says, “Right down extraordinary that 
petunia was...” 

You say, “What would you think now of 
TVA ws” 

He says, ‘‘ Diamond-shaped stripes it had, blue- 
black and salmon... .” 

You say, “I’ve always thought I had a bit of a 
(20g 4 deed ea 

Your daughter Millicent interrupts, “Julia 
Gower has got a pair of snake-skin shoes. She 
bought them at Wiston and Willocks’s.” 

ss 

You miss Mr. Slack’s next two speeches in 
wondering where Millicent got that bangle on 
her wrist. You will have to tell her more care- 
fully than ever that she must not accept presents 

202 JOSEPH CONRAD 

from Tom, Dick and Harry. By the time you 
have come out of that reverie Mr. Slack is re- 
marking: 

“T said to him use turpentine and sweet oil, 
three parts to two. What do you think?” 

SURPRISE 

We agreed that the one quality that gave in- 
terest to Art was the quality of surprise. That 
is very well illustrated in the snatch of conversa- 
tion just given. If you reported a long speech 
of Mr. Slack’s to the effect that he was going to 
enter some of his petunias for the local flower 
show and those, with his hydrangeas and orna- 
mental sugar-beet, might well give him the How- 
ard Cup for the third time in which case it would 
become his property out and out. He would then 
buy two silver and cut-glass epergnes, one to stand 
on each side of the Cup on his sideboard. He 
always did think that a touch of silver and cut 
glass. . . . If, after that, you gave a long speech of 
your own— after, naturally, you had added a few 
commonplaces as a politeness to Mr. Slack—if you 
gave a long speech in which with modesty you 
dwelt on the powers of observation and of the pen 
that you had always considered yourself to possess, 
and in which you announced that you certainly 
meant to write a letter to the paper in which you 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 203 

had shares—on the statuary in the facade of the 
new town hall which was an offence to public 
decency. . . . And if in addition to that you added 
a soliloquy from your daughter Millicent to the 
effect that she intended to obtain on credit from 
your bootmakers, charging them to your account, 
a pair of scarlet morocco shoes with two-inch heels 
with which to go joy-riding on the Sunday with | 
a young actor who played under the name of 
Hildebrand Hare and who had had his portrait 
in your paper.... If you gave all these long 
speeches one after the other you might be aware 
of acertain dullness when you reread that compte 
rendu.... Butif you carefully broke up petunias, 
statuary, and flower-show motives and put them 
down in little shreds, one contrasting with the 
other, you would arrive at something much more 
cofoured, animated, lifelike and interesting, and 
you would convey a profoundly significant lesson 
as to the self-engrossment of humanity. Into that 
live scene you could then drop the piece of news 
that you wanted to convey and so you would carry 
the chapter a good many stages forward.- 
ss 

Here, again, compromise must necessarily come 
in: there must come a point in the dramatic work- 
ing up of every scene in which the characters do 
directly answer each other, for a speech or for two 

204. JOSEPH CONRAD 

or three speeches. It was in this department, as 
has already been pointed out, that Conrad was 
matchless and the writer very deficient. Or, again, 
a point may come in which it is necessary—%in 
which at least it is to take the line of least re- 
sistance — to report directly a whole tremendous 
effort of eloquence as ebullient as an oration by 
Mr. Lloyd George on the hymns of the Welsh 
nation. For there are times when the parapher- 
nalia of indirect speech, interruptions, and the rest 
retard your action too much. Then they must go; 
the sense of reality must stand down before the 
necessity to get on. 

But, on the whole, the indirect, interrupted 
method of handling interviews is invaluable for 
giving a sense of the complexity, the tantalisation, 
the shimmering, the haze, that life is. In the pre- 
War period the English novel began at the be- 
ginning of a hero’s life and went straight on to his 
marriage without pausing to look aside. This was 
all very well in its way, but the very great objec- 
tion could be offered against it that such a story 
was too confined to its characters and, too self- 
centredly, went on, 1m vacuo. If you are so set on 
the affair of your daughter Millicent with the 
young actor that you forget that there are flower 
shows and town halls with nude statuary your in- 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 205 

tellect will appear a thing much more circum- 
scribed than it should be. Or, to take a larger 
matter. A great many novelists have treated of the 
late War in terms solely of the War: in terms of 
pip squeaks, trench coats, wire aprons, shells, mud, 
dust, and sending the bayonet home with a grunt. 
For that reason interest in the late War is said to 
have died. But, had you taken part actually in 
those hostilitres, you would know how infinitely 
little part the actual fighting itself took in your 
mentality. You would be lying on your stomach, 
in a beast of a funk, with an immense, horrid Ger- 
man barrage going on all over and round you and 
with hell and all let loose. But, apart from the 
occasional, petulant question, “When the deuce 
will our fellows get going and shut ’em up?” your 
thoughts were really concentrated on something 
quite distant: on your daughter Millicent’s hair, 
on the fall of the Asquith Ministry, on your finan- 
cial predicament, on why your regimental ferrets 
kept on dying, on whether Latin is really necessary 
to an education. . . . You were there, but great 
shafts of thought from the outside, distant and un- 
attainable world infinitely for the greater part 
occupied your mind. 

It was that effect, then, that Conrad and the 
writer sought to get into their work, that being 
Impressionism. | 

206 JOSEPH CONRAD 

But these two writers were not unaware that 
there are other methods, they were not rigid in 
their own methods, they were sensible to the fact 
that compromise ts at all times necessary in the 
execution of every work of art. 

—m 

Let us come, then, to the eternally vexed seas 
of the Literary Ocean. 

STYLE 
We agreed on this axiom: 

The first business of Style is to make work in- 
teresting: the second business of Style is to make 
work interesting: the third business of Style is to 
make work interesting: the fourth business of 
Style is to make work interesting: the fifth business 
of Style... 

—s 

Style, then, has no other business. 

A style interests when it carries the reader along; 
it is then a good style. A style ceases to interest 
when by reason of disjointed sentences, over-used 
words, monotonous or jog-trot cadences, it fatigues 
the reader’s mind. Too startling words, however 
apt, foo just images, too great displays of clever- 
ness are apt in the long run to be as fatiguing as the 
most over-used words or the most jog-trot cadences. 
That a face resembles a Dutch clock has been too 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 207 

often said; to say that it resembles a ham is inexact 
and conveys nothing; to say that it has the mourn- 
fulness of an old, squashed-in meat tin, cast away 
on a waste building lot, would be smart— but too 
much of that sort of thing would become a nui- 
sance. To say that a face was cramoisy is undesir- 
able; few people nowadays know what the word 
means. Its employment will make the reader mar- 
vel at the user’s erudition; in thus marvelling he 
ceases to consider the story and an impression of 
vagueness or length is produced on his mind. A 
succession of impressions of vagueness and length 
render a book in the end unbearable. 
‘i 

There are, of course, pieces of writing intended 
to convey the sense of the author’s cleverness, 
knowledge of obsolete words or power of invent- 
ing similes: with such exercises Conrad and the 
writer never concerned themselves. 

— 

We used to say, the first lesson that an author 
has to learn is that of humility. Blessed are the 
humble because they do not get between the 
reader’s legs. Before everything the author must 
learn to suppress himself; he must learn that the 
first thing he has to consider is his story and the 
last thing that he has to consider is his story, and 
in between that he will consider his story. 

208 JOSEPH CONRAD 

We used to say that a passage of good style 
began with a fresh, usual word, and continued 
with fresh, usual words to the end; there was 
nothing more to it. When we felt that we had 
really got hold of the reader, with a great deal of 
caution we would introduce a word not common 
to a very limited vernacular, but that only very 
occasionally. Very occasionally indeed; prac- 
tically never. Yet it is in that way that a lan- 
guage grows and keeps alive. People get tired of 
hearing the same words over and over again... . 
It is again a matter for compromise. 

i 

Our chief masters in style were Flaubert and 
Maupassant: Flaubert in the greater degree, Mau- 
passant in the less. In about the proportion of a 
sensible man’s whisky and soda. We stood as it 
were on those hills and thence regarded the world. 
We remembered long passages of Flaubert; elab- 
orated long passages in his spirit and with his ca- 
dences and then translated them into passages of 
English as simple as the subject under treatment 
would bear. We remembered short, staccato pas- 
sages of Maupassant; invented short, staccato pas- 
sages in his spirit and then translated them into 
English as simple as the subject would bear. Dif- 
fering subjects bear differing degrees of simplicity. 
To apply exactly the same timbre of language to 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 209 

a dreadful interview between a father and a 
daughter as to the description of a child’s bed- 
room at night is impracticable because it is un- 
natural. In thinking of the frightful scene with 
your daughter Millicent which ruined your life, 
town councillor and parliamentary candidate 
though you had become, you will find that your 
mind employs a verbiage quite different from that 
which occurs when you remember Millicent 
asleep, her little mouth just slightly opened, her 
toys beside the shaded night-light. 
—* 

Our vocabulary, then, was as simple as was prac- 
ticable. But there are degrees of simplicity. We 
employed as a rule in writing the language that we 
employed in talking the one to the other. When 
we used French in speaking we tried mentally to 
render in English the least literary equivalent of 
the phrase. We were, however, apt to employ 
in our conversation words and periphrases that 
are not in use by, say, financiers. This was in- 
voluntary, we imagining that we talked simply 
enough. But later a body of younger men with 
whom the writer spent some years would say, 
after-dinner, “Palktike a book, H. =... Do talk 
like a book!” The writer would utter some 
speeches in the language that he employed when 
talking with Conrad; but he never could utter 

210 JOSEPH CONRAD 

more than a sentence or two ata time. The whole 
mess would roar with laughter and, for some 
minutes, would render his voice inaudible. 
ae 

If you will reflect on the language you then 
employed — and the writer —you will find that it 
was something like, “‘Cheerio, old bean. The 
beastly Adjutant’s Parade is at five ack emma. 
Will you take my Johnnie’s and let me get a real 
good fug in my downy bug-walk? I’m fair blind 
to the wide to-night.” That was the current lan- 
guage then and, in the earlier days of our con- 
versations, some equivalent with which we were 
unacquainted must normally have prevailed. That 
we could hardly have used in our books, since 
within a very short time such languages become 
incomprehensible. Even to-day the locution “ack 
emma” is no longer used and the expression “ blind 
to the wide” is incomprehensible — the very state 
is unfamiliar—to more than half the English- 
speaking populations of the globe. 

dan 

So we talked and wrote a Middle-High English 
of as unaffected a sort as would express our 
thoughts. And that was all that there really was 
to our “style.” ‘Our greatest admiration for a 
stylist in any language was given to W. H. Hudson 
of whom Conrad said that his writing was like 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE art 

the grass that the good God made to grow and 
when it was there you could not tell how it came. 
—- 

Carefully examined, a good —an interesting — 
style will be found to consist in a constant suc- 
cession of tiny, unobservable surprises. If you 
write— “ His range of subject was very wide and 
his conversation very varied and unusual; he 
could rouse you with his perorations or lull you 
with his periods; therefore his conversation met 
with great appreciation and he made several fast 
friends” — you will not find the world very apt 
to be engrossed by what you have set down. The 
results will be different if you put it, “He had 
the power to charm or frighten rudimentary souls 
into an aggravated witch-dance; he could also fill 
the small souls of the pilgrims with bitter mis- 
givings; he had one devoted friend at least, and 
he had conquered one soul in the world that was 
neither rudimentary nor tainted with self-seeking.” 

“Te 

Or, let us put the matter in another way. The 
catalogue of an ironmonger’s store is uninterest- 
ing as literature because things in it are all classi- 
fied and thus obvious; the catalogue of a farm sale 
is more interesting because things in it are con- 
trasted. No one would for long read: Nails, 
drawn wire, % inch, per lb... .; nails, do., 34 

212 JOSEPH CONRAD 

inch,eper Ib aere nails dos ache peraibe ream, 
But it is often not disagreeable to read desultorily: 
“Tot 267. Pair rabbit gins. Lot 268, Antique 
powder flask. Lot 269, Malay Kris. Lot 270, Set 
of six sporting prints by Herring. Lot 271, Silver 
caudle cup .. .” for that, as far as it goes, has the 
quality of surprise. 
a‘ 

That is, perhaps, enough about Style. This is 
not a technical manual, and at about this point 
we atrive at a region in which the writer’s memory 
is not absolutely clear as to the points on which 
he and Conrad were agreed. We made in addi- 
tion an infinite number of experiments, together 
and separately, in points of style and cadence. 
The writer, as has been said, wrote one immense 
book entirely in sentences of not more than ten 
syllables. He read the book over. He found it 
read immensely long. He went through it all 
again. He joined short sentences; he introduced 
relative clauses; he wrote in long sentences that 
had a gentle sonority and ended with a dying fall. 
The book read less long. Much less long. 

Tarn 5 

Conrad also made experiments, but not on such 
a great scale since he could always have the bene- 
fit of the writer’s performances of that sort. The 
writer only remembers specifically one instance of 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 213 

an exercise on Conrad’s part. He was interested 
in blank verse at the moment — though he took no 
interest in English verse as a rule—and the writer 
happening to observe that whole passages of 
“Heart of Darkness” were not very far off blank 
verse, Conrad tried for a short time to run a para- 
graph into decasyllabic lines. The writer remem- 
bers the paragraph quite well. It is the one which 
begins: 

She walked with measured steps, draped in 
striped and fringed cloths, treading the earth 
proudly with a slight jingle and flash of barbarous 
ornaments. ... 

= 

But he cannot remember what Conrad added 
or took away. There come back vaguely to him 
a line or two like: 

She carried high her head, her hair was done 
In the shape of a helmet; she had greaves of brass 
To the knee; gauntlets of brass to th’ elbow. 
A crimson spot. ... 
7 

That, however, may just as well be the writer’s 
contrivance as Conrad’s: it happened too long 
ago for the memory to be sure. A little later, the 
writer occupying himself with writing French 
rhymed vers libre, Conrad tried his hand at that 
too. He produced: 

214 JOSEPH CONRAD 

Riez toujours! La vie. n'est pas si gaie, 
Ces tristes jours quand a travers la haie 
Tombe le long rayon 
Dernier : 
De mon soleil qui gagne 
Les sommets, la montagne, 
De Vhorizon. ... 
There was a line or two more that the writer has 
forgotten. 
That was Conrad’s solitary attempt to write 

Verse. 
at ae 

We may as well put the rest of this matter under 
a separate heading: 

CADENCE 

This was the one subject upon which we never 
came to any agreement. It was the writer’s view 
that every one has a natural cadence of his own 
from which in the end he cannot escape. Conrad 
held that a habit of good cadence could be acquired 
by the study of models. His own he held came to 
him from constant reading of Flaubert. He did 
himself probably an injustice. 

“me 

But questions of cadence and accentuation as 
of prosody in general we were chary of discussing. 
They were matters as to which Conrad was very 
touchy. His ear was singularly faulty for one who 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 15 

was a great writer of elaborated prose so that at 
times the writer used to wonder how the deuce he 
did produce his effects of polyphonic closings to 
paragraphs. In speaking English he had prac- 
tically no idea of accentuation whatever, and 
indeed no particular habits. He would talk of 
Mr. Cunninghame Graham’s book “ Success”? al- 
ternately as “Success” and “Success” half a 
dozen times in the course of a conversation about 
the works of that very wonderful writer. Over 
French he was not much better. He became quite 
enraged when told that if the first line of his verse 
quoted above was to be regarded as decasyllabic — 
and it must by English people be regarded as deca- 
syllabic—then the word vie must be a mono- 
syllable in spite of its termination ine. He had 
in the second line quite correctly allowed for 
tristes as being two syllables, and tombe in the 
third. In the clash of French verse-theories of 
those days he might be correct or incorrect with- 
out committing a solecism, but he could not 
be incorrect in the first line and formal in the 
others. Conrad’s face would cloud over. He 
would snatch up a volume of Racine and read half 
a dozen lines. He would exclaim contemptuously, 
“Do you mean to say that each of those verses 
consists of ten syliables?” .. . Yet he would have 
read the verse impeccably. . . . He would flush 

216 JOSEPH CONRAD 

up to the eyes. He would cry, “ Did you ever hear 
a Frenchman say ‘ vee-yeh’ when he meant ‘vee?’ 
You never did! Jamais de la vie!” And with 
fury he would read his verse aloud, making, 
with a slight stammer, vie a monosyllable and, 
with impetus, two syllables each out of tristes and 
tombe. He would begin to gesticulate, his eyes 
flashing... . 
a 

One would change the subject of discussion to 
the unfailing topic of the rottenness of French 
as a medium for poetry, finding perfect harmony 
again in the thought that French was as rotten 
for verse-poetry as was English for any sort of 
preses.>. 3 

The curious thing was that when he read his 
prose aloud his accentuation was absolutely fault- 
less. So that it always seemed to the writer that 
Conrad’s marvellous gift of language was, in the 
end, dramatic. When he talked his sense of pho- 
netics was dormant, but the moment it came to any 
kind of performance the excitement would quicken 
the brain centres that governed his articulation. 
It was, indeed, the same with his French. When 
conversing desultorily with the writer, he had 
much of the accent and the negligence of an 
aristocratic, meridional lounger of the seventies. 
. . . But when at Lamb House, Rye, he addressed 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 217 

compliments to Mr. Henry James, you could im- 
agine, if you closed your eyes, that it was the sen- 
ior actor of the Théatre Frangais, addressing an 
eulogium to the bust of Moliére. .. . 
re 

Probably the mere thought of reading aloud 
subconsciously aroused memories of once-heard 
orations of Mr. Gladstone or John Bright; so, in 
writing, even to himself he would accentuate and 
pronounce his words as had done those now long- 
defunct orators. . . . And it is to be remembered 
that during all those years the writer wrote every 
word that he wrote with the idea of reading aloud 
to Conrad, and that during all those years Conrad 
wrote what he wrote with the idea of reading it 
aloud to this writer. 

STRUCTURE 

That gets rid, as far as is necessary in order to 
give a pretty fair idea of Conrad’s methods, of 
the questions that concern the texture of a book. 
More official or more learned writers who shall 
not be novelists shall treat of this author’s prose 
with less lightness—but assuredly too with less 
love. . . . Questions then of vocabulary, selection 
of incident, style, cadence and the rest concern 
themselves with the colour and texture of prose 
and, since this writer, again, will leave to more 

218 JOSEPH CONRAD 

suitable pens the profounder appraisements of 
Conrad’s morality, philosophy and the rest, there 
remains only to say a word or two on the subject 
of form. 
Me 

Conrad, then, never wrote a true short story, a 
matter of two or three pages of minutely consid- 
ered words, ending with a smack . . . with what 
the French call a coup de canon. His stories were 
always what for lack of a better phrase one has to 
call “long-short” stories. For these the form is 
practically the same as that of the novel. Or, to 
avoid the implication of saying that there is only 
one form for the novel, it would be better to put it 
that the form of long-short stories may vary as 
much as may the form for novels. The short story 
of Maupassant, of ‘Tchekhov or even of the late 
O. Henry is practically stereotyped —the intro- 
duction of a character in a word or two, a word or 
two for atmosphere, a few paragraphs for story, 
and then, click! a sharp sentence that flashes the 
illumination of the idea over the whole. 

ae 

This Conrad—and for the matter of that, the 
writer—never so much as attempted, either apart 
or in collaboration. The reason for -this lies in 
all that is behind the mystic word “justification.” 
Before everything a story must convey a sense of 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 1g 

inevitability: that which happens in it must seem 
to be the only thing that could have happened. Of 
course a.character may cry, “If I had then acted 
differently how different everything would now 
be.” The problem of the author is to make his 
then action the only action that character could 
have taken. It must be inevitable, because of his 
character, because of his ancestry, because of past 
illness or on account of the gradual coming to- 
gether of the thousand small circumstances by 
which Destiny, who is inscrutable and august, will 
push us into one certain predicament. Let us 
illustrate: 

In rendering your long friendship with, and 
ultimate bitter hostility towards, your neighbour 
Mr. Slack, who had a greenhouse painted with 
Cox’s aluminum paint, you will, if you wish to get 
yourself in with the scrupulousness of a Conrad, 
have to provide yourself, in the first place, with 
an ancestry at least as far back as your grand- 
parents. To account for your own stability of 
character and physical robustness you will have 
to give yourself two dear old grandparents in a 
lodge at the gates of a great nobleman: if neces- 
sary you will have to give them a brightly polished 
copper kettle simmering on a spotless hob, with 
silhouettes on each side of the mantel: in order 
to account for the lamentable procedure of your 

220 JOSEPH CONRAD 

daughter Millicent you must provide yourself with 
an actress or gipsy-grandmother. Or at least with 
a French one. This grandmother will have lived, 
unfortunately unmarried, with some one of elo- 
quence — possibly with the great Earl-Prime Min- 
ister dt whose gates is situated the humble abode 
of your other grandparents—at any rate she 
will have lived with some one from whom you will 
have inherited your eloquence. From her will 
have descended the artistic gifts to which the 
reader will owe your admirable autobiographic 
novel. 

If you have any physical weakness, to counter- 
balance the robustness of your other grandparents, 
you will provide your mother, shortly before 
your birth, with an attack of typhoid fever, due 
to a visit to Venice in company with your father, 
who was a gentleman’s courier in the family 
in which your mother was a lady’s maid. Your 
father, in order to be a courier, will have had, 
owing to his illegitimacy, to live abroad in very 
poor circumstances. The very poor circumstances 
will illustrate the avarice of his statesman father 
—an avarice which will have descended to you in 
the shape of that carefulness in money matters that, 
reacting on the detrimental tendencies inherited 
by Millicent from her actress-grandmother, so 
lamentably influences your daughter’s destiny. 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 221 

And of course there will have-to~be a great deal 
more than that, always supposing you to be as 
scrupulous as was Conrad in this matter of justi- 
fication. For Conrad —and for the matter of that 
the writer — was never satisfied that he had really 
and sufficiently got his characters in; he was never 
convinced that he had convinced the reader; this 
accounting for the great lengths of some of his 
books. He never introduced a character, however 
subsidiary, without providing that character with 
ancestry and hereditary characteristics, or at least 
with home surroundings— always supposing that 
character had any influence on the inevitability of 
the story. Any policeman who arrested any char- 
acter must be “justified”, because the manner in 
which he effected the arrest, his mannerisms, his 
vocabulary and his voice, might have a permanent 
effect on the psychology of the prisoner. The 
writer remembers Conrad using almost those very 
words during the discussion of the plot of “The 
Secret Agent.” 

at ae 

This method, unless it is very carefully handled, 
is apt to have the grave defect of holding a story 
back very considerably. You must as a rule bring 
the biography of a character in only after you have 
introduced the character; yet, if you introduce a 
policeman to make an arrest the rendering of his 

222 JOSEPH CONRAD 

biography might well retard the action of an ex- 
citing point in the story. ... It becomes then 
your job to arrange that the very arresting of the 
action is an incitement of interest in the reader, 
just as, if you serialise a novel, you take care to let 
the words “‘to be continued in our next” come in 
at as harrowing a moment as you can contrive. 
“~ 

And of course the introducing of the biography 
of a character may have the great use of giving 
contrast to the tone of the rest of the book... . 
Supposing that in your history of your affair with 
Mr. Slack you think that the note of your orderly 
middle-class home is growing a little monotonous, 
it would be very handy if you could discover that 
Mr. Slack had a secret, dipsomaniacal wife, con- 
fined in a country cottage under the care of a rather 
criminal old couple; with a few pages of biog- 
raphy of that old couple you could give a very 
pleasant relief to the sameness of your narrative. 
In that way the sense of reality is procured. 

PHILOSOPHY, ETC. 

We agreed that the novel is absolutely the only 
vehicle for the thought of our day. With the 
novel you can do anything: you can inquire into 
every department of life, you can explore every 
department of the world of thought. The one 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 223 

thing that you can not do is to propagandise, as 
author, for any cause. You must not, as author, 
utter any views; above all, you must not fake any 
events. You must not, however humanitarian you 
may be, over-elaborate the fear felt by a coursed 
rabbit. 

ae 

It is obviously best if you can contrive to be 
without views at all; your business with the world 
is rendering, not alteration. You have to render 
life with such exactitude that more specialised 
beings than you, learning from you what are the 
secret needs of humanity, may judge how many 
white-tiled bathrooms are, or to what extent par- 
liamentary representation is, necessary for the 
happiness of men and women. If, however, your 
yearning to amend the human race is so great that 
you cannot possibly keep your fingers out of the 
watch-springs there is a device that you can adopt. 

a 

Let us suppose that you feel tremendously strong 
views as to sexual immorality or temperance. 
You feel that you must express these, yet you know 
that like, say, M. Anatole France, who is also a 
propagandist, you are a supreme novelist. You 
must then invent, justify and set going in your 
novel a character who can convincingly express 
your views. If you are a gentleman you will also 

224 JOSEPH CONRAD 

invent, justify and set going characters to express 
views opposite to those you hold... . 

You have reached the climax of your long re- 
lationship with Mr. Slack; you are just going to 
address a deputation that has come to invite you 
to represent your native city in the legislature of 
your country. The deputation is just due. Five 
minutes before it arrives to present you with the 
proudest emotion of your life, you learn that your 
daughter Millicent is going to have a child by Mr. 
Slack. (Him, of course, you will have already 
“justified” as the likely seducer of a young lady 
whose cupidity in the matter of bangles and shoes 
you, by your pecuniary carefulness, have kept per- 
petually on the stretch.) Mr. Slack has a dipso- 
maniac wife so there is no chance of his making 
the matter good.... 

You thus have an admirable opportunity of ex- 
pressing with emphasis quite a number of views 
through the mouth of the character whom you 
have so carefully “justified” as yourself. Quite a 
number of views! 

i 

That then was, cursorily stated, the technique 
that we evolved at the Pent. It will be found 
to be nowadays pretty generally accepted as the 
normal way of handling the novel. It is founded 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 225 

on common sense and some of its maxims may 
therefore stand permanently. Or they may not. 

PROGRESSION D’EFFET 

There is just one other point. In writing a 
novel we agreed that every word set on paper — 
every word set on paper—must carry the story 
forward and that, as the story progressed, the story 
must be carried forward faster and faster and with 
more and more intensity. That is called progres- 
ston d’effet, words for which there is no English 
equivalent. 

B45 

One might go on to further technicalities, such 
as how to squeeze the last drop out of a subject. 
The writer has, however, given an instance of this 
in describing how we piled perils of the hang- 
man’s rope on the unfortunate John Kemp. To 
go deeper into the matter would be to be too tech- 
nical. Besides enough has been said in this 
chapter to show you what was the character, the 
scrupulousness and the common sense of our hero. 

rr 

There remains to add once more: 

But these two writers were not unaware—wete 
not unaware—that there are other methods of 
writing novels. They were not rigid even in their 
own methods. They were sensible to the fact that 

226 JOSEPH CONRAD 

compromise is at all times necessary to the execu- 
tion of a work of art. 

The lay reader will. be astonished at this repeti- 
tion and at these italics. They are inserted for the 
benefit of gentlemen and ladies who comment on 
books in the Press. 

LANGUAGE 

It would be disingenuous to avoid the subject 
of language. This is the only matter on which the 
writer ever differed fundamentally from Conrad. 
It was one upon which the writer felt so deeply 
that, for several years, he avoided his friend’s 
society. The pain of approaching the question is 
thus very great. 

a 

Conrad’s dislike for the English language, then, 
was, during all the years of our association, extreme, 
his contempt for his medium unrivalled. Again 
and again during the writing of, say, ‘‘ Nostromo” 
he expressed passionate regret that it was then too 
late to hope to make a living by writing in French, 
and as late as 1916 he expressed to the writer an 
almost equally passionate envy of the writer who 
was in a position to write in French, propaganda 
for the government of the French Republic. .. . 
And Conrad’s contempt for English as a prose 
language was not, as in the writer’s case, mitigated 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 227 

by love for English as the language for verse- 
poetry. For, to the writer, English is as much 
superior to French in the one particular as French 
to English in the other. 

Conrad, however, knew nothing of, and cared 
less for, English verse—and his hatred for Eng- 
lish as a prose medium reached such terrible 
heights that during the writing of “ Nostromo” 
the continual weight of Conrad’s depression broke 
the writer down. We had then published “ Ro- 
mance” and Conrad, breaking, in the interests of 
that work, his eremitic habits, decided that we 
ought to show ourselves in Town. ‘The writer 
therefore took a very large, absurd house on Camp- 
den Hill and proceeded to “entertain.” Conrad 
had lodgings also on Campden Hill. At this time 
“Nostromo” had begun to run as a serial in a very 
popular journal, and on the placards of that jour- 
nal Conrad’s name appeared on every hoarding in 
London. This publicity caused Conrad an un- 
believable agony, he conceiving himself for ever 
dishonoured by such vicarious pandering to popu- 
larity. 

Ie 

It was the most terrible period of Conrad’s life 
and of the writer’s. Conrad at that time con- 
sidered himself completely unsuccessful; ignored 

228 JOSEPH CONRAD 

by the public; ill-treated by the critics (he was 
certainly at that date being treated with unusual 
stupidity by the critics) ; he was convinced that he 
would never make a decent living. And he was 
convinced that he would never master English. 
He used to declare that English was a language 
in which it was impossible to write a direct state- 
ment. That was true enough. He used to declare 
that to make a direct statement in English is like 
trying to kill a mosquito with a forty-foot stock 
whip when you have never before. handled a stock 
whip. One evening he made, in French, to the 
writer, the impassioned declaration which will be 
found in French at the end of this volume. On the 
following afternoon he made a terrible scene at the 
writer's house. =... 
ae 

The writer was at the time very much harassed. 
The expense of keeping up a rather portentous 
establishment made it absolutely necessary that 
he should add considerably to his income with his 
pen—a predicament with which he had not yet 
been faced. There was nothing in that except 
that it was almost impossible to find time to write. 
An epidemic of influenza running through the 
house crippled its domestic staff so that all sorts 
of household tasks had of necessity to be per- 
formed by the writer: there were, in addition, 

IT IS ABOVE ALL TO MAKE YOU SEE 229 

social duties — and the absolute necessity of carry- 
ing Conrad every afternoon through a certain 
quantum of work without which he must miss his 
weekly instalments in the popular journal... . 
ee 

At an At Home there, amongst eminently de- 
corous people, a well-meaning but unfortunate 
gentleman congratulated Conrad on the fact that 
his name appeared on all the hoardings and Con- 
rad considered that these congratulations were 
ironical gibes at him because his desperate cir- 
cumstances had forced him to agree to the dis- 
honour of serialisation in a popular journal. ... 

= 

Conrad’s indictment of the English language 
was this, that no English word is a word; that 
all English words are instruments for exciting 
blurred emotions. ‘“Oaken” in French means 
“made of oak wood” —nothing more. “ Oaken” 
in English connotes innumerable moral attributes: 
it will connote stolidity, resolution, honesty, blond 
features, relative unbreakableness, absolute un- 
bendableness— also, made of oak. . . . The con- 
sequence is that no English word has clean edges: 
a reader is always, for a fraction of a second, un- 
certain as to which meaning of the word the writer 
intends. Thus, all English prose is blurred. Con- 
rad desired to write prose of extreme limpidity.... 

230 JOSEPH CONRAD 

We may let it go at that. In later years Conrad 
achieved a certain fluency and a great limpidity 
of language. He then regretted that for him all 
the romance of writing was gone — the result being 
“The Rover”, which strikes the writer as being 
a very serene and beautiful work... . In be- 
tween the two he made tributes to the glory of the 
English language, by implication contemning the 
tongue that Flaubert used. This struck the writer, 
at that time in a state of exhausted depression, as 
unforgivable—as the very betrayal of Dain by 
Tom Lingard. ... Perhaps it was. If it were 
Conrad faced the fact in that book. There are 
predicaments that beset great Adventurers, in dark 
hours, in the shallows: the overtired nerve will 
Talli wave mayowerlwlienitgomethat. .ce. 

—* 

“For it would be delightful to catch the echo of 
the desperate and funny quarrels that enlivened 
these old days. The pity of it is that there comes a 
time when all the fun of one’s life must be looked 
forin the past... .” 

ee 

Those were Conrad’s last words on all the mat- 
ters of our collaborations here treated of. They 
were, too, almost his last words. . . . For those 
who can catch them here, then, are the echoes. . . . 

Part IV 
THAT, TOO, IS ROMANCE... 

WITH the turn of the century we took up again 
“Romance.” 
a 

For a long time we had talked of going to 
Bruges in order to get quiet in which to finish this 
work; this not because the Pent was noisy, but its 
corners seemed to be filled with the whispering 
echoes of our struggles. The crux of the diffi- 
culties in this book had arrived. By that time a 
great deal of it was finished and in about its present 
condition. 

= 

Conrad’s allotment of the authorship of the parts 
of this work had better be given here again. 

“T suppose our recollections agree,” he writes 
to the author. “ Mine in their simplest form, are: 

“First part, yours; Second part, mainly yours, 
with a little by me on points of seamanship and 
suchlike small matters; Third part about 60 per 
cent. mine with important touches by you. Fourth 
part mine, with here and there an important sen- 
tence by you: Fifth part practically all yours, in- 
cluding the famous sentence at which we both 

234 JOSEPH CONRAD 

exclaimed: ‘This is Genius’ (Do you remember 
what it was?) with perhaps half a dozen lines by 
me.” ; 
i 
The writer’s recollection agrees except as to the 
Fourth part, which does not contain one word by 
the writer. How that came about shall now be 
recounted. 
ae 

The writer with his family and paraphernalia 
had transported themselves to Bruges to await 
Conrad and his. Bruges is a grey, silent town with 
crowstep gables to the house fronts, its shadows 
being shot with the gleams from canals that run 
through the streets. Its roof-level is dominated by 
an immense belfry from which there descend 
chimes. The chimes are practically never silent. 
Beautifully and drowsily five minutes before every 
quarter of the hour they begin to announce that the 
quarter is about to strike; for ten minutes after 
the quarter has struck they go on announcing that the 
quarter has struck. The hour is greeted for a quarter 
of an hour by chimes that announce that the hour 
is about to strike; for forty-five minutes after the 
hour has struck they continue to announce that the 
hour has struck. The hours and the quarters are 
struck on great bells whose overtones go on rever- 
berating for fifty and for ten minutes respectively. 

THAT, TOO, IS ROMANCE 236 

. .. That is impressionism: the impressionism of 
those who in Bruges lie awake at night. There are 
in Bruges a great number of churches—all with 
bells— and some very lovely, bright little pictures 
by Van Eyck. There was also an English pension 
to which we had agreed to go. Conrad liked to 
be amongst English people when abroad... . 
Bruges is also very relaxing: except at night it is 
difficult not to sleep. 

ss 

The Contents page of “Romance” looks like 
this: 
PARTORIRG LT 
THE QUARRY AND THE BEACH 

PART SECOND 
THE GIRL WITH THE LIZARD 

PART THIRD 
CASA RIEGO 
PART FOURTH 
BLADE AND GUITAR 

PART FIFTH 
THE Lot oF MAN 

. whose names are five sweet symphonies in 
the capa y espada manner. They are all Conrad’s, 
those names. There was nothing he loved so 
much as inventing titles for Parts: it was like 

236 JOSEPH CONRAD 

being a herald proclaiming war from the steps of 
StePaulses ae 

On arrival in Bruges the author was carrying 
the manuscript of Parts One, Two and ‘Three com- 
plete. The end of the book was also done by 
then, exactly as it stands, except for the peroration 
over which, subsequently, we worked for twenty 
hours on end. We were to meet, cheered by the 
new atmosphere of Bruges and, in a rush, finish 
off Part Four and the opening of Part Five... . 
In three or four days. Then we would take a 
week’s holiday and look at the churches. We had 
also planned an excursion to Ghent: two sailors 
ashore after a four years’ voyage. For, by that 
time, we had been, on and off, four years over 

“ Romance.” 
oe 

So there we were in Bruges, in the English 
pension, waiting for Conrad. The English pen- 
sion seemed to be distinguished chiefly by brown 
linoleum, bentwood chairs in long perspectives, 
long teeth in withered faces, dimness and placards 
forbidding you to take water between certain hours 
from certain taps—and by complete, absolute, un- 
shakable lassitude. There was no place in which 
to write. When, with a desperate struggle of the 
will, the writer took a private sitting room on the 

THAT, TOO, IS ROMANCE 237 

ground floor, little boys from the school opposite 
used to throw in at the windows envelopes full of 
ink which made a delectable mess. About the 
shadowy streets and along the dim canals the 
Briton was pursued by crowds of little boys whose 
shouts of Vivent les Boers! gave temporary anima- 
tion to Bruges la Morte. 

Conrad delayed to come . . . “Romance” was 
thus hung up. We had agreed that the writer 
would work in the mornings on “ Romance” whilst 
Conrad wrote—probably “Typhoon”—at the 
same time. We would play dominoes in agreeable 
cafés during the afternoons and after dinner col- 
laborate gaily. The work would take only a few 
a yoNo 

es 

It was impossible to do anything during the day 
in Bruges but lie on one’s bed; at night it was im- 
possible to sleep for chimes and mosquitoes. .. . 
Conrad delayed to come. ... The diet of the 
English pension — thin slices of cold mutton, pota- 
toes boiled in water, “greens” boiled in water 
which remained with the greens — began seriously 
to deteriorate a digestion used to food more elab- 
orate. The taste of the greens was never out of 
the mouth.... We hesitated to change our 
lodging because Conrad was coming to-morrow. 

238 JOSEPH CONRAD 

He liked to be amongst English people when 
abroad. It was perhaps “To-morrow” that he 
was then writing, or both “To-morrow” and 
“Typhoon.” The withered faces and the long 
teeth that phantasmally loomed in the more dim 
places of the English pension were curious to know 
why we needed a private sitting room... . To 
write a book in? ... A novel? Oh, good gra- 
cious. . . . They had never been in a pension with 
a novelist before... . Was it quite... . Of course 
you locked your door at night. . . . But they had 
always thought. . . . Like common soldiers, you 
know. . . . Not allowed in the best... . 
Telegrams went back and forth between the 
pension and the Pent... . “ Book just being fin- 
ished,” came the cheerful news from the Pent. 
Pinker would come down with large sum... . 
The early summer waned; the dog-days were in- 

tolerable there. . . . The French-Swiss governess, 
indispensable, declared she would not stop another 
day in Bruges. . . . Little boys calling her Sale 

Anglaise had thrown ink over her pink-striped, 
best dimity dress. . . . Agitated packings began. 
In the midst of them a telegram from Sandling 
Junction to say, “Starting.” 

mr 

There was, of course, a rush to Ostend where 

THAT, TOO, IS ROMANCE 239 

the boat comes in. Travellers not coming by boat 
are not allowed on the Ostend-Bruges Express. 
The writer visited the sous chef de gare: Statie- 
Onderovoorste. He removed his hat, bowing with 
exquisite politeness, and announced to a uniformed 
man as big as a sea-lion “gu’il serait infiniment 
reconnatssant si M. Le Chef de Gare lui accor- 
derait la permission. ...” The sea-lion mum- 
bled, “Wat wolt gi? . . . Wadger want?” The 
writer wanted permission to travel by the Ostend- 
Bruges Express. The sea-lion waved a flapper 
and cried: “ VatdoZ kerr? . . . Do wadger want. 
BIN O.CL-Wayees: 26 
one, 

Conrad appeared on the platform, overbur- 
dened by the weight of a large-small boy, not very 
well. ... Bearers staggering after that Congo 
caravan. ... The scared face of Amy Foster, 
maid, who had never been abroad. . . . A swarm 
of frightened ticket collectors running alongside. 
Conrad infuriated. ... The caravan is assimi- 
lated by the express. . . . The timid ticket collec- 
tors waver round the open door of the carriage 
bleating, “Tickets, pliss. Billets. Koupangs.... 
Bitte die Fahrkarten. ...” Conrad, exhausted 
but volanic, sunk on the cushions, exclaims, “ Dirt: 
foreigners. . . . Sales Belges. .. . Damn, damn, 
damn! .. 2’ The sea-lion in an unbuttoned blue 

240 JOSEPH CONRAD 

tunic with gilt buttons—a tunic large enough to 
be a truck cover—waddles like a great sow 
amongst a poultry yard of ticket collectors. He 
exclaims, “Det maakt mix. ... Verrokter En- 
gelsker ... Ko away. ...” The ticket collec- 
tors disperse. ... Whether Conrad had any 
tickets the writer never knew. He certainly never 
showed them. . . . It is perhaps in that way that 
one ought to handle foreigners. . . . 

Conrad remained wrapped in a comminative 
gloom, the train going over the flat lands. He 
contrived to communicate to the milder writer 
that all... all... all these things: the train, 
the boat, the mislaid trunks, the ticket collectors 
and the whole dreary waste of foreigners were 
his—the writer’s—fault. . .. One ought to be 
English. .. . The writer ought to be English. 
. . . Why wasn’t he English to the soul? Asking 
permission of a Statie-Onderovoorste!...It made 
these fellows not know their places. ... But it 
would be all right when we got to the English 
pension, amongst English people... . 

At the first sight of the first placard on the first 
landing, surrounded by long teeth that peeped 
from the gloom of corridors, Conrad stiffened, like 
a sudden corpse. 

THAT, TOO, IS ROMANCE 241 

WATER MUST NOT BE DRAWN FROM THIS TAP 
BETWEEN THE HOURS OF ELEVEN AND TEN MORN- 
ING OR EVENING. GUESTS WILL BE STRICTLY SILENT 
ON THE STAIRS. A FINE OF ONE FRANC TWENTY- 
FIVE WILL BE ENACTED FOR EVERY FIVE MINUTES 
LATE AT MEALS. NO SMOKING IN THE DINING- 
ROOM SALONS STAIRS BATH ROOMS OR W.C.S. BOOTS 
ARE NOT CLEANED IN THE CORRIDORS. ANGLICAN 
SERVICE DAILY IN THE DINING-ROOM FROM NINE 
THIRTY TO ONE... 2? 
4 ire 

Thus England spoke. 

What Conrad said made all the glimmering 
teeth vanish from those corridors for the next seven 
hours. He disappeared. Gone. 

te 

He seemed to be gone for days. . . . But within 
seven hours we were all aboard the tram for 
Knocke. . . . He had met an admirable Abbé in 
the Place du Beffroi. . . . He had been directed 
to that seashore. Admirable hotel. ... Won- 
derful domino players. ... Charming Dutch, 
French, Spanish, German fellow guests. . . . Bel- 
gians not ‘so bad. . .-. Best-class. .. . Director 
of Brussels orchestra. . . . Wagnerian cantatrice. 
. . . Unsurpassed sands... . Cooking ... Hum, 
hum. ... Four francs a day bath and vin com- 
pris... . A little music with the chasse café, mon 

242 JOSEPH CONRAD 

vieux. ... We will finish “Romance” in a 
WEEK 54 

It was not so bad. When Conrad really went 
at it he fell on his feet all right... . Knocke 
was just within the Belgian border. You could 
run in a sand-yacht in front of the dunes, right 
to Sluys, far in Holland. . . . The hotel was very 
airy, the fellow guests were pleasant. You could 
play in domino or écarté tournaments or sand- 
tennis ones. Even Miss Benny van der Meer de 
Walcheren was charming when, at meals, her 
voice was not shaking the glasses on the trays in 
the sixth-floor back bedroom where we tried to 
collaborate. ... 

at aml 

Alas! A child fell ill; the book would not go 
in the mornings in the top room; “ Romance” in 
the mornings would not go, either, on the corner 
of the café table: doctors had to be fetched at 
midnights in the teeth of westerly gales, the foam 
white like a bar across the sky, the sand skinning 
your lips: so The child swas-vetyrull . seal he 
writer developed symptoms of idiocy never before 
suspected. . . . Owing to the illness of the child 
it was impossible for Conrad to invent the escape 
of John Kemp from the Casa Riego in Rio Media. 
The writer was set to invent. . .. He invented 

THAT, TOO, IS’ ROMANCE 243 

John Kemp boarding the Lion, or some other ship, 
with the fainting Seraphina on one arm: Kemp 
swarming up a rope with his burden and shooting 
two negroes whose white teeth gleamed at the 
wheel. . . . It became touch and go with the 
child. Conrad had very bad gout, his wrist all 
wapped up. He groaned all day long in the top 
room. Writing was impossible. From time to 
time he would smile distractedly to the writer and 
say, “If I didn’t know that you, mon vieux, were 
writing away at that book I should go mad... .” 
a 

Alas! . . . In the café downstairs the sand and 
the draughts filtered round the writer’s ankles. 
The ink was full of sand, the typewriter was 
stopped by sand, the marble table on which one 
wrote was like ice. Autumn was there; the voice 
of Miss Benny competed with great gales off the 
leaden North Sea. ... The child lived to be- 
come an admirable son, and to make the proudest 
of fathers that Conrad was, the discreetly proudest 
of grandfathers. . .. So Conrad had mind enough 
to read how the bodies of those white-teethed 
niggers falling on the wheel made the pirate ship 
come about, and how John Kemp exclaimed to the 
villainous O’Brien, “ Foiled! And by a stripling!” 
. . . It was not really as bad as that; but that was 
how it felt as the writer sat by with Conrad read- 

244 JOSEPH CONRAD 

ing the manuscript. Conrad had too bad a head- 
ache, and was too bad with the gout to be read to 
in the top room that contained a deal table, an 
unmade-up bed, some ash trays and a portrait of 
Leopold, King of the Belgians, hanging on the 
wall askew. ... Leopold had his revenge for 
“The Inheritors” as he simpered down over his 
preposterous beard—the ugly Jew! ... 

The writer almost turned. Not because Conrad 
did not like John Kemp’s pistol practice, but be- 
cause Conrad’s belief in the writer’s omniscience 
should have put him to the job of writing sea ad- 
ventures, which was trying him altogether too 
high. For Conrad really had that belief; that is 
the one certainty that the writer has as to how 
Conrad really regarded him. He may have had 
affection for the writer or he may not; he may 
have had admiration for his gifts or he may not. 
The one thing certain is that he really regarded 
him as omniscient. Otherwise he would never 
have put him at the jobs that he did put him at. 
For of our establishment the writer was Bill the 
Lizard, It-was, “Here Bill’. :.. Wheres Bill? 
. . . Bill, the master says that you’ve got to go up 
the chimney!” all day long. . . . And proud, too! 
The writer would have to supply authentic in- 
formation about Anarchists as about Cabinet Min- 

THAT, TOO, IS ROMANCE 245 

isters, about Courts of Justice as about the emo- 
tions of women, about leases, mining shares, brands 
of cigarettes, the verse of Christina Rossetti. . . . 
He did, too, and was mostly treated with an ex- 
aggerated politeness. As to the accusation of omni- 
science and the politeness there is documentary 
evidence: you may read in the preface of “The 
Secret Agent” of “the omniscient friend who first 
gave me the first suggestion of the book.” Or 
again — this is Conrad giving you the writer: 

The subject of “The Secret Agent” —I mean 
the tale— came to me in the shape of a few words 
uttered by a friend, in a casual conversation about 
anarchists or rather anarchists’ activities; how 
brought about I do not remember now. .. . 

I remember, however, remarking on the crim- 
inal futility of the whole thing, doctrine, action, 
Mentaiity... ... Presently ..:.,.we recalled. the 
already old story of the attempt to blow up Green- 
wich Observatory. ... That outrage could not 
be laid hold of mentally in any sort of a way... . 

I pointed all this out to my friend who remained 
silent for a while, and then remarked in his char- 
acteristically casual and omniscient manner: “ Oh, 
that fellow was half an idiot. His sister committed 
suicide afterwards.” . . . It never occurred to me 
later to ask how he arrived at his knowledge. I 
am sure that if he had once in his life seen the back 
of an anarchist, that must have been the whole of 
his connection with the underworld. .. . 

246 JOSEPH CONRAD 

That passage is curiously characteristic Conrad. 
. . « For what the writer really did say to Conrad 
was, “Oh, that fellow was half an idiot! His 
sister murdered her husband afterwards and was 
allowed to escape by the police. I remember the 
funeral. . . .” The suicide was invented by Con- 
rad. And the writer knew—and Conrad knew 
that the writer knew—a great many anarchists of 
the Goodge Street group, as well as a great many 
of the police who watched them. The writer had 
provided Conrad with anarchist literature, with 
memoirs, with introductions to at least one anarch- 
ist young lady who figures in “The Secret Agent.” 
Indeed, the writer’s first poems were set up by that 
very young lady on an anarchist printing press. 

— 

Acquiring such knowledge is the diversion of 
most youths, the writer having once been young. 
There are few English boys of spirit who have not 
at one time or other dressed up in sweaters and, 
with handkerchiefs round their necks, gone after 
experience amongst the cutthroats at Wapping 
Old Stairs. ... But Conrad, when he met the 
writer after the publication of “The Secret Agent” 
with preface in 1920, remarked almost at once and 
solicitously: 

“You know. ... The preface to ‘The Secret 
Agent... . I did not give you away too much. 

THAT, TOO, IS. ROMANCE 247 

. .. I was very cautious.” ... He had wished 
politely to throw a veil of eternal respectability 
over the writer. And he had been afraid that the 
suggestion that the writer had once known some 
anarchists, thirty-five years before, might ruin the 
writer’s career! ... And of course few men in 
self-revelations and prefaces have ever so con- 
trived under an aspect of lucidity to throw over 
themselves veils of confusion. 
wr 

For the sake of completing the picture of col- 
laborators at work, whilst we are quoting, the 
writer will quote here a passage from Stephen 
Crane that has always pleased the writer very 
much. ‘You must not be offended,” he writes to 
some one, “by Hueffer’s manner. He patronises 
Mr. James, he patronises Mr. Conrad. Of course 
he patronises me, and he will patronise Almighty 
God when they meet, but God will get used to it, 
for Hueffer is all right.” With the additional in- 
formation that it was according to Conrad that 
Henry James always referred to the writer as votre 
ami, le jeune homme modeste, the writer will leave 
the reader to make what he can of it. Relation- 
ships are extraordinarily indefinable things. 

aaa 

But with the Fourth Part of “Romance” the 

writer really did momentarily feel that he was being 

248 JOSEPH CONRAD 

tried too high. And he protested. He pointed out 
that he knew nothing about the sea, except that it 
was salt and bitter. He ought not to have been 
set to contrive the escape of John Kemp by sea. 
He could have done it overland, and would have 
made Kemp just as hangable. 

* 

Conrad grumbled rather suspiciously that the 
writer had managed all right with the pirate at- 
tack on the Breeze in Part IJ. The writer pointed 
out that it was one thing to elaborate a scene from 
the evidence of a trial and to write: “a quarter of 
a mile astern and between the land and us, a little 
schooner, rather low in the water, curtsying under 
a cloud of white canvas—a wonderful thing to 
look at.” Any one who could describe a pint pot 
could write that. But with the impression that 
the writer knew all about his, Conrad’s past, at the 
back of his mind, Conrad said, still suspiciously, 
“That’s all right... . What’s the matter with 
it? ...”’ The implication being that the writer 
really knew all about seafaring and had just not 
tried when he invented those niggers at the wheel. 

x 

... The fact was that Conrad suspected the 
writer of not having taken trouble with the passage, 
because of going joy-riding with Miss Benny on a 
sand-yacht into Holland. Something like that.... 

THAT, TOO, IS ROMANCE 249 

In any case, that was the end of the writer’s 
invention of parts of “Romance.” Conrad took 
over the Fourth Part which begins, “There was 
a slight, almost imperceptible jar, a faint grating 
noise, a whispering sound of sand—and the boat, 
without a splash, floated.” In the literature of 
romantic adventure there is nothing more admir- 
able—unless only, Conrad would have added, 
“The Purple Land.” 

So the writer failed Conrad as any other King 
Tom always fails any Malay Prince, for the la- 
bours Conrad put into that immense wad out of the 
book must have been agonising, and in that matter 
the writer was past help... . 

_ 

But it must not be imagined that that ended 
our labours. The Parts once joined up, we went 
right over the book again, working upon every 
passage with microscopes. It then went to the 
printers and there was an interval. But the proof 
corrections we made were so overwhelming that 
when we were halfway through the Second Part, 
Messrs. Smith and Elder sent the manuscript back, 
suggesting that we might as well make our correc- 
tions on that. We went through it all again and, 
even after that, corrected elaborately. On the last 
section of the proof we worked at the Pent from 
ten in the morning till fire-lighting time of the next 

250 JOSEPH CONRAD 

morning. What our labours amounted to was 
what follows. This passage from the end of 
“Romance” has been printed elsewhere as well. 
The reader may not have seen that book. We 
worked all that day on those passages, putting in 
sentences and taking them out; there was a great 
deal more Conrad at one time, a great deal more 
Hueffer at another. It all went but what here is 
given. We were, you see, shortening, shortening, 
shortening —for the sake of progression d’effet. 

It takes long enough to realise that some one 1s 
dead at a distance. I had done that. But how 
long, how long it needs to know that the life of 
your heart has come back from the dead. For 
years afterwards I could not bear to have her out 
of my sight. 

Of our first meeting in London all I can re- 
member is a speechlessness that was like the awed 
hesitation of our overtried souls before the great- 
ness of a change from the verge of despair to the 
opening of a supreme joy. The whole world, the 
whole of life, with her return had changed all 
around me; it enveloped me, it enfolded me so’ 
lightly as not to be felt, so suddenly as not to be 
believed in, so completely that that whole meeting 
was an embrace, so softly that at last it lapsed into 
a sense of rest that was like the fall of a beneficent 
and welcome death. 

For suffering 1s the lot of man, but not inevi- 
table failure or worthless despair which is without 
end—suffering, the mark of manhood, which 
bears within its pain a hope of felicity like a jewel 
SEL I LON, <3. 1 s 

Her first words were: 

“You broke our compact. You went away from 
me whilst I was sleeping.” Only the deepness of 
her reproach revealed the depth of her love, and 

254 JOSEPH CONRAD 

the suffering she too had endured to reach a union 
that was to be without end—and to forgive. 

And, looking back, we see Romance—that subtle 
thing that is mirage —that 1s life. It is the good- 
ness of the years we have lived through, of the old 
time when we did this or that, when we dwelt here 
or there. Looking back it seems a wonderful 
enough thing that I who am this and she who 1s 
that, commencing so far away a life that, after such 
sufferings borne together and apart, ended so tran- 
quilly there in a world so stable—that she and I 
should have passed through so much, good chance 
and evil chance, sad hours and joyful, all lived 
down and swept away into the little heap of dust 
that 1s life. That, too,1s Romance. 

L’ENVoI 

The writer has always considered that that man 
may be said to have lived happily who has a happy 
death. What are all the glories of Napoleon as 
set against his fretted and fretful end? Death 
is no doubt to all kind; a dulling of the faculties 
sets in and it is, however fast, a gradual, restful 
affair. But how kind must death be to the faith- 
ful worker, who, having toiled all his life, can say 
with his last breath, I have achieved. His last 
backward glance must show all his reverses as 
mere reverses; but all his progresses have had 
such permanence as is vouchsafed to us mortals. 

THE END 255 

So the writer in these sad months and years has 

one certain happiness. . . 
= 

In the days here mostly treated of, Conrad had 
a very dreadful, a very agonising life. Few men 
can so much have suffered; there was about all 
his depressed moments a note of pain—of agony 
indeed —that coloured our whole relationship; 
that caused one to have an almost constant quality 
of solicitude. It is all very well to say that he 
had his marvellous resilience. He had, and that 
was his greatness. But the note of a sailor’s life 
cannot be called preponderantly cheerful whose 
whole existence is passed in a series of ninety-day 
passages, in labouring ships, beneath appalling 
weathers, amongst duties and work too heavy, in 
continual discomfort and acute physical pain— 
with, in between each voyage, a few days spent 
as Jack-ashore. And that, in effect, was the life 
of Conrad. 

“ne 

His resilience was his own; his oppressions 
were the work of humanity or of destiny. That 
is why his personality struck so strong a note of 
humour. The personality of Conrad as it re- 
mains uppermost in the reader’s mind was three- 
fold, with very marked divisions. There was 
the Conrad with the sharp, agonising intake of 

256 JOSEPH CONRAD 

the breath who feared your approach because 
you might jar his gout-martyrised wrist, or the 
approach of fate with the sharp pain of new dis- 
aster. There was the gloomy aristocrat— as man 
and as intellect—who mused unceasingly upon 
the treacheries, the muddles, the lack of imagi- 
nation, the imbecilities which make up the conduct 
of human affairs; who said after the relation of 
each new story of incapacity and cruelness: “‘ Cela 
vous donne une fiere idée de ’/homme.” .. . But 
most marked in the writer’s mind was the alert, 
dark, extremely polished and tyrannous person- — 
ality, tremendously awake, tremendously interested 
in small things, peering through his monocle at 
something close to the ground, taking in a charac- 
teristic and laughing consumedly —at a laborious 
child progressing engrossedly over a sloping lawn, 
at a bell-push that functioned of itself in the door- 
post of a gentleman who had written about an in- 
visible man—or at the phrase: “Excellency, a 
Tew. poats. . 5% 
Ct a a 

Once the writer, in one of his more gorgeous 
frames of mind, was standing outside his bank, 
wearing a dazzling huit-reflets, a long-tailed morn- 
ing coat, beautiful trousers and spats, a very high 
collar that was like enamel, a black satin stock, 
and dangling a clouded cane. . . . Just like that! 

THE END 254 

Bored stiff! Thinking nothing at all he gazed 
down Pall Mall. . . . There approached him an 
old, shrunken, wizened man, in an unbrushed 
bowler, an ancient burst-seamed overcoat, one 
wrist wrapped in flannel, the other hand helping 
him to lean on a hazel walking stick, cut from a 
hedge and prepared at home. It had in one 
tortured eye a round piece of dirty window glass. 
Itsaid,; “Ford .. 0°“ How dare... .”. The writer 
said to himself, “this atrocious old usurer. .. .” 
For naturally, no one but a moneylender would 
have dared . . . insuch a get-up. 

But, within three minutes, as he stood and talked, 
the bowler hat was jetty black, the overcoat just 
come from Poole’s, the beard torpedo-shaped, 
black, and defiant, the confident accents dusky and 
caressing; the monocle sparkled like cut crystal, 
the eyes glowed. And, almost more wonderfully, 
Pall Mall became alive as we went towards the 
Bodega; it became alive as towns of the true be- 
lief awaken in the presence of the Prince of True 
Believers, come to saunter through his slave 
market. .. . That, too, was Romance... . 

HK 

But, indeed, with Conrad in it, London was 
another place. The writer knows his London, has 
written about it silly books that have been violently 

258 JOSEPH CONRAD 

if undeservedly belauded; there is not much that 
you could tell him about what lies two miles or 
so west of Piccadilly and no one should go any- 
where else — at any rate, not in that frame of mind. 
But with Conrad at your elbow it became extra- 
ordinarily altered and more vivid. It was not, of 
course, that he discoursed archzologies or told you 
what famous men had lived in such a house in 
Panton Street. It was simply that he looked at a 
house front and laughed; or at a hat on a cabman, 
or his horse, or a tree in a London square, or the 
skirt of a girl with a bandbox, crossing the road in 
front of the Ritz, or at the Foreign Office facade. 
. . . Once we were sitting in the front row of the 
stalls at the Empire— and Conrad was never tired 
of wondering at the changes that had come over 
places of musical entertainment since his time, 
when they had lodged in cellars, with sanded floors, 
pots of beer and chairmen. On that night at the 
Empire there was at least one clergyman with a 
number of women; ladies is meant. ... And, 
during applause by the audience of some too 
middle-class joke, one of us leaned over towards the 
other and said, ‘“‘Doesn’t one feel lonely in this 
beastly country!” ... Which of us it was that 
spoke neither remembered after, the other had 
been at that moment thinking so exactly the same 
thing. 

THE END 259 

And that must not be taken as want of patriot- 
ism to Great Britain on the part of either of us. 
To the measure of our abilities we were ready to 
do our bits each for the little bit of scarlet on the 
map, and that seems to be all that is wanted... . 
But in any popular assembly, anywhere, the artist 
must needs feel a foreigner and lonely. He must 
have the feeling that not one soul of all those thou- 
sands would understand one word of what he was 
talking of if he really talked of the things that oc- 
cupied his mind. You are a part of the mob, at 
times with some of the mob-psychology yourself. 
But if you draw into yourself and resume your in- 
dividuality you are frightened. That is what it is. 
You are frightened. If that House knew what you 
were thinking of their entertainment and them- 
selves they would tear you to pieces on the instant 
—precisely as a foreigner. That is the same all 
over the world; but it is at its worst in Anglo- 
Saxondom. 

<a 

Indeed, in that frame of mind, Conrad was 
very impartial. He used to shock the writer who, 
as a Briton, knows nothing about his Imperial pos- 
sessions, by declaring that the French were the 
only European nation who knew how to colonise; 
they had none of the spirit of Mr. Kipling’s “ You- 
bloody-niggerisms” about them, but regarded 

260 JOSEPH CONRAD 

black or tan or black and tan as all one humanity 
with themselves, intermarrying, working peace- 
fully side by side, and side by side, in Algerian 
cafés of an evening, sitting and drinking their 
apéritifs. And they provided the nigger with ex- 
actly the same mairies, frescoes, statuary in the 
midst of jungles, representation in Paris and mad- 
dening regulations for obtaining permis de chasse 
or money from the Post Office as are provided in 
any French town from Pont |’Evéque to Aigues 
Mortes. That seemed to Conrad the way to col- 
onise: and indeed one never heard of any Seces- 
sionist movements in the French colonies, from 
Algeria to Annam. But be that as it may, with all 
his gloomily fatalistic views of the incapacity of 
Anglo-Saxons as colonists other than by butchery 
and the sjambok, in “ Heart of Darkness” it is a 
French, not a British, ship-of-war that bombards 
the unanswering bush from the tepid seas of Afri- 
can coasts. 

“ne 

There wasn’t even a shed there and she was 
shelling the bush. . . . Her ensign dropped limp 
like a rag; the muzzles of the long six-inch guns 
stuck out all over the low hull; the greasy, slimy 
swell swung her up lazily and let her down. In 
the empty immensity of earth, sky, and water, 
there she was, incomprehensible, firing into a con- 
tinent. Pop, would go one of the six-inch guns; 

THE END 261 

a small flame would dart and vanish, a little white 
smoke would disappear, a tiny projectile give a 
feeble screech —and nothing happened. Nothing 
could happen. There was a touch of insanity in 
the proceeding. ... 

It was not that Conrad was markedly humani- 
tarian; it was that he disliked waste of human 
effort even when it is expended in meaningless 
cruelty. 
tame 

So, against the cruelties of fate, he stood up. 
. . . [here was an occasion when the whole of the 
manuscript of the last instalment of “The End of 
the Tether” for Blackwood’s was burnt shortly 
before it was due for publication. That sounds a 
small thing. But the instalments of Blackwood 
are pretty long and the idea of letting Maga miss 
an instalment appalled: it was the almost unthink- 
able crime. ., . The manuscript had been lying on 
the round, Madox Brown table, under a paraffin 
lamp with a glass reservoir, no doubt also an 
eighteen-forty contrivance: the reservoir had 
burst. . . . For a day or so it was like a funeral: 
then for moral support or because his writing room 
was burnt out, Conrad drove over to Winchelsea, 
to which ancient town the writer had removed. 
Then you should have seen Romance! It became 
a matter of days; then of hours. Conrad wrote; 

262 JOSEPH CONRAD 

the writer corrected the manuscript behind him 
or wrote in a sentence— the writer in his study on 
the street, Conrad in a two-roomed cottage that we 
had hired immediately opposite. The household 
sat up all night keeping soups warm. In the mid- 
dle of the night Conrad would open his window 
and shout, “For heaven’s sake give me something 
for sale pochard, it’s been holding me up for an 
hour.” The writer called back, “ Confounded 
swilling pig!” across the dead-still, grass-grown 
StLCOtie cron 

Telegrams went back and forth between ancient 
Winchelsea and the ancient house of Blackwood in 
Edinburgh. So ancient was that house that it was 
said to send its proofs from London to Edinburgh 
and back by horse-messenger. We started the 
manuscript like that. Our telegrams would ask 
what was the latest day, the latest hour, the latest 
half-minute that would do if “The End of the 
Tether” was to catch the presses. Blackwoods 
answered, at first Wednesday morning, then Thurs- 
day. Then Friday night would be just possible. 
. .. At two in the morning the mare—another 
mare by then—was saddled by the writer and the 
stable boy. The stable boy was to ride to the junc- 
tion with the manuscript and catch the six in the 
morning mail train. The soup kept hot; the 

THE END 263 

writers wrote. By three the writer had done all 
that he could in his room. He went across the 
road to where Conrad was still at it. Conrad said, 
“For God’s sake. ... Another half-hour; just 
finishing. .. .” At four the writer looked over 
Conrad’s shoulder. He was writing, “The blow 
had come, softened by the spaces of the earth, by 
the years of absence.” The writer said, “You 
must finish now.” To Ashford junction was eight- 
een miles. Conrad muttered, “Just two para- 
graphs more.” He wrote, “There had been whole 
days when she had not thought of him at all—had 
no time.” ‘The writer said, “ You absolutely must 
stop!” Conrad wrote on, “ But she loved him, she 
felt that she had loved him after all,” and mut- 
fered. “Two paragraphs....” The writer 
shouted —it had come to him as an inspiration — 
“In the name of God, don’t you know you can 
write those two paragraphs into the proofs when 
you get them back? .. .” 

That was what life was like with us. At our 
last sitting over “‘ Romance” we began, at the Pent, 
at ten in the morning. We worked solidly till 
dinner, not lunch time; played two games of chess, 
began again at nine and, just as we finished, the 
dilapidated Hunt fell back and dropped the kin- 
dling-faggot wood wrapped in newspaper that he 

264 JOSEPH CONRAD 

was bringing in to light the fire with. . . . As for 
the last two paragraphs of “The End of the 
Tether”, they never got written. Conrad disliked 
the story as being too sentimental and never wanted 
to touch it again. So the close remains, for Con- 
rad, a trifle bald. It was to have ended with two 
polyphonic paragraphs in a closing rhythm—as 
it might be: the coming-on of an incommensurable 
darkness! 
“- 

And then we had the Jack-ashore touch. It 
brought into play Conrad’s incomparable busi- 
ness powers. The Insurance Man came to look 
at the blistered table and the holes in the carpet, 
both of which had belonged to Madox Brown. 
They were therefore. on their last legs. The In- 
surance Man, a gloomy sportsman in a long over- 
coat, sat on a small chair, gazing at the ruins and 
leaning his chin on the crook of his umbrella. “It 
looks a very o/d carpet,” he said. ‘Almost time 
the moths had it, isn’t it?” “ But that’s just what 
makes its value,” Conrad said. ‘My dear faller, 
consider the feet that have walked on it.” “The 
table’s very old, too,” the Insurance Man said 
gloomily. “'That’s why it’s so immensely valu- 
able,” Conrad said. “ Consider all the people with 
great names that have sat round it. It’s an historic 
table. That’s what it is.” “I’m afraid,” the In- 

THE END 265 

surance Man said, “that we can’t pay for historic 
associations.” “But that’s just exactly what you 
do have to pay for,” Conrad cried. “That before 
everything. Consider what you would have to pay 
if Windsor Castle burned down. Yet that’s most 
incommodious as a residence. Dreadfully old- 
fashioned.” The Insurance Man shivered and 
drove away more depressed than ever. . . . Even- 
tually the Company repaired the table so that the 
top shone as it can never have shone since 1840: 
they replaced the carpet and paid quite a substan- 
tial sum for the historic associations. 
a 

What we did with that windfall the writer can- 
notremember. Perhaps we hired the amazing vehi- 
cle in which we made our first motor trip: a pink 
char-a-banc on solid wooden, iron-tyred wheels, 
of almost no horse power. It broke down eight times 
in thirty-six miles and we pushed it hilariously up 
the slightest incline. But it was a good beanfeast. 
Conrad had hired that machine from the retired 
master mariner who, all unconsciously, had sat to 
him for “ Falk.” He was reputed to have become 
a cannibal after the screw dropped off his vessel in 
the Antarctic, drifting helpless for months. The 
disappointing thing about that ride was that the 
children were in no sort of a way impressed. It 
was no good pointing out to them that that carriage 

266 JOSEPH CONRAD 

ran without horses; they just accepted that fact 
along with every other phenomenon and consid- 
ered that a carriage with a horse or two was a 
much more spirited affair. 

We went in that vehicle through Postling, 
through Lyminge, Barham and Elham along the 
shallow depression that is the Elham Valley— 
past the house, about eight miles from the Pent, 
in which he eventually died—to Canterbury, 
where he lies buried. That wasa happy day. We 
put up at the Falstaff Inn where, as they say, 
Chaucer stayed with his pilgrims. . . . And the 
happy thought of which the writer spoke at the 
beginning of this chapter is this. . . . Yesterday 
a young lady came into his office and said that she 
had interviewed Conrad just before —for a Kansas 
paper — Conrad who had never allowed himself to 
be interviewed. He had received her with great 
charm; had told her many beautiful things; the 
writer does not interfere with the charming young 
lady’s story by here repeating them. . . . But he 
must have been just the old Conrad of the old 
days. And he did not have to say, Alas/ that there 
comes a day when all the fun of life lies in the past. 
For, after lunch he had out his own car and drove 
the young lady all over Barham Downs, by Stel- 
ling Minnis and Upper and Lower Hardres— in 

THE END 267 

the forgotten valleys of “The Inheritors” opening. 
From time to time he said, “This is what I like; 
this is what I really like in life.” And he stopped 
the car in Postling Gap that looks over the lands 
of the Pent, right away over the Stour Valley that 
is like the end of a bowl, over the Channel, to 
France on aclear day. He said, “‘ This is the view 
I love best in the world!” That was his last 
Wednesday but one and the writer hopes that he 
will never speak with any one who saw Conrad 
later. 
i 

For that is the happy memory to have. He 
surely could look back on life, so much of it pass- 
ing in that country that he loved, and could say 
with his dying breath that all his reverses had been 
temporary but that his achievements truly had all 
such permanence as is vouchsafed to us men... . 
That is to be granted what we Papists call the cross 
of the happy death. 

ie ee 

4 

APPENDIX 

For those not dreading more emotion than the 
English language will bear, the writer appends 
what follows, which was written immediately after 
learning of the death of Conrad. It contains 
something that is not in the foregoing pages. The 
writer could not face its translation. It is reprinted 
from the Journal Littéraire of Paris for August 
16, 1924. 

L’INTELLIGENCE, a dit M. H. G. Wells, consiste dans la 
faculté de découvrir des relations entre des analogies éloignées. 
Ce pouvoir était le grand dan de mon ami... 

Jai écrit “mon ami” et je me mets a réfléchir... 
Pourquoi n’avoir pas écrit: ‘‘Ce grand maitre qui vient de 
trépasser .. . ” ou “Ce grand gentilhomme anglais qui suivait 
la mer .. .”, ce quiil eit préféré, lui-méme? 

Car, né en Pologne, au siécle dernier, il fut d’abord lieutenant 
de torpilleur de la marine militaire francaise — puis une espéce 
de gentilhomme anglais du siécle de la reine Elizabeth, des 
Drake, des Grenville —et des grands poétes, les contemporains 
de Shakespeare. Pour comprendre le génie de Conrad, il faut 
se souvenir que la civilisation polonaise s’est arrétée vers la fin 
du dix-septiéme siécle, siécle de ses gloires guerriéres et de sa 

by Pr JOSEPH CONRAD 

chute. Et Conrad garda jusqu’a la fin de sa vie la mentalité de 
ce siecle de grands gentilshommes qui “ suivaient la fortune sur 
la mer” et qui étaient des grands poétes. 

La plus forte influence qui s’est fait sentir sur la vie de 
Conrad — sur sa vie littéraire, sur ses voyages, sur la facon 
dont il affronta sa carriére pénible et glorieuse —émane des 
romans du Capitaine Marryatt. Un grand—un trés grand — 
romancier-marin anglais. Les livres de Marryatt parlent presque 
exclusivement de la guerre des frégates dans la Méditerranée 
du temps de Napoléon I ... Et, au moment de sa mort, 
Conrad était en train d’écrire un roman sur ce méme sujet. 

“ Peter Simple ”, “ Percival Keene”, ‘‘ Japhet in Search of a 
Father”, “ Midshipman Easy” . .. surtout peut-¢tre “ Mid- 
shipman Easy” ... ce sont les livres qu’il faut lire si l’on 
veut comprendre la simple philosophie de lame anglaise — et 
de l’4me de Conrad .. . 

Quelle est la profession de foi d’un Anglais du dix-neuviéme 
siécle? I] pense que dans les questions de marine militaire, il 
vaut trois— que dis-je?—sept, huit, dix-sept Francais; qu’en 
mer, il existe seul et régne tandis que les Francais restent a tout 
jamais ses subordonnés; que les Anglais sont les représentants du 
Plus Haut qui tient la mer dans le creux de sa main; que les 
Francais, soutenus par un diable personnel, n’existent que pour 
étre chassés de la mer, pour se cacher derriére les digues de Tou- 
lon; que tout Anglais, et surtout l’Anglais qui “suit la mer ”’ est 
courageux, hautain, hardi, probe, avisé, blond, de six pieds de 
hauteur . . . Et cette profession de foi simpliste, Joseph Conrad 
Kurzeniowski, en a été imbibé a l’Age de huit ans, dans la 
Vologda, en lisant ses premiers romans—les romans du Capi- 
taine Marryatt qui jouissaient d’une popularité incroyable en 
Pologne, de, disons, 1840 4 1870... Et les derniers mots 

APPENDIX 273 

que Conrad m’a adressés sur cette question furent justement 
que Conrad restait du méme avis: aprés Shakespeare, Marryatt 
était le plus grand romancier anglais. Je venais de lui rappeler 
que nos relations littéraires s’étaient nouées vingt-cinq ans 
auparavant par l’expression d’une opinion identique — méme 
par des mots identiques . . . 

L’ironique destin a voulu que ses premiers voyages se fissent 
sous le pavillon francais. II parlait l’anglais jusqu’a sa mort 
d’un bon accent méridional francais qui le rendait presque in- 
compréhensible 4 tout Anglais qui ne parlait pas au moins un 
peu le frangais: il pensait, il me l’a avoué pour la derniére fois 
en mai de cette année, toujours en francais. Aujourd’hui il 
est mort: le plus grand maitre, le plus grand dompteur de ces 
choses sauvages que sont les mots, les rythmes, les phrases et 
les cadences de la langue anglaise — le plus grand que nos iles 
alent-vul..« 

Plutot petit de taille, les épaules trés larges, les bras longs, 
la barbe courte et les cheveux trés noirs, les dents trés blanches, 
doué d’une voix profonde, quand son attention était vraiment 
éveillée, il insérait un monocle dans l’ceil gauche et vous re- 
gardait de trés pres... 

Il possédait — pendant les jours de notre pauvreté commune 
—une extraordinaire voiture 4 quatre roues, poussiéreuse, en 
osier noir et une femelle quadrupéde, chevaline, a longues 
oreilles que tout le monde prenait pour un mulet ... Et nous 
avons passé des heures, des journées, des nuits entiéres, bal- 
ancés, cahotés, trés fiers, dans notre caléche qui roulait entre 
les haies vertes et soignées, l’été, grises et en haillons épineux, 
Vhiver. Et nous nous demandions sans cesse l’un a l’autre: 

“Comment allez-vous ‘rendre’ en mots ces grands champs 
de blés que sillonnent les vents faibles? . . . Comment, donc, 
mon vieux Ford . . .” 

274 JOSEPH CONRAD 

Lundi passé —c’est bien aujourd’hui dimanche — je passais, 
balancé, cahoté, par le trot saccadé d’un quadrupéde féminin 
septuagénaire, dans une voiture de louage quelconque, noire- 
grise et poussiéreuse .. . Et nous nous promenions entre les 
champs de blés dont les vents faibles sillonnaient les surfaces 
roussatres ... Et je me disais: c’est la vraie vérité que je 
me disais: 

“Eh bien, mon vieux, comment allez vous ‘rendre,’ ces champs 
de blés, ces petits clos, ces petites collines vertes et ondulantes 
—de la France?” 

Et je continuais a y penser tout en discutant le prix de ce 
parcours avec le cocher vieux et sournois; tout en achetant mes 
billets ; en achetant le Daily Mail que jamais, jamais de ma vie je 
n’acheterai plus; et méme en lisant les mots: Sudden Death of 
Joseph Conrad. 

Je m’occupais de la recherche des mots justes qui rendraient 
ces champs chuchotants et dorés... Et j’entendis ma voix 
qui criait: 4a ma compagne: “ Look ... Look ... Regardez!” 
Et j’indiquais le journal qu’elle tenait et dont je pouvais lire les 
majuscules noires ... Mort soudaine de Joseph Conrad. 

Et, d’un coup, j’ai vu, s’étalant devant les batiments de cette 
gare de banlieue parisienne — j’ai vu une nuit de clair de lune 
dans une petite ville trés ancienne qui domine la-bas la Manche. 
C’était sur une vérandah a toit de verre ou grimpaient des 
vignes fanées ... Et, dans les taches d’ombre noires, et les 
taches le lumiére blanches, il était une heure du matin, et de- 
bout, Conrad parlait ... 

APPENDIX 275 

Il nous racontait comment, sous les palmiers des iles mala- 
isiennes, assis, les jambes croisées, par terre, il enseigna, l’usage 
de la machine a coudre aux petites femmes des rajahs mussul- 
mans malaisiens . . . Et, dans les entreponts de son schooner 
amarré au quai croulant, se trouvaient des caisses et des caisses 
de fusils cachés sous les caisses de machines 4 coudre . . . Car 
les rajahs des iles malaisiennes n’aiment guére leurs seigneurs 
hollandais, et, 1a-bas la guerre a duré non pas cing, mais trois 
cent cinquante ans. 

Et puis je m’entendis, me disant 4 moi-méme: 

“ C’est le mur du silence éternel qui descend devant vous! ” 

Que voulez-vous? Je ne deviserai jamais devant des littéra- 
teurs francais sur le mot juste . . . La modestie m’en défend! 
Et jamais je ne reverrai Joseph Conrad qui était le dernier Don 
Quixote de la Manza du mot juste en Angleterre. Mettez vi 
vous voulez que la jument fut sa Rossinante, les champs de 
blés indescriptibles ses moulins a vent, sa voiture en osier noir le 
char triomphal de son apothéose sur I’'Ile . . . et moi-méme 
surement son Sancho . . . Et lui qui me disait sans cesse: 

“Mon cher; c’est, notre métier, un vrai métier de chien... 
Vous écrirez, et vous écrirez ... Et personne, personne au 
monde ne comprendra, ni ce que vous voulez dire, ni ce que 
vous avez donné d’effort, de sang, de sueur. Et a la fin vous 
vous direz: C’est comme si j’avais ramé toute ma vie dans un 
bateau, sur un fleuve immense, dans un brouillard impénétrable 
. .. Et vous ramerez et vous ramerez et jamais, jamais vous 
ne verrez un poteau sur les rives invisibles pour vous dire si 
vous montez le fleuve ou si le courant vous entraine ... et 

276 JOSEPH CONRAD 

vous connaitrez la disette; les nuits' froides, faute de couver- 
tures; les viandes améres, et le sommeil hanté de regrets. Et 
vous ne trouverez jamais, jamais pendant toute votre vie, une 
ame pour vous dire si a la fin vous étes le plus grand génie du 
monde . . . Ni non plus si vous étes le dernier, le plus infecte 
descendant de . . . Ponson du Terrail . . .” 

i? 

16 

Date Due 

Ql 5 A 
6 

e 

O 

] 

a 
Yemco 293-5 

Carnegie Institute of Technology 
Library ~ 
PITTSBURGH, PA. 

ea EIS III PIIISISSLI SS LLL LLL ES 

WAMU 

J 64ée O0eS50) 0388) 

yy Yy Yj 

77/7) j 

=_ 
_ _ 

iil) Mellon Offsite Faci 

A 

A131669 

|
