Penguin Island (Anatole France, 1908)
==========================================================
The great satirical history of France as penguins — Voltairean irony at its 20th-century peak. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (penguinisland0000anat_l1j9).

niin I 


4 
Alt 


er 
‘fie "5 


V olume 


ERSITY 


This 


OF 
ARIZONA 
LIBRARY 
Presented to the Library 
by 


2 
Zz 


¥ 


= : 
4 


Be a$e s°° 


ee wit 
lll 


Bie ae 


Ze ay 4 
ii) 
oh " 


— 
‘t 
L 


ll 
yy: 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/penguinisland0000anat_11j9 


PENGUIN ISLAND 
BY ANATOLE FRANCE 


A TRANSLATION 
BY A. W. EVANS 


BUUEAREB BON BOOKS 
NEW YORK 


Copyright, 1909, by 
Dopp, MEAD aND COMPANY. 


PRINTED IN U.S. A. 


PRINTED BY THE CORNWALL PRESS, INC. 
CORNWALL, N. Y. 


PREFACE 


REET TS 


im Sy) ry N spite of the apparent diversity of 

UF te & the amusements that seem to attract 
me, my life has but one object. It 
is wholly bent upon the accomplish- 
ment of one great scheme. I am 
writing the history of the Penguins. 
I Jabour sedulously at this task with- 
out allowing myself to be repelled by its frequent 
difficulties although at times these seem insuperable. 

I have delved into the ground in order to dis- 
cover the buried remains of that people. Men’s 
first books were stones, and I have studied the stones 
that can be regarded as the primitive annals of the 
Penguins. On the shore of the ocean I have ran- 
sacked a previously untouched tumulus, and in it I 
found, as usually happens, flint axes, bronze swords, 
Roman coins, and a twenty-sou piece bearing the 
efiigy of Louis-Philippe I., King of the French. 

For historical times, ine chronicle of Johannes 
Talpa, a monk of the monastery of Beargarden, 
has been of great assistance to me. I steeped my- 
self the more thoroughly in this author as no other 
source for the Penguin history of the Early Middle 
Ages has yet been discovered. 

We are richer for the period that begins with the 
thirteenth century, richer but not better off. It is ex- 
tremely difficult to write history. We do not know 
exactly how things have happened, and the his- 
torian’s embarrassment increases with the abundance 

Vv 


Vi PREFACE 


of documents at his disposal. When a fact is known 
through the evidence of a single person, it is admitted 
without much hesitation. Our perplexities begin 
when events are related by two or by several wit- 
nesses, for their evidence is always contradictory 
and always irreconcilable. 

It is true that the scientific reasons for preferring 
one piece of evidence to another are sometimes very 
strong, but they are never strong enough to out- 
weigh our passions, our prejudices, our interests, or 
to overcome that levity of mind common to all grave 
men. It follows that we continually present the 
facts in a prejudiced or frivolous manner. 

I have confided the difficulties that I expe- 
rienced in writing the history of the Penguins to 
several learned archeologists and paleographers 
both of my own and foreign countries. I endured 
their contempt. They looked at me with a pitying 
smile which seemed to say: “Do we write history? 
Do you imagine that we attempt to extract the least 
parcel of life or truth from a text or a document? 
We publish texts purely and simply. We keep to 
their exact letter. The letter alone is definite and 
perceptible. It is not so with the spirit; ideas are 
crotchets. A man must be very vain to write his- 
tory, for to do so requires imagination.” 

All this was in the glances and smiles of our 
masters in paleography, and their behaviour dis- 
couraged me deeply. One day after a conversation 
with an eminent sigillographer, I was even more 
depressed than usual, when I suddenly thought: 

“After all, there are historians; the race has not 
entirely disappeared. Some five or six of them have 
been preserved at the Academy of Moral Sciences. 
They do not publish texts; they write history. They 


PREFACE vil 


will not tell me that one must be a vain fellow to take 
up that sort of work.” 

This idea restored my courage. 

The following day I called upon one of them, an 
astute old man. 

“IT came, sir,” said I to him, “to ask for the ad- 
vice that a man of your experience can give. I am 
taking the utmost trouble in composing a history and 
I reach no result whatever.”’ 

He answered me, shrugging his shoulders: 

“What is the good, my dear sir, of giving yourself 
so much trouble, and why compose a history when 
all you need do is to copy the best-known ones in 
the usual way? If you have a fresh view or an 
original idea, if you present men and things from 
an unexpected point of view, you will surprise the 
reader. And the reader does not like being sur- 
prised. He never looks in a history for anything 
but the stupidities that he knows already. If you try 
to instruct him you only humiliate him and make 
him angry. Do not try to enlighten him; he will 
only cry out that you insult his beliefs. 

“Historians copy from one another. Thus they 
spare themselves trouble and avoid the appearance 
of presumption. Imitate them and do not be orig- 
inal. An original historian is the object of distrust, 
contempt, and loathing from everybody. 

“Do you imagine, sir,” added he, “that I should 
be respected and honoured as I am if I had put 
innovations into my historical works? And what 
are innovations? ‘They are impertinences.”’ 

He rose. I thanked him for his kindness and 
reached the door. He called me back. 

“One word more. If you want your book to 
he well received, lose no opportunity for exalting 


Vill PREFACE 


the virtues on which society is based—attachment 
to wealth, pious sentiments, and especially resigna- 
tion on the part of the poor, which latter is the very 
foundation of order. Proclaim, sir, that the origins 
of property—nobility and police—are treated in 
your history with all the respect which these insti- 
tutions deserve. Make it known that you admit the 
supernatural when it presents itself. On these con- 
ditions you will succeed in good society.” 

I have given much thought to these judicious ob- 
servations and I have given them the fullest weight. 


I have not here to deal with the Penguins before 
their metamorphosis. They begin to come within 
my scope only at the moment when they leave the 
realm of zoology to enter those of history and 
theology. It was in truth Penguins that the great 
St. Maél changed into men, though it is necessary to 
explain this, for to-day the term might give rise to 
confusion. 

We call by the name of Penguin in French, a bird 
of the Arctic regions belonging to the family of the 
Alcides; we call the type of the spheniscides, inhabit- 
ing the Antarctic seas, manchots. Thus M. G. 
Lecointe, for example, says in his narrative of the 
voyage of the Belgica: * “Of all birds that people 
the Strait of Gerlache, the manchots are certainly 
the most interesting. They are sometimes desig- 
nated, though inaccurately, under the name of the 
penguins of the South.” Doctor J. B. Charcot 
afirms,t on the contrary, that the true and only 
Penguins are those Antarctic birds which we call 

*G. Lecointe, “Au Pays des manchots.” Brussels, 1904. 8vo. 


tJ. B. Charcot, “Journal de l’expédition antartique francaise. 
1903-1905.” Paris. 8vo. 


PREFACE ix 


manchots, and he gives for reason that they re- 
ceived from the Dutch, who in 1598 reached Cape 
Magellan, the name of pinguinos, doubtless be- 
cause of their fat. But if the manchots are called 
penguins what are we in future to call the Penguins 
themselves? Dr. J. B. Charcot does not tell us, 
and he does not seem to have given the matter 
a moment’s attention. 

Well, that his manchots become or re-become 
Penguins is a matter to which we must consent. 
He has acquired the right to name them by discover- 
ing them. But let him at least allow the Northern 
penguins to remain penguins. There will be the 
penguins of the South and those of the North, the 
Antarctic and the Arctic, the alcides or old penguins, 
and the spheniscides or former manchots. This will 
perhaps cause embarrassment to ornithologists who 
are careful in describing and classing the palmi- 
pedes; they will doubtless ask if a single name is 
really suited to two families who are poles apart 
from one another and who differ in several respects, 
particularly in their beaks, winglets, and claws. 
For my part, I adapt myself easily to this confusion. 
Whatever be the differences between my penguins 
and those of M. J. B. Charcot, the resemblances are 
more numerous and more deep-seated. ‘The former, 
like the latter, attract notice by their grave and 
placid air, their comic dignity, their trustful famil- 
iarity, their sly simplicity, their habits at once awk- 
ward and solemn. Both are pacific, abounding in 
speech, eager to see anything novel, immersed in 
public affairs, and perhaps a little jealous of all 
that is superior to them. 

My hyperboreans have, it is true, winglets that 
are not scaly, but covered with little feathers, and, 


x PREFACE 


although their legs are fixed a little farther back 
than those of the Southerns, they walk in the same 
way with their chests lifted up and their heads held 
aloft, balancing their bodies in a like dignified style, 
and their sublime beak (os sublime) is not the least 
cause of the error into which the apostle fell when 
he took them for men. 


The present work, I cannot but recognise, belongs 
to the old order of history, to that which presents 
the sequence of events whose memory has been 
preserved, to the order which indicates, as far as 
possible, causes and effects. It is an art rather 
than a science. It is claimed that this method no 
longer satisfies exact minds, and that the ancient 
Clio is to-day looked upon as a teller of old wives’ 
fables. And possibly we shall have in the future. 
a more trustworthy history, a history of the con- 
ditions of life, which will teach us what a given peo- 
ple at a given epoch produced and consumed in every 
department of its activity. History of that type 
will be no longer an art but a science, and it will 
assume the exactness which the former history 
lacked. But in order that it may come into existence, 
it has need of a multitude of statistics which is 
hitherto wanting among all peoples and particularly 
among the Penguins. It is possible that modern 
nations may one day provide the elements of such a 
history. As regards what is already past we must 
always content ourselves, I fear, with a narrative in 
the ancient style. The interest of such a narrative 
depends above all on the perspicacity and good faith 
of the narrator. 

As a great writer of Alca has said, the life of a 
people is a tissue of crime. wretchedness, and folly. 


PREFACE xi 


Penguinia did not differ in this respect from other 
nations; nevertheless, its history contains some 
admirable sections upon which I hope that I have 
cast much fresh light. 

The Penguins remained warlike for a lengthy 
period. One of them, Jacquot, the Philosopher, 
has painted their character in a little moral picture 
that I reproduce here, and that, doubtless, will not 
be read without pleasure: 

The philosopher, Gratien, travelled through 
Penguinia in the time of the later Draconides. One 
day as he passed through a pleasant valley where 
the cow-bells tinkled in the pure air, he seated him- 
self on a bench at the foot of an oak, close beside a 
cottage. At the threshold a woman was nursing 
her child; a little boy was playing with a big dog; 
a blind old man, seated in the sun with his lips 
half-opened, drank in the light of day. 

The master of the house, a young and sturdy man, 
offered some bread and milk to Gratien. 

The Porpoise philosopher having taken this rural 
repast: 

“Delightful inhabitants of a delightful country, 
I give you thanks,” said he. ‘Everything here 
breathes forth joy, concord, and peace.” 

As he said this a shepherd passed by playing a 
march upon his pipe. 

“What is that lively air?” asked Gratien. 

“Tt is the war-hymn against the Porpoises,” an- 
swered the peasant. ‘Everybody here sings it. 
Little children know it before they can speak. We 
are all good Penguins.” 

“You don’t like the Porpoises then?” 

“We hate them.” 

“For what reason do you hate them?” 


xii PREFACE 


“Need you ask? Are not the Porpoises neigh- 
bours of the Penguins!” 

=) racoursess 

‘Well, that is why the Penguins hate the Por- 
poises.” 

“Ts that a reason?” 

“Certainly. He who says neighbours says ene- 
mies. Look at the field that borders mine. It be- 
longs to the man I hate most in the world. After 
him my worst enemies are the people of the village 
on the other slope of the valley at the foot of that 
birchwood. In this narrow valley formed of two 
parts there are but that village and mine: they are 
enemies. Every time that our lads meet the 
others, insults and blows pass between them. And 
you want the Penguins not to be enemies of the Por- 
poises! Don’t you know what patriotism is? 
For my part there are but two cries that rise to my 
lips: ‘Hurrah for the Penguins! Death to the 
Porpoises!’ ” 

During thirteen centuries the Penguins made war 
upon all the peoples in the world with a constant 
ardour and diverse fortunes. Then for some years 
they tired of what they had loved so long and showed 
a marked preference for peace which they expressed 
with dignity, indeed, but in the most sincere accents. 
Their generals adapted themselves very well to this 
new humour; all their army, officers, non- 
commissioned officers, and men, conscripts and, 
veterans, took pleasure in conforming to it. None 
but scribblers and book-worms complained of the 
change and the cut-throats alone refused to be con- 
soled on account of it. 

This same Jacquot, the Philosopher, composed 
a sort of moral tale in which he represented in a 


PREFACE Xlil 


comic and lively fashion the diverse actions of men, 
and he mingled in it several passages from the his- 
tory of his own country. Some persons asked him 
why he had written this feigned history and what 
advantage, according to him, his country would de- 
rive from it. 

“A very great one,” answered the philosopher. 
‘When they see their actions travestied in this way 
and lopped of all which flattered them, the Pen- 
guins will judge better, and, perhaps, become more 
reasonable.” 

I desired to omit nothing from this history that 
could interest artists. There is a chapter on 
Penguin painting in the Middle Ages, and if that 
chapter is not so complete as I desired the fault is 
not mine, as you can see from reading the terrible 
recital with which I end this preface. 

The idea occurred to me, in the month of June 
last year, to go and consult on the origins and prog- 
ress of Penguin art, the lamented M. Fulgence 
Tapir, the learned author of the “Universal Annals 
of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture.” 

Having been shown into his study, I found seated 
before a roll-top desk, beneath a frightful mass of 
papers, an amazingly short-sighted little man whose 
eyelids blinked behind his gold-mounted spectacles. 

To make up for the defeat of his eyes his long and 
mobile nose, endowed with an exquisite sense of 
touch, explored the sensible world. By means of 
this organ Fulgence Tapir put himself in contact 
with art and beauty. It is observed that in France, 
as a general rule, musical critics are deaf and art 
critics are blind. This allows them the collected- 
ness necessary for esthetic ideas. Do you imagine 
that with eyes capable of perceiving the forms and 


b] 


XIV PREFACE 


colours with which mysterious nature- envelops 
herself, Fulgence Tapir would have raised him- 
self, on a mountain of printed and manuscript docu- 
ments, to the summit of doctrinal spiritualism, or 
that he would have conceived that mighty theory 
which makes the arts of all times and countries 
converge towards the Institute of France, their su- 
preme end? 

The walls of the study, the floor, and even the 
ceiling were loaded with overflowing bundles, paste- 
board boxes swollen beyond measure, boxes in 
which were compressed an innumerable multitude of 
small cards covered with writing. I beheld in ad- 
miration mingled with terror the cataracts of erudi- 
tion that threatened to burst forth. 

“Master,” said I in feeling tones, “I throw myself 
upon your kindness and your knowledge, both of 
which are inexhaustible. Would you consent to 
guide me in my arduous researches into the origins 
of Penguin art?” 

“Sir,” answered the Master, “I possess all art, 
you understand me, all art, on cards classed alpha- 
betically and in order of subjects. I consider it 
my duty to place at your disposal all that relates to 
the Penguins. Get on that ladder and take out that 
box you see above. You will find in it everything 
you require.” 

I tremblingly obeyed. But scarcely had I opened 
the fatal box than some blue cards escaped from it, 
and slipping through my fingers, began to rain 
down. Almost immediately, acting in sympathy, the 
neighbouring boxes opened, and there flowed streams 
of pink, green, and white cards, and by degrees, 
from all the boxes, differently coloured cards were 
poured out murmuring like a waterfall on a moun- 


PREFACE XV 


tain-side in April. In a minute they covered the 
floor with a thick layer of paper. Issuing from their 
inexhaustible reservoirs with a roar that continually 
grew in force, each second increased the vehemence 
of their torrential fall. Swamped up to the knees 
in cards, Fulgence Tapir observed the cataclysm with 
attentive nose. He recognised its cause and grew 
pale with fright. 

“What a mass of art!’ he exclaimed. 

I called to him and leaned forward to help him 
mount the ladder which bent under the shower. 
It was too late. Overwhelmed, desperate, pitiable, 
his velvet smoking-cap and his gold-mounted spec- 
tacles having fallen from him, he vainly opposed his 
short arms to the flood which had now mounted to 
his arm-pits. Suddenly a terrible spurt of cards 
arose and enveloped him in a gigantic whirlpool. 
During the space of a second I could see in the gulf 
the shining skull and little fat hands of the scholar; 
then it closed up and the deluge kept pouring over 
what was silence and immobility. In dread lest I 
in my turn should be swallowed up ladder and all 
I made my escape through the topmost pane of the 
window. 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE 
Book I THE Become 
I Lire or Saint Maki 
II THe ApostoLicaL VOCATION OF 
SAINT MAEL 
III Tue Temprartion or St. MasL 
IV St. Mat1’s NAVIGATION ON THE 
OCEAN OF ICE. 
V Tue BAPTISM OF THE PENGUINS 
VI AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE . 
Vil AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE 
(Continuation and End) 
VIII MeraAmorpuosis OF THE PENGUINS 
Book II THe ANCIENT TIMEs 
I Tue First CLOTHES 
II THe First CLOTHES 
(Continuation and End) 
III SeEtTrinc BOUNDs To THE FIELDS AND 
THE ORIGIN OF PROPERTY 
IV Tue First AssEMBLY OF THE Es- 
TATES OF PENGUINIA . 
V Tue MarriaGE OF KRAKEN AND 
ORBEROSIA ; 
VI Tue DrRacon or ALCa . 
VII Tue DRAGon or AIca . 


(Continuation) 
xvii 


PAGS 


XIII 


~ CONTENTS 


Tue DRAGON oF ALCA . 
(Continuation) 
THe DRAGON oF ALCA . 
(Continuation) 
Tue DRacon oF ALCa . 
(Continuation) 
THE DRAGON oF ALCA . 
(Continuation) 
THE DRAGON OF ALCA . 
(Continuation) 
THe DRAGON oF ALCa . 
(Continuation and hed 


Book III Ture Mippie AGEs AND THE RE- 


NAISSANCE 
BRIAN THE Good AND QUEEN 
GLAMORGAN 
DRACO THE GREAT . 
QUEEN CRUCHA 
LETTERS: JOHANNES TALPA 
THe Arts: THE PRIMITIVES OF 
PENGUIN PAINTING 
MARBODIUS : 
SIGNS IN THE Moon . 


Book IV Mopern TIMEs: TRINCO 


I 
II 
III 


MorTHER RovaQuin . 

TRINCO 

THE JOURNEY OF Docror Osnu, 
BILE. . 


PAGE 


68 
72 
the 
77 
83 


87 


93 
98 
102 


- 106 


Bese Ae) 
Aa we dc) 


Alot 


5 LUGS 


I4I 


145 


CONTENTS 


Book V Mopern TIMEs: CHATILLON 


THE REVEREND FATHERS AGARIC 
AND CORNEMUSE 

PRINCE CRUCHO . 

THE CABAL . : 

VISCOUNTESS OLIVE . 

THE PRINCE DES BOSCENOs . 

THE EMIRAL’s FALL . 

CONCLUSION . 


Book VI MopernN Times: THE AFFAIR 


OF THE EIGHTY THOUSAND 
Trusses OF Hay 

GENERAL GREATAUK, DUKE OF 
SKULL 

PyRoT 

Count De Swimnite DE LA Spin 
DULYNX 

COLOMBAN : 

THE REVEREND ee enc 
AND CORNEMUSE 

THE SEVEN HUNDRED eiewemcne : 

BIDAULT-COQUILLE AND MANI- 
FLORE. ‘THE SOCIALISTs . 

THE COLOMBAN TRAIL . 

FATHER DOUILLARD . 

Mr. JusTICE CHAUSSEPIED . 

CONCLUSION . 


xix, 


PAGE 


153 
162 
166 
172 
177 
184. 
193 


199 
203 


. 208 


213 


TAG, 


228 


» 229 


6 ZBYT 
44 
SPyee 


a PABIS 


Book VII Mopern Times: MAapAmMe CERES 


I 


MapAME CLARENCE’S DRAWING- 
Room 


. 263 


XX CONTENTS 


PAGE 
II Tue Cuarity oF St. ORBEROSIA . 268 


HT) Hrprorvre= Ceres? 0 eee 27 
IV A POLiTICIAN’s MARRIAGE. . . 282 
V>) THE Viste ‘CABINET 2) cua 87, 
VI Tue SOFA OF THE FAVOURITE . . 293 
VII THE First CONSEQUENCES. . . 298 
VIII FurrHER CONSEQUENCES . . . 303 
IX THe FINAL CONSEQUENCES. . S12 

X THE ZENITH OF PENGUIN Civ 
ZATION= co. *.5) se LS 


Book VIII Furure Times: THE ENDLESS 
EIISTORY Ge eve) ee 


ILLUSTRATIONS 
eheeve Met 00.0. -. 5 ls 6 os ss Erontispiece 


FACING 
PAGE 


He Guarded Himself by Making the Sign of the Cross 16 
“TI Love Thee Because Thou Art Daring’. . . . 96 
Pegerie Gaye Us Glory ©. 2. 1-2 3 et a oe 142 


Pyrot . . . Kept Writing Down His Innocence on 
Peicces@L OTC mislisyonirt. cos cc oe tet. ete) el U4 


lie-sWas Not a Bill-Poster . . . . = »-. 3 « 214 


“The Day Meee the ae ficbiagt Gave Them 
Clothes’) << 274 


xxi 


ANA HHH 


eee ine oh 
De THT Te 
\n\ 
aii y 
\i 
A\) 
\ Ait 
AWW 


IW A) | fpxw YY YA, 
IN ALIA LLL 
Y COL 


I 
LIFE OF SAINT MAEL 


ry) Oegeni AEL, a scion of a royal family of 
soem] Cambria, was sent in his ninth year 
- to the Abbey of Yvern so that he 
p might there study both sacred and 
} profane learning. At the age of 
fourteen he renounced his patrimony 
and took a vow to serve the Lord. 
His time was divided, according to the rule, 
between the singing of hymns, the study of 
grammar, and the meditation of eternal truths. 

A celestial perfume soon disclosed the virtues of 
the monk throughout the cloister, and when the 
blessed Gal, the Abbot of Yvern, departed from 
this world into the next, young Maél succeeded him 
in the government of the monastery. He estab- 
lished therein a school, an infirmary, a guest-house, 
a forge, work-shops of all kinds, and sheds for 
building ships, and he compelled the monks to till 
the lands in the neighbourhood. With his own 
hands he cultivated the garden of the Abbey, he 
worked in metals, he instructed the novices, and his 
life was gently gliding along like a stream that re~ 
flects the heaven and fertilizes the fields. 

At the close of the day this servant of God was 
accustomed to seat himself on the cliff, in the place 
that is to-day still called St. Maél’s chair. At his 
feet the rocks bristling with green seaweed and 
tawny wrack seemed like black dragons as they 

3 


4 PENGUIN ISLAND 


faced the foam of the waves with their monstrous 
breasts. He watched the sun descending into the 
ocean like a red Host whose glorious blood gave a 
purple tone to the clouds and to the summits of the 
waves. And the holy man saw in this the image 
of the mystery of the Cross, by which the divine 
blood has clothed the earth with a royal purple. 
In the offing a line of dark blue marked the shores 
of the island of Gad, where St. Bridget, who had 
been given the veil by St. Malo, ruled over a con- 
vent of women. | 

Now Bridget, knowing the merits of the vener- 
able Maél, begged from him some work of his 
hands as a rich present. Maél cast a hand-bell of 
bronze for her and, when it was finished, he blessed 
it and threw it into the sea. And the bell went 
ringing towards the coast of Gad, where St. 
Bridget, warned by the sound of the bell upon the 
waves, received it piously, and carried it in solemn 
procession with singing of psalms into the chapel of 
the convent. 

Thus the holy Maél advanced from virtue to 
virtue. He had already passed through two-thirds 
of the way of life, and he hoped peacefully to reach 
his terrestrial end in the midst of his spiritual breth- 
ren, when he knew by a certain sign that the Divine 
wisdom had decided otherwise, and that the Lord 
was calling him to less peaceful but not less meri- 
torious labours. 


II 


THE APOSTOLICAL VOCATION OF SAINT 
MAEL 


2 aT NE day as he walked in meditation 

%, to the furthest point of a tranquil 
Fa beach, for which rocks jutting out 
4 into the sea formed a rugged dam, he 
me saw a trough of stone which floated 
like a boat upon the waters. 

It was in a vessel similar to 
this that St. Guirec, the great St. Columba, and so 
many holy men from Scotland and from Ireland had 
gone forth to evangelize Armorica. More recently 
still, St. Avoye having come from England, ascended 
the river Auray in a mortar made of rose-coloured 
granite into which children were afterwards placed 
in order to make them strong; St. Vouga passed 
from Hibernia to Cornwall on a rock whose frag- 
ments, preserved at Penmarch, will cure of fever 
such pilgrims as place these splinters on their heads. 
St. Samson entered the Bay of St. Michael’s Mount 
in a granite vessel which will one day be called St. 
Samson’s basin. It is because of these facts that 
when he saw the stone trough the holy Maél under- 
stood that the Lord intended him for the apostolate 
of the pagans who still peopled the coast and the 
Breton islands. 

He handed his ashen staff to the holy Budoc, thus 
investing him with the government of the monastery. 
Then, furrished with bread, a barrel of fresh water, 

5 


6 PENGUIN ISLAND 


and the book of the Holy Gospels, he entered the 
stone trough which carried him gently to the island 
of Heedic. 

This island is perpetually buffeted by the winds. 
In it some poor men fished among the clefts of the 
rocks and laboriously cultivated vegetables in gar- 
dens full of sand and pebbles that were sheltered 
from the wind by walls of barren stone and hedges 
of tamarisk. A beautiful fig-tree raised itself in a 
hollow of the island and thrust forth its branches far 
and wide. ‘The inhabitants of the island used to 
worship it. 

And the holy Maél said to them: “You worship 
this tree because it is beautiful. Therefore you are 
capable of feeling beauty. Now I come to reveal 
to you the hidden beauty.”’ And he taught them 
the Gospel. And after having instructed them, he 
baptized them with salt and water. 

The islands of Morbihan were more numerous 
in those times than they are to-day. For since then 
many have been swallowed up by the sea. St. 
Maél evangelized sixty of them. Then in his 
granite trough he ascended the river Auray. And 
after sailing for three hours he landed before a Ro- 
man house. A thin column of smoke went up from 
the roof. The holy man crossed the threshold on 
which there was a mosaic representing a dog with 
its hind legs outstretched and its lips drawn back. 
He was welcomed by an old couple, Marcus Com- 
babus and Valeria Moerens, who lived there on the 
products of theirlands. ‘There was a portico round 
the interior court the columns of which were painted 
red, half their height upwards from the base. A 
fountain made of shells stood against the wall and 
under the portico there rose an altar with a niche in 


APOSTOLICAL VOCATION OF ST. MAEL 7 


which the master of the house had placed some little 
idols made of baked earth and whitened with white- 
wash. Some represented winged children, others 
Apollo or Mercury, and several were in the form 
of a naked woman twisting her hair. But the holy 
Maél, observing those figures, discovered among 
them the image of a young mother holding a child 
upon her knees. 

Immediately pointing to that image he said: 

“That is the Virgin, the mother of God. The 
poet Virgil foretold her in Sibylline verses before 
she was born and, in angelical tones he sang Jam 
redit et virgo. Throughout heathendom prophetic 
figures of her have been made, like that which you, 
O Marcus, have placed upon this altar. And with- 
out doubt it is she who has protected your modest 
household. ‘Thus it is that those who faithfully ob- 
serve the natural law prepare themselves for the 
knowledge of revealed truths.” 

Marcus Combabus and Valeria Moerens, having 
been instructed by this speech, were converted to 
the Christian faith. They received baptism to- 
gether with their young freedwoman, Caelia Avi- 
tella, who was dearer to them than the light of their 
eyes. All their tenants renounced paganism and 
were baptized on the same day. 

Marcus Combabus, Valeria Moerens, and Caelia 
Avitella led thenceforth a life full of merit. They 
died in the Lord and were admitted into the canon 
of the saints. 

For thirty-seven years longer the blessed Maél 
evangelized the pagans of the inner lands. He 
built two hundred and eighteen chapels and seventy- 
four abbeys. 

Now on a certain day in the city of Vannes, where 


8 PENGUIN ISLAND 


he was preaching the Gospel, he learned that the 
monks of Yvern had in his absence declined from 
the rule of St. Gal. Immediately, with the zeal of a 
hen who gathers her brood, he repaired to his err- 
ing children. He was then towards the end of his 
ninety-seventh year; his figure was bent, but his arms 
were still strong, and his speech was poured forth 
abundantly like winter snow in the depths of the 
valleys. 

Abbot Budoc restored the ashen staff to St. Maél 
and informed him of the unhappy state into which 
the Abbey had fallen. The monks were in dis- 
agreement as to the date on which the festival of 
Easter ought to be celebrated. Some held for the 
Roman calendar, others for the Greek calendar, 
and the horrors of a chronological schism distracted 
the monastery. 

There also prevailed another cause of disorder. 
The nuns of the island of Gad, sadly fallen from 
their former virtue, continually came in boats to the 
coast of Yvern. The monks received them in the 
guest-house and from this there arose scandals which 
filled pious souls with desolation. 

Having finished his faithful report, Abbot Budoc 
concluded ‘in these terms: 

“Since the coming of these nuns the innocence 
and peace of the monks are at an end.” 

“I readily believe it,’ answered the blessed Maél. 
‘For woman is a cleverly constructed snare by which 
we are taken even before we suspect the trap. 
Alas! the delightful attraction of these creatures is 
exerted with even greater force from a distance than 
when they are close at hand. The less they satisfy 
desire the more they inspire it. This is the reason 
why a poet wrote this verse to one of them: 


APOSTOLICAL VOCATION OF ST. MAEL 9 


When present I avoid thee, but when away I find thee. 


Thus we see, my son, that the blandishments of 
carnal love have more power over hermits and 
monks than over men who live in the world. All 
through my life the demon of lust has tempted me 
in various ways, but his strongest temptations did 
not come to me from meeting a woman, however 
beautiful and fragrant she was. They came to me 
from the image of an absent woman. Even now, 
though full of days and approaching my ninety- 
eighth year, I am often led by the Enemy to sin 
against chastity, at least in thought. At night 
when I am cold in my bed and my frozen old bones 
rattle together with a dull sound I hear voices re- 
citing the second verse of the third Book of the 
Kings: ‘Wherefore his servants said unto him, 
Let there be sought for my lord the king a young 
virgin: and let her stand before the king, and let her 
cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my 
lord the king may get heat,’ and the devil shows 
me a girl in the bloom of youth who says to me: 
‘I am thy Abishag; I am thy Shunamite. Make, 
O my lord, room for me in thy couch.’ 

“Believe me,’ added the old man, “it is only by 
the special aid of Heaven that a monk can keep his 
chastity in act and in intention.” 

Applying himself immediately to restore inno- 
cence and peace to the monastery, he corrected the 
calendar according to the calculations of chronology 
and astronomy and he compelled all the monks to 
accept his decision; he sent the women who had de- 
clined from St. Bridget’s rule back to their convent; 
but far from driving them away brutally, he caused 
them to be led to their boat with singing of psalms 
and litanies. 


IO PENGUIN ISLAND 


“Let us respect in them,” he said, “‘the daughters 
of Bridget and the betrothed of the Lord. Let us 
beware lest we imitate the Pharisees who affect to 
despise sinners. The sin of these women and not 
their persons should be abased, and they should be 
made ashamed of what they have done and not of 
what they are, for they are all creatures of God.” 

And the holy man exhorted his monks to obey 
faithfully the rule of their order. 

‘When it does not yield to the rudder,” said he 
to them,‘‘the ship yields to the rock.” 


At 
BIS 


SY 


ui 

ib 
} 

iy 


i 


YY, 
DHS 


SQN 
ey 


Ky SS 
life 
~ J 


Ill 
THE TEMPTATION OF SAINT MAEL 


HE blessed Maél had scarcely re- 
stored order in the Abbey of Yvern 
before he learned that the inhabi- 
tants of the island of Heedic, his first 
catechumens and the dearest of all 


ism, and that they were hanging 
crowns of flowers and fillets of wool to the branches 
of the sacred fig-tree. 

The boatman who brought this sad news ex- 
pressed a fear that soon those misguided men might 
violently destroy the chapel that had been built on 
the shore of their island. 

The holy man resolved forthwith to visit his 
faithless children, so that he might lead them back 
to the faith and prevent them from yielding to 
such sacrilege. As he went down to the bay where 
his stone trough was moored, he turned his eyes 
to the sheds, then filled with the noise of saws and 
of hammers, which, thirty years before, he had 
erected on the fringe of that bay for the purpose of 
building ships. 

At that moment, the Devil, who never tires, 
went out from the sheds and, under the appearance 
of a monk called Samson, he approached the holy 
man and tempted him thus: 

“Father, the inhabitants of the island of Hedic 


commit sins unceasingly. Every moment that 
It 


12 PENGUIN ISLAND 


passes removes them farther from God. They are 
soon going to use violence towards the chapel that 
you have raised with your own venerable hands on 
the shore of their island. Time is pressing. Do 
you not think that your stone trough would carry 
you more quickly towards them if it were rigged 
like a boat and furnished with a rudder, a mast, 
and a sail, for then you would be driven by the 
wind? Your arms are still strong and able to 
steer a small craft. It would be a good thing, too, 
to put a sharp stem in front of your apostolic 
trough. You are much too clear-sighted not to 
have thought of it already.” 

‘Truly time is pressing,’ answered the holy 
man. ‘But to do as you say, Samson, my son, 
would it not be to make myself like those men of 
little faith who do not trust the Lord? Would it 
not be to despise the gifts of Him who has sent me 
this stone vessel without rigging or sail?” 

This question, the Devil, who is a great theo- 
logian, answered by another. 

‘Father, is it praiseworthy to wait, with our arms 
folded, until help comes from on high, and to ask 
everything from Him who can do all things, instead 
of acting by human prudence and helping our- 
selves?” 

“It certainly is not,’ answered the holy Maél, 
‘‘and to neglect to act by human prudence is tempt- 
ing God.” 

“Well,” urged the Devil, ‘‘is it not prudence in 
this case to rig the vessel?” 

“It would be prudence if we could not attain our 
end in any other way.” 

“Is your vessel then so very speedy?” 

“It is as speedy as God pleases.” 


TEMPTATION OF SAINT MAEL 13 


“What do you know about it? It goes like 
Abbot Budoc’s mule. It is a regular old tub. 
Are you forbidden to make it speedier?” 

“My son, clearness adorns your words, but they 
are unduly over-confident. Remember that this 
vessel is miraculous.”’ 

“It is, father. A granite trough that floats on 
the water like a cork is a miraculous trough. 
There is not the slightest doubt about it. What 
conclusion do you draw from that?” 

“T am greatly perplexed. Is it right to perfect 
so miraculous a machine by human and _ natural 
means?” 

“Father, if you lost your right foot and God 
restored it to you, would not that foot be miracu- 
lous ?”’ 

‘Without doubt, my son.” 

“Would you put a shoe on it?” 

‘‘Assuredly.”’ 

“Well, then, if you believe that one may cover a 
miraculous foot with a natural shoe, you should also 
believe that we can put natural rigging on a miracu- 
lous boat. That is clear. Alas! Why must the 
holiest persons have their moments of weakness 
and despondency? The most illustrious of the 
apostles of Brittany could accomplish works worthy 
of eternal glory . . . But his spirit is tardy and 
his hand is slothful. Farewell then, father! ‘Travel 
by short and slow stages and when at last you ap- 
proach the coast of Heedic you will see the smoking 
ruins of the chapel that was built and consecrated 
by your own hands. The pagans will have burned 
it and with it the deacon you left there. He will be 
as thoroughly roasted as a black pudding.” 

“My trouble is extreme,” said the servant of God, 


14 PENGUIN ISLAND 


drying with his sleeve the sweat that gathered upon 
his brow. ‘But tell me, Samson, my son, would 
not rigging this stone trough be a difficult piece of 
work? And if we undertook it might we not lose 
time instead of gaining it?” 

‘““Ah! father,’ exclaimed the Devil, “in one 
turning of the hour-glass the thing would be done. 
We shall find the necessary rigging in this shed that 
you have formerly built here on the coast and in 
those store-houses abundantly stocked through your 
care. I will myself regulate all the ship’s fittings. 
Before being a monk I was a sailor and a carpenter 
and I have worked at many other trades as well. 
Let us to work.” 

Immediately he drew the holy man into an out- 
house filled with all things needful for fitting out a 
boat. 

‘That for you, father !”’ 

And he placed on his shoulders the sail, the mast, 
the gaff, and the boom. 

Then, himself bearing a stem and a rudder with 
its screw and tiller, and seizing a carpenter's bag 
full of tools, he ran to the shore, dragging the holy 
man after him by his habit. The latter was bent, 
sweating, and breathless, under the burden of can- 
vas and wood. 


IV 


ST. MAEL’S NAVIGATION ON THE 
OCEAN OF ICE 


weeewaa HE Devil, having tucked his clothes 
up to his arm-pits, dragged the 
trough on the sand, and fitted the 
rigging in less than an hour. 

As soon as the holy Maél had 
embarked, the vessel, with all its 
sails set, cleft through the waters 
with such speed that the coast was almost immedi- 
ately out of sight. The old man steered to the 
south so as to double the Land’s End, but an irresis- 
tible current carried him to the south-west. He 
went along the southern coast of Ireland and turned 
sharply towards the north. In the evening the 
wind freshened. In vain did Maél attempt to furl 
the sail. The vessel flew distractedly towards the 
fabulous seas. 

By the light of the moon the immodest sirens of 
the North came around him with their hempen- 
coloured hair, raising their white throats and their 
rose-tinted limbs out of the sea; and beating the 
water into foam with their emerald tails, they sang 
in cadence: 


Whither go’st thou, gentle Maél, 

In thy trough distracted? 

All distended is thy sail 

Like the breast of Juno 

When from it gushed the Milky Way. 
15 


16 PENGUIN ISLAND 


For a moment their harmonious laughter followed 
him beneath the stars, but the vessel fled on, a hun- 
dred times more swiftly than the red ship of a 
Viking. And the petrels, surprised in their 
flight, clung with their feet to the hair of the holy 
man. 

Soon a tempest arose full of darkness and groan- 
ings, and the trough, driven by a furious wind, flew 
like a sea-mew through the mist and the surge. 

After a night of three times twenty-four hours 
the darkness was suddenly rent and the holy man 
discovered on the horizon a shore more dazzling 
than diamond. ‘The coast rapidly grew larger, and 
soon by the glacial light of a torpid and sunken sun, 
Maél saw, rising above the waves, the silent streets 
of a white city, which, vaster than Thebes with its 
hundred gates, extended as far as the eye could 
see the ruins of its forum built of snow, its pal- 
aces of frost, its crystal arches, and its iridescent 
obelisks. 

The ocean was covered with floating ice-bergs 
around which swam men of the sea of a wild yet 
gentle appearance. And Leviathan passed by hurl- 
ing a column of water up to the clouds. 

Moreover, on a block of ice which floated at the 
same rate as the stone trough there was seated a 
white bear holding her little one in her arms, and 
Maél heard her murmuring in a low voice this verse 
of Virgil, Incipe parve puer. 

And full of sadness and trouble, the old man 
wept. 

The fresh water had frozen and burst the barrel 
that contained it. And Maél was sucking pieces of 
ice to quench his thirst, and his food was bread 
dipped in dirty water. His beard and his hair were 


gig ae spe Reeies 
q 


Hi 
ab by making the sign of ihe Cross ao 


aoe CO 


NAVIGATION ON THE OCEAN OF ICE 17 


broken like glass. His habit was covered with a 
layer of ice and cut into him at every movement of 
his limbs. Huge waves rose up and opened their 
foaming jaws at the old man. Twenty times the 
boat was filled by masses of sea. And the ocean 
swallowed up the book of the Holy Gospels which 
the apostle guarded with extreme care in a purple 
cover marked with a golden cross, 

Now on the thirtieth day the sea calmed. And 
lo! with a frightful clamour of sky and waters a 
mountain of dazzling whiteness advanced towards 
the stone vessel. Maél steered to avoid it, but 
the tiller broke in his hands. ‘To lessen the speed of 
his progress towards the rock he attempted to reef 
the sails, but when he tried to knot the reef-points 
the wind pulled them away from him and the rope 
seared his hands. He saw three demons with wings 
of black skin having hooks at their ends, who, hang- 
ing from the rigging, were puffing with their breath 
against the sails. 

Understanding from this sight that the Enemy 
had governed him in all these things, he guarded 
himself by making the sign of the Cross. Immedi- 
ately a furious gust of wind filled with the noise of 
sobs and howls struck the stone trough, carried off 
the mast with all the sails, and tore away the rudder 
and the stem. 

The trough was drifting on the sea, which had 
now grown calm. The holy man knelt and gave 
thanks to the Lord who had delivered him from the 
snares of the demon. ‘Then he recognised, sitting 
on a block of ice, the mother bear who had spoken 
during the storm. She pressed her beloved child 
to her bosom, and in her hand she held a purple 
book marked with a golden cross. Hailing the 


18 PENGUIN ISLAND 


granite trough, she saluted the holy man with these 
words: 


“Pax tibi Maél’ 


And she held out the book to him. 

The holy man recognised his evangelistary, and, 
full of astonishment, he sang in the tepid air a hymn 
to the Creator and His creation. 


wi é SOR) AIAAESL Wainy SSEAICEET UTIL " WET ay 
arr Z 
Ww ; id Ry yyy 

S . \\\ LT 


ey, 
Ly r4 
Y 


li 


MYA) 


fal 


Ay 


\E I 


———_—— = 


i} = aS Fe 
yr ES 


== 


Vv 
THE BAPTISM OF THE PENGUINS 


FTER having drifted for an hour 
the holy man approached a narrow 
strand, shut in by steep mountains. 
He went along the coast for a whole 
day and a night, passing around the 
reef which formed an insuperable 
barrier. He discovered in this way 

that it was a round island in the middle of which rose 

a mountain crowned with clouds. He joyfully 

breathed the fresh breath of the moist air. Rain 

fell, and this was so pleasant that the holy man 
said to the Lord: 

“Lord, this is the island of tears, the island of 
contrition.” 

The strand was deserted. Worn out with fatigue 
and hunger, he sat down on a rock in the hollow of 
which there lay some yellow eggs, marked with black 
spots, and about as large as those of a swan. But 
he did not touch them, saying: 

“Birds are the living praises of God. I should 
not like a single one of these praises to be lacking 
through me.”’ 

And he munched the lichens which he tore from 
the crannies of the rocks. 

The holy man had gone almost entirely round 
the island without meeting any inhabitants, when he 
came to a vast amphitheatre formed of black and 
red rocks whose summits became tinged with blue 
19 


20 PENGUIN ISLAND 


as they rose towards the clouds, and they were 
filled with sonorous cascades. 

The reflection from the polar ice had hurt the old 
man’s eyes, but a feeble gleam of light still shone 
through his swollen eyelids. He distinguished ani- 
mated forms which filled the rocks, in stages, like a 
crowd of men on the tiers of an amphitheatre. And 
at the same time, his ears, deafened by the continual 
noises of the sea, heard a feeble sound of voices. 
Thinking that what he saw were men living under 
the natural law, and that the Lord had sent him to 
teach them the Divine law, he preached the gospel 
to them. 

Mounted on a lofty stone in the midst of the wild 
circus : 

“Inhabitants of this island,” said he, “although 
you be of small stature, you look less like a band 
of fishermen and mariners than like the senate 
of a judicious republic. By your gravity, your si- 
lence, your tranquil deportment, you form on this 
wild rock an assembly comparable to the Conscript 
Fathers at Rome deliberating in the temple of Vic- 
tory, or rather, to the philosophers of Athens dis- 
puting on the benches of the Areopagus. Doubtless 
you possess neither their science nor their genius, 
but perhaps in the sight of God you are their supe- 
riors. I believe that you are simple and good. As 
I went round your island I saw no image of murder, 
no sign of carnage, no enemies’ heads or scalps hung 
from a lofty pole or nailed to the doors of your 
villages. You appear to me to have no arts and 
not to work in metals. But your hearts are pure 
and your hands are innocent, and the truth will 
easily enter into your souls.” 

Now what he had taken for men of small stature 


BAPTISM OF THE PENGUINS a 


but of grave bearing were penguins whom the 
spring had gathered together, and who were ranged 
in couples on the natural steps of the rock, erect in 
the majesty of their large white bellies. From 
moment to moment they moved their winglets like 
arms, and uttered peaceful cries. They did not 
fear men, for they did not know them, and had 
never received any harm from them; and there was 
in the monk a certain gentleness that reassured the 
most timid animals and that pleased these penguins 
extremely. With a friendly curiosity they turned 
towards him their little round eyes lengthened in 
front by a white oval spot that gave something odd 
and human to their appearance. 

Touched by their attention, the holy man taught 
them the Gospel. 

“Inhabitants of this island, the early day that 
has just risen over your rocks is the image of the 
heavenly day that rises in your souls. For I bring 
you the inner light; I bring you the light and heat 
of the soul. Just as the sun melts the ice of your 
mountains so Jesus Christ will melt the ice of your 
hearts.” 

Thus the old man spoke. As everywhere 
throughout nature voice calls to voice, as all which 
breathes in the light of day loves alternate strains, 
these penguins answered the old man by the sounds 
of their throats. And their voices were soft, for it 
was the season of their loves. 

The holy man, persuaded that they belonged to 
some idolatrous people and that in their own lan- 
guage they gave adherence to the Christian faith, 
invited them to receive baptism. 

“T think,” said he to them, “that you bathe often, 
for all the hollows of the rocks are full of pure 


ys PENGUIN ISLAND 


water, and as I came to your assembly I saw several 
of you plunging into these natural baths. Now 
purity of body is the image of spiritual purity.”’ 

And he taught them the origin, the nature, and 
the effects of baptism. 

‘“‘Baptism,”’ said he to them, “is Adoption, New 
Birth, Regeneration, Illumination.” 

And he explained each of these points to them in 
succession. 

Then, having previously blessed the water that 
fell from the cascades and recited the exorcisms, he 
baptized those whom he had just taught, pouring 
on each of their heads a drop of pure water and pro- 
nouncing the sacred words. 

And thus for three days and three nights he bap- 
sized the birds. 


¥ 

: 

N 

. 
RQ, 
1y 

x 

N 
= 


é Sve 
oF = S Derwes tpevert 
-—~. 


VI 
AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE 


W Se VW HEN the baptism of the penguins 
f ww: Th was known in Paradise, it caused 
(eseiesyy) neither joy nor sorrow, but an ex- 
: Vie. | ¢| treme surprise. The Lord himself 
V) was embarrassed. He gathered an 
co ae assembly of clerics and doctors, and 
asked them whether they regarded 

the baptism as valid. 

“It is void,” said St. Patrick. 

“Why is it void?” asked St. Gal, who had evan- 
gelized the people of Cornwall and had trained the 
holy Maél for his apostolical labours. 

‘The sacrament of baptism,” answered St. Pat- 
rick, ‘‘is void when it is given to birds, just as the 
sacrament of marriage is void when it is given to a 
eunuch.” 

But St. Gal replied: 

“What relation do you claim to establish between 
the baptism of a bird and the marriage of a eunuch? 
There is none at all. Marriage is, if I may say so, 
a conditional, a contingent sacrament. ‘The priest 
blesses an event beforehand; it is evident that if the 
act is not consummated the benediction remains 
without effect. That is obvious. I have known 
on earth, in the town of Antrim, a rich man named 
Sadoc, who, living in concubinage with a woman, 
caused her to be the mother of nine children. In 
his old age, yielding to my reproofs, he consented to 

23 


24 PENGUIN ISLAND 


marry her, and I blessed their union. Unfortu- 
nately Sadoc’s great age prevented him from consum- 
mating the marriage. A short time afterwards he 
lost all his property, and Germaine (that was the 
name of the woman), not feeling herself able to 
endure poverty, asked for the annulment of a mar- 
riage which was no reality. The Pope granted her 
request, for it was just. So much for marriage. 
But baptism is conferred without restrictions or re- 
serves of any kind. There is no doubt about it, 
what the penguins have received is a sacrament.” 

Called to give his opinion, Pope St. Damasus 
expressed himself in these terms: 

“Tn order to know if a baptism is valid and will 
produce its result, that is to say, sanctification, 
it is necessary to consider who gives it and not 
who receives it. In truth, the sanctifying virtue of 
this sacrament results from the exterior act by which 
it is conferred, without the baptized person co- 
operating in his own sanctification by any personal 
act; if it were otherwise it would not be administered 
to the newly born. And there is no need, in order 
to baptize, to fulfill any special condition; it is not 
necessary to be in a state of grace; it is sufficient 
to have the intention of doing what the Church 
does, to pronounce the consecrated words and to 
observe the prescribed forms. Now we cannot 
doubt that the venerable Maél has observed these 
conditions. Therefore the penguins are baptized.”’ 

“Do you think so?” asked St. Guénolé. “And 
what then do you believe that baptism really is? 
‘Baptism is the process of regeneration by which 
man is born of water and of the spirit, for having 
entered the water covered with crimes, he goes out 
of it a neophyte, a new creature, abounding in the 


AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE 25 


fruits of righteousness; baptism is the seed of im- 
mortality; baptism is the pledge of the resurrec- 
tion; baptism is the burying with Christ in His death 
and participation in His departure from the sepul- 
chre. That is not a gift to bestow upon birds. 
Reverend Fathers, let us consider. Baptism washes 
away original sin; now the penguins were not con- 
ceived in sin. It removes the penalty of sin; now 
the penguins have not sinned. It produces grace 
and the gift of virtues, uniting Christians to Jesus 
Christ, as the members to the body, and it is obvious 
to the senses that penguins cannot acquire the virtues 
of confessors, of virgins, and of widows, or receive 
grace and be united to—” 

St. Damasus did not allow him to finish. 

“That proves,” said he warmly, “that the bap- 
tism was useless; it does not prove that it was not 
effective.” 

“But by this reasoning,” said St. Guénolé, “‘one 
might baptize in the name of the Father, of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost, by aspersion or immersion, 
not only a bird or a quadruped, but also an inani- 
mate object, a statue, a table, a chair, etc. That 
animal would be Christian, that idol, that table 
would be Christian! It is absurd!” 

St. Augustine began to speak. There was a 
great silence. 

“T am going,” said the ardent bishop of Hippo, 
“to show you, by an example, the power of formu- 
las. It deals, it is true, with a diabolical operation. 
But if it be established that formulas taught by the 
Devil have effect upon unintelligent animals or even 
on inanimate objects, how can we longer doubt that 
the effect of the sacramental formulas extends to the 
minds of beasts and even to inert matter? 


) 


26 PENGUIN ISLAND 


‘This is the example. There was during my life- 
time in the town of Madaura, the birthplace of the 
philosopher Apuleius, a witch who was able to at- 
tract men to her chamber by burning a few of their 
hairs along with certain herbs upon her tripod, 
pronouncing at the same time certain words. Now 
one day when she wished by this means to gain the 
love of a young man, she was deceived by her maid, 
and instead of the young man’s hairs, she burned 
some hairs pulled from a leather bottle, made out of 
a goatskin that hung ina tavern. During the night 
the leather bottle, full of wine, capered through the 
town up to the witch’s door. This fact is un- 
doubted. And in sacraments as in enchantments it 
is the form which operates. ‘The effect of a divine 
formula cannot be less in power and extent than 
the effect of an infernal formula.” 

Having spoken in this fashion the great St. Au- 
gustine sat down amidst applause. 

One of the blessed, of an advanced age and having 
a melancholy appearance, asked permission to speak. 
No one knew him. His name was Probus, and he 
was not enrolled in the canon of the saints. 

“T beg the company’s pardon,” said he, “I have 
no halo, and I gained eternal blessedness without 
any eminent distinction. But after what the great 
St. Augustine has just told you I believe it right to 
impart a cruel experience, which I had, relative to 
the conditions necessary for the validity of a sacra- 
ment. ‘The bishop of Hippo is indeed right in what 
he said. A sacrament depends on the form; its 
virtue is in its form; its vice is in its form. Listen, 
confessors and pontiffs, to my woeful story. I was 
a priest in Rome under the rule of the Emperor 
Gordianus. Without desiring to recommend my- 


AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE oF 


self to you for any special merit, I may say that I 
exercised my priesthood with piety and zeal. For 
forty years I served the church of St. Modestus- 
beyond-the-Walls. My habits were regular. Every 
Saturday I went to a tavern-keeper called Barjas, 
who dwelt with his wine-jars under the Porta Ca- 
pena, and from him I bought the wine that I conse- 
crated daily throughout the week. During that 
long space of time I never failed for a single morn- 
ing to consecrate the holy sacrifice of the mass. 
However, I had no joy, and it was with a heart cp- 
pressed by sorrow that, on the steps of the altar I 
used to ask, ‘Why art thou so heavy, O my soul, and 
why art thou so disquieted within me?’ The faith- 
ful whom I invited to the holy table gave me cause 
for affliction, for having, so to speak, the Host that 
I administered still upon their tongues, they fell 
again into sin just as if the sacrament had been 
without power or efficacy. At last I reached the 
end of my earthly trials, and falling asleep in the 
Lord, I awoke in this abode of the elect.. I learned 
then from the mouth of the angel who brought me 
here, that Barjas, the tavern-keeper of the Porta 
Capena, had sold for wine a decoction of roots and 
barks in which there was not a single drop of the juice 
of the grape. I had been unable to transmute this 
vile brew into blood, for it was not wine, and wine 
alone is changed into the blood of Jesus Christ. 
Therefore all my consecrations were invalid, and un- 
known to us, my faithful and myself had for forty 
years been deprived of the sacrament and were in 
fact in a state of excommunication. This revela- 
tion threw me into a stupor which overwhelms me 
even to-day in this abode of bliss. I go all through 
Paradise without ever meeting a single one of those 


28 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Christians whom formerly I admitted to the holy 
table in the basilica of the blessed Modestus. De- 
prived of the bread of angels, they easily gave way 
to the most abominable vices, and they have all gone 
to hell. It gives me some satisfaction to think that 
Barjas, the tavern-keeper, is damned. There is in. 
these things a logic worthy of the author of all 
logic. Nevertheless my unhappy example proves 
that it is sometimes inconvenient that form should 
prevail over essence in the sacraments, and I humbly 
ask, Could not eternal wisdom remedy this?” 

“No,” answered the Lord. ‘‘The remedy would 
be worse than the disease. It would be the ruin of 
the priesthood if essence prevailed over form in the 
laws of salvation.” 

‘Alas! Lord,” sighed the humble Probus. ‘Be 
persuaded by my humble experience; as long as 
you reduce your sacraments to formulas your justice 
will meet with terrible obstacles.” 

“T know that better than you do,” replied the 
Lord. “I see in a single glance both the actual 
problems which are difficult, and the future problems 
which will not be less difficult. Thus I can foretell 
that when the sun will have turned round the earth 
two hundred and forty times more. . . .” 

‘Sublime language,” exclaimed the angels. 

‘And worthy of the creator of the world,” an- 
swered the pontifts. 

“Tt is,’ resumed the Lord, ‘fa manner of speak- 
ing in accordance with my old cosmogony and one 
which I cannot give up without losing my immu- 
tability.-.0.). 

“After the sun, then, will have turned another 
two hundred and forty times round the earth, there 


AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE 29 


will not be a single cleric left in Rome who knows 
Latin. When they sing their litanies in the churches 
people will invoke Orichel, Roguel, and Totichel, 
and, as you know, these are devils and not angels. 
Many robbers desiring to make their communions, 
but fearing that before obtaining pardon they would 
be forced to give up the things they had robbed to 
the Church, will make their confessions to travel- 
ling priests, who, ignorant of both Italian and Latin, 
and only speaking the patois of their village, will 
go through cities and towns selling the remission of 
sins for a base price, often for a bottle of wine. 
Probably we shall not be inconvenienced by those 
absolutions as they will want contrition to make 
them valid, but it may be that their baptisms will 
cause us some embarrassment. ‘The priests will be- 
come so ignorant that they will baptize children in 
nomine patria et filia et spirita sancta, as Louis de 
Potter will take a pleasure in relating in the third 
volume of his ‘Philosophical, Political, and Critical 
History of Christianity. It will be an arduous 
question to decide on the validity of such baptisms; 
for even if in my sacred writings I tolerate a Greek 
less elegant than Plato’s and a scarcely Ciceronian 
Latin, I cannot possibly admit a piece of pure patois 
as a liturgical formula. And one shudders when 
one thinks that millions of new-born babes will be 
baptized by this method. But let us return to our 
penguins.” 

“*Your divine words, Lord, have already led uv 
back to them,” said St. Gal. “In the signs of re- 
ligion and the laws of salvation form necessarily 
prevails over essence, and the validity of a sacra- 
ment solely depends upon its form. The whole 


30 PENGUIN ISLAND 


question is whether the penguins have been bap- 
tized with the proper forms. Now there is no 
doubt about the answer.” 

The fathers and the doctors agreed, and their 
perplexity became only the more cruel. 

“The Christian state,” said St. Cornelius, ‘‘is 
not without serious inconveniences for a penguin. 
In it the birds are obliged to work out their own 
salvation. How can they succeed? The habits 
of birds are, in many points, contrary to the com- 
mandments of the Church, and the penguins have 
no reason for changing theirs. I mean that they 
are not intelligent enough to give up their present 
habits and assume better.” 

“They cannot,” said the Lord; ‘“‘my decrees pre- 
vent them.” 

‘Nevertheless,’ resumed St. Cornelius, ‘in vir- 
tue of their baptism their actions no longer remain 
indifferent. Henceforth they will be good or bad, 
susceptible of merit or of demerit.” 

‘That is precisely the question we have to deal 
with,” said the Lord. 

“IT see only one solution,” said St. Augustine. 
“The penguins will go to hell.” 

“But they have no soul,” observed St. Irenaeus. 

“It is a pity,’ sighed Tertullian. 

“It is indeed,” resumed St. Gal. ‘‘And I admit 
that my disciple, the holy Maél, has, in his blind 
zeal, created great theological difficulties for the 
Holy Spirit and introduced disorder into the econ- 
omy of mysteries.” 

‘He is an old blunderer,” cried St. Adjutor of 
Alsace, shrugging his shoulders. 

But the Lord cast a reproachful look on Adjutor. 

‘‘Allow me to speak,” said he; ‘‘the holy Maél has 


AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE 31 


not intuitive knowledge like you, my blessed ones. 
He does not see me. He is an old man burdened by 
infirmities; he is half deaf and three parts blind. 
You are too severe on him. However, I recognise 
that the situation is an embarrassing one.” 
“Luckily it is but a passing disorder,” said St. 
Irenaeus. ‘‘The penguins are baptized, but their 
eggs are not, and the evil will stop with the present 


generation.” 
“Do not speak thus, Irenaeus my son,” said the 
Lord. ‘There are exceptions to the laws that men 


of science lay down on the earth because they are 
imperfect and have not an exact application to 
nature. But the laws that I establish are perfect 
and suffer no exception. We must decide the fate 
of the baptized penguins without violating any di- 
vine law, and in a manner conformable to the deca» 
logue as well as to the commandments of my 
Church.” 

“Lord,” said St. Gregory Nazianzen, “give them 
an immortal soul.” 

“Alas! Lord, what would they do with it,” sighed 
Lactantius. ‘They have not tuneful voices to sing 
your praises. They would not be able to celebrate 
your mysteries.” 

“Without doubt,” said St. Augustine, “they would 
not observe the divine law.” 

“They could not,” said the Lord. 

“They could not,’ continued St. Augustine. 
“And if, Lord, in your wisdom, you pour an im- 
mortal soul into them, they will burn eternally in 
hell in virtue of your adorable decrees. Thus will 
the transcendent order, that this old Welshman has 
disturbed, be re-established.” 

“You propose a correct solution to me, son of 


S2 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Monica,” said the Lord, ‘‘and one that accords 
with my wisdom. But it does not satisfy my mercy. 
And, although in my essence I am immutable, the 
longer I endure, the more I incline to mildness. 
This change of character is evident to anyone who 
reads my two Testaments.” 

As the discussion continued without much light 
being thrown upon the matter and as the blessed 
showed a disposition to keep repeating the same 
thing, it was decided to consult St. Catherine of 
Alexandria. This is what was usually done in such 
cases. St. Catherine while on earth had confounded 
fifty very learned doctors. She knew Plato’s phi- 
losophy in addition to the Holy Scriptures, and she 
also possessed a knowledge of rhetoric. 


EL 


AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE 
(Continuation and End) 


Ay =p PR T CATHERINE entered the as- 

TaN sembly, her head encircled by a 
beg crown of emeralds, sapphires, and 
pearls, and she was clad in a robe of 
cloth of gold. She carried at her 
side a blazing wheel, the image of 
the one whose fragments had struck 


her persecutors. 

The Lord having invited her to speak, she ex- 
pressed herself in these terms: 

‘Lord, in order to solve the problem you deign to 
submit to me I shall not study the habits of animals 
in general nor those of birds in particular. [I shall 
only remark to the doctors, confessors, and pontiffs 
gathered in this assembly that the separation be- 
tween man and animal is not complete since there 
are monsters who proceed from both. Such are 
chimeras—half nymphs and half serpents; such 
are the three Gorgons and the Capripeds; such are 
the Scyllas and the Sirens who sing in the sea. 
These have a woman’s breast and a fish’s tail. Such 
also are the Centaurs, men down to the waist and 
the remainder horses. ‘They are a noble race of 
monsters. One of them, as you know, was able, 
guided by the light of reason alone, to direct his 
steps towards eternal blessedness, and you some- 
times see his heroic bosom prancing on the clouds. 

oo 


34 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Chiron, the Centaur, deserved for his works on the 
earth to share the abode of the blessed; he it was 
who gave Achilles his education; and that young 
hero, when he left the Centaur’s hands, lived for 
two years, dressed as a young girl, among the 
daughters of King Lycomedes. He shared their 
games and their bed without allowing any suspicion 
to arise that he was not a young virgin like them. 
Chiron, who taught him such good morals, is, with 
the Emperor Trajan, the only righteous man who 
obtained celestial glory by following the law of 
nature. And yet he was but half human. 

“T think I have proved by this example that, to 
reach eternal blessedness, it is enough to possess 
some parts of humanity, always on the condition 
that they are noble. And what Chiron, the Cen- 
taur, could obtain without having been regenerated 
by baptism, would not the penguins deserve too if 
they became half penguins and half men? ‘That is 
why, Lord, I entreat you to give old Maél’s pen- 
guins a human head and breast so that they can 
praise you worthily. And grant them also an 
immortal soul—but one of small size.”’ 

Thus Catherine spoke, and the fathers, doctors, 
confessors, and pontiffs heard her with a murmur of 
approbation. 

But St. Anthony, the Hermit, arose and stretch- 
ing two red and knotty arms towards the Most 
High: 

‘Do not so, O Lord God,” he cried, ‘‘in the name 
of your holy Paraclete, do not so!” 

He spoke with such vehemence that his long 
white beard shook on his chin like the empty nose- 
bag of a hungry horse. 

“Lord, do not so. Birds with human heads exist 


AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE 35 


already. St. Catherine has told us nothing new.” 

“The imagination groups and compares; it never 
creates,”’ replied St. Catherine drily. 

“They exist already,” continued St. Anthony, 
who would listen to nothing. ‘They are called 
‘arpies, and they are the most obscene animals in 
creation. One day as I was having supper in the 
desert with the Abbot St. Paul, I placed the table 
outside my cabin under an old sycamore tree. The 
harpies came and sat in its branches; they deafened 
us with their shrill cries and cast their excrement 
over all our food. The clamour of the monstevs 
prevented me from listening to the teaching of the 
Abbot St. Paul, and we ate birds’ dung with our 
bread and lettuces. Lord, it is impossible to 
believe that harpies could give thee worthy praise. 

‘Truly in my temptations I have seen many hy- 
brid beings, not only women-serpents and women- 
fishes, but beings still more confusedly formed such 
as men whose bodies were made out of a pot, a bell, 
a clock, a cupboard full of food and crockery, or 
even out of a house with doors and windows 
through which people engaged in their domestic 
tasks could be seen. Eternity would not suffice 
were I to describe all the monsters that assailed me 
in my solitude, from whales rigged like ships to a 
shower of red insects which changed the water of 
my fountain into blood. But none were as dis- 
gusting as the harpies whose offal polluted the 
leaves of my sycamore.” 

‘FTarpies,’ observed Lactantius, “are female 
monsters with birds’ bodies. They have a woman’s 
head and breast. Their forwardness, their shame- 
lessness, and their obscenity proceed from their 
female nature as the poet Virgil demonstrated 


36 PENGUIN ISLAND 


in his ‘/Mneid.’ They share the curse of Eve.” 

“Let us not speak of the curse of Eve,” said the 
Lord. ‘The second Eve has redeemed the first.” 

Paul Orosius, the author of a universal history 
that Bossuet was to imitate in later years, arose and 
prayed to the Lord: 

“Lord, hear my prayer and Anthony’s. Do not 
make any more monsters like the Centaurs, Sirens, 
and Fauns, whom the Greeks, those collectors of 
fables, loved. You will derive no satisfaction from 
them. Those species of monsters have pagan in- 
clinations and their double nature does not dis- 
pose them to purity of morals.” 

The bland Lactantius replied in these terms: 

‘““HlTe who has just spoken is assuredly the best his- 
torian in Paradise, for Herodotus, Thucydides, 
Polybius, Livy, Velleius Paterculus, Cornelius 
Nepos, Suetonius, Manetho, Diodorus Siculus, Dion 
Cassius, and Lampridius are deprived of the sight 
of God, and Tacitus suffers in hell the torments that 
are reserved for blasphemers. But Paul Orosius 
does not know heaven as well as he knows the earth, 
for he does not seem to bear in mind that the angels, 
who proceed from man and bird, are purity 
itself.” 

“We are wandering,” said the Eternal. ‘‘What 
have we to do with all those centaurs, harpies, and 
angels? We have to deal with penguins.” 

‘You have spoken to the point, Lord,” said the 
chief of the fifty doctors, who, during their mortal 
life had been confounded by the Virgin of Alexan- 
dria, “‘and I dare express the opinion that, in order 
to put an end to the scandal by which heaven is now 
stirred, old Maél’s penguins should, as St. Catherine 
who confounded us has proposed, be given half of a 


AN ASSEMBLY IN PARADISE 37 


human body with an eternal soul proportioned to 
that half.” 

At this speech there arose in the assembly a great 
noise of private conversations and disputes of the 
doctors. The Greek fathers argued with the 
Latins concerning the substance, nature, and dimen- 
sions of the soul that should be given to the pen- 
guins. 

“Confessors and pontiffs,’ exclaimed the Lord, 
“do not imitate the conclaves and synods of the 
earth. And do not bring into the Church Trium- 
phant those violences that trouble the Church Mil- 
itant. For it is but too true that in all the councils 
held under the inspiration of my spirit, in Europe, 
in Asia, and in Africa, fathers have torn the beards 
and scratched the eyes of other fathers. Neverthe- 
less they were infallible, for I was with them.” 

Order being restored, old Hermas arose and 
slowly uttered these words: 

“T will praise you, Lord, for that you caused my 
mother, Saphira, to be born amidst your people, in 
the days when the dew of heaven refreshed the 
earth which was in travail with its Saviour. And 
I will praise you, Lord, for having granted to me to 
see with my mortal eyes the Apostles of your divine 
Son. And I will speak in this illustrious assembly 
because you have willed that truth should proceed 
out of the mouths of the humble, and I will say: 
‘Change these penguins to men. It is the only 
determination conformable to your justice and your 


mercy. 


Several doctors asked permission to speak, others 
began to do so. No one listened, and all the con- 
fessors were tumultuously shaking their palms and 


their crowns. 


38 PENGUIN ISLAND 


The Lord, by a gesture of his right hand, ap- 
peased the quarrels of his elect. 

“Let us not deliberate any longer,” said he. 
‘The opinion broached by gentle old Hermas is the 
only one conformable to my eternal designs. ‘These 
birds will be changed into men. I foresee in this 
several disadvantages. Many of those men will 
commit sins they would not have committed as pen- 
guins. ‘Truly their fate through this change will 
be far less enviable than if they had been without 
this baptism and this incorporation into the family 
of Abraham. But my foreknowledge must not en- 
croach upon their free will. 

“In order not to impair human liberty, I will be 
ignorant of what I know, I will thicken upon my 
eyes the veils I have pierced, and in my blind clear- 
sightedness I will let myself be surprised by what I 
have foreseen.” 

And immediately calling the archangel Raphael: 

“Go and find the holy Maél,’” said he to him; 
“inform him of his mistake and tell him, armed with 
my Name, to change these penguins into men.” 


VII 
METAMORPHOSIS OF THE PENGUINS 


HE archangel, having gone down into 
the Island of the Penguins, found the 
holy man asleep in the hollow of a 

wa rock surrounded by his new disciples. 

‘ us BG He laid his hand on his shoulder and, 

Ste oS, having waked him, said in a gentle 

voice: 

“Maél, fear not!” 

The holy man, dazzled by a vivid light, inebriated 
by a delicious odour, recognised the angel of the 
Lord, and prostrated himself with his forehead on 
the ground. 

The angel continued: 

‘“‘Maél, know thy error, believing that thou wert 
baptizing children of Adam thou hast baptized 
birds; and it is through thee that penguins have 
entered into the Church of God.” 

At these words the old man remained stupefied. 

And the angel resumed: 

“Arise, Maél, arm thyself with the mighty Name 
of the Lord, and say to these birds, ‘Be ye men!’ ” 

And the holy Maél, having wept and prayed, 
armed himself with the mighty Name of the Lord 
and said to the birds: 

EB iseave men. 

Immediately the penguins were transformed. 
Their foreheads enlarged and their heads grew 
round like the dome of St. Maria Rotunda in Rome. 
39 


40 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Their oval eyes opened more widely on the universe; 
a fleshy nose clothed the two clefts of their nostrils; 
their beaks were changed into mouths, and from 
their mouths went forth speech; their necks grew 
short and thick; their wings became arms and their 
claws legs; a restless soul dwelt within the breast 
of each of them. 

However, there remained with them some traces 
of their first nature. They were inclined to look 
sideways; they balanced themselves on their short 
thighs; their bodies were covered with fine down. 

And Maél gave thanks to the Lord, because he 
had incorporated these penguins into the family of 
Abraham. 

But he grieved at the thought that he would soon 
leave the island to come back no more, and that 
perhaps when he was far away the faith of the pen- 
guins would perish for want of care like a young and 
tender plant. 

And he formed the idea of transporting their 
island to the coasts of Armorica. 

“T know not the designs of eternal Wisdom,” 
said he to himself. “But if God wills that this 
island be transported, who could prevent it?” 

And the holy man made a very fine cord about 
forty feet long out of the flax of his stole. He 
fastened one end of the cord round a point of rock 
that jutted up through the sand of the shore and, 
holding the other end of the cord in his hand, he 
entered the stone trough. 

The trough glided over the sea and towed Pen- 
guin Island behind it; after nine days’ sailing it 
cee aes the Breton coast, bringing the island 
with it. 


= y 
FY 
a 


es 


4: 


f 

Wy 
» 4, 
= 
Fi 


a 
SSS SAW 
: A” ws .: 
eae 

: 
~ = 
S Smoker 


See 
SS =\ —— =< : = = 

A ae x 

3 = SS 
SS 2* Ss 4 

SSS : 


= 


= 
=e - 
BAS a | 
3 : 4 oe 
S A fis 
SS SEN é 
| Sane ae 
Saito Ss sie eee 


I 
THE FIRST CLOTHES 


an 8) E day St. Maél was sitting by the 

Lax 4 seashore on a warm stone that he 

, a meq found. He thought it had been 

WIG warmed by the sun and he gave 
thanks to God for it, not knowing 
that the Devil had been resting on it. 
The apostle was waiting for the 
monks of Yvern who had been commissioned to 
bring a freight of skins and fabrics to clothe the 
inhabitants of the island of Alca. 

Soon he saw a monk called Magis coming ashore 
and carrying a chest upon his back. This monk 
enjoyed a great reputation for holiness. 

When he had drawn near to the old man he laid 
the chest on the ground and wiping his forehead 
with the back of his sleeve, he said: 

“Well, father, you wish then to clothe these pen- 
guins ?” 

“Nothing is more needful, my son,” said the old 
man. ‘Since they have been incorporated into the 
family of Abraham these penguins share the curse 
of Eve, and they know that they are naked, a thing 
of which they were ignorant before. And it is 
high time to clothe them, for they are losing the 
down that remained on them after their metamor- 
phosis.”’ 

“Tt is true,’ said Magis as he cast his eyes over 
the coast where the penguins were to be seen look- 

43 


44 PENGUIN ISLAND 


ing for shrimps, gathering mussels, singing, or sleep- 
ing, “they are naked. But do you not think, father, 
that it would be better to leave them naked? Why 
clothe them? When they wear clothes and are un- 
der the moral law they will assume an immense 
pride, a vile hypocrisy, and an excessive cruelty.” 
‘Ts it possible, my son,” sighed the old man, 
“that you understand so badly the effects of the 
moral law to which even the heathen submit ?” 
“The moral law,” answered Magis, ‘“‘forces men 
who are beasts to live otherwise than beasts, a thing 
that doubtless puts a constraint upon them, but that 
also flatters and reassures them; and as they are 
proud, cowardly, and covetous of pleasure, they 
willingly submit to restraints that tickle their vanity 
and on which they found both their present security 
and the hope of their future happiness. ‘That is the 
principle of all morality. . . . But let us not mislead 
ourselves. My companions are unloading their 
cargo of stuffs and skins on the island. Think, 
father, while there is still time! To clothe the pen- 
guins is a very serious business. At present when a 
penguin desires a penguin he knows precisely what he 
desires and his lust is limited by an exact knowledge 
of its object. At this moment two or three couples 
of penguins are making love on the beach. See with 
what simplicity! No one pays any attention and 
the actors themselves do not seem to be greatly pre- 
occupied. But when the female penguins are 
clothed, the male penguin will not form so exact a 
notion of what it is that attracts him to them. His 
indeterminate desires will fly out into all sorts of 
dreams and illusions; in short, father, he will know 
love and its mad torments. And all the time the 
female penguins will cast down their eyes and bite 


THE FIRST CLOTHES 45 


their lips, and take on airs as if they kept a treasure 
under their clothes! . . . what a pity! 

“The evil will be endurable as long as these 
people remain rude and poor; but only wait for a 
thousand years and you will see, father, with what 
powerful weapons you have endowed the daughters 
of Alca. If you will allow me, I can give you some 
idea of it beforehand. I have some old clothes in 
this chest. Let us take at hazard one of these fe- 
male penguins to whom the male penguins give such 
little thought, and let us dress her as well as we 
can. 

“Here is one coming towards us. She is neither 
more beautiful nor uglier than the others; she is 
young. No one looks at her. She strolls indo- 
lently along the shore, scratching her back and with 
her finger at her nose as she walks. You cannot 
help seeing, father, that she has narrow shoulders, 
clumsy breasts, a stout figure, and short legs. Her 
reddish knees pucker at every step she takes, and 
there is, at each of her joints, what looks like a 
little monkey’s head. Her broad and sinewy feet 
cling to the rock with their four crooked toes, while 
the great toes stick up like the heads of two cunning 
serpents. She begins to walk, all her muscles are 
engaged in the task, and, when we see them working, 
we think of her as a machine intended for walking 
rather than as a machine intended for making love, 
although visibly she is both, and contains within 
herself several other pieces of machinery besides. 
Well, venerable apostle, you will see what I am 
going to make of her.”’ 

With these words the monk, Magis, reached the 
female penguin in three bounds, lifted her up, car 
ried her in his arms with her hair trailing behind her, 


46 PENGUIN ISLAND 


and threw her, overcome with fright, at the feet of 
the holy Maél. 

And whilst she wept and begged him to do her no 
harm, he took a pair of sandals out of his chest and 
commanded her to put them on. 

“Her feet,” observed the old man, “will appear 
smaller when squeezed in by the woollen cords. 
The soles, being two fingers high, will give an elegant 
length to her legs and the weight they bear will seem 
magnified.” 

As the penguin tied on her sandals she threw a 
curious look towards the open coffer, and seeing 
that it was full of jewels and finery, she smiled 
through her tears. 

The monk twisted her hair on the back of her 
head and covered it with a chaplet of flowers. He 
encircled her wrist with golden bracelets and making 
her stand upright, he passed a large linen band be- 
neath her breasts, alleging that her bosom would 
thereby derive a new dignity and that her sides 
would be compressed to the greater glory of her hips. 

He fixed this band with pins, taking them one by 
one out of his mouth. 

‘You can tighten it still more,” said the penguin. 

When he had, with much care and study, enclosed 
the soft parts of her bust in this way, he covered 
her whole body with a rose-coloured tunic which 
gently followed the lines of her figure. 

“Does it hang well?” asked the penguin. 

And bending forward with her head on one side 
and her chin on her shoulder, she kept looking at- 
tentively at the appearance of her toilet. 

Magis asked her if she did not think the dress a 
little long, but she answered with assurance that it 
was not—she would hold it up. 


b] 


THE FIRST CLOTHES 47 


Immediately, taking the back of her skirt in her 
left hand, she drew it obliquely across her hips, 
taking care to disclose a glimpse of her heels. Then 
she went away, walking with short steps and swing- 
ing her hips. 

She did not turn her head, but as she passed near 
a stream she glanced out of the corner of her eye 
at her own reflection. 

A male penguin, who met her by chance, stopped 
in surprise, and retracing his steps began to follow 
her. As she went along the shore, others coming 
back from fishing, went up to her, and after looking 
at her, walked behind her. Those who were lying 
on the sand got up and joined the rest. 

Unceasingly, as she advanced, fresh penguins, de- 
scending from the paths of the mountain, coming 
out of clefts of the rocks, and emerging from the 
water, added to the size of her retinue. 

And all of them, men of ripe age with vigorous 
shoulders and hairy breasts, agile youths, old men 
shaking the multitudinous wrinkles of their rosy, 
and white-haired skins, or dragging their legs thin- 
ner and drier than the juniper staff that served them 
as a third leg, hurried on, panting and emitting an 
acrid odour and hoarse gasps. Yet she went on 
peacefully and seemed to see nothing. 

“Father,” cried Magis, “notice how each one 
advances with his nose pointed towards the centre 
of gravity of that young damsel now that the centre 
is covered by a garment. The sphere inspires the 
meditations of geometers by the number of its prop- 
erties. When it proceeds from a physical and living 
nature it acquires new qualities, and in order that 
the interest of that figure might be fully revealed to 
the penguins it was necessary that, ceasing to see it 


48 PENGUIN ISLAND 


distinctly with their eyes, they should be led to re- 
present it to themselves in their minds. I myself 
feel at this moment irresistibly attracted towards 
that penguin. Whether it be because her skirt gives 
more importance to her hips, and that in its simple 
magnificence it invests them with a synthetic and 
general character and allows only the pure idea, the 
divine principle, of them to be seen, whether this be 
the cause I cannot say, but I feel that if I embraced 
her I would hold in my hands the heaven of human 
pleasure. It is certain that modesty communicates 
an invincible attraction to women. My uneasiness 
is so great that it would be vain for me to try to 
conceal it.” 

He spoke, and, gathering up his habit, he rushed 
among the crowd of penguins, pushing, jostling, 
trampling, and crushing, until he reached the daugh- 
ter of Alca, whom he seized and suddenly carried 
in his arms into a cave that had been hollowed out 
by the sea. 

Then the penguins felt as if the sun had gone out. 
And the holy Maél knew that the Devil had taken 
the features of the monk, Magis, in order that he 
might give clothes to the daughter of Alca. He 
was troubled in spirit, and his soul was sad. As 
with slow steps he went towards his hermitage he 
saw the little penguins of six and seven years of age 
tightening their waists with belts made of sea-weed 
and walking along the shore to see if anybody would 
follow them. 


II 


THE FIRST CLOTHES 
(Continuation and End) 


HE holy Maél felt a profound sad- 
ness that the first clothes put upon a 
daughter of Alca should have be- 
trayed the penguin modesty instead 
NA of helping it. He persisted, none 
the less, in his design of giving 
clothes to the inhabitants of the mi- 
raculous island. Assembling them on the shore, he 
distributed to them the garments that the monks of 
Yvern had brought. The male penguins received 
short tunics and breeches, the female penguins long 
robes. But these robes were far from creating the 
effect that the former one had produced. ‘They 
were not so beautiful, their shape was uncouth and 
without art, and no attention was paid to them since 
every woman had one. As they prepared the meals 
and worked in the fields they soon had nothing but 
slovenly bodices and soiled petticoats. 

The male penguins loaded their unfortunate con- 
sorts with work until they looked like beasts of bur- 
den. They knew nothing of the troubles of the 
heart and the disorders of passion. Their habits 
were innocent. Incest, though frequent, was a sign 
of rustic simplicity and if drunkenness led a youth 
to commit some such crime he thought nothing more 
about it the day afterwards. 

49 


it 


SETTING BOUNDS TO THE FIELDS 
AND THE ORIGIN OF PROPERTY 


HE island did not preserve the 

rugged appearance that it had for- 
merly, when in the midst of floating 
icebergs it sheltered a population of 
birds within its rock amphitheatre. 
Its snow-clad peak had sunk down 
into a hill from the summit of which 
one could see the coasts of Armorica eternally cov- 
ered with mist, and the ocean strewn with sullen 
reefs like monsters half raised out of its depths. 

Its coasts were now very extensive and clearly 
defined and its shape reminded one of a mulberry 
leaf. It was suddenly covered with coarse grass, 
pleasing to the flocks, and with willows, ancient fig- 
trees, and mighty oaks. This fact is attested by 
the Venerable Bede and several other authors 
worthy of credence. 

To the north the shore formed a deep bay that in 
after years became one of the most famous ports in 
the universe. To the east, along a rocky coast 
beaten by a foaming sea, there stretched a deserted 
and fragrant heath. It was the Beach of Shadows, 
and the inhabitants of the island never ventured on 
it for fear of the serpents that lodged in the hollows 
of the rocks and lest they might encounter the souls 
of the dead who resembled livid flames. To the 
south, orchards and woods bounded the languid Bay 
50 


SETTING BOUNDS TO THE FIELDS 51 


of Divers. On this fortunate shore old Maél 
built a wooden church and a monastery. To the 
west, two streams, the Clange and the Surelle, wa- 
tered the fertile valleys of Dalles and Dombes. 

Now one autumn morning, as the blessed Maél 
was walking in the valley of Clange in company with 
a monk of Yvern called Bulloch, he saw bands of 
fierce-looking men loaded with stones passing along 
the roads. At the same time he heard in all direc- 
tions cries and complaints mounting up from the 
valley towards the tranquil sky. 

And he said to Bulloch: 

“T notice with sadness, my son, that since they be- 
came men the inhabitants of this island act with less 
wisdom than formerly. When they were birds they 
only quarrelled during the season of their love af- 
fairs. But now they dispute all the time; they 
pick quarrels with each other in summer as well 
as in winter. How greatly have they fallen 
from that peaceful majesty which made the assem- 
bly of the penguins look like the Senate of a wise 
republic! 

“Took towards Surelle, Bulloch, my son. In 
yonder pleasant valley a dozen men penguins are 
busy knocking each other down with the spades and 
picks that they might employ better in tilling the 
ground. ‘The women, still more cruel than the men, 
are tearing their opponents’ faces with their nails. 
Alas! Bulloch, my son, why are they murdering each 
other in this way?” 

“From a spirit of fellowship, father, and through 
forethought for the future,” answered Bulloch. 
“For man is essentially provident and sociable. 
Such is his character and it is impossible to imagine 
it apart from a certain appropriation of things. 


$2 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Those penguins whom you see are dividing the 
ground among themselves.” 

“Could they not divide it with less violence?” 
asked the aged man. ‘‘As they fight they exchange 
invectives and threats. I do not distinguish their 
words, but they are angry ones, judging from the 
tone.” 

“They are accusing one another of theft and en- 
croachment,” answered Bulloch. ‘That is the gen- 
eral sense of their speech.” 

At that moment the holy Maél clasped his hands 
and sighed deeply. 

‘Do you see, my son,” he exclaimed, ‘‘that mad- 
man who with his teeth is biting the nose of the ad- 
versary he has overthrown and that other one who 
is pounding a woman’s head with a huge stone?” 

“IT see them,” said Bulloch. ‘They are creating 
law; they are founding property; they are estab- 
lishing the principles of civilization, the basis of 
society, and the foundations of the State.” 

“How is that?” asked old Maél. 

“By setting bounds to their fields. That is the 
origin of all government. Your penguins, O Mas- 
ter, are performing the most august of functions. 
Throughout the ages their work will be consecrated 
by lawyers, and magistrates will confirm it.”’ 

Whilst the monk, Bulloch, was pronouncing these 
words a big penguin with a fair skin and red hair 
went down into the valley carrying a trunk of a 
tree upon his shoulder. He went up to a little pen- 
guin who was watering his vegetables in the heat 
of the sun, and shouted to him: 

“Your field is mine!” 

And having delivered himself of this stout utter- 
ance he brought down his club on the head of the 


SETTING BOUNDS TO THE FIELDS 53 


little penguin, who fell dead upon the field that his 
own hands had tilled. 

At this sight the holy Maél shuddered through his 
whole body and poured forth a flood of tears. 

And in a voice stifled by horror and fear he ad- 
dressed this prayer to heaven: 

“O Lord, my God, O thou who didst receive 
young Abel’s sacrifices, thou who didst curse Cain, 
avenge, O Lord, this innocent penguin sacrified upon 
his own field and make the murderer feel the weight 
of thy arm. Is there a more odious crime, is 
there a graver offence against thy justice, O Lord, 
than this murder and this robbery?” 

“Take care, father,” said Bulloch gently, ‘‘that 
what you call murder and robbery may not really 
be war and conquest, those sacred foundations of 
empires, those sources of all human virtues and all 
human greatness. Reflect, above all, that in blam- 
ing the big penguin you are attacking property in its 
origin and in its source. I shall have no trouble 
in showing you how. To till the land is one thing, 
to possess it is another, and these two things must 
not be confused; as regards ownership the right of 
the first occupier is uncertain and badly founded. 
The right of conquest, on the other hand, rests 
on more solid foundations. It is the only right that 
receives respect since it is the only one that makes 
itself respected. The sole and proud origin of 
property is force. It is born and preserved by 
force. In that it is august and yields only to a 
greater force. This is why it is correct to say that 
he who possesses is noble. And that big red man, 
when he knocked down a labourer to get possession 
of his field, founded at that moment a very noble 
house upon this earth. I congratulate him upon it.” 


54 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Having thus spoken, Bulloch approached the big 
penguin, who was leaning upon his club as he stood 
in the blood-stained furrow: 

“Tord Greatauk, dreaded Prince,’’ said he, bow- 
ing to the ground, “I come to pay you the homage 
due to the founder of legitimate power and heredi- 
tary wealth. The skull of the vile Penguin you 
have overthrown will, buried in your field, attest 
for ever the sacred rights of your posterity over 
this soil that you have ennobled. Blessed be your 
sons and your sons’ sons! They shall be Greatauks, 
Dukes of Skull, and they shall rule over this island 
of Alca.” 

Then raising his voice and turning towards the 
holy Maél: 

“Bless Greatauk, father, for all power comes 
from God.” 

Maél remained silent and motionless, with his 
eyes raised towards heaven; he felt a painful un- 
certainty in judging the monk Bulloch’s doctrine. 
It was, however, the doctrine destined to prevail 
in epochs of advanced civilization. Bulloch can be 
considered as the creator of civil law in Penguinia. 


Ly 


THE FIRST ASSEMBLY OF THE ESTATES 
OF PENGUINIA 


ULLOCH, my son,” said old Maél, 
“we ought to make a census of the 
Penguins and inscribe each of their 
names in a book.” 

“It is a most urgent matter,” an- 
swered Bulloch, “there can be no 
good government without it.” 

Forthwith, the apostle, with the help of twelve 
monks, proceeded to make a census of the people. 

And old Maél then said: 

“Now that we keep a register of all the inhabi- 
tants, we ought, Bulloch, my son, to levy a just tax 
so as to provide for public expenses and the main- 
tenance of the Abbey. Each ought to contribute 
according to his means. For this reason, my son, 
call together the Elders of Alca, and in agreement 
with them we shall establish the tax.” 

The Elders, being called together, assembled to 
the number of thirty under the great sycamore in 
the courtyard of the wooden monastery. They 
were the first Estates of Penguinia. Three-fourths 
of them were substantial peasants of Surelle and 
Clange. Greatauk, as the noblest of the Penguins, 
sat upon the highest stone. 

The venerable Maél took his place in the midst of 
his monks and uttered these words: 

_ “Children, the Lord when he pleases grants riches 

55 


a 
q 


ame 


56 PENGUIN ISLAND 


to men and he takes them away from them. Now 
I have called you together to levy contributions 
from the people so as to provide for public ex- 
penses and the maintenance of the monks. I con- 
sider that these contributions ought to be in propor- 
tion to the wealth of each. Therefore he who has 
a hundred oxen will give ten; he who has ten will 
give one.” 

When the holy man had spoken, Morio, a la- 
bourer at Anis-on-the-Clange, one of the richest of 
the Penguins, rose up and said: 

“OQ Father Maél, I think it right that each should 
contribute to the public expenses and to the support 
of the Church. For my part I am ready to give up 
all that I possess in the interest of my brother Pen- 
guins, and if it were necessary I would even cheer- 
fully part with my shirt. All the elders of the peo- 
ple are ready, like me, to sacrifice their goods, and no 
one can doubt their absolute devotion to their coun- 
try and their creed. We have, then, only to con- 
sider the public interest and to do what it requires. 
Now, Father, what it requires, what it demands, is 
not to ask much from those who possess much, for 
then the rich would be less rich and the poor still 
poorer. ‘The poor live on the wealth of the rich 
and that is the reason why that wealth is sacred. 
Do not touch it, to do so would be an uncalled for 
evil. You will get no great profit by taking from 
the rich, for they are very few in number; on the 
contrary you will strip yourself of all your resources 
and plunge the country into misery. Whereas if 
you ask a little from each inhabitant without regard 
to his wealth, you will collect enough for the public 
necessities and you will have no need to enquire into 
each citizen’s resources, a thing that would be re. 


FIRST ASSEMBLY OF THE ESTATES 57 


garded by all as a most vexatious measure. By tax- 
ing all equally and easily you will spare the poor, for 
you will leave them the wealth of the rich. And 
how could you possibly proportion taxes to wealth? 
Yesterday I had two hundred oxen, to-day I have 
sixty, to-morrow [ shall have a hundred. Clunic 
has three cows, but they are thin; Nicclu has only 
two, but they are fat. Which is the richer, Clunic 
or Nicclu? The signs of opulence are deceitful. 
What is certain is that everyone eats and drinks. 
Tax people according to what they consume. That 
would be wisdom and it would be justice.” 

Thus spoke Morio amid the applause of the 
Elders. 

“T ask that this speech be graven on bronze,” 
cried the monk, Bulloch. “It is spoken for the fu- 
ture; in fifteen hundred years the best of the Pen- 
guins will not speak otherwise.” 

The Elders were still applauding when Great- 
auk, his hand on the pommel of his sword, made this 
brief declaration: 

“Being noble, I shall not contribute; for to con- 
tribute is ignoble. It is for the rabble to pay.” 

After this warning the Elders separated in 
silence. 

As in Rome, a new census was taken every five 
years; and by this means it was observed that the 
population increased rapidly. Although children 
died in marvellous abundance and plagues and 
famines came with perfect regularity to devastate: 
entire villages, new Penguins, in continually greater 
numbers, contributed by their private misery to the 
public prosperity. 


V 


THE MARRIAGE OF KRAKEN AND 
ORBEROSIA 


RING these times there lived in the 
island of Alca a Penguin whose arm 
was strong and whose mind was sub- 
tle. He was called Kraken, and 
had his dwelling on the Beach of 
Shadows whither the inhabitants 
never ventured for fear of serpents 
that lodged in the hollows of the rocks and lest they 
might encounter the souls of Penguins that had died 
without baptism. These, in appearance like livid 
flames, and uttering doleful groans, wandered night 
and day along the deserted beach. For it was gen- 
erally believed, though without proof, that among 
the Penguins that had been changed into men at the 
blessed Maél’s prayer, several had not received bap- 
tism and returned after their death to lament amid 
the tempests. Kraken dwelt on this savage coast in 
an inaccessible cavern. The only way to it was 
through a natural tunnel a hundred feet long, the 
entrance of which was concealed by a thick wood. 
One evening as Kraken was walking through this de- 
serted plain he happened to meet a young and 
charming woman Penguin. She was the one that 
the monk Magis had clothed with his own hands 
and thus was the first to have worn the garments 
of chastity. In remembrance of the day when the 
astonished crowd of Penguins had seen her moving 
8 


KRAKEN AND ORBEROSIA 59 


gloriously in her robe tinted like the dawn, this 
maiden had received the name of Orberosia.* 

At the sight of Kraken she uttered a cry of alarm 
and darted forward to escape from him. But the 
hero seized her by the garments that floated behind 
her, and addressed her in these words: 

“Damsel, tell me thy name, thy family and thy 
country.” 

But Orberosia kept looking at Kraken with alarm. 

“Is it you, I see, sir,” she asked him, trembling, 
“or is it not rather your troubled spirit?” 

She spoke in this way because the inhabitants of 
Alca, having no news of Kraken since he went to 
live on the Beach of Shadows, believed that he had 
died and descended among the demons of night. 

“Cease to fear, daughter of Alca,’’ answered 
Kraken. ‘He who speaks to thee is not a wan- 
dering spirit, but a man full of strength and might. 
I shall soon possess great riches.” 

And young Orberosia asked: 

“How dost thou think of acquiring great riches, 
O Kraken, since thou art a child of the Penguins ?” 

“By my intelligence,” answered Kraken. 

“T know,” said Orberosia, ‘‘that in the time that 
thou dwelt among us thou wert renowned for thy 
skill in hunting and fishing. No one equalled thee 
in taking fishes in a net or in piercing with thy ar- 
rows the swift-flying birds.” 

“Tt was but a vulgar and laborious industry, O 
maiden. I have found a means of gaining much 
wealth for myself without fatigue. But tell me who 


thou art?” 
“T am called Orberosia,”’ answered the young girl. 


*“Orb, poetically, a globe when speaking of the heavenly 
bodies. By extension any species of globular body.”—Littre. 


60 PENGUIN ISLAND 


“Why art thou so far away from thy dwelling 
and in the night?” 

“Kraken, it was not without the will of Heaven.” 

“‘What meanest thou, Orberosia ?” 

‘That Heaven, O Kraken, placed me in thy path, 
for what reason I know not.” 

Kraken beheld her for a long time in silence. 

Then he said with gentleness: 

“Orberosia, come into my house; it is that of the 
bravest and most ingenious of the sons of the Pen- 
guins. If thou art willing to follow me, I will make 
thee my companion.” 

Then casting down her eyes, she murmured: 

“T will follow thee, master.”’ 

It is thus that the fair Orberosia became the con- 
sort of the hero Kraken. This marriage was not 
celebrated with songs and torches because Kraken 
did not consent to show himself to the people of 
the Penguins; but hidden in his cave he planned 
great designs. 


VI 
THE DRAGON OF ALCA 


“We afterwards went to visit the 
cabinet of natural history. ... The care- 
taker showed us a sort of packet bound in 
straw that he told us contained the 
skeleton of a dragon; a proof, added he, 
that the dragon is not a fabulous ani- 
mal.”—Memoirs of Jacques Casanova, 
Paris, 1843. Vol. IV., pp. 404, 40s. 


yy] N the meantime the inhabitants of 
4 Alca practised the labours of peace. 
Those of the northern coast went in 
boats to fish or to search for shell- 
fish. The labourers of Dombes cul- 
tivated oats, rye, and wheat. The 
rich Penguins of the valley of Dalles 
reared domestic animals, while those of the Bay of 
Divers cultivated their orchards. Merchants of 
Port-Alca carried on a trade in salt fish with Armo- 
rica and the gold of the two Britains, which began to 
be introduced into the island, facilitated exchange. 
The Penguin people were enjoying the fruit of their 
labours in perfect tranquillity when suddenly a sinis- 
ter rumour ran from village to village. It was said 
everywhere that a frightful dragon had ravaged two 
farms in the Bay of Divers. 

A few days before, the maiden Orberosia had 
disappeared. Her absence had at first caused no 
uneasiness because on several occasions she had been 


carried off by violent men who were consumed with 
61 


62 PENGUIN ISLAND 


love. And thoughtful people were not. astonished 
at this, reflecting that the maiden was the most 
beautiful of the Penguins. It was even remarked 
that she sometimes went to meet her ravishers, for 
none of us can escape his destiny. But this time, 
as she did not return, it was feared that the dragon 
had devoured her. The more so as the inhabitants 
of the valley of Dalles soon knew that the dragon 
was not a fable told by the women around the foun- 
tains. For one night the monster devoured out of 
the village of Anis six hens, a sheep, and a young 
orphan child called little Elo. The next morning 
nothing was to be found either of the animals or of 
the child. 

Immediately the Elders of the village assembled 
in the public place and seated themselves on the 
stone bench to take counsel concerning what it was 
expedient to do in these terrible circumstances. 

Having called all those Penguins who had seen 
the dragon during the disastrous night, they asked 
them: 

“Have you not noticed his form and his be- 
haviour ?” 

And each answered in his turn: 

“He has the claws of a lion, the wings of an 
eagle, and the tail of a serpent.”’ 

“His back bristles with thorny crests.” 

“His whole body is covered with yellow scales.”’ 

“His look fascinates and confounds. He vomits 
flames.” 

‘He poisons the air with his breath.” 

“He has the head of a dragon, the claws of a 
lion, and the tail of a fish.” 

And a woman of Anis, who was regarded as intel- 
ligent and of sound judgment and from whom the 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 63 


dragon had taken three hens, deposed as follows: 

“He is formed like a man. The proof is that 
I thought he was my husband, and I said to him, 
‘Come to bed, you old fool.’ ” 

Others said: 

“He is formed like a cloud.” 

“He looks like a mountain.” 

And a little child came and said: 

“TI saw the dragon taking off his head in the barn 
so that he might give a kiss to my sister Minnie.” 

And the Elders also asked the inhabitants: 

“How big is the dragon?” 

And it was answered: 

As bic as an ox.’ 

“Like the big merchant ships of the Bretons.”’ 

“He is the height of a man.” 

“He is higher than the fig-tree under which you 
are sitting.” 

“He is as large-as a dog.” 

Questioned finally on his colour, the inhabitants 
said: 

“Red.” 

Bisteen: | 

Rolie 

Py ecllow. 

“His head is bright green, his wings are brilliant 
orange tinged with pink, his limbs are silver grey, 
his hind-quarters and his tail are striped with brown 
and pink bands, his belly bright yellow ‘spotted 
with black.” 

“His colour? He has no colour.” 

“Fle is the colour of a dragon.” 

After hearing this evidence the Elders remained 
uncertain as to what should be done. Some ad- 
vised to watch for him, to surprise him and over- 


64 PENGUIN ISLAND 


throw him by a multitude of arrows. Others, think- 
ing it vain to oppose so powerful a monster by force, 
counselled that he should be appeased by offerings. 

‘Pay him tribute,” said one of them who passed 
for a wise man. ‘We can render him propitious 
to us by giving him agreeable presents, fruits, wine, 
lambs, a young virgin.” 

Others held for poisoning the fountains where he 
was accustomed to drink or for smoking him out of 
his cavern. 

But none of these counsels prevailed. ‘The dis- 
pute was lengthy and the Elders dispersed without 
coming to any resolution. 


Vil 
THE DRAGON OF ALCA 


(Continuation) 


gos URING all the month dedicated by 
the Romans to their false god Mars 
or Mavors, the dragon ravaged the 
farms of Dalles and Dombes. He 
carried off fifty sheep, twelve pigs, 
and three young boys. Every fam- 
ily was in mourning and the island 
was full of lamentations. In order to remove the 
scourge, the Elders of the unfortunate villages wa- 
tered by the Clange and the Survelle resolved to as- 
semble and together go and ask the help of the 
blessed Maél. 

On the fifth day of the month whose name among 
the Latins signifies opening, because it opens the 
year, they went in procession to the wooden mon- 
astery that had been built on the southern coast of 
the island. When they were introduced into the 
cloister they filled it with their sobs and groans. 
Moved by their lamentations, old Maél left the 
room in which he devoted himself to the study of 
astronomy and the meditation of the Scriptures, and 
went down to them, leaning on his pastoral staff. 
At his approach, the Elders, prostrating themselves, 
held out to him green branches of trees and some of 
them burnt aromatic herbs. 

And the holy man, seating himself beside the 

65 


66 PENGUIN ISLAND 


cloistral fountain under an ancient fig-tree, uttered 
these words: 

“O my sons, offspring of the Penguins, why do 
you weep and groan? Why do you hold out those 
suppliant boughs towards me? Why do you raise 
towards heaven the smoke of those herbs? What 
calamity do you expect that I can avert from your 
heads? Why do you beseech me? I am ready to 
give my life for you. Only tell your father what 
it is you hope from him.” 

To these questions the chief of the Elders an- 
swered: 

“O Maél, father of the sons of Alca, I will speak 
for all. A horrible dragon is laying waste our lands, 
depopulating our cattle-sheds, and carrying off the 
flower of our youth. He has devoured the child 
Elo and seven young boys; he has mangled the 
maiden Orberosia, the fairest of the Penguins, with 
his teeth. There is not a village in which he does 
not emit his poisoned breath and which he has not 
filled with desolation. A prey to this terrible 
scourge, we come, O Maél, to pray thee, as the wis- 
est, to advise us concerning the safety of the inhabit- 
ants of this island lest the ancient race of Penguins 
be extinguished.” 

“O chief of the Elders of Alca,” replied Maél, 
“thy words fill me with profound grief, and I groan 
at the thought that this island is the prey of a ter- 
rible dragon. But such an ocurrence is not unique, 
for we find in books several tales of very fierce drag- 
ons. The monsters are oftenest found in caverns, 
by the brinks of waters, and, in preference, among 
pagan peoples. Perhaps there are some among you 
who, although they have received holy baptism and 
been incorporated into the family of Abraham, have 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 67 


yet worshipped idols, like the ancient Romans, or 
hung up images, votive tablets, fillets of wool, and 
garlands of flowers on the branches of some sacred 
tree. Or perhaps some of the women Penguins have 
danced round a magic stone and drunk water from 
the fountains where the nymphs dwell. If it be so, 
I believe, O Penguins, that the Lord has sent this 
dragon to punish all for the crimes of some, and to 
lead you, O children of the Penguins, to exterminate 
blasphemy, superstition, and impiety from amongst 
you. For this reason I advise, as a remedy against 
the great evil from which you suffer, that you care- 
fully search your dwellings for idolatry, and extir- 
pate it from them. I think it would be also effica- 
cious to pray and do penance.” 

Thus spoke the holy Maél. And the Elders of 
the Penguin people kissed his feet and returned to 
their villages with renewed hope. 


VIII 
THE DRAGON OF ALCA 


(Continuation) 


OLLOWING the counsel of the holy 
Maél the inhabitants of Alca en- 
deavoured to uproot the supersti- 
tions that had sprung up amongst 
them. They took care to prevent 
the girls from dancing with incan- 
tations round the fairy tree. Young 

mothers were sternly forbidden to rub their children 
against the stones that stood upright in the fields so 
as to make them strong. An old man of Dombes 
who foretold the future by shaking grains of barley 
on a sieve, was thrown into a well. 

However, each night the monster still raided the 
poultry-yards and the cattle-sheds. The frightened 
peasants barricaded themselves in their houses. A 
woman with child who saw the shadow of a dragon 
on the road through a window in the moonlight, was 
so terrified that she was brought to bed before her 
time. 

In those days of trial, the holy Maél meditated 
unceasingly on the nature of dragons and the means 
of combating them. After six months of study and 
prayer he thought he had found what he sought. 
One evening as he was walking by the sea with a 
young monk called Samuel, he expressed his thought 
to him in these terms: 


68 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 69 


“I have studied at length the history and habits 
of dragons, not to satisfy a vain curiosity, but to 
discover examples to follow in the present circum- 
stances. For such, Samuel, my son, is the use of 
history. 

“It is an invariable fact that dragons are ex- 
tremely vigilant. They never sleep, and for this 
reason we often find them employed in guarding 
treasures. A dragon guarded at Colchis the golden 
fleece that Jason conquered from him. A dragon 
watched over the golden apples in the garden of the 
Hesperides. He was killed by Hercules and trans- 
formed into a star by Juno. This fact is related in 
some books, and if it be true, it was done by magic, 
for the gods of the pagans are in reality demons. 
A dragon prevented barbarous and ignorant men 
from drinking at the fountain of Castalia. We 
must also remember the dragon of Andromeda, 
which was slain by Perseus. But let us turn from 
these pagan fables, in which error is always mixed 
with truth. We meet dragons in the histories of 
the glorious archangel Michael, of St. George, St. 
Philip, St. James the Great, St. Patrick, St. Martha, 
and St. Margaret. And it is in such writings, since 
they are worthy of full credence, that we ought 
to look for comfort and counsel. 

“The story of the dragon of Silena affords us par- 
ticularly precious examples. You must know, my 
son, that on the banks of a vast pool close to that 
town there dwelt a dragon who sometimes ap- 
proached the walls and poisoned with his breath all 
who dwelt in the suburbs. And that they might 
not be devoured by the monster, the inhabitants of 
Silena delivered up to him one of their number every 
morning. The victim was chosen by lot, and after 


70 PENGUIN ISLAND 


a hundred others, the lot fell upon the king’s 
daughter. 

“Now St. George, who was a military tribune, as 
he passed through the town of Silena, learned that 
the king’s daughter had just been given to the fierce 
beast. He immediately mounted his horse, and, 
armed with his lance, rushed to encounter the 
dragon, whom he reached just as the monster was 
about to devour the royal virgin. And when St. 
George had overthrown the dragon, the king’s 
daughter fastened her girdle round the beast’s neck 
and he followed her like a dog led on a leash. 

“That is an example for us of the power of vir- 
gins over dragons. The history of St. Martha 
furnishes us with a still more certain proof. Do 
you know the story, Samuel, my son?” 

“Yes, father,” answered Samuel. 

And the blessed Maél went on: 

‘There was in a forest on the banks of the Rhone, 
between Arles and Avignon, a dragon half quad- 
ruped and half fish, larger than an ox, with sharp 
teeth like horns and huge wings at his shoulders. 
He sank the boats and devoured their passengers. 
Now St. Martha, at the entreaty of the people, ap- 
proached this dragon, whom she found devouring 
aman. She put her girdle round his neck and led 
him easily into the town. 

‘These two examples lead me to think that we 
should have recourse to the power of some virgin 
so as to conquer the dragon who scatters terror and 
death through the island of Alca. 

‘For this reason, Samuel my son, gird up thy 
loins and go, I pray thee, with two of thy compan- 
ions, into all the villages of this island, and pro- 
claim everywhere that a virgin alone shall be able to 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 71 


deliver the island from the monster that devastates 
it. 

“Thou shalt sing psalms and canticles and thou 
shalt say: 

‘“““O sons of the Penguins, if there be among you 
a pure virgin, let her arise and go, armed with the 
sign of the cross, to combat the dragon!’ ” 

Thus the old man spake, and Samuel promised to 
obey him. The next day he girded up his loins and 
set out with two of his companions to proclaim to the 
inhabitants of Alca that a virgin alone would be able 
to deliver the Penguins from the rage of the dragon. 


IX 
THE DRAGON OF ‘ALCA 


(Continuation) 


RY >») RBEROSIA loved her husband, but 
s ms | she did not love him alone. At the 
AW: hour when Venus lightens in the pale 
sky, whilst Kraken scattered terror 
through the villages, she used to 
visit in his moving hut, a young shep- 
herd of Dalles called Marcel, whose 
pleasing form was invested with inexhaustible vig- 
our. The fair Orberosia shared the shepherd’s 
aromatic couch with delight, but far from making 
herself known to him, she took the name of Bridget, 
and said that she was the daughter of a gardener in 
the Bay of Divers. When regretfully she left his 
arms she walked across the smoking fields towards 
the Coast of Shadows, and if she happened to meet 
some belated peasant she immediately spread out 
her garments like great wings and cried: 

“Passer by, lower your eyes, that you may not 
have.to say, ‘Alas! alas! woe is me, for I have seen 
the angel of the Lord.’ ” 

The villagers tremblingly knelt with their faces 
to the ground. And several of them used to say 
that angels, whom it would be death to see, passed 
along the roads of the island in the night time. 

Kraken did not know of the loves of Orberosia 
and Marcel, for he was a hero, and heroes never 
discover the secrets of their wives. But though he 
72 


vs 
Gs 
a 
*, 


uss 
wi A 


Ny 
= 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 73 


did not know of these loves, he reaped the benefit of 
them. Every night he found his companion more 
good-humoured and more beautiful, exhaling pleas- 
ure and perfuming the nuptial bed with a delicious 
odour of fennel and vervain. She loved Kraken with 
a love that never became importunate or anxious, be- 
cause she did not rest its whole weight on him alone. 

This lucky infidelity of Orberosia was destined 
soon to save the hero from a great peril and to as- 
sure his fortune and his glory for ever. For it 
happened that she saw passing in the twilight a 
neatherd from Belmont, who was goading on his 
oxen, and she fell more deeply in love with him than 
she had ever been with the shepherd Marcel. He 
was hunch-backed; his shoulders were higher than 
his ears; his body was supported by legs of different 
lengths; his rolling eyes flashed from beneath his 
matted hair. From his throat issued a hoarse voice 
and strident laughter; he smelt of the cow-shed. 
However, to her he was beautiful. ‘A plant,” as 
Gnatho says, “has been loved by one, a stream by 
another, a beast by a third.” 

Now, one day, as she was sighing within the neat- 
herd’s arms in a village barn, suddenly the blasts of 
a trumpet, with sounds and footsteps, fell upon her 
ears; she looked through the window and saw the 
inhabitants collected in the marketplace round a 
young monk, who, standing upon a rock, uttered 
these words in a distinct voice: 

“Inhabitants of Belmont, Abbot Maél, our vener- 
able father, informs you through my mouth that 
neither by strength nor skill in arms shall you pre- 
vail against the dragon; but the beast shall be over- 
come by a virgin. If, then, there be among you a 
perfectly pure virgin, let her arise and go towards 


74 PENGUIN ISLAND 


the monster; and when she meets him let her tie her 
girdle round his neck and she shall lead him as 
easily as if he were a little dog.” 

And the young monk, replacing his hood upon his 
head, departed to carry the proclamation of the 
blessed Maél to other villages. 

Orberosia sat in the amorous straw, resting her 
head in her hand and supporting her elbow upon her 
knee, meditating on what she had just heard. 

Although, so far as Kraken was concerned, she 
feared the power of a virgin much less than the 
strength of armed men, she did not feel reassured 
by the proclamation of the blessed Maél. A vague 
but sure instinct ruled her mind and warned her that 
Kraken could not henceforth be a dragon with safety. 

She said to the neatherd: 

“My own heart, what do you think about the 
dragon?” 

The rustic shook his head. 

“Tt is certain that dragons laid waste the earth in 
ancient times and some have been seen as large as 
mountains. But they come no longer, and I believe 
that what has been taken for a dragon is not one at 
all, but pirates or merchants who have carried off the 
fair Orberosia and the best of the children of Alca 
in their ships. But if one of those brigands attempts 
to rob me of my oxen, I will either by force or craft 
find a way to prevent him from doing me any harm.” 

This remark of the neatherd increased Orbe- 
rosia’s apprehensions and added to her solicitude 
for the husband whom she loved. 


xX 
THE DRAGON OF ALCA 


(Continuation) 


HE days passed by and no maiden 
arose in the island to combat the 
monster. And in the wooden mon- 
astery old Maél, seated on a bench 
in the shade of an old fig-tree, ac- 
companied by a pious monk called 
Regimental, kept asking himself 
anxiously and sadly how it was that there was not 
in Alca a single virgin fit to overthrow the monster. 

He sighed and brother Regimental sighed too. 
At that moment old Maél called young Samuel, who 
happened to pass through the garden, and said to 
him: 

“T have meditated anew, my son, on the means of 
destroying the dragon who devours the flower of 
our youth, our flocks, and our harvests. In this re- 
spect the story of the dragons of St. Riok and of St. 
Pol de Leon seems to me particularly instructive. 
The dragon of St. Riok was six fathoms long; his 
head was derived from the cock and the basilisk, his 
body from the ox and the serpent; he ravaged the 
banks of the Elorn in the time of King Bristocus. 
St. Riok, then aged two years, led him by a leash to 
the sea, in which the monster drowned himself of 
his own accord. St. Pol’s dragon was sixty feet 
long and not less terrible. The blessed apostle of 
75 


76 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Leon bound him with his stole and allowed a young 
noble of great purity of life to lead him. These 
examples prove that in the eyes of God a chaste 
young man is as agreeable as a chaste girl. Heaven 
makes no distinction between them. For this rea- 
son, my son, if you believe what I say, we will both 
go to the Coast of Shadows; when we reach the 
dragon’ s cavern we will call the monster in a loud 
voice, and when he comes forth I will tie my stole 
round his neck and you will lead him to the sea, 
where he will not fail to drown himself.” 

At the old man’s words Samuel cast down his 
head and did not answer. 

“You seem to hesitate, my son,”’ said Maél. 

Brother Regimental, contrary to his custom, 
spoke without being addressed. 

‘“There is at least cause for some hesitation,” said 
he. “St. Riok was only two years old when he 
overcame the dragon. Who says that nine or ten 
years later he could have done as much? Remem- 
ber, father, that the dragon who is devastating our 
island has devoured little Elo and four or five other 
young boys. Brother Samuel is not so presump- 
tuous as to believe that at nineteen years of age he 
is more innocent that they were at twelve and four- 
teen. 

‘Alas!’ added the monk, with a groan, “‘who 
can boast of being chaste in this world, where every- 
thing gives the example and model of love, where all 
things in nature, animals, and plants, show us the 
caresses of love and advise us to share them? 
Animals are eager to unite in their own fashion, but 
the various marriages of quadrupeds, birds, fishes, 
and reptiles are far from equalling in lust the nup- 
dials of the trees. The greater extremes of lewd- 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA a7) 


ness that the pagans have imagined in their fables 
are outstripped by the simple flowers of the field, 
and, if you knew the irregularities of lilies and roses 
you would take those chalices of impurity, those 
vases of scandal, away from your altars.” 

“Do not speak in this way, Brother Regimental,”’ 
answered old Maél. Since they are subject to the 
law of nature, animals and plants are always inno- 
cent. ‘They have no souls to save, whilst man—”’ 

“You are right,” replied Brother Regimental, “it 
is quite a different thing. But do not send young 
Samuel to the dragon—the dragon might devour 
him. For the last five years Samuel is not ina state 
to show his innocence to monsters. In the year of 
the comet, the Devil in order to seduce him, put in 
his path a milkmaid, who was lifting up her petti- 
coat to cross a ford. Samuel was tempted, but he 
overcame the temptation. The Devil, who never 
tires, sent him the image of that young girl in a 
dream. ‘The shade did what the reality was unable 
to accomplish, and Samuel yielded. When he awoke 
he moistened his couch with his tears, but alas! re- 
pentance did not give him back his innocence.” 

As he listened to this story Samuel asked himself 
how his secret could be known, for he was ignorant 
that the Devil had borrowed the appearance of 
Brother Regimental, so as to trouble the hearts of 
the monks of Alca. 

And old Maél remained deep in thought and kept 
asking himself in grief: 

“Who will deliver us from the dragon’s tooth? 
Who will preserve us from his breath? Who will 
save us from his look ?”’ 

However, the inhabitants of Alca began to take 
courage. The labourers of Dombes and the neat- 


78 PENGUIN ISLAND 


herds of Belmont swore that they themselves would 
be of more avail than a girl against the ferocious 
beast, and they exclaimed as they stroked the mus- 
cles on their arms, ‘‘Let the dragon come!”” Many 
men and women had seen him. They did not agree 
about his form and his figure, but all now united in 
saying that he was not as big as they had thought, 
and that his height was not much greater than a 
man’s. ‘The defence was organised; towards night- 
fall watches were stationed at the entrances of the 
villages ready to give the alarm; and during the 
night companies armed with pitchforks and scythes 
protected the paddocks in which the animals were 
shut up. Indeed, once in the village of Anis some 
plucky labourers surprised him as he was scaling 
Morio’s wall, and, as they had flails, scythes, and 
pitchforks, they fell upon him and pressed him hard. 
One of them, a very quick and courageous man, 
thought to have run him through with his pitch- 
fork; but he slipped in a pool and so let him escape. 
The others would certainly have caught him had 
they not waited to pick up the rabbits and fowls that 
he dropped in his flight. 

Those labourers declared to the Elders of the 
village that the monster’s form and proportions ap- 
peared to them human enough except for his head 
and his tail, which were, in truth, terrifying. 


XI 
THE DRAGON OF ALCA 


(Continuation) 


~ 


( (ean 


9) N that day Kraken came back to his 
cavern sooner than usual. He took 
from his head his sealskin helmet 
with its two bull’s horns and its visor 
trimmed with terrible hooks. He 
threw on the table his gloves that 
ended in horrible claws—they were 
the beaks of sea-birds. He unhooked his belt from 
which hung a long green tail twisted into many 
folds. ‘Then he ordered his page, Elo, to help him 
off with his boots and, as the child did not succeed 
in doing this very quickly, he gave him a kick that 
sent him to the other end of the grotto. 

Without looking at the fair Orberosia, who was 
spinning, he seated himself in front of the fireplace, 
on which a sheep was roasting, and he muttered: 

“Tonoble Penguins. . . . There is no worse trade 
than a dragon’s. ” 

‘What does my master say?”’ asked the fair Or- 
berosia. 

“They fear me no longer,’ continued Kraken. 
“Formerly everyone fled at my approach. I car- 
ried away hens and rabbits in my bag; I drove sheep 
and pigs, cows, and oxen before me. ‘To-day these 
clod-hoppers keep a good guard; they sit up at 
night. Just now I was pursued in the village of 
79 


— ae, y 


<j 


wy 
Ya 
‘ 

A 


80 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Anis by doughty labourers armed with flails and 
scythes and pitchforks. I had to drop the hens and 
rabbits, put my tail under my arm, and run as fast 
as I could. Now I ask you, is it seemly for a 
dragon of Cappadocia to run away like a robber 
with his tail under his arm? Further, incommoded 
as I was by crests, horns, hooks, claws, and scales, I 
barely escaped a brute who ran half an inch of his 
pitchfork into my left thigh.” 

As he said this he carefully ran his hand over the 
insulted part, and, after giving himself up for a few 
moments to bitter meditation: 

“What idiots those Penguins are! I am tired of 
blowing flames in the faces of such imbeciles. Or- 
berosia, do you hear me?” 

Having thus spoken the hero raised his terrible 
helmet in his hands and gazed at it for a long time 
in gloomy silence. Then he pronounced these rapid 
words: 

‘“T have made this helmet with my own hands in 
the shape of a fish’s head, covering it with the skin 
of a seal. To make it more terrible I have put on 
it the horns of a bull and I have given it a boar’s 
jaws; I have hung from it a horse’s tail dyed ver- 
milion. When in the gloomy twilight I threw it 
over my shoulders no inhabitant of this island had 
courage to withstand its sight. Women and chil- 
dren, young men and old men fled distracted at its 
approach, and I carried terror among the whole race 
of Penguins. By what advice does that insolent peo- 
ple lose its earlier fears and dare to-day to be- 
hold these horrible jaws and to attack this terrible 
crest?” 

And throwing his helmet on the rocky soil: 

“Perish. deceitful helmet!” cried Kraken. “I 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 81 


swear by all the demons of Armor that I will never 
bear you upon my head again.” 

And having uttered this oath he stamped upon his 
helmet, his gloves, his boots, and upon his tail with 
its twisted folds. 

“Kraken,” said the fair Orberosia, “will you 
allow your servant to employ artifice to save your 
reputation and your goods? Do not despise a 
woman’s help. You need it, for all men are im- 
beciles.”’ 

“Woman,” asked Kraken, “‘what are your plans?” 

And the fair Orberosia informed her husband that 
the monks were going through the villages teach- 
ing the inhabitants the best way of combating the 
dragon; that, according to their instructions, the 
beast would be overcome by a virgin, and that if a 
maid placed her girdle around the dragon’s neck she 
could lead him as easily as if he were a little dog. 

, ‘How do you know that the monks teach this?” 
asked Kraken. 

“My friend,” answered Orberosia, ‘‘do not inter- 
rupt a serious subject by frivolous questions. .. . 
‘If, then,’ added the monks, ‘there be in Alca a pure 
virgin, let her arise!’ Now, Kraken, I have deter- 
mined to answer their call. I will go and find the 
holy Maél and I will say to him: ‘I am the virgin 
destined by Heaven to overthrow the dragon.’ ”’ 

At these words Kraken exclaimed: “How can 
you be that pure virgin? And why do you want to 
overthrow me, Orberosia? Have you lost your rea- 
son? Be sure that I will not allow myself to be 
conquered by you!” 

“Can you not try and understand me before you 
get angry?” sighed the fair Orberosia with deep 
though gentle contempt. 


82 PENGUIN ISLAND 


And she explained the cunning designs that she 
had formed. 

As he listened, the hero remained pensive. And 
when she ceased speaking: 

“Orberosia, your cunning is deep,” said he. 
‘And if your plans are carried out according to your 
intentions I shall derive great advantages from them. 
But how can you be the virgin destined by heaven?” 

“Don’t bother about that,” she replied, ‘‘and 
come to bed.” 

The next day in the grease-laden atmosphere of 
the cavern, Kraken plaited a deformed skeleton out 
of osier rods and covered it with bristling, scaly, 
and filthy skins. To one extremity of the skeleton 
Orberosia sewed the fierce crest and the hideous 
mask that Kraken used to wear in his plundering 
expeditions, and to its other end she fastened the 
tail with twisted folds which the hero was wont to 
trail behind him. And when the work was finished 
they showed little Elo and the other five children 
who waited on them how to get inside this machine, 
how to make it walk, how to blow horns and burn 
tow in it so as to send forth smoke and flames 
through the dragon’s mouth. 


XII 
THE DRAGON OF ALCA 


(Continuation) 


RBEROSIA, having clothed herself 
in a robe made of coarse stuff and 
girt herself with a thick cord, went 
to the monastery and asked to speak 
to the blessed Maél. And because 
women were forbidden to enter the 
enclosure of the monastery the old 
man advanced outside the gates, holding his pas- 
toral cross in his right hand and resting his left on 
the shoulder of Brother Samuel, the youngest of his 
disciples. 

Pievasked: 

“Woman, who art thou?” 

“T am the maiden Orberosia.” 

At this reply Maél raised his trembling arms to 
heaven. 

“Do you speak truth, woman? It is a certain 
fact that Orberosia was devoured by the dragon. 
And yet I see Orberosia and hear her. Did you 
not, O my daughter, while within the dragon’s 
bowels arm yourself with the sign of the cross and 
come uninjured out of his throat? ‘That is what 
seems to me the most credible explanation.” 

“You are not deceived, father,’’ answered Orber- 
osia. ‘That is precisely what happened to me. 
Immediately I came out of the creature’s bowels I 
took refuge in a hermitage on the Coast of Shadows. 
83 


7 


Ped b 
wer 


9) 

A 5 
Ly 

VO 

» 

ss 


84 PENGUIN ISLAND 


I lived there in solitude, giving myself up to prayer 
and meditation, and performing unheard of auster- 
ities, until I learnt by a revelation from heaven that 
a maid alone could overcome the dragon, and that I 
was that maid.” 

“Show me a sign of your mission,” said the old 
man. 

“T myself am the sign,’ answered Orberosia. 

“T am not ignorant of the power of those who 
have placed a seal upon their flesh,” replied the 
apostle of the Penguins. ‘But are you indeed such 
as you say?” 

“You will see by the result,’ answered Orberosia. 

The monk Regimental drew near: 

“That will,” said he, “be the best proof. King 
Solomon has said: ‘Three things are hard to under- 
stand and a fourth is impossible: they are the way 
of a serpent on the earth, the way of a bird in the 
air, the way of a ship in the sea, and the way of a 
man with a maid.’ I regard such matrons as noth- 
ing less than presumptuous who claim to compare 
themselves in these matters with the wisest of kings. 
Father, if you are led by me you will not consult 
them in regard to the pious Orberosia. When they 
have given their opinion you will not be a bit farther 
on than before. Virginity is not less difficult to 
prove than to keep. Pliny tells us in his history that 
its signs are either imaginary or very uncertain.* 
One who bears upon her the fourteen signs of cor- 
ruption may yet be pure in the eyes of the angels, 
and, on the contrary, another who has been pro- 
nounced pure by the matrons who inspected her 
may know that her good appearance is due to the 


*We have vainly sought for this phrase in Pliny’s “Natural 
History.”—E ditor. 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 85 


artifices of a cunning perversity. As for the purity 
of this holy girl here, I would put my hand in the 
fire in witness of it.” 

He spoke thus because he was the Devil. But old 
Maél did not know it. He asked the pious Orber- 
osia: 

‘“My daughter, how would you proceed to con- 
quer so fierce an animal as he who devoured you?” 

The virgin answered: 

‘To-morrow at sunrise, O Maél, you will sum- 
mon the people together on the hill in front of the 
desolate moor that extends to the Coast of Shad- 
ows, and you will take care that no man of the Pen- 
guins remains less than five hundred paces from 
those rocks so that he may not be poisoned by the 
monster’s breath. And the dragon will come out 
of the rocks and I will put my girdle round his neck 
and lead him like an obedient dog.” 

“Ought you not to be accompanied by a coura- 
geous and pious man who will kill the dragon?” 
asked Maél. 

“Tt will be as thou sayest, venerable father. I 
shall deliver the monster to Kraken, who will slay 
him with his flashing sword. For I tell thee that 
the noble Kraken, who was believed to be dead, will 
return among the Penguins and he shall slay the 
dragon. And from the creature’s belly will come 
forth the little children whom he has devoured.” 

“What you declare to me, O virgin,” cried the 
apostle, ‘‘seems wonderful and beyond human 


“Tt is,’ answered the virgin Orberosia. “But 
learn, O Maél, that I have had a revelation that as 
a reward for their deliverance, the Penguin people 
will pay to the knight Kraken an annual tribute of 


86 PENGUIN ISLAND 


three hundred fowls, twelve sheep, two oxen, three 
pigs, one thousand eight hundred bushels of corn, 
and vegetables according to their season; and that, 
moreover, the children who will come out of the 
dragon’s belly will be given and committed to the 
said Kraken to serve him and obey him in all things. 
If the Penguin people fail to keep their engagements 
a new dragon will come upon the island more terri- 
ble than the first. I have spoken.” 


wt 
ie, 3 


: “BRS LONGA « VITR BREVIS: 


XIII 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 
(Continuation and End) 


HE people of the Penguins were as- 
sembled by Maél and they spent the 
night on the Coast of Shadows 
within the bounds which the holy 

oman had prescribed in order that 

Sf] none among the Penguins should be 

poisoned by the monster’s breath. 

The veil of night still covered the earth when, 
preceded by a hoarse bellowing, the dragon showed 
his indistinct and monstrous form upon the rocky 
coast. He crawled like a serpent and his writhing 
body seemed about fifteen feet long. At his ap- 
pearance the crowd drew back in terror. But soon 
all eyes were turned towards the Virgin Orberosia, 
who, in the first light of the dawn, clothed in white, 
advanced over the purple heather. With an intre- 
pid though modest gait she walked towards the 
beast, who, uttering awful bellowings, opened his 
flaming throat. An immense cry of terror and pity 
arose from the midst of the Penguins. But the 
virgin, unloosing her linen girdle, put it round the 
dragon’s neck and led him on the leash like a faith- 
ful dog amid the acclamations of the spectators. 

She had walked over a long stretch of the heath 
when Kraken appeared armed with a flashing sword. 

The people, whe believed him dead, uttered cries of 

joy and surprise. The hero rushed towards the 

87 


88 PENGUIN ISLAND 


beast, turned him over on his back, and with his 
sword cut open his belly, from whence came forth 
in their shirts, with curling hair and folded hands, 
little Elo and the five other children whom the mon- 
ster had devoured. 

Immediately they threw themselves on their knees 
before the virgin Orberosia, who took them in her 
arms and whispered into their ears: 

“You will go through the villages saying: ‘We 
are the poor little children who were devoured by 
the dragon, and we came out of his belly in our 
shirts.’ The inhabitants will give you abundance of 
all that you can desire. But if you say anything 
else you will get nothing but cuffs and whippings. 
Go!” 

Several Penguins, seeing the dragon disem- 
bowelled, rushed forward to cut him to pieces, some 
from a feeling of rage and vengeance, others to get 
the magic stone called dragonite, that is engendered 
in his head. The mothers of the children who had 
come back to life ran to embrace their little ones. 
But the holy Maél kept them back, saying that none 
of them were holy enough to approach a dragon 
without dying. 

And soon little Elo and the five other children 
came towards the people and said: 

“We are the poor little children who were de- 
voured by the dragon and we came out of his belly 
in our shirts.”’ 

And all who heard them kissed them and said: 

“Blessed children, we will give you abundance of 
all that you can desire.” 

And the crowd of people dispersed, full of joy, 
singing hymns and canticles. 

To commemorate this day on which Providence 


THE DRAGON OF ALCA 89 


delivered the people from a cruel scourge, proces- 
sions were established in which the effigy of a 
chained dragon was led about. 

Kraken levied the tribute and became the richest 
and most powerful of the Penguins. As a sign of 
his victory and so as to inspire a salutary terror, he 
wore a dragon’s crest upon his head and he had a 
habit of saying to the people: 

‘‘Now that the monster is dead I am the dragon.” 

For many years Orberosia bestowed her favours 
upon neatherds and shepherds, whom she thought 
equal to the gods. But when she was no longer 
beautiful she consecrated herself to the Lord. 

At her death she became the object of public ven- 
eration, and was admitted into the calendar of the 
saints and adopted as the patron saint of Penguinia. 

Kraken left a son, who, like his father, wore a 
dragon’s crest, and he was for this reason surnamed 
Draco. He was the founder of the first royal dy- 
nasty of the Penguins. 


| BOOK 
(THe! 


Na 
Be SS 


TOON 
OOS Bee, 
OX'K 


les 
Sj 


\ | 


SSAA, 


i 


I 


BRIAN THE GOOD AND QUEEN 
GLAMORGAN 


HE kings of Alca were descended 
from Draco, the son of Kraken, and 
they wore on their heads a terrible 
dragon’s crest, as a sacred badge 
whose appearance alone inspired the 
Y} people with veneration, terror, and 
love. They were perpetually in con- 

flict either with their own vassals and subjects or 

with the princes of the adjoining islands and con- 
tinents. 

The most ancient of these kings has left but a 
name. We do not even know how to pronounce or 
write it. The first of the Draconides whose history 
is known was Brian the Good, renowned for his skill 
and courage in war and in the chase. 

He was a Christian and loved learning. He also 
favoured men who had vowed themselves to the 
monastic life. In the hall of his palace where, un- 
der the sooty rafters, there hung the heads, pelts, 
and horns of wild beasts, he held feasts to which all 
the harpers of Alca and of the neighbouring islands 
were invited, and he himself used to join in singing 
the praises of the heroes. He was just and mag- 
nanimous, but inflamed by so ardent a love of glory 
that he could not restrain himself from putting to 
death those who had sung better than himself. 

The monks of Yvern having been driven out by 
93 


94 PENGUIN ISLAND 


the pagans who ravaged Brittany, King Brian sum- 
moned them into his kingdom and built a wooden 
monastery for them near his palace. Every day he 
went with Queen Glamorgan, his wife, into the mon- 
astery chapel and was present at the religious cere- 
monies and joined in the hymns. 

Now among these monks there was a brother 
called Oddoul, who, while still in the flower of his 
youth, had adorned himself with knowledge and 
virtue. The devil entertained a great grudge against 
him, and attempted several times to lead him into 
temptation. He took several shapes and appeared 
to him in turn as a war-horse, a young maiden, and 
a cup of mead. Then he rattled two dice in a dice- 
box and said to him: 

“Will you play with me for the kingdoms of the 
world against one of the hairs of your head?” 

But the man of the Lord, armed with the sign of 
the Cross, repulsed the enemy. Perceiving that he 
could not seduce him, the devil thought of an artful 
plan to ruin him. One summer night he approached 
the queen, who slept upon her couch, showed her an 
image of the young monk whom she saw every day 
in the wooden monastery, and upon this image he 
placed a spell. Forthwith, like a subtle poison, love 
flowed into Glamorgan’s veins, and she burned with 
an ardent desire to do as she listed with Oddoul. 
She formed unceasing pretexts to have him near her. 
Several times she asked him to teach reading and 
singing to her children. 

“I entrust them to you,” said she to him. ‘And 
I will follow the lessons you will give them so that I 
myself may learn also. You will teach both mother 
and sons at the same time.”’ 

But the young monk kept making excuses. At 


BRIAN THE GOOD 95 


times he would say that he was not a learned enough 
teacher, and on other occasions that his state for- 
bade him all intercourse with women. This refusal 
inflamed Glamorgan’s passion. One day as she lay 
pining upon her couch, her malady having become 
intolerable, she summoned Oddoul to her chamber. 
He came in obedience to her orders, but remained 
with his eyes cast down towards the threshold of the 
door. With impatience and grief she resented his 
not looking at her. 

“See,” said she to him, “I have no more strength, 
a shadow is on my eyes. My body is both burning 
and freezing.” 

And as he kept silence and made no movement, 
she called him in a voice of entreaty: 

“Come to me, come!”’ 

With outstretched arms to which passion gave 
more length, she endeavoured to seize him and draw 
him towards her. 

But he fled away, reproaching her for her wanton- 
ness. 

Then, incensed with rage and fearing that Od- 
doul might divulge the shame into which she had 
fallen, she determined to ruin him so that he might 
not ruin her. 

In a voice of lamentation that resounded through- 
out all the palace she called for help, as if, in truth, 
she were in some great danger. Her servants rushed 
up and saw the young monk fleeing and the queen 
pulling back the sheets upon her couch. They all 
cried out together. And when King Brian, at- 
tracted by the noise, entered the chamber, Glamor- 
gan, showing him her dishevelled hair, her eyes 
flooded with tears, and her bosom that in the fury 
of her love she had torn with her nails, said: 


96 PENGUIN ISLAND 
“My lord and husband, behold the traces of the 


insults I have undergone. Driven by an infamous 
desire Oddoul has approached me and attempted to 
do me violence.” 

When he heard these complaints and saw the 
blood, the king, transported with fury, ordered his 
guards to seize the young monk and burn him alive 
before the palace under the queen’s eyes. 

Being told of the affair, the Abbot of Yvern went 
to the king and said to him: 

“King Brian, know by this example the difference 
between a Christian woman and a pagan. Roman 
Lucretia was the most virtuous of idolatrous prin- 
cesses, yet she had not the strength to defend herself 
against the attacks of an effeminate youth, and, 
ashamed of her weakness, she gave way to despair, 
whilst Glamorgan has successfully withstood the 
assaults of a criminal filled with rage, and possessed 
by the most terrible of demons.” Meanwhile Od- 
doul, in the prison of the palace, was waiting for the 
moment when he should be burned alive. But God 
did not suffer an innocent to perish. He sent to 
him an angel, who, taking the form of one of 
the queen’s servants called Gudrune, took him 
out of his prison and led him into the very room 
where the woman whose appearance he had taken 
dwelt. 

And the angel said to young Oddoul: 

“T love thee because thou art daring.” 

And young Oddoul, believing that it was Gudrune 
herself, answered with downcast looks: 

“Tt is by the grace of the Lord that I have resisted 
the violence of the queen and braved the anger of 
that powerful woman.” 

And the angel asked: 


BRIAN THE GOOD 97 


“What? Hast thou not done what the queen 
accuses thee of ?” 

“In truth no, I have not done it,” answered 
Oddoul, his hand on his heart. 

“Thou hast not done it?” 

“No, I have not done it. The very thought of 
such an action fills me with horror.” 

“Then,” cried the angel, “what art thou doing 
here, thou impotent creature?” * 

And she opened the door to facilitate the young 
man’s escape. Oddoul felt himself pushed violently 
out. Scarcely had he gone down into the street than 
a chamber-pot was poured over his head; and he 
thought: 

“Mysterious are thy designs, O Lord, and thy 
ways past finding out.” 


* The Penguin chronicler who relates the fact employs the ex- 
pression, Species inductilis, I have endeavoured to translate it 
literally. 


II 


DRACO THE GREAT 
(Translation of the Relics of St. Orberosia) 


\HE direct posterity of Brian the Good 
was extinguished about the year 900 
in the person of Collic of the Short 
Nose. A cousin of that prince, Bosco 
the Magnanimous, succeeded him, 
and took care, in order to assure him- 
self of the throne, to put to death all 
his relations. ‘There issued from him a ong line of 
powerful kings. 

One of them, Draco the Great, attained great re- 
nown as aman of war. He was defeated more fre- 
quently than the others. It is by this constancy in 
defeat that great captains are recognized. In twenty 
years he burned down more than a hundred thou- 
sand hamlets, market towns, unwailed towns, vil- 
lages, walled towns, cities, and universities. He set 
fire impartially to his enemies’ territory and to his 
own domains. And he used to explain his conduct 
by saying: 

‘War without fire is like tripe without mustard: 
it is an insipid thing.” 

His justice was rigorous. When the peasants 
whom he made prisoners were unable to raise the 
money for their ransoms he had them hanged from 
a tree, and if any unhappy woman came to plead 
for her destitute husband he dragged her by the hair 

08 


DRACO THE GREAT 99 


at his horse’s tail. He lived like a soldier without 
effeminacy. It is satisfactory to relate that his man- 
ner of life was pure. Not only did he not allow his 
kingdom to decline from its hereditary glory, but, 
even in his reverses he valiantly supported the hon- 
our of the Penguin people. 

Draco the Great caused the relics of St. Orberosia 
to be transferred to Alca. 

The body of the blessed saint had been buried in 
a grotto on the Coast of Shadows at the end of a 
scented heath. ‘The first pilgrims who went to visit 
it were the boys and girls from the neighbouring 
villages. They used to go there in the evening, by 
preference in couples, as if their pious desires natu- 
rally sought satisfaction in darkness and solitude. 
They worshipped the saint with a fervent and dis- 
creet worship whose mystery they seemed jealously 
to guard, for they did not like to publish too openly 
the experiences they felt. But they were heard to 
murmur one to another words of love, delight, and 
rapture with which they mingled the name of Orber- 
osia. Some would sigh that there they forgot the 
world; others would say that they came out of the 
grotto in peace and calm; the young girls among 
them used to recall to each other the joys with which 
they had been filled in it. 

Such were the marvels that the virgin of Alca per- 
formed in the morning of her glorious eternity; they 
had the sweetness and indefiniteness of the dawn. 
Soon the mystery of the grotto spread like a perfume 
throughout the land; it was a ground of joy and edi- 
fication for pious souls, and corrupt men endeav- 
oured, though in vain, by falsehood and calumny, to 
divert the faithful from the springs of grace that 
flowed from the saint’s tomb. The Church took 


Univ. of Arizona Library 


100 PENGUIN ISLAND 


measures so that these graces should not remain 
reserved for a few children, but should be diffused 
throughout all Penguin Christianity. Monks took 
up their quarters in the grotto, they built a mon- 
astery, a chapel, and a hostelry on the coast, and pil- 
grims began to flock thither. 

As if strengthened by a longer sojourn in heaven, 
the blessed Orberosia now performed still greater 
miracles for those who came to lay their offerings on 
her tomb. She gave hopes to women who had been 
hitherto barren, she sent dreams to reassure jealous 
old men concerning the fidelity of the young wives 
whom they had suspected without cause, and she 
protected the country from plagues, murrains, fam- 
ines, tempests, and dragons of Cappadocia. 

But during the troubles that desolated the king- 
dom in the time of King Collic and his successors, 
the tomb of St. Orberosia was plundered of its 
wealth, the monastery burned down, and the monks 
dispersed. ‘The road that had been so long trodden 
by devout pilgrims was overgrown with furze and 
heather, and the blue thistles of the sands. For a 
hundred years the miraculous tomb had been visited 
by none save vipers, weasels, and bats, when, one 
day the saint appeared to a peasant of the neighbour- 
hood, Momordic by name. 

‘IT am the virgin Orberosia,” said she to him; 
‘‘T have chosen thee to restore my sanctuary. Warn 
the inhabitants of the country that if they allow my 
memory to be blotted out, and leave my tomb with- 
out honour and wealth, a new dragon will come 
and devastate Penguinia.” 

Learned churchmen held an inquiry concerning 
this apparition, and pronounced it genuine, and not 
diabolical but truly heavenly, and in later years it 


DRACO THE GREAT IOI 


was remarked that in France, in like circumstances, 
St. Foy and St. Catherine had acted in the same way 
and made use of similar language. 

The monastery was restored and pilgrims flocked 
to it anew. The virgin Orberosia worked greater 
and greater miracles. She cured divers hurtful 
maladies, particularly club-foot, dropsy, paralysis, 
and St. Guy’s disease. The monks who kept the 
tomb were enjoying an enviable opulence, when the 
saint, appearing to King Draco the Great, ordered 
him to recognise her as the heavenly patron of the 
kingdom and to transfer her precious remains to the 
cathedral of Alca. 

In consequence, the odoriferous relics of that vir- 
gin were carried with great pomp to the metropol- 
itan church and placed in the middle of the choir in 
a shrine made of gold and enamel and ornamented 
with precious stones. 

The chapter kept a record of the miracles wrought 
by the blessed Orberosia. 

Draco the Great, who had never ceased to defend 
and exalt the Christian faith, died fulfilled with the 
most pious sentiments and bequeathed his great 
possessions to the Church. 


III 
QUEEN CRUCHA 


ERRIBLE disorders followed the 
death of Draco the Great. That 
prince’s successors have often been 
accused of weakness, and it is true 

H that none of them followed, even 

from afar, the example of their val- 
lant ancestor. 

His son, Chum, who was lame, failed to increase 
the territory of the Penguins. Bolo, the son of 
Chum, was assassinated by the palace guards at the 
age of nine, just as he was ascending the throne. 
His brother Gun succeeded him. He was only seven 
years old and allowed himself to be governed by his 
mother, Queen Crucha. 

Crucha was beautiful, learned, and intelligent; 
but she was unable to curb her own passions. 

These are the terms in which the venerable Talpa 
expresses himself in his chronicle regarding that 
illustrious queen: 

“In beauty of face and symmetry of figure Queen 
Crucha yields neither to Semiramis of Babylon nor to 
Penthesilea, queen of the Amazons; nor to Salome, 
the daughter of Herodias. But she offers in her 
person certain singularities that will appear beautiful 
or uncomely according to the contradictory opinions 
of men and the varying judgments of the world. 
She has on her forehead two small horns which she 


conceals in the abundant folds of her golden hair; 
102 


QUEEN CRUCHA 103 


one of her eyes is blue and one is black; her neck is 
bent towards the left side; and, like Alexander of 
Macedon, she has six fingers on her right hand, and 
a stain like a little monkey’s head upon her skin. 

“Her gait is majestic and her manner affable. 
She is magnificent in her expenses, but she is not al- 
ways able to rule desire by reason. 

“One day, having noticed in the palace stables, a 
young groom of great beauty, she immediately fell 
violently in love with him, and entrusted to him the 
command of her armies. What one must praise 
unreservedly in this great queen is the abundance of 
gifts that she makes to the churches, monasteries, 
and chapels in her kingdom, and especially to the 
holy house of Beargarden, where, by the grace of the 
Lord, I made my profession in my fourteenth year. 
She has founded masses for the repose of her soul in 
such great numbers that every priest in the Penguin 
Church is, so to speak, transformed into a taper 
lighted in the sight of heaven to draw down the di- 
vine mercy upon the august Crucha.” 

From these lines and from some others with which 
I have enriched my text the reader can judge of the 
historical and literary value of the “‘Gesta Penguino- 
rum.” Unhappily, that chronicle suddenly comes 
to an end at the third year of Draco the Simple, the 
successor of Gun the Weak. Having reached that 
point of my history, I deplore the loss of an agree- 
able and trustworthy guide. 

During the two centuries that followed, the Pen- 
guins remained plunged in blood-stained disorder. 
All the arts perished. In the midst of the general 
ignorance, the monks in the shadow of their cloister 
devoted themselves to study, and copied the Holy 
Scriptures with indefatigable zeal. As parchment 


104 PENGUIN ISLAND 


was scarce, they scraped the writing off old manu- 
scripts in order to transcribe upon them the divine 
word. Thus throughout the breadth of Penguinia 
Bibles blossomed forth like roses on a bush. 

A monk of the order of St. Benedict, Ermold the 
Penguin, had himself alone defaced four thousand 
Greek and Latin manuscripts so as to copy out the 
Gospel of St. John four thousand times. Thus the 
masterpieces of ancient poetry and eloquence were 
destroyed in great numbers. Historians are unani- 
mous in recognising that the Penguin convents were 
the refuge of learning during the Middle Ages. 

Unending wars between the Penguins and the 
Porpoises filled the close of this period. It is ex- 
tremely difficult to know the truth concerning these 
wars, not because accounts are wanting, but because 
there are so many of them. The Porpoise Chron- 
icles contradict the Penguin Chronicles at every 
point. And, moreover, the Penguins contradict each 
other as well as the Porpoises. I have discovered 
two chroniclers that are in agreement, but one has 
copied from the other. A single fact is certain, 
namely, that massacres, rapes, conflagrations, and 
plunder succeeded one another without interruption. 

Under the unhappy prince Bosco IX. the kingdom 
was at the verge of ruin. On the news that the Por- 
poise fleet, composed of six hundred great ships, 
was in sight of Alca, the bishop ordered a solemn 
procession. The cathedral chapter, the elected 
magistrates, the members of Parliament, and the 
clerics of the University entered the Cathedral and, 
taking up St. Orberosia’s shrine, led it in procession 
through the town, followed by the entire people sing- 
ing hymns. ‘The holy patron of Penguinia was 
not invoked in vain. Nevertheless, the Porpoises 


QUEEN CRUCHA 105 


beseiged the town both by land and sea, took it by 
assault, and for three days and three nights killed, 
plundered, violated, and burned, with all the indif- 
ference that habit produces. 

Our astonishment cannot be too great at the fact 
that, during those iron ages, the faith was preserved 
intact among the Penguins. The splendour of the 
truth in those times illumined all souls that had not 
been corrupted by sophisms. This is the explana- 
tion of the unity of belief. A constant practice of 
the Church doubtless contributed also to maintain 
this happy communion of the faithful—every Pen- 
guin who thought differently from the others was 
immediately burned at the stake. 


$ > a: > 
Seg Beet) SS aly TD 


IV 
LETTERS: JOHANNES TALPA 


7-A URING the minority of King Gun, 
Johannes Talpa, in the monastery of 
Beargarden, where at the age of 
fourteen he had made his profession 
and from which he never departed 
for a single day throughout his life, 
composed his celebrated Latin chron- 
icle in twelve books called ““De‘Gestis Penguinorum.” 

The monastery of Beargarden lifts its high walls 
on the summit of an inaccessible peak. One sees 
around it only the blue tops of mountains, divided 
by the clouds. 

When he began to write his ‘““Gesta Penguinorum,”’ 
Johannes Talpa was already old. The good monk 
has taken care to tell us this in his book: ‘““My head 
has long since lost,” he says, “its adornment of fair 
hair, and my scalp resembles those convex mirrors 
of metal which the Penguin ladies consult with so 
much care and zeal. My stature, naturally small, 
has with years become diminished and bent. My 
white beard gives warmth to my breast.” 

With a charming simplicity, Talpa informs us of 
certain circumstances in his life and some features 
in his character. ‘“‘Descended,”’ he tells us, ‘from 
a noble family, and destined from childhood for the 
ecclesiastical state, I was taught grammer and music. 
I learned to read under the guidance of a master who 
was called Amicus, and who would have been better 

106 


LETTERS: JOHANNES TALPA 107 


named Inimicus. As I did not easily attain to a 
knowledge of my letters, he beat me violently with 
rods so that I can say that he printed the alphabet 
in strokes upon my back.” 

In another passage Talpa confesses his natural 
inclination towards pleasure. These are his ex- 
pressive words: “In my youth the ardour of my 
senses was such that in the shadow of the woods I 
experienced a sensation of boiling in a pot rather 
than of breathing the fresh air. I fled from women, 
but in vain, for every object recalled them to me.”’ 

While he was writing his chronicle, a terrible war, 
at once foreign and domestic, laid waste the Pen- 
guin land. ‘The soldiers of Crucha came to defend 
the monastery of Beargarden against the Penguin 
barbarians and established themselves strongly with- 
in its walls. In order to render it impregnable they 
pierced loop-holes through the walls and they took 
the lead off the church roof to make balls for their 
slings. At night they lighted huge fires in the courts 
and cloisters and on them they roasted whole oxen 
which they spitted upon the ancient pine-trees of 
the mountain. Sitting around the flames, amid 
smoke filled with a mingled odour of resin and fat, 
they broached huge casks of wine and beer. Their 
songs, their blasphemies, and the noise of their 
quarrels drowned the sound of the morning bells. 

At last the Porpoises, having crossed the defiles, 
laid siege to the monastery. They were warriors 
from the North, clad in copper armour. They 
fastened ladders a hundred and fifty fathoms long 
to the sides of the cliffs and sometimes in the dark- 
ness and storm these broke beneath the weight of 
men and arms, and bunches of the besiegers were 
hurled into the ravines and precipices. A prolonged 


108 . PENGUIN ISLAND 


wail would be heard going down into the darkness, 
and the assault would begin again. The Penguins 
poured streams of burning wax upon their assail- 
ants, which made them blaze like torches. Sixty 
times the enraged Porpoises attempted to scale the 
monastery and sixty times they were repulsed. 

For six months they had closely invested the mon- 
astery, when, on the day of the Epiphany, a shep- 
herd of the valley showed them a hidden path by 
which they climbed the mountain, penetrated into 
the vaults of the abbey, ran through the cloisters, 
the kitchens, the church, the chapter halls, the 
library, the laundry, the cells, the refectories, and 
the dormitories, and burned the buildings, killing 
and violating without distinction of age or sex. 
The Penguins, awakened unexpectedly, ran to arms, 
but in the darkness and alarm they struck at one an- 
other, whilst the Porpoises with blows of their axes 
disputed the sacred vessels, the censers, the candle- 
sticks, dalmatics, reliquaries, golden crosses, and 
precious stones. 

The air was filled with an acrid odour of burnt 
flesh. Groans and death-cries arose in the midst 
of the flames, and on the edges of the crumbling 
roofs monks ran in thousands like ants, and fell 
into the valley. Yet Johannes Talpa kept on writ- 
ing his Chronicle. The soldiers of Crucha retreated 
speedily and filled up all the issues from the monas- 
tery with pieces of rock so as to shut up the Por- 
poises in the burning buildings. And to crush the 
enemy beneath the ruin they employed the trunks of 
old oaks as battering-rams. ‘The burning timbers 
fell in with a noise like thunder and the lofty arches 
of the naves crumbled beneath the shock of these 
giant trees when moved by six hundred men to- 


LETTERS: JOHANNES TALPA roy 


gether. Soon there was left nothing of the rich and 
extensive abbey but the cell of Johannes Talpa, 
which, by a marvellous chance, hung from the ruin 
of a smoking gable. The old chronicler still kept 
writing. 

This admirable intensity of thought may seem 
excessive in the case of an annalist who applies him- 
self to relate the events of his own time. For, how- 
ever abstracted and detached we may be from sur- 
rounding things, we nevertheless resent their influ- 
ence. I have consulted the original manuscript of 
Johannes Talpa in the National Library, where it 
is preserved (Monumenta Peng., K. L6., 12390 
four). It is a parchment manuscript of 628 leaves. 
The writing is extremely confused, the letters instead 
of being in a straight line, stray in all directions and 
are mingled together in great disorder, or, more cor- 
rectly speaking, in absolute confusion. They are 
so badly formed that for the most part it is impossi- 
ble not merely to say what they are, but even to dis- 
tinguish them from the splashes of ink with which 
they are plentifully interspersed. ‘Those inestimable 
pages bear witness in this way to the troubles amid 
which they were written. To read them is difficult. 
On the other hand, the monk of Beargarden’s style 
shows no trace of emotion. The tone of the “‘Gesta 
Penguinorum”’ never departs from simplicity. The 
narration is rapid and of a conciseness that some- 
times approaches dryness. ‘The reflections are rare 
and, as a rule, judicious. 


V 


THE ARTS: THE PRIMITIVES OF 
PENGUIN PAINTING 


G1 LE Penguin critics vie with one an- 
other in affirming that Penguin art 
has from its origin been distinguished 
by a powerful and pleasing original- 
ity, and that we may look elsewhere 
in vain for the qualities of grace 
and reason that characterise its ear- 
liest works. But the Porpoises claim that their art- 
ists were undoubtedly the instructors and masters of 
the Penguins. It is difficult to form an opinion on 
the matter, because the Penguins, before they began 
to admire their primitive painters, destroyed all 
their works. 

We cannot be too sorry for this loss. For my own 
part I feel it cruelly, for I venerate the Penguin an- 
tiquities and I adore the primitives. They are de- 
lightful. I do not say they are all alike, for that 
would be untrue, but they have common characters 
that are found in all schools—I mean formulas from 
which they never depart—and there is besides some- 
thing finished in their work, for what they know they 
know well. Luckily we can form a notion of the 
Penguin primitives from the Italian, Flemish, and 
Dutch primitives, and from the French primitives, 
who are superior to all the rest; as M. Gruyer tells 
us they are more logical, logic being a peculiarly 
French quality. Even if this is denied it must at 

IIo 


EHIEPARTS 11} 


least be admitted that to France belongs the credit 
of having kept primitives when the other nations 
knew them no longer. The Exhibition of French 
Primitives at the Pavilion Marsan in 1904 contained 
several little panels contemporary with the later 
Valois kings and with Henry IV. 

I have made many journeys to see the pictures of 
the brothers Van Eyck, of Memling, of Roger van 
der Weyden, of the painter of the death of Mary, of 
Ambrogio Lorenzetti, and of the old Umbrian mas: 
ters. It was, however, neither Bruges, nor Cologne, 
nor Sienna, nor Perugia, that completed my initia- 
tion; it was in the little town of Arezzo that I be- 
came a conscious adept in primitive painting. ‘That 
was ten years ago or even longer. At that period 
of indigence and simplicity, the municipal museums, 
though usually kept shut, were always opened to 
foreigners. One evening, an old woman with a 
candle showed me, for half a lira, the sordid museum 
of Arezzo, and in it I discovered a painting by Mar- 
garitone, a “St. Francis,” the pious sadness of which 
moved me to tears. I was deeply touched, and 
Margaritone of Arezzo became from that day my 
dearest primitive. 

I picture to myself the Penguin primitives in con- 
formity with the works of that master. It will not 
therefore be thought superfluous if in this place I 
consider his works with some attention, if not in 
detail, at least under their more general and, if I 
dare say so, most representative aspect. 

We possess five or six pictures signed with his 
hand. His masterpiece, preserved in the National 
Gallery of London, represents the Virgin seated on 
a throne and holding the infant Jesus in her arms. 
What strikes one first when one looks at this figure 


112 PENGUIN ISLAND 


is the proportion. The body from the neck to the 
feet is only twice as long as the head, so that it ap- 
pears extremely short and podgy. ‘This work is not 
less remarkable for its painting than for its drawing. 
The great Margaritone had but a limited number of 
colours in his possession, and he used them in all 
their purity without ever modifying the tones. From 
this it follows that his colouring has more vivacity 
than harmony. ‘The cheeks of the Virgin and those 
of the Child are of a bright vermilion which the old 
master, from a naive preference for clear definitions, 
has placed on each face in two circumferences as exact 
as if they had been traced out bya pair of compasses. 

A learned critic of the eighteenth century, the 
Abbé Lanzi, has treated Margaritone’s works with 
profound disdain. ‘They are,” he says, ‘merely 
crude daubs. In those unfortunate times people 
could neither draw nor paint.’’ Such was the com- 
mon opinion of the connoisseurs of the days of pow- 
dered wigs. But the great Margaritone and his 
contemporaries were soon to be avenged for this 
cruel contempt. ‘There was born in the nineteenth 
century, in the biblical villages and reformed cot- 
tages of pious England, a multitude of little Samuels 
and little St. Johns with hair curling like lambs, 
who, about 1840 and 1850, became spectacled pro- 
fessors and founded the cult of the primitives. 

That eminent theorist of Pre-Raphaelitism, Sir 
James Tuckett, does not shrink from placing the 
Madonna of the National Gallery on a level with 
the masterpieces of Christian art. “By giving to the 
Virgin’s head,” says Sir James Tuckett, ‘‘a third 
of the total height of the figure, the old master at- 
tracts the spectator’s attention and keeps it directed 
towards the more sublime parts of the human figure, 


THE ARTS 113 


and in particular the eyes, which we ordinarily de- 
scribe as the spiritual organs. In this picture, colour- 
ing and design conspire to produce an ideal and mys- 
tical impression. The vermilion of the cheeks does 
not recall the natural appearance of the skin; it rather 
seems as if the old master has applied the roses of 
Paradise to the faces of the Mother and the Child.”’ 

We see, in such a criticism as this, a shining re- 
flection, so to speak, of the work which it exalts; yet 
MacSilly, the seraphic esthete of Edinburgh, has 
expressed in a still more moving and penetrating 
fashion the impression produced upon his mind by 
the sight of this primitive painting. ‘The Ma- 
donna of Margaritone,” says the revered MacSilly, 
‘attains the transcendent end of art. It inspires its 
beholders with feelings of innocence and purity; it 
makes them like little children. And so true is this, 
that at the age of sixty-six, after having had the joy 
of contemplating it closely for three hours, I felt my- 
self suddenly transformed into a little child. While 
my cab was taking me through Trafalgar Square I 
kept laughing and prattling and shaking my spec- 
tacle-case as if it were a rattle. And when the maid 
in my boarding-house had served my meal I kept 
pouring spoonfuls of soup into my ear with all the 
artlessness of childhood.” 

“Tt is by such results,’ adds MacSilly, “that the 
excellence of a work of art is proved.” 

Margaritone, according to Vasari, died at the age 
of seventy-seven, ‘regretting that he had lived to see 
a new form of art arising and the new artists 
crowned with fame.” 

These lines, which I translate literally, have in- 
spired Sir James Tuckett with what are perhaps the 
finest pages in his work. They form part of his 


114 PENGUIN ISLAND 


“Breviary for A‘sthetes”; all the Pre-Raphaelites 
know them by heart. I place them here as the most 
precious ornament of this book. You will agree 
that nothing more sublime has been written since the 
days of the Hebrew prophets. 


MARGARITONE’S VISION 


Margaritone, full of years and labours, went one 
day to visit the studio of a young painter who had 
lately settled in the town. He noticed in the studio 
a freshly painted Madonna, which, although severe 
and rigid, nevertheless, by a certain exactness in the 
proportions and a devilish mingling of light and 
shade, assumed an appearance of relief and life. At 
this sight the artless and sublime worker of Arezzo 
perceived with horror what the future of painting 
would be. With his brow clasped in his hands he 
exclaimed : 

‘What things of shame does not this figure show 
forth! I discern in it the end of that Christian art 
which paints the soul and inspires the beholder with 
an ardent desire for heaven. Future painters will 
not restrain themselves as does this one to por- 
traying on the side of a wall or on a wooden panel 
the cursed matter of which our bodies are formed; 
they will celebrate and glorify it. They will clothe 
their figures with dangerous appearances of flesh, 
and these figures will seem like real persons. Their 
bodies will be seen; their forms will appear through 
their clothing. St. Magdalen will have a bosom. 
St. Martha a belly, St. Barbara hips, St. Agnes but- 
tocks; St. Sebastian will unveil his youthful beauty, 
and St. George will display beneath his armour the 
muscular wealth of a robust virility; apostles, con: 


THE ARTS 1d BL 


fessors, doctors, and God the Father himself will 
appear as ordinary beings like you and me; the 
angels will affect an equivocal, ambiguous, mysteri- 
ous beauty which will trouble hearts. What desire 
for heaven will these representations impart? 
None; but from them you will learn to take pleasure 
in the forms of terrestrial life. Where will painters 
stop in their indiscreet inquiries? They will stop 
nowhere. ‘They will go so far as to show men and 
women naked like the idols of the Romans. There 
will be a sacred art and a profane art, and the sacred 
art will not be less profane than the other.” 

“Get ye behind me, demons,” exclaimed the old 
master. For in prophetic vision he saw the right- 
eous and the saints assuming the appearance of mel- 
ancholy athletes. He saw Apollos playing the lute 
on a flowery hill, in the midst of the Muses wearing 
light tunics. He saw Venuses lying under shady 
myrtles and the Danae exposing their charming sides 
to the golden rain. He saw pictures of Jesus under 
the pillars of the temple amidst patricians, fair 
ladies, musicians, pages, negroes, dogs, and parrots. 
He saw in an inextricable confusion of human limbs, 
outspread wings, and flying draperies, crowds of 
tumultuous Nativities, opulent Holy Families, em. 
phatic Crucifixions. He saw St. Catherines, St. 
Barbaras, St. Agneses humiliating patricians by the 
sumptuousness of their velvets, their brocades, and 
their pearls, and by the splendour of their breasts. 
He saw Auroras scattering roses, and a multitude of 
naked Dianas and Nymphs surprised on the banks 
of retired streams. And the great Margaritone 
died, strangled by so horrible a presentiment of the 
Renaissance and the Bolognese School. 


‘VE 
MARBODIUS 


a ie E possess a precious monument of the 
i vi vs: ‘ Penguin literature of the fifteenth 
century. It is a narrative of a jour- 
ney to hell undertaken by the monk 
Marbodius, of the order of St. Bene- 
dict, who professed a fervent ad- 
miration for the poet Virgil. This 
narrative, written in fairly good Latin, has been pub- 
lished by M. du Clos des Lunes. It is here trans- 
lated for the first time. I believe that I am doing a 
service to my fellow-countrymen in making them ac- 
quainted with these pages, though doubtless they are 
far from forming a unique example of this class of 
medieval Latin literature. Among the fictions that 
may be compared with them we may mention ‘“The 
Voyage of St. Brendan,” “The Vision of Albericus,” 
and “St. Patrick’s Purgatory,” imaginary descrip- 
tions, like Dante Alighieri’s “Divine Comedy,” of 
the supposed abode of the dead. ‘The narrative of 
Marbodius is one of the latest works dealing with 
this theme, but it is not the least singular. 


Tue Descent oF MARBODIUS INTO HELL 


In the fourteen hundred and fifty-third year of 
the incarnation of the Son of God, a few days be- 
fore the enemies of the Cross entered the city of 
Helena and the great Constantine, it was given to 
me, Brother Marbodius, an unworthy monk, to see 

116 


MARBODIUS 117 


and to hear what none had hitherto seen or heard. 
I have composed a faithful narrative of those things 
so that their memory may not perish with me, for 
man’s time is short. 

On the first day of May in the aforesaid year, at 
the hour of vespers, I was seated in the Abbey of 
Corrigan on a stone in the cloisters and, as my cus- 
tom was, I read the verses of the poet whom I love 
best of all, Virgil, who has sung of the labours of the 
field, of shepherds, and of heroes. Evening was 
hanging its purple folds from the arches of the clois- 
ters and in a voice of emotion I was murmuring the 
verses which describe how Dido, the Pheenician 
queen, wanders with her ever-bleeding wound be- 
neath the myrtles of hell. At that moment Brother 
Hilary happened to pass by, followed by Brother 
Jacinth, the porter. 

Brought up in the barbarous ages before the resur- 
rection of the Muses, Brother Hilary has not been 
initiated into the wisdom of the ancients; neverthe- 
less, the poetry of the Mantuan has, like a subtle 
torch, shed some gleams of light into his under- 
standing. 

‘“‘Brother Marbodius,”’ he asked me, ‘‘do those 
verses that you utter with swelling breast and spark- 
ling eyes—do they belong to that great ‘A‘neid’ 
from which morning or evening your glances are 
never withheld ?”’ 

I answered that I was reading in Virgil how the 
son of Anchises perceived Dido like a moon behind 
the foliage.* 


* The text runs 
. qualem primo qui surgere mense 
Aut videt aut vidisse putat per nubila lunam. 
Brother Marbodius, by a strange misunderstanding, substitutes an 


entirely different image for the one created by the poet. 


118 PENGUIN ISLAND 


“Brother Marbodius,” he replied, “I am certain 
that on all occasions Virgil gives expression to wise 
maxims and profound thoughts. But the songs 
that he modulates on his Syracusan flute hold such 
a lofty meaning and such exalted doctrine that I am 
continually puzzled by them.” 

“Take care, father,” cried Brother Jacinth, in an 
agitated voice. “Virgil was a magician who wrought 
marvels by the help of demons. It is thus he pierced 
through a mountain near Naples and fashioned a 
bronze horse that had power to heal all the diseases 
of horses. He was a necromancer, and there is still 
shown, in a certain town in Italy, the mirror in 
which he made the dead appear. And yet a woman 
deceived this great sorcerer. A Neapolitan courtesan 
invited him to hoist himself up to her window in the 
basket that was used to bring the provisions, and she 
left him all night suspended between two storeys.” 

Brother Hilary did not appear to hear these ob- 
servations. 

‘Virgil is a prophet,” he replied, ‘and a prophet 
who leaves far behind him the sibyls with their sacred 
verses as well as the daughter of King Priam, and 
that great diviner of future things, Plato of Athens. 
You will find in the fourth of his Syracusan cantos 
the birth of our Lord foretold in a language that 
seems of heaven rather than of earth.* In the time 
of my early studies, when I read for the first time 
Jam Repir er Virco, I felt myself bathed in an in- 
finite delight, but I immediately experienced intense 

* Three centuries before the epoch in which our Marbodius 
lived the words— 


Maro, vates gentilium 
Da Christo testimonium 


were sung in the churches on Christmas Day. 


MARBODIUS 119 


grief at the thought that, for ever deprived of the 
presence of God, the author of this prophetic verse, 
the noblest that has come from human lips, was pin- 
ing among the heathen in eternal darkness. This 
cruel thought did not leave me. It pursued me 
even in my studies, my prayers, my meditations, and 
my ascetic labours. Thinking that Virgil was de- 
prived of the sight of God and that possibly he 
might even be suffering the fate of the reprobate in 
hell, I could neither enjoy peace nor rest, and I went 
so far as to exclaim several times a day with my 
arms outstretched to heaven: 

“ “Reveal to me, O Lord, the lot thou hast as- 
signed to him who sang on earth as the angels sing 
in heaven!’ 

“After some years my anguish ceased when I 
read in an old book that the great Apostle St. Paul, 
who called the Gentiles into the Church of Christ, 
went to Naples and sanctified with his tears the 
tomb of the prince of poets.* This was some 
ground for believing that Virgil, like the Emperor 
Trajan, was admitted to Paradise because even in 
error he had a presentiment of the truth. We are 
not compelled to believe it, but I can easily per- 
suade myself that it is true.” 

Having thus spoken, old Hilary wished me the 
peace of a holy night and went away with Brother 
Jacinth. 

I resumed the delightful study of my poet. 


* Ad meronis mausoleum 
Ductus, fudit super eum 
Piae rorem lacryme. 


Quem te, inquit, reddidissem, 
Si te vivum invenissem 
Poctarum maxime! 


120 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Book in hand, I meditated upon the way in which 
those whom Love destroys with its cruel malady 
wander through the secret paths in the depth of the 
myrtle forest, and, as I meditated, the quivering 
reflections of the stars came and mingled with those 
of the leafless eglantines in the waters of the clois- 
ter fountain. Suddenly the lights and the perfumes 
and the stillness of the sky were overwhelmed, a 
fierce Northwind charged with storm and darkness 
burst roaring upon me. It lifted me up and car- 
ried me like a wisp of straw over fields, cities, rivers, 
and mountains, and through the midst of thunder- 
clouds, during a long night composed of a whole 
series of nights and days. And when, after this 
prolonged and cruel rage, the hurricane was at last 
stilled, I found myself far from my native land at 
the bottom of a valley bordered by cypress trees. 
Then a woman of wild beauty, trailing long gar- 
ments behind her, approached me. She placed her 
Jeft hand on my shoulder, and, pointing her right 
arm to an oak with thick foliage: 

“Look!” said she to me. 

Immediately I recognised the Sibyl who guards 
the sacred wood of Avernus, and I discerned the 
fair Proserpine’s beautiful golden twig amongst the 
tufted boughs of the tree to which her finger 
pointed. 

“O prophetic Virgin,” I exclaimed, ‘‘thou hast 
comprehended my desire and thou hast satisfied it 
in this way. Thou has revealed to me the tree 
that bears the shining twig without which none can 
enter alive into the dwelling-place of the dead. 
And in truth, eagerly did I long to converse with 
the shade of Virgil.” 

Having said this, I snatched the golden branch 


MARBODIUS 121 


from its ancient trunk and I advanced without fear 
into the smoking gulf that leads to the miry banks 
of the Styx, upon which the shades are tossed about 
like dead leaves. At sight of the branch dedicated 
to Proserpine, Charon took me in his bark, which 
groaned beneath my weight, and I alighted on the 
shores of the dead, and was greeted by the mute 
baying of the threefold Cerberus. I pretended to 
throw the shade of a stone at him, and the vain 
monster fled into his cave. There, amidst the 
rushes, wandered the souls of those children whose 
eyes had but opened and shut to the kindly light 
of day, and there in a gloomy cavern Minos judges 
men. I penetrated into the myrtle wood in which 
the victims of love wander languishing, Phzdra, 
Procris, the sad Eriphyle, Evadne, Pasiphaé, Lao- 
damia, and Cenis, and the Phenician Dido. ‘Then 
I went through the dusty plains reserved for 
famous warriors. Beyond them open two ways. 
That to the left leads to Tartarus, the abode of 
the wicked. I took that to the right, which leads to 
Elysium and to the dwellings of Dis. Having hung 
the sacred branch at the goddess’s door, I reached 
pleasant fields flooded with purple light. The 
shades of philosophers and poets hold grave con- 
verse there. The Graces and the Muses formed 
sprightly choirs upon the grass. Old Homer sang, 
accompanying himself upon his rustic lyre. His 
eyes were closed, but divine images shone upon his 
lips. I saw Solon, Democritus, and _ Pythag- 
oras watching the games of the young men in the 
meadow, and, through the foliage of an ancient 
laurel, I perceived also Hesiod, Orpheus, the melan- 
choly Euripides, and the masculine Sappho. I 
passed and recognised, as they sat on the bank of a 


122 PENGUIN ISLAND 


fresh rivulet, the poet Horace, Varius, Gallus, and 
Lycoris. A little apart, leaning against the trunk 
of a dark holm-oak, Virgil was gazing pensively at 
the grove. Of lofty stature, though spare, he still 
preserved that swarthy complexion, that rustic air, 
that negligent bearing, and unpolished appearance 
which during his lifetime concealed his genius. I 
saluted him piously and remained for a long time 
without speech. 

At last when my halting voice could proceed out 
of my throat: 

“O thou, so dear to the Ausonian Muses, thou 
honour of the Latin name, Virgil,” cried I, “‘it is 
through thee I have known what beauty is, it is 
through thee I have known what the tables of the 
gods and the beds of the goddesses are like. Suffer 
the praises of the humblest of thy adorers.” 

‘‘Arise, stranger,’ answered the divine poet. “TI 
perceive that thou art a living being among the 
shades, and that thy body treads down the grass in 
this eternal evening. Thou art not the first man 
who has descended before his death into these 
dwellings, although all intercourse between us and 
the living is difficult. But cease from praise; I do 
not like eulogies and the confused sounds of glory 
have always offended my ears. That is why I fled 
from Rome, where I was known to the idle and 
curious, and laboured in the solitude of my beloved 
Parthenope. And then I am not so convinced that 
the men of thy generation understand my verses that 
{ should be gratified by thy praises. Who art thou?” 

“Tam called Marbodius of the Kingdom of Alca. 
I made my profession in the Abbey of Corrigan. 
I read thy poems by day and I read them by night. 
It is thee whom I have come to see in Hell; I was 


MARBODIUS 124 


impatient to know what thy fate was. On earth 
the learned often dispute about it. Some hold it 
probable that, having lived under the power of 
demons, thou art now burning in inextinguishable 
flames; others, more cautious, pronounce no opinion, 
believing that all which is said concerning the dead 
is uncertain and full of lies; several, though not in 
truth the ablest, maintain that, because thou didst 
elevate the tone of the Sicilian Muses and foretell 
that a new progeny would descend from heaven, 
thou wert admitted, like the Emperor Trajan, to 
enjoy eternal blessedness in the Christian heaven.”’ 

“Thou seest that such is not the case,’”’ answered 
the shade, smiling. 

“T meet thee in truth, O Virgil, among the heroes 
and sages in those Elysian Fields which thou thy- 
self hast described. Thus, contrary to what several 
on earth believe, no one has come to seek thee on 
the part of Him who reigns on high?” 

After a rather long silence: 

“T will conceal nought from thee. He sent for 
me; one of His messengers, a simple man, came to 
say that I was expected, and that, although I had 
not been initiated into their mysteries, in consider- 
ation of my prophetic verses a place had been re- 
served for me among those of the new sect. But I 
refused to accept that invitation; I had no desire 
to change my place. I did so not because I share 
the admiration of the Greeks for the Elysian fields, 
or because I taste here those joys which caused 
Proserpine to lose the remembrance of her mother. 
I never believed much myself in what I say about 
these things in the ‘A/neid.’ I was instructed by 
philosophers and men of science and [ had a cor- 
rect foreboding of the truth. Life in hell is ex 


124 PENGUIN ISLAND 


tremely attenuated; we feel neither pleasure nor 
pain; we are as if we were not. The dead have 
no existence here except such as the living lend 
them. Nevertheless I prefer to remain here.” 

“But what reason didst thou give, O Virgil, for 
so strange a refusal?” 

“T gave excellent ones. I said to the messenger 
of the god that I did not deserve the honour he 
brought me, and that a meaning had been given to 
my verses which they did not bear. In truth I have 
not in my fourth Eclogue betrayed the faith of my 
ancestors. Some ignorant Jews alone have inter- 
preted in favour of a barbarian god a verse which 
celebrates the return of the golden age predicted 
by the Sibylline oracles. I excused myself then on 
the ground that I could not occupy a place which 
was destined for me in error and to which I recog- 
nised that I had no right. Then I alleged my dis- 
position and my tastes, which do not accord with 
the customs of the new heavens. 

‘“**T am not unsociable,’ said I to this man. ‘I 
have shown in life a complaisant and easy disposi- 
tion, although the extreme simplicity of my habits 
caused me to be suspected of avarice. I kept 
nothing for myself alone. My library was open 
to all and I have conformed my conduct to that 
fine saying of Euripides, “all ought to be common 
among friends.’ ‘Those praises that seemed ob- 
trusive when I myself received them became agree- 
able to me when addressed to Varius or to Macer. 
But at bottom I am rustic and uncultivated. I 
take pleasure in the society of animals; I was so 
zealous in observing them and took so much care 
of them that I was regarded, not altogether 
wrongly, as a good veterinary surgeon. I am told 


MARBODIUS 125 


that the people of thy sect claim an immortal soul 
for themselves, but refuse one to the animals. 
That is a piece of nonsense that makes me doubt 
their judgment. Perhaps I love the flocks and the 
shepherds a little too much. That would not seem 
right amongst you. There is a maxim to which I 
endeavour to conform my actions, “Nothing too 
much.” More even than my feeble health my phil- 
osophy teaches me to use things with measure. I 
am sober; a lettuce and some olives with a drop of 
Falernian wine form all my meals. I have, indeed, 
to some extent gone with strange women, but I have 
not delayed over long in taverns to watch the young 
Syrians dance to the sound of the crotalum.* But 
if I have restrained my desires it was for my own 
satisfaction and for the sake of good discipline. 
To fear pleasure and to fly from joy appears to me 
the worst insult that one can offer to nature. I am 
assured that during their lives certain of the elect 
of thy god abstained from food‘and avoided women 
through love of asceticism, and voluntarily exposed 
themselves to useless sufferings. I should be afraid 
of meeting those criminals whose frenzy horrifies 
me. A poet must not be asked to attach himself 
too strictly to any scientific or moral doctrine. 
Moreover, I am a Roman, and the Romans, unlike 
the Greeks, are unable to pursue profound specula- 
tions in a subtle manner. If they adopt a philoso- 
phy it is above all in order to derive some practical 
advantages from it. Siro, who enjoyed a great re- 
nown among us, taught me the system of Epicurus 
and thus freed me from vain terrors and turned me 
aside from the cruelties to which religion persuades 

* This phrase seems to indicate that, if one is to believe Macro- 
bius, the “Copa” is by Virgit. 


126 PENGUIN ISLAND 


ignorant men. I have embraced the views of Py- 
thagoras concerning the souls of men and animals, 
both of which are of divine essence; this invites us 
to look upon ourselves without pride and without 
shame. I have learnt from the Alexandrines how 
the earth, at first soft and without form, hardened 
in proportion as Nereus withdrew himself from it 
to dig his humid dwellings; I have learned how 
things were formed insensibly; in what manner the 
rains, falling from the burdened clouds, nourished 
the silent forests, and by what progress a few ani- 
mals at last began to wander over the nameless 
mountains. I could not accustom myself to your 
cosmogony either, for it seems to me fitter for a 
camel-driver on the Syrian sands than for a disciple 
of Aristarchus and Samos. And what would be- 
come of me in the abode of your beatitude if I did 
not find there my friends, my ancestors, my masters, 
and my gods, and if it is not given me to see Rhea’s 
noble son, or Venus, mother of AEneas, with her 
winning smile, or Pan, or the young Dryads, or the 
Sylvans, or old Silenus, with his face stained by 
fEgle’s purple mulberries.’ These are the reasons 
which I begged that simple man to plead before the 
successor of Jupiter.”’ 

‘And since then, O great shade, thou has received 
no other messages?” 

‘“T have received none.” 

‘To console themselves for thy absence, O Vir- 
gil, they have three poets, Commodianus, Pruden- 
tius, and Fortunatus, who were all three born in 
those dark days when neither prosody nor grammar 
were known. But tell me, O Mantuan, hast thou 
never received other intelligence of the God whose 
company thou didst so deliberately refuse?” 


MARBODIUS 127 


“Never that I remember.” 

‘Hast thou not told me that I am not the first 
who descended alive into these abodes and presented 
himself before thee ?”’ 

‘Thou dost remind me of it. A century and a 
half ago, or so it seems to me (it is difficult to 
reckon days and years amid the shades), my pro- 
found peace was intruded upon by a strange visitor. 
As I was wandering beneath the gloomy foliage 
that borders the Styx, I saw rising before me a 
human form more opaque and darker than that of 
the inhabitants of these shores. I recogniscd a 
living person. He was of high stature, thin, with 
an aquiline nose, sharp chin, and hollow cheeks. 
His dark eyes shot forth fire; a red hood girt with 
a crown of laurels bound his lean brows. His bones 
pierced through the tight brown cloak that de- 
scended to his heels. He saluted me with defer- 
ence, tempered by a sort of fierce pride, and ad- 
dressed me in a speech more obscure and incorrect 
than that of those Gauls with whom the divine 
Julius filled both his legions and the Curia. At 
last I understood that he had been born near Fie- 
sole, in an ancient Etruscan colony that Sulla had 
founded on the banks of the Arno, and which had 
prospered; that he had obtained municipal honours, 
but that he had thrown himself vehemently into the 
sanguinary quarrels which arose between the senate, 
the knights, and the people, that he had been de- 
feated and banished, and now he wandered in exile 
throughout the world. He described Italy to me 
as distracted by more wars and discords than in 
the time of my youth, and as sighing anew for a 
second Augustus. I pitied his misfortunes, remem- 
bering what I myself had formerly endured. 


128 PENGUIN ISLAND 


“An audacious spirit unceasingly disquieted him, 
and his mind harboured great thoughts, but alas! 
his rudeness and ignorance displayed the triumph 
of barbarism. He knew neither poetry, nor 
science, nor even the tongue of the Greeks, and he 
was ignorant, too, of the ancient traditions con- 
cerning the origin of the world and the nature of 
the gods. He gravely repeated fables which in 
my time would have brought smiles to the little chil- 
dren who were not yet old enough to pay for ad- 
mission at the baths. The vulgar easily believe in 
monsters. The Etruscans especially peopled hell 
with demons, hideous as a sick man’s dreams. ‘That 
they have not abandoned their childish imaginings 
after so many centuries is explained by the contin- 
uation and progress of ignorance and misery, but 
that one of their magistrates whose mind is raised 
above the common level should share these popular 
illusions and should be frightened by the hideous 
demons that the inhabitants of that country painted 
on the walls of their tombs in the time of Porsena— 
that is something which might sadden even a sage. 
My Etruscan visitor repeated verses to me which he 
had composed in a new dialect, called by him the 
vulgar tongue, the sense of which I could not under- 
stand. My ears were more surprised than charmed 
as I heard him repeat the same sound three or four 
times at regular intervals in his efforts to mark the 
rhythm. That artifice did not seem ingenious to 
me; but it is not for the dead to judge of novelties. 

“But I do not reproach this colonist of Sulla, born 
in an unhappy time, for making inharmonious verses 
or for being, if it be possible, as bad a poet as 
Bavius or Maevius. I have grievances against him 
which touch me more closely. The thing is mon- 


MARBODIUS 129 


strous and scarcely credible, but when this man re- 
turned to earth he disseminated the most odious 
lies about me. He affirmed in several passages of 
his barbarous poems that I had served him as a 
guide in the modern Tartarus, a place I know 
nothing of. He insolently proclaimed that I had 
spoken of the gods of Rome as false and lying gods, 
and that I held as the true God the present suc- 
cessor of Jupiter. Friend, when thou art restored 
to the kindly light of day and beholdest again thy 
native land, contradict those abominable falsehoods. 
Say to thy people that the singer of the pious Eneas 
has never worshipped the god of the Jews. I am 
assured that his power is declining and that his 
approaching fall is manifested by undoubted indi- 
cations. This news would give me some pleasure 
if one could rejoice in these abodes, where we feel 
neither fears nor desires.” 

He spoke, and with a gesture of farewell he went 
away. I beheld his shade gliding over the aspho- 
dels without bending their stalks. I saw that it be- 
came fainter and vaguer as it receded farther from 
me, and it vanished before it reached the wood of 
evergreen laurels. ‘Then I understood the meaning 
of the words, ‘“The dead have no life, but that 
which the living lend them,” and I walked slowly 
through the pale meadow to the gate of horn. 

I affirm that all in this writing is true.* 


* There is in Marbodius’s narrative a passage very worthy of 
notice, viz., that in which the monk of Corrigan describes Dante 
Alighieri such as we picture him to ourselves to-day. The min- 
jatures in a very old manuscript of the “Divine Comedy,” the 
“Codex Venetianus,’ represent the poet as a little fat man clad 
in a short tunic, the skirts of which fall above his knees. As for 
Virgil, he still wears the philosophical beard, in the wood-engrav- 
ings of the sixteenth century. 


130 PENGUIN ISLAND 


One would not have thought either that Marbodius, or even 
Virgil, could have known the Etruscan tombs of Chiusi and Cor- 
neto, where, in fact, there are horrible and burlesque devils closely 
resembling those of Orcagna. Nevertheless, the authenticity of 
the “Descent of Marbodius into Hell” is indisputable. M. du 
Clos des Lunes has firmly established it. To doubt it would be 
to doubt paleography itself. 


Be 
44) 
I ok 


Vil 
SIGNS IN THE MOON 


fe in ignorance and barbarism, 
Giles Bird-catcher, a Franciscan 
E| monk, known by his writings under 
the name A gidius Aucupis, devoted 
himself with indefatigable zeal to 
the study of letters and the sciences. 
He gave his nights to mathematics and music, which 
he called the two adorable sisters, the harmonious 
daughters of Number and Imagination. He was 
versed in medicine and astrology. He was sus- 
pected of practising magic, and it seemed true that 
he wrought metamorphoses and discovered hidden 
things. 

The monks of his convent, finding in his cell 
Greek books which they could not read, imagined 
them to be conjuring-books, and denounced their 
too learned brother as a wizard. /gidius Aucupis 
fled, and reached the island of Ireland, where he 
lived for thirty studious years. He went from mon- 
astery to monastery, searching for and copying the 
Greek and Latin manuscripts which they contained. 
He also studied physics and alchemy. He acquired 
a universal knowledge and discovered notable secrets 
concerning animals, plants, and stones. He was 
found one day in the company of a very beautiful 
woman who sang to her own accompaniment on 
I31 


1325 PENGUIN ISLAND 


the lute, and who was afterwards discovered to be 
a machine which he had himself constructed. 

He often crossed the Irish Sea to go into the land 
of Wales and to visit the libraries of the monas- 
teries there. During one of these crossings, as he 
remained during the night on the bridge of the ship, 
he saw beneath the waters two sturgeons swimming 
side by side. He had very good hearing and he 
knew the languages of the fishes. Now he heard 
one of the sturgeons say to the other: 

“The man in the moon, whom we have often 
seen carrying fagots on his shoulders, has fallen 
into the sea.”’ 

And the other sturgeon said in its turn: 

‘And in the silver disc there will be seen the im- 
age of two lovers kissing each other on the mouth.”’ 

Some years later, having returned to his native 
country, A‘gidus Aucupis found that ancient learn- 
ing had been restored. Manners had softened. 
Men no longer pursued the nymphs of the foun- 
tains, of the woods, and of the mountains with their 
insults. They placed images of the Muses and of 
the modest Graces in their gardens, and they ren- 
dered her former honours to the Goddess with am- 
brosial lips, the joy of men and gods. They were 
becoming reconciled to nature. They trampled vain 
terrors beneath their feet and raised their eyes to 
heaven without fearing, as they formerly did, to read 
signs of anger and threats of damnation in the skies. 

At this spectacle A-gidius Aucupis remembered 
what the two sturgeons of the sea of Erin had fore- 


told. 


De depietea 


. 


I 
MOTHER ROUQUIN 


EGIDIUS AUCUPIS, the Erasmus 
of the Penguins, was not mistaken; 
his age was an age of free inquiry. 
But that great man mistook the ele- 
gances of the humanists for softness 
of manners, and he did not foresee 
the effects that the awaking of in- 

telligence would have amongst the Penguins. It 
brought about the religious Reformation; Catholics 
massacred Protestants and Protestants massacred 
Catholics. Such were the first results of liberty of 
thought. The Catholics prevailed in Penguinia. 
But the spirit of inquiry had penetrated among them 
without their knowing it. They joined reason to 
faith, and claimed that religion had been divested 
of the superstitious practices that dishonoured it, 
just as in later days the booths that the cobblers, 
hucksters, and dealers in old clothes had built 
against the walls of the cathedrals were cleared 
away. The word, legend, which at first indicated 
what the faithful ought to read, soon suggested the 
idea of pious fables and childish tales. 

The saints had to suffer from this state of mind. 
An obscure canon called Princeteau, a very austere 
and crabbed man, designated so great a number of 
them as not worthy of having their days observed, 
that he was surnamed the exposer of the saints. 
He did not think, for instance, that if St. Margaret’s 
135 


—) 
A 


na wom 


= 
e 


136 PENGUIN ISLAND 


prayer were applied as a poultice to a woman in tra- 
vail that the pains of childbirth would be softened. 

Even the venerable patron saint of Penguinia did 
not escape his rigid criticism. This is what he says 
of her in his ‘‘Antiquities of Alca’”’: 

‘Nothing is more uncertain than the history, or 
even the existence, of St. Orberosia. An ancient 
anonymous annalist, a monk of Dombes, relates 
that a woman called Orberosia was possessed by 
the devil in a cavern where, even down to his own 
days, the little boys and girls of the village used to 
play at a sort of game representing the devil and 
the fair Orberosia. He adds that this woman be- 
came the concubine of a horrible dragon, who rav- 
aged the country. Such a statement is hardly cred- 
ible, but the history of Orberosia, as it has since 
been related, seems hardiy more worthy of belief. 
The life of that saint by the Abbot Simplicissimus 
is three hundred years later than the pretended 
events which it relates and that author shows him- 
self excessively credulous and devoid of all critical 
faculty.” 

Suspicion attacked even the supernatural origin of 
the Penguins. ‘The historian Ovidius Capito went 
so far as to deny the miracle of their transforma- 
tion. He thus begins his “Annals of Penguinia”’: 

‘‘A dense obscurity envelopes this history, and it 
would be no exaggeration to say that it is a tissue 
of puerile fables and popular tales. The Penguins 
claim that they are descended from birds who were 
baptized by St. Maél and whom God changed into 
men at the intercession of that glorious apostle. 
They hold that, situated at first in the frozen ocean, 
their island, floating like Delos, was brought to an- 
chor in these heaven-favoured seas, of which it is to- 


MOTHER ROUQUIN 137 


day the queen. I conclude that this myth is a rem- 
iniscence of the ancient migrations of the Penguins.” 

In the following century, which was that of the 
philosophers, scepticism became still more acute. 
No further evidence of it is needed than the follow- 
ing celebrated passage from the “Moral Essay.” 

“Arriving we know not from whence (for indeed 
their origins are not very clear), and successively 
invaded and conquered by four or five peoples from 
the north, south, east, and west, miscegenated, inter- 
bred, amalgamated, and commingled, the Penguins 
boast of the purity of their race, and with jusiice, 
for they have become a pure race. This mixture of 
all mankind, red, black, yellow, and white, round- 
headed and long-headed, has formed in the course 
of ages a fairly homogeneous human family, and 
one which is recognisable by certain features due to 
a community of life and customs. 

“This idea that they belong to the best race in 
the world, and that they are its finest family, inspires 
them with noble pride, indomitable courage, and a 
hatred for the human race. 

“The life of a people is but a succession of mis- 
eries, crimes, and follies. ‘This is true of the Pen- 
guin nation, as of all other nations. Save for this 
exception its history is admirable from beginning to 
end.” 

The two classic ages of the Penguins are too 
well-known for me to lay stress upon them. But 
what has not been sufficiently noticed is the way in 
which the rationalist theologians such as Canon 
Princeteau called into existence the unbelievers of 
the succeeding age. The former employed their 
reason to destroy what did not seem to them essen- 
tial to their religion; they only left untouched the 


138 PENGUIN ISLAND 


most rigid article of faith. Their intellectual suc- 
cessors, being taught by them how to make use of 
science and reason, employed them against what- 
ever beliefs remained. Thus rational theology en- 
gendered natural philosophy. 

That is why (if I may turn from the Penguins of 
former days to the Sovereign Pontiff, who, to-day 
governs the universal Church) we cannot admire 
too greatly the wisdom of Pope Pius X. in condemn- 
ing the study of exegesis as contrary to revealed 
truth, fatal to sound theological doctrine, and deadly 
to the faith. Those clerics who maintain the rights 
of science in opposition to him are pernicious doc- 
tors and pestilent teachers, and the faithful who 
approve of them are lacking in either mental or 
moral ballast. 

At the end of the age of philosophers, the ancient 
kingdom of Penguinia was utterly destroyed, the 
king put to death, the privileges of the nobles abol- 
ished, and a Republic proclaimed in the midst of 
public misfortunes and while a terrible war was 
raging. The assembly which then governed Pen- 
guinia ordered all the metal articles contained in the 
churches to be melted down. ‘The patriots even 
desecrated the tombs of the kings. It is said that 
when the tomb of Draco the Great was opened, that 
king presented an appearance as black as ebony 
and so majestic that those who profaned his corpse 
fled in terror. According to other accounts, these 
churlish men insulted him by putting a pipe in his 
mouth and derisively offering him a glass of wine. 

On the seventeenth day of the month of May. 
flowers, the shrine of St. Orberosia, which had for 
five hundred years been exposed to the veneration 


of the faithful in the Church of St. Maél, was trans 


MOTHER ROUQUIN 139 


ported into the town-hall and submitted to the 
examination of a jury of experts appointed by the 
municipality. It was made of gilded copper in 
shape like the nave of a church, entirely covered 
with enamels and decorated with precious stones, 
which latter were perceived to be false. The chap- 
ter in its foresight had removed the rubies, sap- 
phires, emeralds, and great balls of rock-crystal, 
and had substituted pieces of glass in their place. 
It contained only a little dust and a piece of old 
linen, which were thrown into a great fire that had 
been lighted on the Place de Gréve to burn the relics 
of the saints. The people danced around it sing- 
ing patriotic songs. 

From the threshold of their booth, which leant 
against the town-hall, a man called Rouquin and his 
wife were watching this group of madmen. Rou- 
quin clipped dogs and gelded cats; he also fre- 
quented the inns. His wife was a ragpicker and a 
bawd, but she had plenty of shrewdness. 

“You see, Rouquin,” said she to her man, ‘“‘they 
are committing a sacrilege. They will repent of it.” 

“You know nothing about it, wife,’’ answered 
Rouquin; ‘they have become philosophers, and 
when one is once a philosopher he is a philosopher 
TOE. CVCT, | 

“T tell you, Rouquin, that sooner or later they 
will regret what they are doing to-day. They ill- 
treat the saints because they have not helped them 
enough, but for all that the quails won’t fall ready 
cooked into their mouths. They will soon find 
themselves as badly off as before, and when they 
have put out their tongues for enough they will be- 
come pious again. Sooner than people think the 
day will come when Penguinia will again begin to 


140 PENGUIN ISLAND 


honour her blessed patron. Rouquin, it would be 
a good thing, in readiness for that day, if we kept 
a handful of ashes and some rags and bones in an 
old pot in our lodgings. We will say that they are 
the relics of St. Orberosia and that we have saved 
them from the flames at the peril of our lives. I 
am greatly mistaken if we don’t get honour and 
profit out of them. That good action might be 
worth a place from the Curé to sell tapers and hire 
chairs in the chapel of St. Orberosia.” 

On that same day Mother Rouquin took home 
with her a little ashes and some bones, and put them 
in an old jam-pot in her cupboard. 


4 


II 
RINGO 


BA) HE sovereign Nation had taken pos- 
session of the lands of the nobility 
and clergy to sell them at a low price 
to the middle classes and the peas- 
ants. The middle classes and the 
peasants thought that the revolution 
was a good thing for acquiring lands 
and a bad one for retaining them. 

The legislators of the Republic made terrible 
laws for the defence of property, and decreed death 
to anyone who should propose a division of’ wealth. 
But that did not avail the Republic. The peasants 
who had become proprietors bethought themselves 
that though it had made them rich, the Republic 
had nevertheless caused a disturbance to wealth, 
and they desired a system more respectful of pri- 
vate property and more capable of assuring the 
permanence of the new institutions. 

They had not long to wait. The Republic, like 
Agrippina, bore her destroyer in her bosom. 

Having great wars to carry on, it created mili- 
tary forces, and these were destined both to save it 
and to destroy it. Its legislators thought they could 
restrain their generals by the fear of punishment, 
but if they sometimes cut off the heads of unlucky 
soldiers they could not do the same to the for- 
tunate soldiers who obtained over it the advantages 


of having saved its existence. 
141 


142 PENGUIN ISLAND 


In the enthusiasm of victory the renovated Pen- 
guins delivered themselves up to a dragon, more 
terrible than that of their fables, who, like a stork 
amongst frogs, devoured them for fourteen years 
with his insatiable beak. 

Half a century after the reign of the new dragon 
a young Maharajah of Malay, called Djambi, de- 
sirous, like the Scythian Anacharsis, of instructing 
himself by travel, visited Penguinia and wrote an 
interesting account of his travels. I transcribe the 
first page of his account: 


ACCOUNT OF THE TRAVELS OF YOUNG DJamBi IN 
PENGUINIA 


After a voyage of ninety days I landed at the 
vast and deserted port of the Penguins and 
travelled over untilled fields to their ruined capital. 
Surrounded by ramparts and full of barracks and 
arsenals it had a martial though desolate appear- 
ance. Feeble and crippled men wandered proudly 
through the streets, wearing old uniforms and carry- 
ing rusty weapons. 

‘What do you want?” I was rudely asked at the 
gate of the city by a soldier whose moustaches 
pointed to the skies. 

“Sir,” I answered, “I come as an inquirer to visit 
this island.” 

“It is not an island,” replied the soldier. 

“What!” I exclaimed, ‘Penguin Island is not an 
island ?” 

‘No, sir, it is an insula. It was formerly called 
an island, but for a century it has been decreed that 
it shall bear the name of insula. It is the only in- 
sula in the whole universe. Have you a passport ?” 


TRINCO 143 


lacre itvis,” 

‘Go and get it signed at the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs.” 

_ A lame guide who conducted me came to a pause 
In a vast square. 

“The insula,” said he, “has given birth, as you 
know, to Trinco, the greatest genius of the uni- 
verse, whose statue you see before you. That 
obelisk standing to your right commemorates Trin- 
co’s birth; the column that rises to your left has 
Trinco crowned with a diadem upon its summit. 
You see here the triumphal arch dedicated to the 
glory of Trinco and his family.” 

‘What extraordinary feat has Trinco per- 
formed?” I asked. 

eV Mare’ 

“That is nothing extraordinary. We Malayans 
make war constantly.” 

“That may be, but Trinco is the greatest warrior 
of all countries and all times. There never existed 
a greater conqueror than he. As you anchored in 
our port you saw to the east a volcanic island called 
Ampelophoria, shaped like a cone, and of small 
size, but renowned for its wines. And to the west 
a larger island which raises to the sky a long range 
of sharp teeth; for this reason it is called the Dog’s 
Jaws. It is rich in copper mines. We possessed 
both before Trinco’s reign and they were the boun- 
daries of our empire. ‘Trinco extended the Pen- 
guin dominion over the Archipelago of the Tur- 
quoises and the Green Continent, subdued the 
gloomy Porpoises, and planted his flag amid the ice- 
bergs of the Pole and on the burning sands of the 
African deserts. He raised troops in all the coun- 
tries he conquered, and when his armies marched 


144 PENGUIN ISLAND 


past in the wake of our own light infantry, our 
island grenadiers, our hussars, our dragoons, our 
artillery, and our engineers there were to be seen 
yellow soldiers looking in their blue armour like 
crayfish standing on their tails; red men with par- 
rots’ plumes, tatooed with solar and Phallic em- 
blems, and with quivers of poisoned arrows re- 
sounding on their backs; naked blacks armed only 
with their teeth and nails; pygmies riding on cranes; 
gorillas carrying trunks of trees and led by an old 
ape who wore upon his hairy breast the cross of 
the Legion of Honour. And all those troops, led 
to Trinco’s banner by the most ardent patriotism, 
flew on from victory to victory, and in thirty years 
of war Trinco conquered half the known world.” 

“What!” cried I, ‘‘you possess half of the world.” 

“Trinco conquered it for us, and Trinco lost it 
tous. As great in his defeats as in his victories he 
surrendered all that he had conquered. He even 
allowed those two islands we possessed before his 
time, Ampelophoria and the Dog’s Jaws, to be 
taken from us. He left Penguinia impoverished 
and depopulated. The flower of the insula per- 
ished in his wars. At the time of his fall there 
were left in our country none but the hunchbacks 
and cripples from whom we are descended. But he 
gave us glory.” 

‘He made you pay dearly for it!” 

“Glory never costs too much,” replied my guide. 


III 
THE JOURNEY OF DOCTOR OBNUBILE 


es a succession of amazing vicis- 
situdes, the memory of which is in 
great part lost by the wrongs of time 
and the bad style of historians, the 
Penguins established the government 
of the Penguins by themselves. 
They elected a diet or assembly, and 
invested it with the privilege of naming the Head of 
the State. The latter, chosen from among the sim- 
ple Penguins, wore no formidable monster’s crest 
upon his head and exercised no absolute authority 
over the people. He was himself subject to the 
laws of the nation. He was not given the title of 
king, and no ordinal number followed his name. 
He bore such names as Paturle, Janvion, Truffaldin, 
Coquenhot, and Bredouille. These magistrates did 
not make war. ‘They were not suited for that. 

The new state received the name of Public Thing 
or Republic. Its partisans were called republican- 
ists or republicans. ‘They were also named Thing- 
mongers and sometimes Scamps, but this latter name 
was taken in ill part. 

The Penguin democracy did not itself govern. 
It obeyed a financial oligarchy which formed opin- 
ion by means of the newspapers, and held in its 
hands the representatives, the ministers, and the 
president. It controlled the finances of the repub- 
lic, and directed the foreign affairs of the country 
as if it were possessed of sovereign power. 

145 


146 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Empires and kingdoms in those days kept up 
enormous fleets. Penguinia, compelled to do as 
they did, sank under the pressure of her armaments. 
Everybody deplored or pretended to deplore so 
grievous a necessity. However, the rich, and those 
engaged in business or affairs, submitted to it with 
a good heart through a spirit of patriotism, and be- 
cause they counted on the soldiers and sailors to 
defend their goods at home and to acquire markets 
and territories abroad. The great manufacturers 
encouraged the making of cannons and ships through 
a zeal for the national defence and in order to ob- 
tain orders. Among the citizens of middle rank 
and of the liberal professions some resigned them- 
selves to this state of affairs without complaining, 
believing that it would last for ever; others waited 
impatiently for its end and thought they might be 
able to lead the powers to a simultaneous disarm- 
ament. 

The illustrious Professor Obnubile belonged to 
this latter class. 

“War,” said he, “‘is a barbarity to which the prog- 
ress of civilization will put an end. The great 
democracies are pacific and will soon impose their 
will upon the aristocrats.”’ 

Professor Obnubile, who had for sixty years led 
a solitary and retired life in his laboratory, whither 
external noises did not penetrate, resolved to ob- 
serve the spirit of the peoples for himself. He be- 
gan his studies with the greatest of all democracies 
and set sail for New Atlantis. 

After a voyage of fifteen days his steamer entered, 
during the night, the harbour of Titanport, where 
thousands of ships were anchored. An iron bridge 
thrown across the water and shining with lights, 


JOURNEY OF DR. OBNUBILE 147 


stretched between two piers so far apart that Pro- 
fessor Obnubile imagined he was sailing on the seas 
of Saturn and that he saw the marvellous ring which 
girds the planet of the Old Man. And this immense 
conduit bore upon it more than a quarter of the 
wealth of the world. The learned Penguin, having 
disembarked, was waited on by automatons in a 
hotel forty-eight stories high. Then he took the 
great railway that led to Gigantopolis, the capital 
of New Atlantis. In the train there were restau- 
rants, gaming-rooms, athletic arenas, telegraphic, 
commercial, and financial offices, a Protestant 
Church, and the printing-office of a great newspaper, 
which latter the doctor was unable to read, as he 
did not know the language of the New Atlantans. 
The train passed along the banks of great rivers, 
through manufacturing cities which concealed the sky 
with the smoke from their chimneys, towns black in 
the day, towns red at night, full of noise by day and 
full of noise also by night. 

“Here,” thought the doctor, ‘is a people far too 
much engaged in industry and trade to make war. 
I am already certain that the New Atlantans pursue 
a policy of peace. For it is an axiom admitted by 
all economists that peace without and peace within 
are necessary for the progress of commerce and 
industry.” 

As he surveyed Gigantopolis, he was confirmed in 
this opinion. People went through the streets so 
swiftly propelled by hurry that they knocked down 
all who were in their way. Obnubile was thrown 
down several times, but soon succeeded in learning 
how to demean himself better; after an hour’s walk- 
ing he himself knocked down an Atlantan. 

Having reached a great square he saw the portico 


148 PENGUIN ISLAND 


of a palace in the classic style, whose Corinthian 
columns reared their capitals of arborescent acan- 
thus seventy metres above the stylobate. 

As he stood with his head thrown back admiring 
the building, a man of modest appearance ap- 
proached him and said in Penguin: 

“T see by your dress that you are from Penguinia. 
I know your language; I am a sworn interpreter. 
This is the Parliament palace. At the present mo- 
ment the representatives of the States are in delibera- 
tion. Would you like to be present at the sitting?” 

The doctor was brought into the hall and cast his 
looks upon the crowd of legislators who were sitting 
on cane chairs with their feet upon their desks. 

The president arose and, in the midst of general 
inattention, muttered rather than spoke the follow- 
ing formulas which the interpreter immediately 
translated to the doctor. 

‘The war for the opening of the Mongol markets 
being ended to the satisfaction of the States, I pro- 
pose that the accounts be laid before the finance 
committee. .. .” 

“Ts there any opposition? ... 

“The proposal is carried.” 

“The war for the opening of the markets of 
Third-Zealand being ended to the satisfaction of the 
States, I propose that the accounts be laid before the 
finance committee. . . .” 

“Is there any opposition? ... 

“The proposal is carried.” 

“Have I heard aright?” asked Professor Obnu- 
bile. “What? you an industrial people and en- 
gaged in all these wars!” 

‘‘Certainly,” answered the interpreter, ‘“‘these are 
industrial wars. Peoples who have neither com- 


bp] 


” 


JOURNEY OF DR. OBNUBILE 149 


merce nor industry are not obliged to make war, but 
a business people is forced to adopt a policy of con- 
quest. The number of wars necessarily increases 
with our productive activity. As soon as one of our 
industries fails to find a market for its products a 
War is necessary to open new outlets. It is in this 
way we have had a coal war, a copper war, and a 
cotton war. In Third-Zealand we have killed two- 
thirds of the inhabitants in order to compel the re- 
mainder to buy our umbrellas and braces.” 

At that moment a fat man who was sitting in the 
middle of the assembly ascended the tribune. 

“T claim,” said he, “a war against the Emerald 
Republic, which insolently contends with our pigs 
for the hegemony of hams and sauces in all the 
markets of the universe.” 

“Who is that legislator?” asked Doctor Obnubile. 

“He is a pig merchant.” 

“Is there any opposition?” said the President. 
“T put the proposition to the vote.” 

The war against the Emerald Republic was voted 
with uplifted hands by a very large majority. 

“What?” said Obnubile to the interpreter; ‘‘you 
have voted a war with that rapidity and that indif- 
ference! 

“Oh! it is an unimportant war which will hardly 
cost eight million dollars.” 

meAndiunem...).) 

“The men are included in the eight million dollars.” 

Then Doctor Obnubile bent his head in bitter 
reflection. 

“Since wealth and civilization admit of as many 
causes of wars as poverty and barbarism, since the 
folly and wickedness of men are incurable, there re- 
raains but one good action to be done. The wise 


150 PENGUIN ISLAND 


man will collect enough dynamite to blow up this 
planet. When its fragments fly through space an 
imperceptible amelioration will be accomplished in 
the universe and a satisfaction will be given to the 
universal conscience. Moreover, this universal con- 
science does not exist.” 


SS 
eres. 
<— s 


EN 1 Se —~y 


OO 
oS ee —— 
SSS SESS 


I 


THE REVEREND FATHERS AGARIC 
AND CORNEMUSE 


VERY system of government pro- 
duces people who are dissatisfied. 
The Republic or Public Thing pro- 
duced them at first from among the 
nobles who had been despoiled of 
their ancient privileges. These looked 
with regret and hope to Prince 

Crucho, the last of the Draconides, a prince adorned 

both with the grace of youth and the melancholy of 

exile. It also produced them from among the smaller 
traders, who, owing to profound economic causes, no 
longer gained a livelihood. They believed that this 
was the fault of the republic which they had at first 
adored and from which each day they were now be- 
coming more detached. The financiers, both Chris- 
tians and Jews, became by their insolence and their 
cupidity the scourge of the country, which they plun- 
dered and degraded, as well as the scandal of a gov- 
ernment which they never troubled either to destroy 
or preserve, so confident were they that they could 
operate without hindrance under all governments. 

Nevertheless, their sympathies inclined to absolute 

power as the best protection against the socialists, 

their puny but ardent adversaries. And just as they 

imitated the habits of the aristocrats, so they imi- 

tated their political and religious sentiments. Their 

women, in particular, loved the Prince and had 
dreams of appearing one day at his Court. 

153 


154 PENGUIN ISLAND 


However, the Republic retained some partisans 
and defenders. If it was not in a position to believe 
in the fidelity of its own officials it could at least still 
count on the devotion of the manual labourers, 
although it had never relieved their misery. These 
came forth in crowds from their quarries and their 
factories to defend it, and marched in long proces- 
sions, gloomy, emaciated, and sinister. They would 
have died for it because it had given them hope. 

Now, under the Presidency of Theodore Formose, 
there lived in a peaceable suburb of Alca a monk 
called Agaric, who kept a school and assisted in 
arranging marriages. In his school he taught fenc- 
ing and riding to the sons of old families, illustrious 
by their birth, but now as destitute of wealth as of 
privilege. And as soon as they were old enough he 
married them to the daughters of the opulent and 
despised caste of financiers. 

Tall, thin, and dark, Agaric used to walk in deep 
thought, with his breviary in his hand and his brow 
loaded with care, through the corridors of the school 
and the alleys of the garden. His care was not 
limited to inculcating in his pupils abstruse doctrines 
and mechanical precepts and to endowing them 
afterwards with legitimate and rich wives. He en- 
tertained political designs and pursued the realisa- 
tion of a gigantic plan. His thought of thoughts 
and labour of labours was to overthrow the Repub- 
lic. He was not moved to this by any personal in- 
terest. He believed that a democratic state was 
opposed to the holy society to which body and soul 
he belonged. And all the other monks, his brethren, 
thought the same. The Republic was perpetually 
at strife with the congregation of monks and the 
assembly of the faithful. True, to plot the death of 


FATHERS AGARIC AND CORNEMUSE 155 


the new government was a difficult and perilous en- 
terprise. Still, Agaric was in a position to carry on 
a formidable conspiracy. At that epoch, when the 
clergy guided the superior classes of the Penguins, 
this monk exercised a tremendous influence over the 
aristocracy of Alca. 

All the young men whom he had brought up 
waited only for a favourable moment to march 
against the popular power. The sons of the ancient 
families did not practise the arts or engage in busi: 
ness. ‘They were almost all soldiers and served the 
Republic. They served it, but they did not love it; 
they regretted the dragon’s crest. And the fair 
Jewesses shared in these regrets in order that they 
might be taken for Christians. 

One July as he was walking in a suburban street 
which ended in some dusty fields, Agaric heard 
groans coming from a moss-grown well that had been 
abandoned by the gardeners. And almost immedi- 
ately he was told by a cobbler of the neighbourhood 
that a ragged man who had shouted out “Hurrah 
for the Republic!”’ had been thrown into the well by 
some cavalry officers who were passing, and had 
sunk up to his ears in the mud. Agaric was quite 
ready to see a general significance in this particular 
fact. He inferred a great fermentation in the whole 
aristocratic and military caste, and concluded that 
it was the moment to act. 

The next day he went to the end of the Wood of 
Conils to visit the good Father Cornemuse. He 
found the monk in his laboratory pouring a golden- 
coloured liquor into a still. He was a short, fat, 
little man, with vermilion-tinted cheeks and elab- 
orately polished bald head. His eyes had ruby- 
coloured pupils like a guinea-pig’s. He graciously 


156 PENGUIN ISLAND 


saluted his visitor and offered him a glass of the St. 
Orberosian liqueur, which he manufactured, and 
from the sale of which he gained immense wealth. 

Agaric made a gesture of refusal. Then, stand- 
ing on his long feet and pressing his melancholy hat 
against his stomach, he remained silent. 

“Take a seat,” said Cornemuse to him. 

Agaric sat down on a rickety stool, but continued 
mute. 

Then the monk of Conils inquired: 

‘Tell me some news of your young pupils. Have 
the dear children sound views?” 

“T am very satisfied with them,’ answered the 
teacher. ‘It is everything to be nurtured in sound 
principles. It is necessary to have sound views be- 
fore having any views at all, for afterwards it is too 
late. . . . Yes, I have great grounds for comfort. 
But we live in a sad age.” 

“Alas!” sighed Cornemuse. 

“We are passing through evil days... . 

Pimes or trial 

“Yet, Cornemuse, the mind of the public is not 
so entirely corrupted as it seems.” 

‘Perhaps you are right.” 

“The people are tired of a government that ruins 
them and does nothing for them. Every day fresh 
scandals spring up. The Republic is sunk in shame. 
It is ruined.” 

‘(May God grant it!” 

“Cornemuse, what do you think of Prince Cru- 
cho?” 

“He is an amiable young man and, I dare say, a 
worthy scion of an august stock. I pity him for 
having to endure the pains of exile at so early an 
age. Spring has no flowers for the exile, and au- 


9 


FATHERS AGARIC AND CORNEMUSE 157 


tumn no fruits. Prince Crucho has sound views; he 
respects the clergy; he practises our religion; be- 
sides, he consumes a good deal of my little products.” 

‘‘Cornemuse, in many homes, both rich and poor, 
his return is hoped for. Believe me, he will come 
back.” 

‘May I live to throw my mantle beneath his feet !’’ 
sighed Cornemuse. 

Seeing that he held these sentiments, Agaric de- 
picted to him the state of people’s minds such as he 
himself imagined them. He showed him the nobles 
and the rich exasperated against the popular govern- 
ment; the army refusing to endure fresh insults; the 
officials willing to betray their chiefs; the people dis- 
contented, riot ready to burst forth, and the enemies 
of the monks, the agents of the constituted authority, 
thrown into the wells of Alca. He concluded that it 
was the moment to strike a great blow. 

“We can,” he cried, “‘save the Penguin people, 
we can deliver it from its tyrants, deliver it from 
itself, restore the Dragon’s crest, re-establish the 
ancient State, the good State, for the honour of the 
faith and the exaltation of the Church. We can do 
this if we will. We possess great wealth and we 
exert secret influences; by our evangelistic and out- 
spoken journals we communicate with all the eccle- 
siastics in towns and county alike, and we inspire 
them with our own eager enthusiasm and our own 
burning faith. They will kindle their penitents and 
their congregations. I can dispose of the chiefs of 
the army; I have an understanding with the men of 
the people. Unknown to them I sway the minds of 
umbrella sellers, publicans, shopmen, gutter mer- 
chants, newspaper boys, women of the streets, and 
police agents. We have more people on our side 


158 PENGUIN ISLAND 


than we need. What are we waiting for? Let us 
actin 

‘What do you think of doing?” asked Cornemuse. 

“Of forming a vast conspiracy and overthrowing 
the Republic, of re-establishing Crucho on the throne 
of the Draconides.”’ 

Cornemuse moistened his lips with his tongue 
several times. Then he said with unction: 

“Certainly the restoration of the Draconides is 
desirable; it is eminently desirable; and for my part, 
I desire it with all my heart. As for the Republic, 
you know what I think of it. . . . But would it not 
be better to abandon it to its fate and let it die of 
the vices of its own constitution? Doubtless, Agaric, 
what you propose is noble and generous. It would 
be a fine thing to save this great and unhappy coun- 
try, to re-establish it in its ancient splendour. But 
reflect on it, we are Christians before we are Pen- 
guins. And we must take heed not to compromise 
religion in political enterprises.”’ 

Agaric replied eagerly: 

‘Fear nothing. We shall hold all the threads of 
the plot, but we ourselves shall remain in the back- 
ground. We shall not be seen.” 

“Like flies in milk,’ murmured the monk of 
Conils. 

And turning his keen ruby-coloured eyes towards 
his brother monk: 

“Take care. Perhaps the Republic is stronger 
than it seems. Possibly, too, by dragging it out of 
the nerveless inertia in which it now rests we may 
only consolidate its forces. Its malice is great; if 
we attack it, it will defend itself. It makes bad laws 
which hardly affect us; if it is frightened it will make 
terrible ones against us. Let us not lightly engage 


FATHERS AGARIC AND CORNEMUSE 159 


in an adventure in which we may get fleeced. You 
think the opportunity a good one. I don’t, and I 
am going to tell you why. The present government 
is not yet known by everybody, that is to say, it is 
known by nobody. It proclaims that it is the Pub. 
lic Thing, the common thing. The populace be- 
lieves it and remains democratic and Republican, 
But patience! This same people will one day de. 
mand that the public thing be the people’s thing. 1 
need not tell you how insolent, unregulated, and 
contrary to Scriptural polity such claims seem to me. 
But the people will make them, and enforce them, 
and then there will be an end of the present govern- 
ment. ‘The moment cannot now be far distant; and 
it is then that we ought to act in the interests of our 
august body. Let us wait. What hurriesus? Our 
existence is not in peril. It has not been rendered 
absolutely intolerable to us. The Republic fails in 
respect and submission to us; it does not give the 
priests the honours it owes them. But it lets us live. 
And such is the excellence of our position that with us 
to live is to prosper. The Republic is hostile to us, 
but women revere us. President Formose does not 
assist at the celebration of our mysteries, but I have 
seen his wife and daughters at my feet. They buy 
my phials by the gross. I have no better clients even 
among the aristocracy. Let us say what there is to 
be said for it. There is no country in the world as 
good for priests and monks as Penguinia. In what 
other country would you find our virgin wax, our 
virile incense, our rosaries, our scapulars, our holy 
water, and our St. Orberosian liqueur sold in such 
great quantities ? What other people would, like 
the Penguins, give a hundred golden crowns for a 
wave of our hands, a sound from our mouths, a 


160 PENGUIN ISLAND 


movement of our lips? For my part, I gain a thou- 
sand times more, in this pleasant, faithful, and docile 
Penguinia, by extracting the essence from a bundle 
of thyme, than I could make by tiring my lungs with 
preaching the remission of sins in the most populous 
States of Europe and America. Honestly, would 
Penguinia be better off if a police officer came 
to take me away from here and put me on a steam- 
boat bound for the Islands of Night ?”’ 

Having thus spoken, the monk of Conils got up 
and led his guest into a huge shed where hundreds 
of orphans clothed in blue were packing bottles, 
nailing up cases, and gumming tickets. The ear 
was deafened by the noise of hammers mingled with 
the dull rumbling of bales being placed upon the 
rails. 

“Tt is from here that consignments are for- 
warded,” said Cornemuse. ‘I have obtained from 
the government a railway through the Wood and a 
station at my door. Every three days I fill a truck 
with my own products. You see that the Republic 
has not killed all beliefs.” 

Agaric made a last effort to engage the wise dis- 
tiller in his enterprise. He pointed him to a prompt, 
certain, dazzling success. 

“Don’t you wish to share in it?” he added. 
“Don’t you wish to bring back your king from exile ?”’ 

‘Exile is pleasant to men of good will,” answered 
the monk of Conils. “If you are guided by me, my 
dear Brother Agaric, you will give up your project 
for the present. For my own part I have no illu- 
sions. Whether or not I belong to your party, if 
you lose, I shall have to pay like you.” 

Father Agaric took leave of his friend and went 
back satisfied to his school. “Cornemuse,” thought 


FATHERS AGARIC AND CORNEMUSE 161 


he, ‘‘not being able to prevent the plot, would like 
to make it succeed and he will give money.’ Agaric 
was not deceived. Such, indeed, was the solidarity 
among priests and monks that the acts of a single 
one bound them all. That was at once both their 
strength and their weakness. 


II 
PRINCE CRUCHO 


GARIC resolved to proceed without 
delay to Prince Crucho, who hon- 
oured him with his familiarity. In 
the dusk of the evening he went out 
of his school by the side door, dis- 
guised as a cattle merchant and took 
passage on board the St. Maél. 

The next day he landed in Porpoisea, for it was 
at Chitterlings Castle on this hospitable soil that 
Crucho ate the bitter bread of exile. 

Agaric met the Prince on the road driving in a 
motor-car with two young ladies at the rate of a 
hundred miles an hour. When the monk saw him 
he shook his red umbrella and the prince stopped 
his car. 

“Ts it you, Agaric? Getin! There are already 
three of us, but we can make room for you. You 
can take one of these young ladies on your knee.” 

The pious Agaric got in. 

“What news, worthy father?” asked the young 
prince. 

“Great news,’ answered Agaric. ‘Can I speak?” 

“You can. I have nothing secret from these two 
ladies.”’ 

“Sire; Penguinia claims you. You will not be 
deaf to her call.”’ 

Agaric described the state of feeling and outlined 
a vast plot. 


AS 


VA 


162 


PRINCE CRUCHO 163 


“On my first signal,” said he, “all your partisans 
will rise at once. With cross in hand and habits 
girded up, your venerable clergy will lead the armed 
crowd into Formose’s palace. We shall carry terror 
and death among your enemies. For a reward of 
our efforts we only ask of you, Sire, that you will not 
render them useless. We entreat you to come and 
seat yourself on the throne that we shall prepare.” 

The prince returned a simple answer: 

“T shall enter Alca on a green horse.” 

Agaric declared that he accepted this manly re- 
sponse. Although, contrary to his custom, he had a 
lady on his knee, he adjured the young prince, with 
a sublime loftiness of soul, to be faithful to his royal 
duties. 

“Sire,” he cried, with tears in his eyes, ‘‘you will 
live to remember the day on which you have been 
restored from exile, given back to your people, re- 
established on the throne of your ancestors by the 
hands of your monks, and crowned by them with 
the august crest of the Dragon. King Crucho, may 
you equal the glory of your ancestor Draco the 
Great!” 

The young prince threw himself with emotion on 
his restorer and attempted to embrace him, but he 
was prevented from reaching him by the girth of the 
two ladies, so tightly packed were they all in that 
historic carriage. 

‘Worthy father,” said he, “I would like all Pen. 
guinia to witness this embrace.” 

“It would be a cheering spectacle,” said Agaric. 

In the mean time the motor-car rushed like a tor 
nado through hamlets and villages, crushing hens, 
geese, turkeys, ducks, guinea-fowls, cats, dogs, pigs, 
children, labourers, and women beneath its insatia- 


164 PENGUIN ISLAND 


ble tyres. And the pious Agaric turned over his 
great designs in his mind. His voice, coming from 
behind one of the ladies, expressed this thought: 

‘“‘We must have money, a great deal of money.” 

“That is your business,’ answered the prince. 

But already the park gates were opening to the 
formidable motor-car. 

The dinner was sumptuous. ‘They toasted the 
Dragon’s crest. Everybody knows that a closed 
goblet is a sign of sovereignty; so Prince Crucho and 
Princess Gudrune, his wife, drank out of goblets 
that were covered over like ciboriums. The prince 
had his filled several times with the wines of Pen- 
guinia, both white and red. 

Crucho had received a truly princely education, 
and he excelled in motoring, but was not ignorant of 
history either. He was said to be well versed in the 
antiquities and famous deeds of his family; and, in- 
deed, he gave a notable proof of his knowledge in 
this respect. As they were speaking of the various 
remarkable peculiarities that had been noticed in 
famous women, 

“It is perfectly true,” said he, “that Queen 
Crucha, whose name I bear, had the mark of a little 
monkey’s head upon her body.” 

During the evening Agaric had a decisive inter- 
view with three of the prince’s oldest councillors. It 
was decided to ask for funds from Crucho’s father- 
in-law, as he was anxious to have a king for son-in- 
law, from several Jewish ladies, who were impatient 
to become ennobled, and, finally, from the Prince 
Regent of the Porpoises, who had promised his aid 
to the Draconides, thinking that by Crucho’s resto- 
ration he would weaken the Penguins, the heredi- 
tary enemies of his people. The three old coun- 


PRINCE CRUCHO 165 


cillors divided among themselves the three chief 
offices of the Court, those of Chamberlain, Senes- 
chal, and High Steward, and authorised the monk to 
distribute the other places to the prince’s best ad- 
vantage. 

“Devotion has to be rewarded,” said the three old 
councillors. 

“And treachery also,” said Agaric. 

“Tt is but too true,” replied one of them, the Mar- 
quis of Sevenwounds, who had experience of revo- 
lutions. 

There was dancing, and after the ball Princess 
Gudrune tore up her green robe to make cockades. 
With her own hands she sewed a piece of it on the 
monk’s breast, upon which he shed tears of sensi- 
bility and gratitude. 

M. de Plume, the prince’s equerry, set out the 
same evening to look for a green horse. 


mH 
THE: CABAL 


\ EN 
ay Penguinia, the Reverend Father Ag- 
aric disclosed his projects to Prince 
Nias ine 4 | Adélestan des Boscénos, of whose 
Te @ Draconian sentiments he was well 
LA) aware. 

The Prince belonged to the highest 
nobility. The Torticol des Boscénos went back 
to Brian the Good, and under the Draconides 
had held the highest offices in the kingdom. 
In 1179, Philip Torticol, High Admiral of Pen- 
guinia, a brave, faithful, and generous, but vin- 
dictive man, delivered over the port of La Crique 
and the Penguin fleet to the enemies of the 
kingdom, because he suspected that Queen Cru- 
cha, whose lover he was, had been unfaithful to him 
and loved a stable-boy. It was that great queen 
who gave to the Boscénos the silver warming-pan 
which they bear in their arms. As for their motto, 
it only goes back to the sixteenth century. The 
story of its origin is as follows: One gala night, as 
he mingled with the crowd of courtiers who were 
watching the fire-works in the king’s garden, Duke 
John des Boscénos approached the Duchess of Skull 
and put his hand under the petticoat of that lady, 
who made no complaint at the gesture. The king, 
happening to pass, surprised them and contented 


himself with saying, “And thus I find you.” These 
166 


GA) Pena his return to the capital of 
e 


a rere 


THE CABAL 167 


four words became the motto of the Boscénos. 

Prince Adélestan had not degenerated from his 
ancestors. He preserved an unalterable fidelity for 
the race of the Draconides and desired nothing so 
much as the restoration of Prince Crucho, an event 
which was in his eyes to be the fore-runner of the 
restoration of his own fortune. He therefore read- 
ily entered into the Reverend Father Agaric’s plans. 
He joined himself at once to the monk’s projects, 
and hastened to put him into communication with 
the most loyal Royalists of his acquaintance, Count 
Cléna, M. de la Trumelle, Viscount Olive, and M. 
Bigourd. They met together one night in the Duke 
of Ampoule’s country house, six miles eastward of 
Alca, to consider ways and means. 

M. de la Trumelle was in favour of legal action. 

“We ought to keep within the law,” said he in 
substance. ‘We are for order. It is by an untiring 
propaganda that we shall best pursue the realisation 
of our hopes. We must change the feeling of the 
country. Our cause will conquer because it is just.” 

The Prince des Boscénos expressed a contrary 
opinion. He thought that, in order to triumph, just 
causes need force quite as much and even more than 
unjust causes require it. 

“In the present situation,” said he tranquilly, 
“three methods of action present themselves: to hire 
the butcher boys, to corrupt the ministers, and to 
kidnap President Formose.” 

“Tt would be a mistake to kidnap Formose,”’ ob- 
jected M. de la Trumelle. “The President is on 
our side.” 

The attitude and sentiments of the President of 
the Republic are explained by the fact that one 
Dracophil proposed to seize Formose while another 


168 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Dracophil regarded him as a friend. Formose 
showed himself favourable to the Royalists, whose 
habits he admired and imitated. If he smiled at the 
mention of the Dragon’s crest it was at the thought 
of putting it on his own head. He was envious of 
sovereign power, not because he felt himself capable 
of exercising it, but because he loved to appear so. 
According to the expression of a Penguin chronicler, 
“he was a goose.” 

Prince des Boscénos maintained his proposal to 
march against Formose’s palace and the House of 
Parliament. 

Count Cléna was even still more energetic. 

“Let us begin,” said he, ‘‘by slaughtering, disem- 
bowelling, and braining the Republicans and all 
partisans of the government. Afterwards we shall 
see what more need be done.” 

M. de la Trumelle was a moderate, and moder- 
ates are always moderately opposed to violence. He 
recognised that Count Cléna’s policy was inspired 
by a noble feeling and that it was high-minded, but 
he timidly objected that perhaps it was not con- 
formable to principle, and that it presented certain 
dangers. At last he consented to discuss it. 

“T propose,” added he, “‘to draw up an appeal to 
the people. Let us show who we are. For my own 
part I can assure you that I shall not hide my flag 
in my pocket.” 

M. Bigourd began to speak. 

“Gentlemen, the Penguins are dissatisfied with 
the new order because it exists, and it is natural for 
men to complain of their condition. But at the 
same time the Penguins are afraid to change their 
government because new things alarm them. They 
have not known the Dragon’s crest and, although 


THE CABAL 169 


they sometimes say that they regret it, we must not 
believe them. It is easy to see that they speak in this 
way either without thought or because they are in an 
ill-temper. Let us not have any illusions about their 
feelings towards ourselves. They do not like us. 
They hate the aristocracy both from a base envy and 
from a generous love of equality. And these two 
united feelings are very strong in a people. Public 
opinion is not against us, because it knows nothing 
about us. But when it knows what we want it will 
not follow us. If we let it be seen that we wish to 
destroy democratic government and restore the 
Dragon’s crest, who will be our partisans? Only 
the butcher-boys and the little shopkeepers of Alca. 
And could we even count on them to the end? They 
are dissatisfied, but at the bottom of their hearts 
they are Republicans. They are more anxious to 
sell their cursed wares than to see Crucho again. If 
we act openly we shall only cause alarm. 

“To make people sympathise with us and follow 
us we must make them believe that we want, not to 
overthrow the Republic, but, on the contrary, to 
restore it, to cleanse, to purify, to embellish, to 
adorn, to beautify, and to ornament it, to render it, 
in a word, glorious and attractive. Therefore, we 
ought not to act openly ourselves. It is known that 
we are not favourable to the present order. We 
must have recourse to a friend of the Republic, and, 
if we are to do what is best, to a defender of this 
government. We have plenty to choose from. It 
would be well to prefer the most popular and, if I 
dare say so, the most republican of them. We shall 
win him over to us by flattery, by presents, and above 
all by promises. Promises cost less than presents, 
and are worth more. No one gives as much as he 


170 PENGUIN ISLAND 


who gives hopes. It is not necessary for the man we 
choose to be of brilliant intellect. I would even pre- 
fer him to be of no great ability. Stupid people 
show an inimitable grace in roguery. Be guided by 
me, gentlemen, and overthrow the Republic by the 
agency of a Republican. Let us be prudent. But 
prudence does not exclude energy. If you need me 
you will find me at your disposal.” 

This speech made a great impression upon those 
who heard it. The mind of the pious Agaric was 
particularly impressed. But each of them was anx- 
ious to appoint himself to a position of honour and 
profit. A secret government was organised of which 
all those present were elected active members. The 
Duke of Ampoule, who was the great financier of 
the party, was chosen treasurer and charged with 
organising funds for the propaganda. 

The meeting was on the point of coming to an end 
when a rough voice was heard singing an old air: 


Boscénos est un gros cochon; 

On en va faire des andouilles 

Des saucisses et du jambon 

Pour le réveillon des pauvy’ bougres. 


It had, for two hundred years, been a well-known 
song in the slums of Alca. Prince Boscénos did not 
like to hear it. He went down into the street, and, 
perceiving that the singer was a workman who was 
placing some slates on the roof of a church, he po- 
litely asked him to sing something else. 

“T will sing what I like,” answered the man. 

~My friend, to,pleasei mec sae 

‘T don’t want to please you.” 

Prince Boscénos was as a rule good-tempered, but 
he was easily angered and a man of great strength. 


THE CABAT, 71 


“Fellow, come down or I will go up to you,” 
cried he, in a terrible voice. 

As the workman, astride on his coping, showed no 
sign of budging, the prince climbed quickly up the 
staircase of the tower and attacked the singer. He 
gave him a blow that broke his jaw-bone and sent 
him rolling into a water-spout. At that moment 
seven or eight carpenters, who were working on the 
rafters, heard their companion’s cry and looked 
through the window. Seeing the prince on the 
coping they climbed along a ladder that was leaning 
on the slates and reached him just as he was slipping 
into the tower. They sent him, head foremost, down 
the one hundred and thirty-seven steps of the spiral 
staircase. 


\ 


GP AU 
aS / 


1 wale Sa 
| a 


IV 
VISCOUNTESS OLIVE 


HE Penguins had the finest army in 
the world. So had the Porpoises. 
And it was the same with the other 
nations of Europe. The smallest 
amount of thought will prevent any 
surprise at this. For all armies are 
the finest in the world. The second 
finest army, if one could exist, would be in a notori- 
ously inferior position; it would be certain to be 
beaten. It ought to be disbanded at once. There- 
fore, all armies are the finest in the world. In 
France the illustrious Colonel Marchand understood 
this when, before the passage of the Yalou, being 
questioned by some journalists about the Russo- 
Japanese war, he did not hesitate to describe the 
Russian army as the finest in the world, and also the 
Japanese. And it should be noticed that even after 
suffering the most terrible reverses an army does not 
fall from its position of being the finest in the world. 
For if nations ascribe their victories to the ability of 
their generals and the courage of their soldiers, they 
always attribute their defeats to an inexplicable fa. 
tality. On the other hand, navies are classed ac. 
cording to the number of their ships. There is a 
first, a second, a third, and so on. So that there 
exists no doubt as to the result of naval wars. 
The Penguins had the finest army and the second 


navy in the world. ‘This navy was commanded by 
172 


VISCOUNTESS OLIVE 173 


the famous Chatillon, who bore the title of Emiral- 
bahr, and by abbreviation Emiral. It is the same 
word which, unfortunately in a corrupt form, is used 
to-day among several European nations to designate 
the highest grade in the naval service. But as there 
was but one Emiral among the Penguins, a singular 
prestige, if 1 dare say so, was attached to that 
rank. 

The Emiral did not belong to the nobility. A 
child of the people, he was loved by the people. 
They were flattered to see a man who sprang from 
their own ranks holding a position of honour. Cha- 
tillon was good-looking and fortune favoured him. 
He was not over-addicted to thought. No event 
ever disturbed his serene outlook. 

The Reverend Father Agaric, surrendering to 
M. Bigourd’s reasons and recognising that the exist- 
ing government could only be destroyed by one of 
its defenders, cast his eyes upon Emiral Chatillon. 
He asked a large sum of money from his friend, 
the Reverend Father Cornemuse, which the latter 
handed him with a sigh. And with this sum he 
hired six hundred butcher boys of Alca to run be- 
hind Chatillon’s horse and shout, ‘Hurrah for the 
Emiral!” Henceforth Chatillon could not take a 
single step without being cheered. 

Viscountess Olive asked him for a private inter- 
view. He received her at the Admiralty * in a room 
decorated with anchors, shells, and grenades. 

She was discreetly dressed in greyish blue. A hat 
trimmed with roses covered her pretty, fair hair. 
Behind her veil her eyes shone like sapphires. Al- 
though she came of Jewish origin there was no 
more fashionable woman in the whole nobility. She 

*Or better, Emiralty. 


174 PENGUIN ISLAND 


was tall and well shaped; her form was that of the 
year, her figure that of the season. 

‘“miral,” said she, in a delightful voice, ‘I can- 
not conceal my emotion from you. .. . It is very 
natural fe. before a hero. 

“You are too kind. But tell me, Viscountess, 
what brings me the honour of your visit.” 

‘For a long time I have been anxious to see you, 
to speak to you. . . . So I very willingly undertook 
to convey a message to you.” 

**Please take a seat.” 

“How still it is here.” 

“Yes, it is quiet enough.” 

“You can hear the birds singing.” 

‘Sit down, then, dear lady.” 

And he drew up an arm-chair for her. 

She took a seat with her back to the light. 

‘“Emiral, I came to bring you a very important 
message, a enessapes. iy 

expla 

‘““Emiral, have you ever seen Prince Crucho?”’ 

SNever.” 

She sighed. 

“Tt is a great pity. He would be so delighted to 
see you! He esteems and appreciates you. He has 
your portrait on his desk beside his mother’s. What 
a pity it is he is not better known! He is a charm- 
ing prince and so grateful for what is done for him! 
He will be a great king. For he will be king with- 
out doubt. He will come back and sooner than 
people think. . . . What I have to tell you, the mes- 
sage with which I am entrusted, refers precisely 
to... 

The Emiral stood up. 

“Not a word more, dear lady. I have the esteem, 


VISCOUNTESS OLIVE 175 


the confidence of the Republic. I will not betray 
it. And why should | betray it? Iam loaded with 
honours and dignities.”’ 

‘Allow me to tell you, my dear Emiral, that your 
honours and dignities are far from equalling what 
you deserve. If your services were properly re- 
warded, you would be Emiralissimo and Generalis- 
simo, Commander-in-chief of the troops both on 
land and sea. The Republic is very ungrateful to 
you.” 

‘All governments are more or less ungrateful.” 

“Yes, but the Republicans are jealous of you. 
That class of person is always afraid of his superiors. 
They cannot endure the Services. Everything that 
has to do with the navy and the army is odious to 
them. They are afraid of you.” 

“That is possible.” 

‘They are wretches; they are ruining the coun- 
try. Don’t you wish to save Penguinia?” 

“Tn what way?” 

“By sweeping away all the rascals of the Repub- 
lic, all the Republicans.” 

“What a proposal to make to me, dear lady!” 

“Tt is what will certainly be done, if not by you, 
then by some one else. The Generalissimo, to men- 
tion him alone, is ready to throw all the ministers, 
deputies, and senators into the sea, and to recall 
Prince Crucho.” 

“Oh, the rascal, the scoundrel,” exclaimed the 
Emiral, 

“Do to him what he would do to you. The 
prince will know how to recognise your services. 
He will give you the Constable’s sword and a mag- 
nificent grant. I am commissioned, in the mean 
time, to hand you a pledge of his royal friendship.” 


176 PENGUIN ISLAND 


As she said these words she drew a green cockade 
from her bosom. 

“What is that ?”? asked the Emiral. 

“Tt is his colours which Crucho sends you.” 

“Be good enough to take them back.” 

“So that they may be offered to the Generalis- 
simo who will accept them! . . . No, Emiral, let 
me place them on your glorious breast.” 

Chatillon gently repelled the lady. But for some 
minutes he thought her extremely pretty, and he felt 
this impression still more when two bare arms and 
the rosy palms of two delicate hands touched him 
lightly. He yielded almost immediately. Olive was 
slow in fastening the ribbon. Then when it was 
done she made a low courtesy and saluted Chatillon 
with the title of Constable. 

“T have been ambitious like my comrades,” an- 
swered the sailor, “I don’t hide it, and perhaps I am 
so still; but upon my word of honour, when I look 
at you, the only desire I feel is for a cottage and a 
heart... 

She turned upon him the charming sapphire 
glances that flashed from under her eyelids. 

‘That is to be had also . . . what are you doing, 
Emiral ?” 

“T am looking for the heart.” 

When she left the Admiralty, the Viscountess 
went immediately to the Reverend Father Agaric to 
give an account of her visit. 

“You must go to him again, dear lady,” said that 
austere monk. 


V 
THE PRINCE DES BOSCENOS 


Py ORNING and evening the newse 

papers that had been bought by the 
Dracophils proclaimed Chatillon’s 
praises and hurled shame and oppro- 
brium upon the Ministers of the Re- 
public. Chatillon’s portrait was sold 
through the streets of Alca. Those 
young descendants of Remus who carry plaster fig- 
ures on their heads, offered busts of Chatillon for 
sale upon the bridges. 

Every evening Chatillon rode upon his white horse 
round the Queen’s Meadow, a place frequented 
by the people of fashion. The Dracophils posted 
along the Emiral’s route a crowd of needy Penguins 
who kept shouting: “It is Chatillon we want.” 
The middle classes of Alca conceived a profound ad. 
miration for the Emiral. Shopwomen murmured: 
“He is good-looking.”” Women of fashion slack- 
ened the speed of their motor-cars and kissed hands 
to him as they passed, amidst the hurrahs of an en- 
thusiastic populace. 

One day, as he went into a tobacco shop, two Pen- 
guins who were putting letters in the box recognized 
Chatillon and cried at the top of their voices: ‘“Hur- 
rah for the Emiral! Down with the Republicans.” 
All those who were passing stopped in front of the 
shop. Chatillon lighted his cigar before the eyes of 
a dense crowd of frenzied citizens who waved thei 
177 


178 PENGUIN ISLAND 


hats and cheered. The crowd kept increasing, and 
the whole town, singing and marching behind its 
hero, went back with him to the Admiralty. 

The Emiral had an old comrade in arms, Under- 
Emiral Vulcanmould, who had served with great 
distinction, a man as true as gold and as loyal as his 
sword. Vulcanmould plumed himself on his thor- 
oughgoing independence and he went among the 
partisans of Crucho and the Minister of the Repub- 
lic telling both parties what he thought of them. 
M. Bigourd maliciously declared that he told each 
party what the other party thought of it. In truth 
he had on several occasions been guilty of regret- 
table indiscretions, which were overlooked as being 
the freedoms of a soldier who knew nothing of in- 
trigue. Every morning he went to see Chatillon, 
whom he treated with the cordial roughness of a 
brother in arms. 

“Well, old buffer, so you are popular,” said he to 
him. ‘Your phiz is sold on the heads of pipes and 
on liqueur bottles and every drunkard in Alca spits 
out your name as he rolls in the gutter. . . . Chat- 
illon, the hero of the Penguins! Chatillon, de- 
fender of the Penguin glory! . . .Who would have 
said it? Who would have thought it?” 

And he laughed with his harsh laugh. Then 
changing his tone: 

“But, joking aside, are you not a bit surprised at 
what is happening to your” 

“No, indeed,’ answered Chatillon. 

And out went the honest Vulcanmould, banging 
the door behind him. 

In the mean time Chatillon had taken a little flat 
at number 18 Johannes-Talpa Street, so that he 
might receive Viscountess Olive. They met there 


THE PRINCE DES BOSCENOS _ 179 


every day. He was desperately in love with her. 
During his martial and neptunian life he had loved 
crowds of women, red, black, yellow, and white, 
and some of them had been very beautiful. But be- 
fore he met the Viscountess he did not know what a 
woman really was. When the Viscountess Olive 
called him her darling, her dear darling, he felt in 
heaven and it seemed to him that the stars shone 
in her hair. 

She would come a little late, and, as she put her 
bag on the table, she would ask pensively: 

“Let me sit on your knee.” 

And then she would talk of subjects suggested by 
the pious Agaric, interrupting the conversation with 
sighs and kisses. She would ask him to dismiss 
such and such an officer, to give a command to an- 
other, to send the squadron here or there. And at 
the right moment she would exclaim: 

“How young you are, my dear!” 

And he did whatever she wished, for he was sim- 
ple, he was anxious to wear the Constable’s sword, 
and to receive a large grant; he did not dislike play- 
ing a double part, he had a vague idea of saving 
Penguinia, and he was in love. 

This delightful woman induced him to remove 
the troops that were at La Cirque, the port where 
Crucho was to land. By this means it was made 
certain that there would be no obstacle to prevent 
the prince from entering Penguinia. 

The pious Agaric organised public meetings so 
as to keep up the agitation. The Dracophils held 
one or two every day in some of the thirty-six dis- 
tricts of Alca, and preferably in the poorer quar- 
ters. They desired to win over the poor, for they 
are the most numerous. On the fourth of May a 


180 PENGUIN ISLAND 


particularly fine meeting was held in an old cattle- 
market, situated in the centre of a populous suburb 
filled with housewives sitting on the doorsteps and 
children playing in the gutters. There were present 
about two thousand people, in the opinion of the 
Republicans, and six thousand according to the 
reckoning of the Dracophils. In the audience was 
to be seen the flower of Penguin society, including 
Prince and Princess des Boscénos, Count Cléna, 
M. de La Trumelle, M. Bigourd, and several rich 
Jewish ladies. 

The Generalissimo of the national army had come 
in uniform. He was cheered. 

The committee had been carefully formed. A 
man of the people, a workman, but a man of sound 
principles, M. Rauchin, the secretary of the yellow 
syndicate, was asked to preside, supported by Count 
Cléna and M. Michaud, a butcher. 

The government which Penguinia had freely given 
itself was called by such names as cesspool and drain 
in several eloquent speeches. But President For- 
mose was spared and no mention was made of 
Crucho or the priests. 

The meeting was not unanimous. A defender of 
the modern State and of the Republic, a manual 
labourer, stood up. 

“Gentlemen,” said M. Rauchin, the chairman, 
‘we have told you that this meeting would not be 
unanimous. We are not like our opponents, we are 
honest men. I allow our opponent to speak. 
Heaven knows what you are going to hear. Gentle- 
men, I beg of you to restrain as long as you can the 
expression of your contempt, your disgust, and your 
indignation.” 


““Gentlemen,”’ 


said the opponent. .... 


THE PRINCE DES BOSCENOS 181 


Immediately he was knocked down, trampled be- 
neath the feet of the indignant crowd, and his un- 
recognisable remains thrown out of the hall. 

The tumult was still resounding when Count 
Cléna ascended the tribune. Cheers took the place 
of groans and when silence was restored the orator 
uttered these words: 

“Comrades, we are going to see whether you have 
blood in your veins. What we have got to do is to 
slaughter, disembowel, and brain all the Republi- 
cans.” 

This speech let loose such a thunder of applause 
that the old shed rocked with it, and a cloud of acrid 
and thick dust fell from its filthy walls and worm- 
eaten beams and enveloped the audience. 

A resolution was carried vilifying the government 
and acclaiming Chatillon. And the audience de- 
parted singing the hymn of the liberator: “It is 
Chatillon we want.” 

The only way out of the old market was through 
a muddy alley shut in by omnibus stables and coal 
sheds. There was no moon and a cold drizzle was 
coming down. The police, who were assembled in 
great numbers, blocked the alley and compelled the 
Dracophils to disperse in little groups. These were 
the instructions they had received from their chief, 
who was anxious to check the enthusiasm of the 
excited crowd. 

The Dracophils who were detained in the alley 
kept marking time and singing, “It is Chatillon we 
want.’ Soon, becoming impatient of the delay, the 
cause of which they did not know, they began to push 
those in front of them. This movement, propagated 
along the alley, threw those in front against the 
broad chests of the police. The latter had no hatred 


182 PENGUIN ISLAND 


for the Dracophils. In the bottom of their hearts 
they liked Chatillon. But it is natural to resist 
aggression and strong men are inclined to make use 
of their strength. For these reasons the police 
kicked the Dracophils with their hob-nailed boots. 
As a result there were sudden rushes backwards 
and forwards. ‘Threats and cries mingled with the 
songs. 

“Murder! Murder! ... It is Chatillon we 
want! Murder! Murder!” 

And in the gloomy alley the more prudent kept 
saying, ‘‘Don’t push.” Among these latter, in the 
darkness, his lofty figure rising above the moving 
crowd, his broad shoulders and robust body notice- 
able among the trampled limbs and crushed sides of 
the rest, stood the Prince des Boscénos, calm, im- 
movable and placid. Serenely and indulgently he 
waited. In the meantime, as the exit was opened 
at regular intervals between the ranks of the police, 
the pressure of elbows against the chests of those 
around the prince diminished and people began to 
breathe again. 

“You see we shall soon be able to go out,” said 
that kindly giant, with a pleasant smile. ‘Time 
and patience = ee.s 

He took a cigar from his case, raised it to his lips 
and struck a match. Suddenly, in the light of the 
match, he saw Princess Anne, his wife, clasped in 
Count Cléna’s arms. At this sight he rushed to- 
wards them, striking both them and those around 
with his cane. He was disarmed, though not with- 
out difficulty, but he could not be separated from his 
opponent. And whilst the fainting princess was 
lifted from arm to arm to her carriage over the ex- 
cited and curious crowd, the two men still fought 


THE PRINCE DES BOSCENOS 183 


furiously. Prince des Boscénos lost his hat, his 
eye-glass, his cigar, his necktie, and his portfolio full 
of private letters and political correspondence; he 
even lost the miraculous medals that he had received 
from the good Father Cornemuse. But he gave his 
opponent so terrible a kick in the stomach that the 
unfortunate Count was knocked through an iron 
grating and went, head foremost, through a glass 
door and into a coal shed. 

Attracted by the struggle and the cries of those 
around, the police rushed towards the prince, who 
furiously resisted them. He stretched three of them 
gasping at his feet and put seven others to flight, 
with, respectively, a broken jaw, a split lip, a nose 
pouring blood, a fractured skull, a torn ear, a dis- 
located collar-bone, and broken ribs. He fell, how- 
ever, and was dragged bleeding and disfigured, with 
his clothes in rags, to the nearest police-station, 
where, jumping about and bellowing, he spent the 
night. 

Until daybreak groups of demonstrators went 
about the town singing, “It is Chatillon we want,” 
and breaking the windows of the houses in which 
the Ministers of the Republic lived. 


VI 
THE EMIRAL’S FALL 


HAT night marked the culmination 
of the Dracophil movement. ‘The 
Royalists had no longer any doubt of 
its triumph. Their chiefs sent con- 
gratulations to Prince Crucho by 
wireless telegraphy. Their ladies 
embroidered scarves and slippers for 

him. M. de Plume had found the green horse. 

The pious Agaric shared the common hope. But 
he still worked to win partisans for the Pretender. 
They ought, he said, to lay their foundations upon 
the bed-rock. 

With this design he had an interview with three 
Trade Union workmen, 

In these times the artisans no longer lived, as in 
the days of the Draconides, under the government of 
corporations. ‘They were free, but they had no as- 
sured pay. After having remained isolated from 
each other for a long time, without help and without 
support, they had formed themselves into unions. 
The coffers of the unions were empty, as it was not 
the habit of the unionists to pay their subscriptions. 
There were unions numbering thirty thousand mem- 
bers, others with a thousand, five hundred, two hun- 
dred, and so forth. Several numbered two or three 
members only, or even a few less. But as the lists 
of adherents were not published, it was not easy to 
distinguish the great unions from the small ones, 


After some dark and indirect steps the pious 
184 


THE EMIRAL’S FALL 185 


Agaric was put into communication in a room in the 
Moulin de la Galette, with comrades Dagobert, 
Tronc, and Balafille, the secretaries of three unions 
of which the first numbered fourteen members, the 
second twenty-four, and the third only one. Agaric 
showed extreme cleverness at this interview. 

“Gentlemen,” said he, ‘you and I have not, in 
most respects, the same political and social views, 
but there are points in which we may come to an 
understanding. We have a common enemy. The 
government exploits you and despises us. Help us 
to overthrow it; we will supply you with the means 
so far as we are able, and you can in addition count 
on our gratitude.” 

“Fork out the tin,”’ said Dagobert. 

The Reverend Father placed on the table a bag 
which the distiller of Conils had given him with 
tears in his eyes. 

“Done!” said the three companions. 

Thus was the solemn compact sealed. 

As soon as the monk had departed, carrying with 
him the joy of having won over the masses to his 
cause, Dagobert, Tronc, and Balafille whistled to 
their wives, Amelia, Queenie, and Matilda, who 
were waiting in the street for the signal, and all six 
holding each other’s hands, danced around the bag, 
singing: 

J’ai du bon pognon, 
Tu n’'l’auras pas Chatillon! 
Hou! Hou! la calotte! 


And they ordered a salad-bowl of warm wine. 

In the evening all six went through the street from 
stall to stall singing their new song. The song be- 
came popular, for the detectives reported that every 
day showed an increase of the number of workpeo- 
ple who sang through the slums: 


186 PENGUIN ISLAND 


J'ai du bon pognon; 
Tu n’l’auras pas Chatillon! 
Hou! Hou! la calotte! 


The Dracophil agitation made no progress in the 
provinces. The pious Agaric sought to find the 
cause of this, but was unable to discover it until old 
Cornemuse bead it to him. 

“T have proofs,” sighed the monk of Conils, ‘that 
the Duke of Ampoule, the treasurer of the Draco- 
phils, has bought property in Porpoisia with the 
funds that he received for the propaganda.” 

The party wanted money. Prince des Boscénos 
had lost his portfolio in a brawl and he was reduced 
to painful expedients which were repugnant to his 
impetuous character. The Viscountess Olive was 
expensive. Cornemuse advised that the monthly 
allowance of that lady should be diminished. 

‘She is very useful to us,” objected the pious 
Agaric. 

“Undoubtedly,” answered Cornemuse, “‘but she 
does us an injury by ruining us.” 

A schism divided the Dracophils. Misunder- 
standings reigned in their councils. Some wished 
that in accordance with che policy of M. Bigourd 
and the pious Agaric, they should carry on the de- 
sign of reforming the Republic. Others, wearied 
by their long constraint, had resolved to proclaim 
the Dragon’s crest and swore to conquer beneath 
that sign. 

The latter urged the advantage of a clear situ- 
ation and the impossibility of making a pretence 
much longer, and in truth, the public began to see 
whither the agitation was tending and that the 
Emiral’s partisans wanted to destroy the very foun- 
dations of the Republic. 


THE EMIRAL’S FALL 187 


A report was spread that the prince was to land 
at La Cirque and make his entry into Alca on a green 
horse. 

These rumours excited the fanatical monks, de- 
lighted the poor nobles, satisfied the rich Jewish 
ladies, and put hope in the hearts of the small 
traders. But very few of them were inclined to pur- 
chase these benefits at the price of a social catastro- 
phe and the overthrow of the public credit; and 
there were fewer still who would have risked their 
money, their peace, their liberty, or a single hour 
from their pleasures in the business. On the other 
hand, the workmen held themselves ready, as ever, 
to give a day’s work to the Republic, and a strong 
resistance was being formed in the suburbs. 

“The people are with us,”’ the pious Agaric used 
to say. 

However, men, women, and children, when leavy- 
ing their factories, used to shout with one voice: 


A bas Chatillon! 
Hou! Hou! la calotte! 


As for the government, it showed the weakness, 
indecision, flabbiness, and heedlessness common to 
all governments, and from which none has ever 
departed without falling into arbitrariness and vio- 
lence. In three words it knew nothing, wanted 
nothing, and could do nothing. Formose, shut in 
his presidential palace, remained blind, dumb, deaf, 
huge, invisible, wrapped up in his pride as in an 
eider-down. 

Count Olive advised the Dracophils to make a last 
appeal for funds and to attempt a great stroke while 
Alca was still in a ferment. 

An executive committee, which he himself had 


188 PENGUIN ISLAND 


chosen, decided to kidnap the members of the Cham- 
ber of Deputies, and considered ways and means. 
The affair was fixed for the twenty-eighth of July. 
On that day the sun rose radiantly over the city. 
In front of the legislative palace women passed to 
market with their baskets; hawkers cried their 
peaches, pears, and grapes; cab horses with their 
noses in their bags munched their hay. Nobody 
expected anything, not because the secret had been 
kept but because it met with nothing but unbelievers. 
Nobody believed in a revolution, and from this fact 
we may conclude that nobody desired one. About 
two o’clock the deputies began to pass, few and un- 
noticed, through the side-door of the palace. At 
three o’clock a few groups of badly dressed men had 
formed. At half past three black masses coming 
from the adjacent streets spread over Revolution 
Square. ‘This vast expanse was soon covered by an 
ocean of soft hats, and the crowd of demonstrators, 
continually increased by sight-seers, having crossed 
the bridge, struck its dark wave against the walls of 
the legislative enclosure. Cries, murmurs, and songs 


went up to the impassive sky. “It is Chatillon we 
want!” ‘Down withthe Deputies!” ‘Down with 
the Republicans!” ‘Death to the Republicans!” 


The devoted band of Dracophils, led by Prince des 
Boscénos, struck up the august canticle: 


Vive Crucho, 

Vaillant et sage, 
Plein de courage 
Dés le berceau! 


Behind the wall silence alone replied. 

This silence and the absence of guards encour- 
aged and at the same time frightened the crowd. 
Suddenly a formidable voice cried out: 


THE EMIRAL’S FALL 189 
“Attack!” 


And Prince des Boscénos was seen raising his gi- 
gantic form to the top of the wall, which was covered 
with barbs and iron spikes. Behind him rushed his 
companions, and the people followed. Some ham- 
mered against the wall to make holes in it; others 
endeavoured to tear down the spikes and to pull out 
the barbs. ‘These defences had given way in places 
and some of the invaders had stripped the wall and 
were sitting astride on the top. Prince des Boscénos 
was waving an immense green flag. Suddenly the 
crowd wavered and from it came a long cry of 
terror. The police and the Republican carabineers 
issuing out of all the entrances of the palace formed 
themselves into a column beneath the wall and in a 
moment it was cleared of its besiegers. After a long 
moment of suspense the noise of arms was heard, 
and the police charged the crowd with fixed bayonets. 
An instant afterwards and on the deserted square 
strewn with hats and walking-sticks there reigned a 
sinister silence. Twice again the Dracophils at- 
tempted to form, twice they were repulsed. The 
rising was conquered. But Prince des Boscénos, 
standing on the wall of the hostile palace, his flag 
in his hand, still repelled the attack of a whole bri- 
gade. He knocked down all who approached him. 
At last he, too, was thrown down, and fell on an iron 
spike, to which he remained hooked, still clasping 
the standard of the Draconides. 

On the following day the Ministers of the Re- 
public and the Members of Parliament determined 
to take energetic measures. In vain this time, did 
President Formose attempt to evade his responsibil- 
ities. The government discussed the question of de- 
priving Chatillon of his rank and dignities and of in- 


190 PENGUIN ISLAND 


dicting him before the High Court as a conspirator, 
an enemy of the public good, a traitor, etc. 

At this news the Emiral’s old companions in arms, 
who the very evening before had beset him with their 
adulations, made no effort to conceal their joy. But 
Chatillon remained popular with the middle classes 
of Alca and one still heard the hymn of the liberator 
sounding in the streets, ‘It is Chatillon we want.” 

The Ministers were embarrassed. They in- 
tended to indict Chatillon before the High Court. 
But they knew nothing; they remained in that total 
ignorance reserved for those who govern men. They 
were incapable of advancing any grave charges 
against Chatillon. They could supply the prosecu- 
tion with nothing but the ridiculous lies of their 
spies. Chatillon’s share in the plot and his relations 
with Prince Crucho remained the secret of the thirty 
thousand Dracophils. The Ministers and the 
Deputies had suspicions and even certainties, but 
they had no proofs. ‘The Public Prosecutor said to 
the Minister of Justice: ‘Very little is needed for 
a political prosecution! but I have nothing at all and 
that is not enough.” The affair made no progress. 
The enemies of the Republic were triumphant. 

On the eighteenth of September the news ran in 
Alca that Chatillon had taken flight. Everywhere 
there was surprise and astonishment. People 
doubted, for they could not understand. 

This is what had happened: One day as the brave 
Under-Emiral Vulcanmould happened, as if by 
chance, to go into the office of M. Barbotan, the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, he remarked with his 
usual frankness: 

“M. Barbotan, your colleagues do not seem to me 
to be up to much; it is evident that they have never 


THE EMIRAL’S FALL IgI 


commanded a ship. That fool Chatillon gives them 
a deuced bad fit of the shivers.” 

The Minister, in sign of denial, waved his paper- 
knife in the air above his desk. 

“Don’t deny it,” answered Vulcanmould. “You 
don’t know how to get rid of Chatillon. You do not 
dare to indict him before the High Court because 
you are not sure of being able to bring forward a 
strong enough charge. Bigourd will defend him, 
and Bigourd is a clever advocate. . .. You are 
right, M. Barbotan, you are right. It would be a 
dangerous trial.” 

“Ah! my friend,” said the Minister, in a careless 
tone, “if you knew how satisfied we are. . . . I re- 
ceive the most reassuring news from my prefects. 
The good sense of the Penguins will do justice to the 
intrigues of this mutinous soldier. Can you suppose 
for a moment that a great people, an intelligent, 
laborious people, devoted to liberal institutions 
wei 

Vulcanmould interrupted with a great sigh: 

“Ah! If I had time to do it I would relieve you 
of your difficulty. I would juggle away my Chatil- 
lon like a nutmeg out of a thimble. I would fillip 
him off to Porpoisia.” 

The Minister paid close attention. 

“Tt would not take long,’ continued the sailor. 
“lswvould rid you in a:trice ofithe creature:;. .7. . 
But just now I have other fish to fry... . I amin 
a bad hole. I must find a pretty big sum. But, 
deuce take it, honour before everything.” 

The Minister and the Under-Emiral looked at 
each other for a moment in silence. Then Barbotan 
said with authority: 

“Under-Emiral Vulcanmould, get rid of this se- 


192 PENGUIN ISLAND © 


ditious soldier. You will render a great service to 
Penguinia, and the Minister of Home Affairs will see 
that your gambling debts are paid.” 

The same evening Vulcanmould called on Chatil- 
lon and looked at him for some time with an expres- 
sion of grief and mystery. 

“Why do you look like that?” answered the 
Emiral in an uneasy tone. 

Vulcanmould said to him sadly: 

“Old brother in arms, all is discovered. For the 
past half-hour the government knows everything.” 

At these words Chatillon sank down over- 
whelmed. 

Vulcanmould continued: 

‘You may be arrested any moment. I advise 
you to make off.” 

And drawing out his watch: 

“Not a minute to lose.”’ 

‘Have I time to call on the Viscountess Olive?” * 

“It would be mad,” said Vulcanmould, handing 
him a passport and a pair of blue spectacles, and 
telling him to have courage. 

“T will,” said Chatillon. 

“Good-bye! old chum.” 

‘Good-bye and thanks! You have saved my life.”’ 

‘That is the least I could do.” 

A quarter of an hour later the brave Emiral had 
left the city of Alca. 

He embarked at night on an old cutter at La 
Cirque and set sail for Porpoisia. But eight miles 
from the coast he was captured by a despatch-boat 
which was sailing without lights and which was under 
the flag of the Queen of the Black Islands. That 
Queen had for a long time nourished a fatal passion 
for Chatillon. 


yi 
CONCLUSION 


UNC est bibendum. Delivered from 
/| its fears and pleased at having es- 
caped from so great a danger, the 
government resolved to celebrate 
the anniversary of the Penguin re- 
generation and the establishment 
of the Republic by holding a gen- 


eral holiday. 

President Formose, the Ministers, and the mem- 
bers of the Chamber and of the Senate were present 
at the ceremony. 

The Generalissimo of the Penguin army was pres- 
ent in uniform. He was cheered. 

Preceded by the black flag of misery and the red 
flag of revolt, deputations of workmen walked in the 
procession, their aspect one of grim protection. 

President, Ministers, Deputies, officials, heads of 
the magistracy and of the army, ‘each, in their own 
names and in the name of the sovereign people, re- 
newed the ancient oath to live in freedom or to die. 
It was an alternative upon which they were reso- 
lutely determined. But they preferred to live in 
freedom. ‘There were games, speeches, and songs. 

After the departure of the representatives of the 
State the crowd of citizens separated slowly and 
peaceably, shouting out, “Hurrah for the Republic!” 
“Hurrah for liberty!’ ‘Down with the shaven 
pates!” 

The newspapers mentioned only one regrettable 
incident that happened on that wonderful day. 

193 


194 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Prince des Boscénos was quietly smoking a cigar in 
the Queen’s Meadow when the State procession 
passed by. ‘The prince approached the Minister’s 
carriage and said in a loud voice: ‘Death to the 
Republicans!” He was immediately apprehended 
by the police, to whom he offered a most desperate 
resistance. He knocked them down in crowds, but 
he was conquered by numbers, and, bruised, 
scratched, swollen, and unrecognisable even to the 
eyes of his wife, he was dragged through the joyous 
streets into an obscure prison. 

The magistrates carried on the case against 
Chatillon in a peculiar style. Letters were found 
at the Admiralty which revealed the complicity of 
the Reverend Father Agaric in the plot. Immedi- 
ately public opinion was inflamed against the monks, 
and Parliament voted, one after the other, a dozen 
laws which restrained, diminished, limited, pre- 
scribed, suppressed, determined, and curtailed, their 
rights, immunities, exemptions, privileges, and bene- 
fits, and created many invalidating disqualifications 
against them. 

The Reverend Father Agaric steadfastly endured 
the rigour of the laws which struck himself person- 
ally, as well as the terrible fall of the Emiral of 
which he was the chief cause. Far from yielding to 
evil fortune, he regarded it as but a bird of passage. 
He was planning new political designs more auda- 
cious than the first. 

When his projects were sufficiently ripe he went 
one day to the Wood of Conils. A thrush sang in a 
tree and a little hedge-hog crossed the stony path in 
front of him with awkward steps. Agaric walked 
with great strides, muttering fragments of sentences 
to himself. 


CONCLUSION 195 


When he reached the door of the laboratory in 
which, for so many years, the pious manufacturer 
had distilled the golden liqueur of St. Orberosia, he 
found the place deserted and the door shut. Hav- 
ing walked around the building he saw in the back- 
yard the venerable Cornemuse, who, with his habit 
pinned up, was climbing a ladder that leant against 
the wall. 

“Ts that you, my dear friend?” said he to him. 
“What are you doing there?” 

“You can see for yourself,’ answered the monk 
of Conils in a feeble voice, turning a sorrowful look 
upon Agaric. “I am going into my house.” 

The red pupils of his eyes no longer imitated the 
triumph and brilliance of the ruby, they flashed 
mournful and troubled glances. His countenance 
had lost its happy fulness. His shining head was 
no longer pleasant to the sight; perspiration and 
inflamed blotches had altered its inestimable per- 
fection. 

“T don’t understand,” said Agaric. 

“Tt is easy enough to understand. You see the 
consequences of your plot. Although a multitude 
of laws are directed against me I have managed to 
elude the greater number of them. Some, however, 
have struck me. ‘These vindictive men have closed 
my laboratories and my shops, and confiscated my 
bottles, my stills, and my retorts. They have put 
seals on my doors and now I am compelled to go in 
through the window. I am barely able to extract 
in secret from time to time the juice of a few plants 
and that with an apparatus which the humblest 
labourer would despise.” 

“You suffer from the persecution,” said Agaric. 
“Tt strikes us all.” 


196 PENGUIN ISLAND 


The monk of Conils passed his hand over his 
afflicted brow: 

“T told you so, Brother Agaric; I told you that 
your enterprise would turn against ourselves.’ 

“Our defeat is only momentary,” replied Agaric 
eagerly. “It is due to purely accidental causes; it 
results from mere contingencies. Chatillon was a 
fool; he has drowned himself in his own ineptitude. 
Listen to me, Brother Cornemuse. We have not a 
moment to lose. We must free the Penguin peo- 
ple, we must deliver them from their tyrants, save 
them from themselves, restore the Dragon’s crest, 
re-establish the ancient State, the good State, for the 
honour of religion and the exaltation of the Cath- 
olic faith. Chatillon was a bad instrument; he broke 
in our hands. Let us take a better instrument to 
replace him. I have the man who will destroy this 
impious democracy. He is a civil official; his name 
is Gomoru. The Penguins worship him. He has 
already betrayed his party for a plate of rice. 
There’s the man we want!” 

At the beginning of this speech the monk of 
Conils had climbed into his window and pulled up 
the ladder. 

“I foresee,” answered he, with his nose through 
the sash, “that you will not stop until you have us 
all expelled from this pleasant, agreeable, and sweet 
land of Penguinia. Good night; God keep you!” 

Agaric, standing before the wall, entreated his 
dearest brother to listen to him for a moment: 

‘Understand your own interest better, Corne- 
muse! Penguinia is ours. What do we need to con- 
quer it? Just one effort more . . . one more little 
sacrifice of money and. . .” 

But without listening further, the monk of Conils 
drew in his head and closed his window. 


5 ai » S aN, LA INOF Hern iim~ars 
; , ye 4 ‘i $ Le ane" ee er ig ate ie las es eh iy adil masuinee BS mM) 
: i = oe S FQ 3 & ti: s 3 #. 
. oye Ae ‘ = Fe 4 e * = >< fe 
N ° SS Set ” mR ‘4a 3 Shs re ee a ee us ~ < S AQ ‘t ~ ns riers wy = = ep é 
3 EP asin ® degen Shang we VIN > iat AANA ee 
RSQ ae Saas ee ogee : = Rai’ A: 


Se as 
oe. 


rt oe Tedd: Tha 


Zed mdtep GAAA od pica tx” jépos vias Axaay, 
roinsov S'aldpyv, 86s S'6pOarpot ow ideoGat 
ey 88 der SAcooov ere wW Tor evadev odTws.* 


(Iliad xvii. 645 ef seq.) 


*O Father Zeus, only save thou the sons of the Acheans from 
the darkness, and make clear sky and vouchsafe sight to our 
eyes, and then, so it be but light, slay us, since such is thy 
good pleasure. 


J 


GENERAL GREATAUK, DUKE OF 
SKULL 


SHORT time after the flight of the 
Emiral, a middle-class Jew called 
Pyrot, desirous of associating with 
=| the aristocracy and wishing to serve 
his country, entered the Penguin 
army. The Minister of War, who 
at the time was Greatauk, Duke of 
Skull, could not endure him. He blamed him for 
his zeal, his hooked nose, his vanity, his fondness for 
study, his thick lips, and his exemplary conduct. 
Every time the author of any misdeed was looked 
for, Greatauk used to say: 

“It must be Pyrot!”’ 

One morning General Panther, the Chief of 
the Staff, informed Greatauk of a serious matter. 
Eighty thousand trusses of hay intended for the cav- 
alry had disappeared and not a trace of them was to 
be found. 

Greatauk exclaimed at once: 

“Tt must be Pyrot who has stolen them!” 

He remained in thought for some time and said: 

‘The more I think of it the more I am convinced 
that Pyrot has stolen those eighty thousand trusses 
of hay. And I know it is by this: he stole them in or- 
der that he might sell them to our bitter enemies the 
Porpoises. What an infamous piece of treachery!”’ 

‘There is no doubt about it,’ answered Panther; 
“it only remains to prove it.” 

199 


200 PENGUIN ISLAND 


The same day, as he passed by a cavalry barracks, 
Prince des Boscénos heard the troopers as they were 
sweeping out the yard, singing: 

Boscénos est un gros vochon; 
On en va faire des andouilles, 


Des saucisses et du jambon 
Pour le réveillon des pauv’ bougres. 


It seemed to him contrary to all discipline that 
soldiers should sing this domestic and revolutionary 
refrain which on days of riot had been uttered by 
the lips of jeering workmen. On this occasion he 
deplored the moral degeneration of the army 
and thought with a bitter smile that his old comrade 
Greatauk, the head of this degenerate army, basely 
exposed him to the malice of an unpatriotic govern- 
ment. And he promised himself that he would 
make an improvement before long. 

‘That scoundrel Greatauk,” said he to himself, 
“will not remain long a Minister.” 

Prince des Boscénos was the most irreconcilable 
of the opponents of modern democracy, free 
thought, and the government which the Penguins had 
voluntarily given themselves. He had a vigorous 
and undisguised hatred for the Jews, and he worked 
in public and in private, night and day, for the resto- 
ration of the line of the Draconides. His ardent 
royalism was still further excited by the thought of 
his private affairs, which were in a bad way and were 
hourly growing worse. He had no hope of seeing 
an end to his pecuniary embarrassments until the 
heir of Draco the Great entered the city of Alca. 

When he returned to his house, the prince took 
out of his safe a bundle of old letters consisting of a 
private correspondence of the rhost secret nature, 
which he had obtained from a treacherous secretary. 


GENERAL GREATAUK 201 


They proved that his old comrade Greatauk, the 
Duke of Skull, had been guilty of jobbery regarding 
the military stores and had received a present of no 
great value from a manufacturer called Maloury. 
The very smallness of this present deprived the Min- 
ister who had accepted it of all excuse. 

The prince re-read the letters with a bitter satis- 
faction, put them carefully back into his safe, and 
dashed to the Minister of War. He was a man of 
resolute character. On being told that the Minister 
could see no one he knocked down the ushers, swept 
aside the orderlies, trampled under foot the civil 
and military clerks, burst through the doors, and en- 
tered the room of the astonished Greatauk. 

“T will not say much,” said he to him, “‘but I will 
speak to the point. You are a confounded cad. I 
have asked you to put a flea in the ear of General 
Mouchin, the tool of those Republicans, and you 
would not do it. I have asked you to give a com- 
mand to General des Clapiers, who works for the 
Dracophils, and who has obliged me personally, and 
you would not do it. I have asked you to dismiss 
General Tandem, the commander of Port Alca, who 
robbed me of fifty louis at cards, and who had me 
handcuffed when I was brought before the High 
Court as Emiral Chatillon’s accomplice. You would 
not do it. I asked you for the hay and bran stores. 
You would not give them. I asked you to send me 
on a secret mission to Porpoisia. You refused. 
And not satisfied with these repeated refusals you 
have designated me to your Government colleagues 
as a dangerous person, who ought to be watched, 
and it is owing to you that I have been shadowed by 
the police. You old traitor! I ask nothing more 
from you and I have but one word to say to you: 


202 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Clear out; you have bothered us too long. Besides, 
we will force the vile Republic to replace you by one 
of our own party. You know that I am a man of 
my word. If in twenty-four hours you have not 
handed in your resignation I will publish the 
Maloury dossier in the newspapers.” 

But Greatauk calmly and serenely replied: 

“Be quiet, you fool. JI am just having a Jew 
transported. I am handing over Pyrot to justice as 
guilty of having stolen eighty thousand trusses of 
hay.” 

Prince Boscénos, whose anger vanished like a 
dream, smiled. 

“Is that true?” 

“You will see.” 

‘““My congratulations, Greatauk. But as one 
always needs to take precautions with you I shall 
immediately publish the good news. People will 
read this evening about Pyrot’s arrest in every news- 
Daperanew leave ee 
_ And he went away muttering: 

“That Pyrot! I suspected he would come to a 
bad end.” 

A moment later General Panther appeared before 
Greatauk. 

“Sir,” said he, “I have just examined the business 
of the eighty thousand trusses of hay. There is no 
evidence against Pyrot.”’ 

‘Let it be found,” answered Greatauk. ‘‘Jus- 
tice requires it. Have Pyrot arrested at once.” 


1m 
PG NOME 


LL Penguinia heard with horror of 
Pyrot’s crime; at the same time there 
was a sort of satisfaction that this 
embezzlement combined with treach- 
ery and even bordering on sacrilege, 
had been committed by a Jew. In 
order to understand this feeling it is 

necessary to be acquainted with the state of the pub- 

lic opinion regarding the Jews both great and small. 

As we have had occasion to say in this history, the 

universally detested and all powerful financial caste 

was composed of Christians and of Jews. The Jews 
who formed part of it and on whom the people 
poured all their hatred were the upper-class Jews. 

They possessed immense riches and, it was said, held 

more than a fifth part of the total property of Pen- 

guinia. Outside this formidable caste there was a 

multitude of Jews of a mediocre condition, who 

were not more loved than the others and who were 
feared much less. In every ordered State, wealth is 

a sacred thing: in democracies it is the only sacred 

thing. Now the Penguin State was democratic. 

Three or four financial companies exercised a more 

extensive, and above all, more effective and con- 

tinuous power, than that of the Ministers of the 

Republic. The latter were puppets whom the com- 

panies ruled in secret, whom they compelled by in- 

timidation or corruption to favour themselves at 
203 


204 PENGUIN ISLAND 


the expense of the State, and whom they ruined by 
calumnies in the press if they remained honest. In 
spite of the secrecy of the Exchequer, enough ap- 
peared to make the country indignant, but the 
middle-class Penguins had, from the greatest to the 
last of them, been brought up to hold money in 
great reverence, and as they all had property, either 
much or little, they were strongly impressed 
with the solidarity of capital and understood that a 
small fortune is not safe unless a big one is protected. 
For these reasons they conceived a religious respect 
for the Jews’ millions, and self-interest being 
stronger with them than aversion, they were as much 
afraid as they were of death to touch a single hair 
of one of the rich Jews whom they detested. To- 
wards the poorer Jews they felt less ceremonious 
and when they saw any of them down they trampled 
on them. That is why the entire nation learnt with 
thorough satisfaction that the traitor was a Jew. 
They could take vengeance on all Israel in his person 
without any fear of compromising the public credit. 

That Pyrot had stolen the eighty thousand trusses 
of hay nobody hesitated for a moment to believe. 
No one doubted because the general ignorance in 
which everybody was concerning the affair did not 
allow of doubt, for doubt is a thing that demands 
motives. People do not doubt without reasons in 
the same way that people believe without reasons. 
The thing was not doubted because it was repeated 
everywhere and, with the public, to repeat is to 
prove. It was not doubted because people wished to 
believe Pyrot guilty and one believes what one wishes 
to believe. Finally, it was not doubted because the 
faculty of doubt is rare amongst men; very few 
minds carry in them its germs and these are not 


mS 


| 
8 


PYROT 205 


developed without cultivation. Doubt is singular, 
exquisite, philosophic, immoral, transcendent, mon- 
strous, full of malignity, injurious to persons and 
to property, contrary to the good order of govern- 
ments, and to the prosperity of empires, fatal to 
humanity, destructive of the gods, held in horror by 
heaven and earth. The mass of the Penguins were 
ignorant of doubt: it believed in Pyrot’s guilt and 
this conviction immediately became one of its chier 
national beliefs and an essential truth in its patriotic 
creed. 

Pyrot was tried secretly and condemned. 

General Panther immediately went to the Minister 
of War to tell him the result. 

“Luckily,” said he, “the judges were certain, for 
they had no proofs.” 

“Proofs,” muttered Greatauk, ‘‘proofs, what do 
they prove? There is only one certain, irrefragable 
proof—the confession of the guilty person. Has 
Pyrot confessed ?” 

“No, General.” 

“Fle will confess, he ought to. Panther, we must 
induce him; tell him it is to his interest. Promise 
him that, if he confesses, he will obtain favours, a 
reduction of his sentence, full pardon; promise 
him that if he confesses his innocence will be ad- 
mitted, that he will be decorated. Appeal to his 
good feelings. Let him confess from patriotism, for 
the flag, for the sake of order, from respect for 
the hierarchy, at the special command of the Min- 
ister of War militarily. . . . But tell me, Panther, 
has he not confessed already? ‘There are tacit con- 
fessions; silence is a confession.” 

“But, General, he is not silent; he keeps on squeal- 
ing like a pig that he is innocent.” 


206 PENGUIN ISLAND 


“Panther, the confessions of a guilty man some- 
times result from the vehemence of his denials. To 
deny desperately is to confess. Pyrot has con- 
fessed; we must have witnesses of his confessions, 
justice requires them.” 

There was in Western Penguinia a_ seaport 
called La Cirque, formed of three small bays and 
formerly greatly frequented by ships, but now sol- 
itary and deserted. Gloomy lagoons stretched 
along its low coasts exhaling a pestilent odour, while 
fever hovered over its sleepy waters. Here, on the 
borders of the sea, there was built a high square 
tower, like the old Campanile at Venice, from the 
side of which, close to the summit, hung an open 
cage which was fastened by a chain to a transverse 
beam. In the times of the Draconides the Inquisi- 
tors of Alca used to put heretical clergy into this 
cage. It had been empty for three hundred years, 
but now Pyrot was imprisoned in it under the guard 
of sixty warders, who lived in the tower and did not 
lose sight of him night or day, spying on him for con- 
fessions that they might afterwards report to the 
Minister of War. For Greatauk, careful and pru- 
dent, desired confessions and still further con- 
fessions. Greatauk, who was looked upon as a 
fool, was in reality a man of great ability and full 
of rare foresight. 

In the mean time Pyrot, burnt by the sun, eaten by 
mosquitos, soaked in the rain, hail and snow, frozen 
by the cold, tossed about terribly by the wind, beset 
by the sinister croaking of the ravens that perched 
upon his cage, kept writing down his innocence on 
pieces torn off his shirt with a tooth-pick dipped in 
blood. These rags were lost in the sea or fell into 


By ROT, 207 


the hands of the gaolers. Some of them, however, 
came under the eyes of the public. But Pyrot’s 
protests moved nobody because his confessions had 


been published. 


~! 


Kes BA 
A ce Sie 
G, ie 
SN 


ww 
3 


18 


i 
| 


Ill 


COUNT DE MAUBEC DE LA 
DENT DUR YIN: 


HE morals of the Jews were not 
always pure; in most cases they were 
averse from none of the vices of 
Christian civilization, but they re- 
tained from the Patriarchal age a 
recognition of family ties and an at- 
tachment to the interest of the 

tribe. Pyrot’s brothers, half-brothers, uncles, 

great-uncles, first, second, and third cousins, nephews 
and great-nephews, relations by blood and relations 
by marriage, and all who were related to him to the 
number of about seven hundred, were at first over- 
whelmed by the blow that had struck their relative, 
and they shut themselves up in their houses, cover- 
ing themselves with ashes and blessing the hand that 
had chastised them. For forty days they kept a 
strict fast. Then they bathed themselves and re- 
solved to search, without rest, at the cost of any toil 
and at the risk of every danger, for the demonstra- 
tion of an innocence which they did not doubt. And 
how could they have doubted? Pyrot’s innocence 
had been revealed to them in the same way that his 
guilt had been revealed to Christian Penguinia; for 
these things, being hidden, assume a mystic character 
and take on the authority of religious truths. The 
seven hundred Pyrotists set to work with as much 


zeal as prudence, and made the most thorough in- 
208 


COUNT DE MAUBEC 209 


quiries in secret. They were everywhere; they were 
seen nowhere. One would have said that, like the 
pilot of Ulysses, they wandered freely over the 
earth. They penetrated into the War Office and 
approached, under different disguises, the judges, 
the registrars, and the witnesses of the affair. Then 
Greatauk’s cleverness was seen. The witnesses 
knew nothing; the judges and registrars knew 
nothing. Emissaries reached even Pyrot and anx- 
iously questioned him in his cage amid the pro- 
longed moanings of the sea and the hoarse croaks 
of the ravens. It was in vain; the prisoner knew 
nothing. The seven hundred Pyrotists could not 
subvert the proofs of the accusation because they 
could not know what they were, and they could not 
know what they were because there were none. 
Pyrot’s guilt was indefeasible through its very 
nullity. And it was with a legitimate pride that 
Greatauk, expressing himself as a true artist, said 
one day to General Panther: “This case is a 
masterpiece: it is made out of nothing.” ‘The 
seven hundred Pyrotists despaired of ever clearing 
up this dark business, when suddenly they discov- 
ered, from a stolen letter, that the eighty thousand 
trusses of hay had never existed, that a most dis- 
tinguished nobleman, Count de Maubec, had sold 
them to the State, that he had received the price 
but had never delivered them. Indeed seeing that 
he was descended from the richest land proprietors 
of ancient Penguinia, the heir of the Maubecs of 
Dentdulynx, once the possessors of four duchies, 
sixty counties, and six hundred and twelve marqui- 
sates, baronies, and viscounties, he did not possess 
as much land as he could cover with his hand, and 
would not have been able to cut a single day’s mow- 


210 PENGUIN ISLAND 


ing of forage off his own domains. As to his getting 
a single rush from a land-owner or a merchant, that 
would have been quite impossible, for everybody 
except the Ministers of State and the Government 
officials knew that it would be easier to get blood 
from a stone than a farthing from a Maubec. 

The seven hundred Pyrotists made a minute in- 
quiry concerning the Count Maubec de la Dent- 
dulynx’s financial resources, and they proved that 
that nobleman was chiefly supported by a house in 
which some generous ladies were ready to furnish 
all comers with the most lavish hospitality. They 
publicly proclaimed that he was guilty of the theft 
of the eighty thousand trusses of straw for which 
an innocent man had been condemned and was now 
imprisoned in the cage. 

Maubec belonged to an illustrious family which 
was allied to the Draconides. There is nothing that 
a democracy esteems more highly than noble birth. 
Maubec had also served in the Penguin army, and 
since the Penguins were all soldiers, they loved their 
army to idolatry. Maubec, on the field of battle, 
had received the Cross, which is a sign of honour 
among the Penguins and which they valued even 
more highly than the embraces of their wives. 
All Penguinia declared for Maubec, and the voice of 
the people which began to assume a threatening 
tone, demanded severe punishments for the seven 
hundred calumniating Pyrotists. 

Maubec was a nobleman; he challenged the seven 
hundred Pyrotists to combat with either sword, 
sabre, pistols, carabines, or sticks. 

‘Vile dogs,”’ he wrote to them in a famous letter, 
“you have crucified my God and you want my life 
too; I warn you that I will not be such a duffer as 


COUNT DE MAUBEC 211 


He was and that I will cut off your fourteen hundred 
ears. Accept my boot on your seven hundred 
behinds.” 

The Chief of the Government at the time was a 
peasant called Robin Mielleux, a man pleasant to 
the rich and powerful, but hard towards the poor, 
a man of small courage and ignorant of his own 
interests. In a public declaration he guaranteed 
Maubec’s innocence and honour, and presented the 
seven hundred Pyrotists to the criminal courts where 
they were condemned, as libellers, to imprisonment, 
to enormous fines, and to all the damages that 
were claimed by their innocent victim. 

It seemed as if Pyrot was destined to remain for 
ever shut in the cage on which the ravens perched. 
But all the Penguins being anxious to know and prove 
that this Jew was guilty, all the proofs brought for- 
ward were found not to be good, while some of them 
were also contradictory. The officers of the Staff 
showed zeal but lacked prudence. Whilst Greatauk 
kept an admirable silence, General Panther made 
inexhaustible speeches and every morning demon- 
strated in the newspapers that the condemned man 
was guilty. He would have done better, perhaps, if 
he had said nothing. The guilt was evident and 
what is evident cannot be demonstrated. So much 
reasoning disturbed people’s minds; their faith, 
though still alive, became less serene. The more 
proofs one gives a crowd the more they ask for. 

Nevertheless the danger of proving too much 
would not have been great if there had not been in 
Penguinia, as there are, indeed, everywhere, minds 
framed for free inquiry, capable of studying a difh- 
cult question, and inclined to philosophic doubt. 
They were few; they were not all inclined to speak, 


212 PENGUIN ISLAND 


and the public was by no means inclined to listen 
to them. Still, they did not always meet with deaf 
ears. The great Jews, all the Israelite millionaires 
of Alca, when spoken to of Pyrot, said: ‘We do 
not know the man’’; but they thought of saving him. 
They preserved the prudence to which their wealth 
inclined them and wished that others would be 
less timid. Their wish was to be gratified. 


SAGE FACIALE | 


IV 
COLOMBAN 


a 24 
| 


FV Tw 
RS OX 


RS OME weeks after the conviction of 

the seven hundred Pyrotists, a little, 
gruff, hairy, short-sighted man left 
his house one morning with a paste- 
pot, a ladder, and a bundle of posters 
and went about the streets pasting 
placards to the walls on which might 
be read in large letters: Pyrot is innocent, Maubec 
is guilty. He was not a bill-poster; his name was 
Colomban, and as the author of sixty volumes on 
Penguin sociology he was numbered among the 
most laborious and respected writers in Alca. 
Having given sufficient thought to the matter and 
no longer doubting Pyrot’s innocence, he proclaimed 
it in the manner which he thought would be most 
sensational. He met with no hindrance while post- 
ing his bills in the quiet streets, but when he came 
to the populous quarters, every time he mounted 
his ladder, inquisitive people crowded round him 
and, dumfounded with surprise and indignation, 
threw at him threatening looks which he received 
with the calm that comes from courage and short- 
sightedness. Whilst caretakers and tradespeople 
tore down the bills he had posted, he kept on zeal- 
ously placarding, carrying his tools and followed by 
little boys who, with their baskets under their arms 
or their satchels on their backs, were in no hurry to 
reach school. ‘To the mute indignation against him, 
212 


214 PENGUIN ISLAND 


protests and murmurs were now added. But Co- 
lomban did not condescend to see or hear anything. 
As, at the entrance to the Rue St. Orberosia, he was 
posting one of his squares of paper bearing the 
words: Pyrot is innocent, Maubec is guilty, the 
riotous crowd showed signs of the most violent an- 
ger. They called after him, ‘Traitor, thief, rascal, 
scoundrel.” A woman opened a window and 
emptied a vessel full of filth over his head, a cabby 
sent his hat flying from one end of the street to the 
other by a blow of his whip amid the cheers of the 
crowd who now felt themselves avenged. A 
butcher’s boy knocked Colomban with his paste-pot, 
his brush, and his posters, from the top of his ladder 
into the gutter, and the proud Penguins then felt the 
greatness of their country. Colomban stood up, 
covered with filth, lame, and with his elbow injured, 
but tranquil and resolute. 

‘Low brutes,” he muttered, shrugging his shoul- 
ders. 

Then he went down on all-fours in the gutter to 
look for his glasses which he had lost in his fall. 
It was then seen that his coat was split from the 
collar to the tails and that his trousers were in rags. 
The rancour of the crowd grew stronger. 

On the other side of the street stretched the big 
St. Orberosian Stores. The patriots seized what- 
ever they could lay their hands on from the shop 
front, and hurled at Colomban oranges, lemons, 
pots of jam, pieces of chocolate, bottles of liqueurs, 
boxes of sardines, pots of foie gras, hams, fowls, 
flasks of oil, and bags of haricots. Covered with 
the debris of the food, bruised, tattered, lame, and 
blind, he took to flight, followed by the shop-boys, 
bakers, loafers, citizens, and hooligans whose num- 


t 
i '- 


| } ; 


q - 
o“¢ 


A BILL-POSTERF 
TT) aS PA PAA He | 


Po Rua Cpe? 


COLOMBAN 21s 


ber increased each moment and who kept shouting: 
“Duck him! Death to the traitor! Duck him!” 
This torrent of vulgar humanity swept along the 
streets and rushed into the Rue St. Maél. The 
police did their duty. From all the adjacent streets 
constables proceeded and, holding their scabbards 
with their left hands, they went at full speed in front 
of the pursuers. They were on the point of grab- 
bing Colomban in their huge hands when he sud- 
denly escaped them by falling through an open 
man-hole to the bottom of a sewer. 

He spent the night there in the darkness, sitting 
close by the dirty water amidst the fat and slimy 
rats. He thought of his task, and his swelling heart 
filled with courage and pity. And when the dawn 
threw a pale ray of light into the air-hole he got up 
and said, speaking to himself: 

“T see that the fight will be a stiff one.” 

Forthwith he composed a memorandum in which 
he clearly showed that Pyrot could not have stolen 
from the Ministry of War the eighty thousand 
trusses of hay which it had never received, for the 
reason that Maubec had never delivered them, 
though he had received the money. Colomban 
caused this statement to be distributed in the streets 
of Alca. The people refused to read it and tore it up 
in anger. The shop-keepers shook their fists at 
the distributers, who made off, chased by angry 
women armed with brooms. Feeling grew warm 
and the ferment lasted the whole day. In the eve- 
ning bands of wild and ragged men went about the 
streets yelling: “Death to Colomban!” The pa- 
triots snatched whole bundles of the memorandum 
from the newsboys and burned them in the public 
squares, dancing wildly round these bon-fires with 


216 PENGUIN ISLAND 


girls whose petticoats were tied up to their waists. 

Some of the more enthusiastic among them went 
and broke the windows of the house in which Colom- 
ban had lived in perfect tranquillity during his 
forty years of work. 

Parliament was roused and asked the Chief of 
the Government what measures he proposed to take 
in order to repel the odious attacks made by Colom- 
ban upon the honour of the National Army and the 
safety of Penguinia. Robin Mielleux denounced 
Colomban’s impious audacity and proclaimed amid 
the cheers of the legislators that the man would be 
summoned before the Courts to answer for his in- 
famous libel. 

The Minister of War was called to the tribune and 
appeared in it transfigured. He had no longer the 
air, as in former days, of one of the sacred geese of 
the Penguin citadels. Now, bristling, with out- 
stretched neck and hooked beak, he seemed the 
symbolical vulture fastened to the livers of his coun- 
try’s enemies. 

In the august silence of the assembly he pro- 
nounced these words only: 

“T swear that Pyrot is a rascal.” 

This speech of Greatauk was reported all over 
Penguinia and satisfied the public conscience. 


V 


THE REVEREND FATHERS AGARIC 
AND CORNEMUSE 


OLOMBAN bore with meekness and 
surprise the weight of the zeneral 
ss reprobation. He could not go out 

without being stoned, so he did not 
go out. He remained in his study 
with a superb obstinacy, writing new 
memoranda in favour of the encaged 
innocent. In the mean time among the few readers 
that he found, some, about a dozen, were struck by 
his reasons and began to doubt Pyrot’s guilt. They 
broached the subject to their friends and endeav- 
oured to spread the light that had arisen in their 
minds. One of them was a friend of Robin Miel- 
leux and confided to him his perplexities, with the 
result that he was no longer received by that Minis- 
ter. Another demanded explanations in an open 
letter to the Minister of War. A third published 
a terrible pamphlet. The latter, whose name was 
Kerdanic, was a formidable controversialist. ‘The 
public was unmoved. It was said that these de- 
fenders of the traitor had been bribed by the rich 
Jews; they were stigmatized by the name of Pyrotists 
and the patriots swore to exterminate them. There 
were only a thousand or twelve hundred Pyrotists in 
the whole vast ‘Republic, but it was believed that 
they were everywhere. People were afraid of find- 
ing them in the promenades, at meetings, at recep- 
217 


218 PENGUIN ISLAND 


tions, in fashionable drawing-rooms, at the dinner- 
table, even in the conjugal couch. One half of the 
population was suspected by the other half. The 
discord set all Alca on fire. 

In the mean time Father Agaric, who managed 
his big school for young nobles, followed events 
with anxious attention. The misfortunes of the 
Penguin Church had not disheartened him. He 
remained faithful to Prince Crucho and preserved 
the hove of restoring the heir of the Draconides to 
the Penguin throne. It appeared to him that the 
events that were happening or about to happen in 
the country, the state of mind of which they were at 
once the effect and the cause, and the troubles that 
necessarily resulted from them might—if they were 
directed, guided, and led by the profound wisdom 
of a monk—overthrow the Republic and incline the 
Penguins to restore Prince Crucho, from whose piety 
the faithful hoped for so much solace. Wearing his 
huge black hat, the brims of which looked like the 
wings of Night, he walked through the Wood of 
Conils towards the factory where his venerable 
friend, Father Cornemuse, distilled the hygienic St. 
Orberosian liqueur. The good monk’s industry, so 
cruelly affected in the time of Emiral Chatillon, 
was being restored from its ruins. One heard goods 
trains rumbling through the Wood and one saw 
in the sheds hundreds of orphans clothed in blue, 
packing bottles and nailing up cases. 

Agaric found the venerable Cornemuse standing 
before his stoves and surrounded by his retorts. 
The shining pupils of the old man’s eyes had again 
become as bright as rubies, his skull shone with its 
former elaborate and careful polish. 


FATHERS AGARIC AND CORNEMUSE 219 


Agaric first congratulated the pious distiller on 
the restored activity of his laboratories and work- 
shops. 

“Business is recovering. I thank God for it,” 
answered the old man of Conils. ‘Alas! it had 
fallen into a bad state, Brother Agaric. You saw 
the desolation of this establishment. I need say 
no more.” 

Agaric turned away his head. 

“The St. Orberosian liqueur,’”’ continued Corne- 
muse, “‘is making fresh conquests. But none the 
less my industry remains uncertain and precarious. 
The laws of ruin and desolation that struck it 
have not been abrogated, they have only been 
suspended.” 

And the monk of Conils lifted his ruby eyes to 
heaven. 

Agaric put his hand on his shoulder. 

“What a sight, Cornemuse, does unhappy Pen- 
guinia present to us! Everywhere disobedience, in- 
dependence, liberty! We see the proud, the haughty, 
the men of revolt rising up. After having braved 
the Divine laws they now rear themselves against 
human laws, so true is it that in order to be a good 
citizen a man must be a good Christian. Colom- 
ban is trying to imitate Satan. Numerous crim- 
inals are following his fatal example. They want, 
in their rage, to put aside all checks, to throw off 
all yokes, to free themselves from the most sacred 
bonds, to escape from the most salutary restraints. 
They strike their country to make it obey them. 
But they will be overcome by the weight of public 
animadversion, vituperation, indignation, fury, ex- 
ecration, and abomination. That is the abyss to 


220 PENGUIN ISLAND 


which they have been led by atheism, free thought, 
and the monstrous claim to judge for themselves 
and to form their own opinions.” 

“Doubtless, doubtless,’ replied Father Corne- 
muse, shaking his head, “but I confess that the 
care of distilling these simples has prevented me 
from following public affairs. I only know that 
people are talking a great deal about a man called 
Pyrot. Some maintain that he is guilty, others afirm 
that he is innocent, but I do not clearly under- 
stand the motives that drive both parties to mix 
themselves up in a business that concerns neither 
of them.” 

The:pious Agaric asked eagerly: 

“You do not doubt Pyrot’s guilt ?” 

“T cannot doubt it, dear Agaric,’ answered the 
monk of Conils. ‘That would be contrary to the 
laws of my country which we ought to respect as 
long as they are not opposed to the Divine laws. 
Pyrot is guilty, for he has been convicted. As to 
saying more for or against his guilt, that would be 
to erect my own authority against that of the judges, 
a thing which I will take good care not to do. Be- 
sides, it is useless, for Pyrot has been convicted. If 
he has not been convicted because he is guilty, he is 
guilty because he has been convicted; it comes to the 
same thing. I believe in his guilt as every good citi- 
zen ought to believe in it; and I will believe in it as 
long as the established jurisdiction will order me to 
believe in it, for it is not for a private person but for 
a judge to proclaim the innocence of a convicted 
person. Human justice is venerable even in the 
errors inherent in its fallible and limited nature. 
These errors are never irreparable; if the judges do 
not repair them on earth, God will repair them in 


FATHERS AGARIC AND CORNEMUSE 221 


Heaven. Besides I have great confidence in gen- 
eral Greatauk, who, though he certainly does not 
look it, seems to me to be an abler man than all those 
who are attacking him.” 
_ “Dearest Cornemuse,” cried the pious Agaric, 
“the Pyrot affair, if pushed to the point whither we 
can lead it by the help of God and the necessary 
funds, will produce the greatest benefits. It will 
lay bare the vices of this Anti-Christian Republic and 
will incline the Penguins to restore the throne of the 
Draconides and the prerogatives of the Church. 
But to do that it is necessary for the people to see 
the clergy in the front rank of its defenders. Let us 
march against the enemies of the army, against those 
who insult our heroes, and everybody will follow 
us.” 

“Everybody will be too many,” murmured the 
monk of Conils, shaking his head. ‘I see that the 
Penguins want to quarrel. If we mix ourselves up 
in their quarrel they will become reconciled at our 
expense and we shall have to pay the cost of the war. 
That is why, if you are guided by me, dear Agaric, 
you will not engage the Church in this adventure.” 

“You know my energy; you know my prudence. 
[ will compromise nothing. . . . Dear Cornemuse, 
I only want from you the funds necessary for us to 
begin the campaign.” 

For a long time Cornemuse refused to bear the 
expenses of what he thought was a fatal enterprise. 
Agaric was in turn pathetic and terrible. At last, 
yielding to his prayers and threats, Cornemuse, with 
hanging head and swinging arms, went to the austere 
cell that concealed his evangelical poverty. In the 
whitewashed wall under a branch of blessed box, 
there was fixed a safe. He opened it, and with a 


222 PENGUIN ISLAND 


sigh: took out a bundle of bills which, with hesitating 
hands, he gave to the pious Agaric. 

“Do not doubt it, dear Cornemuse,” said the 
latter, thrusting the papers into the pocket of his 
overcoat, ‘‘this Pyrot affair has been sent us by God 
for the glory and exaltation of the Church of Pen- 
guinia.”’ 

“T pray that you may be right!”’ sighed the monk 
of Conils. 

And, left alone in his laboratory, he gazed, 
through his exquisite eyes, with an ineffable sadness 
at his stoves and his retorts. 


vI 
THE SEVEN HUNDRED PYROTISTS 


BV WN 


HE seven hundred Pyrotists inspired 
the public with an increasing aver- 
sion. Every day two or three of 
them were beaten to death in the 
streets. One of them was publicly 
whipped, another thrown into the 
river, a third tarred and feathered 
and led through a laughing crowd, a fourth had his 
nose cut off by a captain of dragoons. They did not 
dare to show themselves at their clubs, at tennis, or 
at the races; they put on a disguise when they went 
to the Stock Exchange. In these circumstances the 
Prince des Boscénos thought it urgent to curb their 
audacity and repress their insolence. For this pur- 
pose he joined with Count Cléna, M. de La Tru- 
melle, Viscount Olive, and M. Bigourd in founding 
a great anti-Pyrotist association to which citizens in 
hundreds of thousands, soldiers in companies, reg- 
iments, brigades, divisions, and army corps, towns, 
districts, and provinces, all gave their adhesion. 
About this time the Minister of War happening 
to visit one day his Chief of Staff, saw with surprise 
that the large room where General Panther worked, 
which was formerly quite bare, had now along each 
wall from floor to ceiling in sets of deep pigeon-holes, 
triple and quadruple rows of paper bundles of every 
form and colour. ‘These sudden and monstrous 
records had in a few days reached the dimensions of 
223 


224 PENGUIN ISLAND 


a pile of archives such as it takes centuries to ac- 
cumulate. 

“What is this?” asked the astonished minister. 

“Proofs against Pyrot,’” answered General Pan- 
ther with patriotic satisfaction. “We had not got 
them when we convicted him, but we have plenty of 
them now.” 

The door was open, and Greatauk saw coming 
up the stair-case a long file of porters who were 
unloading heavy bales of papers in the hall, and he 
saw the lift slowly rising heavily loaded with paper 
packets. 

‘““What are those others?”’ said he. 

“They are fresh proofs against Pyrot that are now 
reaching us,” said Panther. “I have asked for them 
in every county of Penguinia, in every Staff Office and 
in every Court in Europe. I have ordered them in 
every town in America and in Australia, and in every 
factory in Africa, and I am expecting bales of them 
from Bremen and a ship-load from Melbourne.” 

And Panther turned towards the Minister of War 
the tranquil and radiant look of a hero. However, 
Greatauk, his eye-glass in his eye, was looking at the 
formidable pile of papers with less satisfaction than 
uneasiness. 

“Very good,” said he, “very good! but I am 
afraid that this Pyrot business may lose its beauti- 
ful simplicity. It was limpid; like a rock-crystal 
its value lay in its transparency. You could have 
searched it in vain with a magnifying-glass for a 
straw, a bend, a blot, for the least fault. When it 
left my hands it was as pure as the light. In- 
deed it was the light. I give you a pearl and you 
make a mountain out of it. To tell you the truth I 
am afraid that by wishing to do too well you have 


SEVEN HUNDRED PYROTISTS 225 


done less well. Proofs! of course it is good to have 
proofs, but perhaps it is better to have none at all. 
I have already told you, Panther, there is only one 
irrefutable proof, the confession of the guilty person 
(or if the innocent what matter!). The Pyrot affair, 
as I arranged it, left no room for criticism; there was 
no spot where it could be touched. It defied assault. 
It was invulnerable because it was invisible. Now 
it gives an enormous ‘handle for discussion. I ad- 
vise you, Panther, to use your paper packets with 
great reserve. I should be particularly grateful if 
you would be more sparing of your communica- 
tions to journalists. You speak well, but you say 
too much. Tell me, Panther, are there any forged 
documents among these ?”’ 

“There are some adapted ones.” 

“That is what I meant. There are some adapted 
ones. So much the better. As proofs, forged docu- 
ments, in general, are better than genuine ones, 
first of all because they have been expressly made 
to suit the needs of the case, to order and measure, 
and therefore they are fitting and exact. They are 
also preferable ‘because they carry the mind into an 
ideal world and turn it aside from the reality which, 
alas! in this world is never without some alloy. .. . 
Nevertheless, I think I should have preferred, Pan- 
ther, that we had no proofs at all.” 

The first act of the Anti-Pyrotist Association was 
to ask the Government immediately to summon the 
seven hundred Pyrotists and their accomplices be- 
fore the High Court of Justice as guilty of high 
treason. Prince des Boscénos was charged to speak 
on behalf of the Association and presented himself 
before the Council which had assembled to hear him. 
He expressed a hope that the vigilance and firmness 


226 PENGUIN ISLAND 


of the Government would rise to the height of the 
occasion. He shook hands with each of the min- 
isters and as he passed General Greatauk he whis- 
pered in his ear: 

“Behave properly, you ruffian, or I will publish 
the Maloury dossier!” 

Some days later by a unanimous vote of both 
Houses, on a motion proposed by the Government, 
the Anti-Pyrotist Association was granted a charter 
recognising it as beneficial to the public interest. 

The Association immediately sent a deputation to 
Chitterlings Castle in Porpoisia, where Crucho was 
eating the bitter bread of exile, to assure the prince 
of the love and devotion of the Anti-Pyrotist 
members. 

However, the Pyrotists grew in numbers, and 
now counted ten thousand. They had:their regular 
cafés on the boulevards. The patriots had theirs 
also, richer and bigger, and every evening glasses of 
beer, saucers, match-stands, jugs, chairs, and tables 
were hurled from one to the other. Mirrors were 
smashed to bits, and the police ended the struggles 
by impartially trampling the combatants of both 
parties under their hob-nailed shoes. 

On one of these glorious nights, as Prince des 
Boscénos was leaving a fashionable café in the com- 
pany of some patriots, M. de La Trumelle pointed 
out to him a little, bearded man with glasses, hatless, 
and having only one sleeve to his coat, who was 
painfully dragging himself along the rubbish-strewn 
pavement. 

“Look!” said he, ‘‘there is Colomban!”’ 

The prince had gentleness as well as strength; 
he was exceedingly mild; but at the name of Colom- 


ban his blood boiled. He rushed at the little spec- 


SEVEN HUNDRED PYROTISTS 227 


tacled man, and knocked him down with one blow 
of his fist on the nose. 

M. de La Trumelle then perceived that, misled by 
an undeserved resemblance, he had mistaken for 
Colomban, M. Bazile, a retired lawyer, the secre- 
tary of the Anti-Pyrotist Association, and an ardent 
and generous patriot. Prince des Boscénos was one 
of those antique souls who never bend. However, 
he knew how to recognise his faults. 

“M. Bazile,”’ said he, raising his hat, “if I have 
touched your face with my hand you will excuse me 
and you will understand me, you will approve of 
me, nay, you will compliment me, you will con- 
gratulate me and felicitate me, when you know the 
cause of that act. I took you for Colomban.” 

M. Bazile, wiping his bleeding nostrils with his 
handkerchief and displaying an elbow laid bare by 
the absence of his sleeve: 

“No, sir,’’ answered he drily, “I shall not felici- 
tate you, I shall not congratulate you, I shall not 
compliment you, for your action was, at the very 
least, superfluous; it was, I will even say, super- 
erogatory. Already this evening I have been three 
times mistaken for Colomban and received a sufh- 
cient amount of the treatment he deserves. The 
patriots have knocked in my ribs and broken my 
back, and, sir, I was of opinion that that was 
enough.” 

Scarcely had he finished this speech than a band 
of Pyrotists appeared, and misled in their turn by 
the insidious resemblance, they believed that the 
patriots were killing Colomban. They fell on Prince 
des Boscénos and his companions with loaded canes 
and leather thongs, and left them for dead. Then 
seizing Bazile they carried him in triumph, and 


228 PENGUIN ISLAND 


in spite of his protests, along the boulevards, amid 
cries of: ‘Hurrah for Colomban! MHurrah for 
Pyrot!’’ At last the police, who had been sent after 
them, attacked and defeated them and dragged them 
ignominiously to the station, where Bazile, under 
the name of Colomban, was trampled on by an 
innumerable quantity of thick, hob-nailed shoes. 


Vil 


BIDAULT-COQUILLE AND MANIFLORE, 
THE SOCIALISTS 


aye “WHILST the wind of anger and hatred 
Pym blew in Alca, Eugéne Bidault- 
Coquille, poorest and happiest of as- 
tronomers, installed in an old steam- 
engine of the time of the Dracon- 
ides, was observing the heavens 
through a bad telescope, and photo- 
graphing the paths of the meteors upon some dam- 
aged photographic plates. His genius corrected the 
errors of his instruments and his love of science tri- 
umphed over the worthlessness of his apparatus. 
With an inextinguishable ardour he observed aero- 
lites, meteors, and fire-balls, and all the glowing 
ruins and blazing sparks which pass through the ter- 
restrial atmosphere with prodigious speed, and as a 
reward for his studious vigils he received the in- 
difference of the public, the ingratitude of the State 
and the blame of the learned societies. Engulfed in 
the celestial spaces he knew not what occurred upon 
the surface of the earth. He never read the news- 
papers, and when he walked through the town his 
mind was occupied with the November asteroids, 
and more than once he found himself at the bottom 
of a pond in one of the public parks or beneath the 
wheels of a motor omnibus. 
Elevated in stature as in thought he respected him- 
self and others. This was shown by his cold polite- 
229 


230 PENGUIN ISLAND 


ness as well as by a very thin black frock coat and a 
tall hat which gave to his person an appearance at 
once emaciated and sublime. He took his meals in a 
little restaurant from which all customers less in- 
tellectual than himself had fled, and thenceforth his 
napkin bound by its wooden ring rested alone in 
the abandoned rack. 

In this cook-shop his eyes fell one evening upon 
Colomban’s memorandum in favour of Pyrot. He 
read it as he was cracking some bad nuts and sud- 
denly, exalted with astonishment, admiration, hor- 
ror, and pity, he forgot all about falling meteors and 
shooting stars and saw nothing but the innocent man 
hanging in his cage exposed to the winds of heaven 
and the ravens perching upon it. 

That image did not leave him. For a week he had 
been obsessed by the innocent convict, when, as he 
was leaving his cook-shop, he saw a crowd of citi- 
zens entering a public-house in which a public meet- 
ing was going on. He went in. The meeting was 
disorderly; they were yelling, abusing one another 
and knocking one another down in the smoke-laden 
hall. The Pyrotists and the Anti-Pyrotists spoke in 
turn and were alternately cheered and hissed at. An 
obscure and confused enthusiasm moved the audi- 
ence. With the audacity of a timid and retired 
man Bidault-Coquille leaped upon the platform and 
spoke for three-quarters of anhour. He spoke very 
quickly, without order, but with vehemence, and with 
all the conviction of a mathematical mystic. He was 
cheered. When he got down from the platform a 
big woman of uncertain age, dressed in red, and 
wearing an immense hat trimmed with heroic feath- 
ers, throwing herself into his arms, embraced him, 
and said to him: 


THE SOCIALISTS 231 


“You are splendid!” 

He thought in his simplicity that there was some 
truth in the statement. 

She declared to him that henceforth she would 
live but for Pyrot’s defence and Colomban’s glory. 
He thought her sublime and beautiful. She was 
Maniflore, a poor old courtesan, now forgotten and 
discarded, who had suddenly become a vehement 
politician. 

She never left him. They spent glorious hours 
together in doss-houses and in lodgings beautified by 
their love, in newspaper offices, in meeting-halls and 
in lecture-halls. As he was an idealist, he persisted 
in thinking her beautiful, although she gave him 
abundant opportunity of seeing that she had pre- 
served no charm of any kind. From her past beauty 
she only retained a confidence in her capacity for 
pleasing and a lofty assurance in demanding hom- 
age. Still, it must be admitted that this Pyrot 
affair, so fruitful in prodigies, invested Maniflore 
with a sort of civic majesty, and transformed her, 
at public meetings, into an august symbol of justice 
and truth. 

Bidault-Coquille and Maniflore did not kindle 
the least spark of irony or amusement in a single 
Anti-Pyrotist, a single defender of Greatauk, or a 
single supporter of the army. The gods, in their 
anger, had refused to those men the precious gift 
of humour. They gravely accused the courtesan 
and the astronomer of being spies, of treachery, 
and of plotting against their country. Bidault- 
Coquille and Maniflore grew visibly greater be- 
neath insult, abuse, and calumny. 

For long months Penguinia had been divided into 
two camps and, though at first sight it may appear 


232 PENGUIN ISLAND 


strange, hitherto the socialists had taken no part in 
the contest. Their groups comprised almost all 
the manual workers in the country, necessarily scat- 
tered, confused, broken up, and divided, but formid- 
able. The Pyrot affair threw the group leaders into 
a singular embarrassment. They did not wish to 
place themselves either on the side of the financiers 
or on the side of the army. They regarded the 
Jews, both great and small, as their uncompromis- 
ing opponents. Their principles were not at stake, 
nor were their interests concerned in the affair. 
Still the greater number felt how difficult it was 
growing for them to remain aloof from struggles 
in which all Penguinia was engaged. 

Their leaders called a sitting of their federation 
at the Rue de la Queue-du-diable-St. Maél, to take 
into consideration the conduct they ought to adopt 
in the present circumstances and in future even- 
tualities. 

Comrade Pheenix was the first to speak. 

‘““A crime,” said he, “‘the most odious and cow- 
ardly of crimes, a judicial crime, has been committed. 
Military judges, coerced or misled by their superior 
officers, have condemned an innocent man to an 
infamous and cruel punishment. Let us not say 
that the victim is not one of our own party, that he 
belongs to a caste which was, and always will be, 
ourenemy. Our party is the party of social justice; 
it can look upon no iniquity with indifference. 

“It would be a shame for us if we left it to Ker- 
danic, a radical, to Colomban, a member of the mid- 
dle classes, and to a few moderate Republicans, 
alone to proceed against the crimes of the army. 
If the victim is not one of us, his executioners are our 


THE SOCIALISTS 233 


brothers’ executioners, and before Greatauk struck 
down this soldier he shot our comrades who were 
on strike. 

‘Comrades, by an intellectual, moral and material 
effort you must rescue Pyrot from his torment, 
and in performing this generous act you are not 
turning aside from the liberating and revolutionary 
task you have undertaken, for Pyrot has become the 
symbol of the oppressed and of all the social iniqui- 
ties that now exist; by destroying one you make 
all the others tremble.” 

When Phenix ended, comrade Sapor spoke in 
these terms: 

“You are advised to abandon your task in order 
to do something with which you have no concern. 
Why throw yourselves into a conflict where, on 
whatever side you turn, you will find none but your 
natural, uncompromising, even necessary opponents ? 
Are the financiers to be less hated by us than the 
army? What inept and criminal generosity is it 
that hurries you to save those seven hundred Pyro- 
tists whom you will always find confronting you in 
the social war? 

“Tt is proposed that you act the part of the police 
for your enemies, and that you are to re-establish for 
them the order which their own crimes have dis- 
turbed. Magnanimity pushed to this degree changes 
its name. 

“Comrades, there is a point at which infamy be- 
comes fatal to a society. Penguin society is being 
strangled by its infamy, and you are requested to 
save it, to give it air that it can breathe. ‘This 
is simply turning you into ridicule. ; 

“T eave it to smother itself and let us gaze at its 


234 PENGUIN ISLAND 


last convulsions with joyful contempt, only regret- 
ting that it has so entirely corrupted the soil on which 
it has been built that we shall find nothing but 
poisoned mud on which to lay the foundations of a 
new society.” 

When Sapor had ended his speech comrade 
Lapersonne pronounced these few words: 

“Phoenix calls us to Pyrot’s help for the reason 
that Pyrot is innocent. It seems to me that that 
is a very bad reason. If Pyrot is innocent he has 
behaved like a good soldier and has always con- 
scientiously worked at his trade, which principally 
consists in shooting the people. That is not a motive 
to make the people brave all dangers in his defence. 
When it is demonstrated to me that Pyrot is guilty 
and that he stole the army hay, I shall be on his 
side.” 

Comrade Larrivée afterwards spoke. 

“T am not of my friend, Phcenix’s opinion but I 
am not with my friend Sapor either. I do not be- 
lieve that the party is bound to embrace a cause as 
soon as we are told that that cause is just. That, 
I am afraid, is a grievous abuse of words and a dan- 
gerous equivocation. For social justice is not revo- 
lutionary justice. They are both in perpetual an- 
tagonism: to serve the one is to oppose the other. 
As for me, my choice is made. I am for revolution- 
ary justice as against social justice. Still, in the pres- 
ent case I am against abstention. I say that when a 
lucky chance brings us an affair like this we should 
be fools not to profit by it. 

“How? We are given an opportunity of striking 
terrible, perhaps fatal, blows against militarism. 
And am I| to fold my arms? [I tell you, comrades, I 
am not a fakir, I have never been a fakir, and if 


THE SOCIAEISTS 2n% 


there are fakirs here let them not count onme. To 
sit in meditation is a policy without results and one 
which I shall never adopt. 

“A party like ours ought to be continually assert- 
ing itself. It ought to prove its existence by con- 
tinual action. We will intervene in the Pyrot af- 
fair but we will intervene in it in a revolutionary 
manner; we will adopt violent action. . . . Perhaps 
you think that violence is old-fashioned and super- 
annuated, to be scrapped along with diligences, 
hand-presses and aerial telegraphy. You are mis- 
taken. To-day as yesterday nothing is obtained ex- 
cept by violence; it is the one efficient instrument. 
The only thing necessary is to know how to use it. 
You ask what will our action be? I will tell you: 
it will be to stir up the governing classes against 
one another, to put the army in conflict with the 
capitalists, the government with the magistracy, the 
nobility and clergy with the Jews, and if possible 
to drive them all to destroy one another. To do 
this would be to carry on an agitation which would 
weaken government in the same way that fever 
wears out the sick. 

“The Pyrot affair, little as we know how to turn it 
to advantage, will put forward by ten years the 
growth of the Socialist party and the emancipation 
of the proletariat, by disarmament, the general 
strike, and revolution.” 

The leaders of the party having each expressed 
a different opinion, the discussion was continued, 
not without vivacity. The orators, as always hap- 
pens in such a case, reproduced the arguments they 
had already brought forward, though with less order 
and moderation than before. ‘The dispute was pro- 
longed and none changed his opinion. But these 


236 PENGUIN ISLAND 


opinions, in the final analysis, were reduced to two, 
that of Sapor and Lapersonne who advised absten- 
tion, and that of Phenix and Larrivée, who wanted 
intervention. Even these two contrary opinions 
were united in a common hatred of the heads of the 
army and of their justice, and in a common belief 
in Pyrot’s innocence. So that public opinion was 
hardly mistaken in regarding all the Socialist leaders 
as pernicious Msti-Pyrotists. 

As for the vast masses in whose name they spoke 
and whom they represented as far as speech can ex- 
press the inexpressible—as for the proletarians 
whose thought is difficult to know and who do not 
know it themselves, it seemed that the Pyrot affair 
did not interest them. It was too literary for them, 
it was in too classical a style, and had an upper- 
middle-class and high-finance tone about it that did 
not please them much. 


VII 
THE COLOMBAN TRIAL 


HEN the Colomban trial began, the 
Pyrotists were not many more than 
thirty thousand, but they were every- 
where and might be found even 
among the priests and millionaires. 
What injured them most was the 
sympathy of the rich Jews. On the 

other hand they derived valuable advantages from 
their feeble number. In the first place there were 
among them fewer fools than among their oppo- 
nents, who were over-burdened with them. Com- 
prising but a feeble minority they co-operated 
easily, acted with harmony, and had no temptation 
to divide and thus counteract one another’s efforts. 
Each of them felt the necessity of doing the best 
possible and was the more careful of his conduct as 
he found himself more in the public eye. Finally, 
they had every reason to hope that they would gain 
fresh adherents, while their opponents, having had 
everybody with them at the beginning, could only 
decrease. 

Summoned before the judges at a public sitting, 
Colomban immediately perceived that his judges 
were not anxious to discover the truth. As soon 
as he opened his mouth the President ordered him 
to be silent in the superior interests of the State. 
For the same reason, which is the supreme reason, 
the witnesses for the defence were not heard. Gen- 
eral Panther, the Chief of the Staff, appeared in 
237 


ar Ava 
= — 
1 a FS oa 


238 PENGUIN ISLAND 


the witness-box, in full uniform and decorated with 
all his orders. He deposed as follows: 

‘The infamous Colomban states that we have no 
proofs against Pyrot. He lies; we have them. I 
have in my archives seven hundred and thirty-two 
square yards of them which at five hundred pounds 
each make three hundred and sixty-six thousand 
pounds weight.” 

That superior officer afterwards gave, with ele- 
gance and ease, a summary of those proofs. 

‘They are of all colours and all shades,” said he in 
substance, ‘“‘they are of every form—pot, crown, soy- 
ereign, grape, dove-cot, grand eagle, etc. The 
smallest is less than the hundredth part of a square 
inch, the largest measures seventy yards long by 
ninety yards broad.” 

At this revelation the audience shuddered with 
horror. 

Greatauk came to give evidence in his turn. Sim- 
pler, and perhaps greater, he wore a grey tunic and 
held his hands joined behind his back. 

‘T leave,” said he calmly and in a slightly raised 
voice, “I leave to M. Colomban the responsibility 
for an act that has brought our country to the brink 
of ruin. The Pyrot affair is secret; it ought to re- 
main secret. If it were divulged the cruelest ills, 
wars, pillages, depredations, fires, massacres, and 
epidemics would immediately burst upon Penguinia. 
I should consider myself guilty of high treason if I 
uttered another word.” 

Some persons known for their political experience, 
among others M. Bigourd, considered the evidence 
of the Minister of War as abler and of greater 
weight than that of his Chief of Staff. 


THE COLOMBAN TRIAL 239 


The evidence of Colonel de Boisjoli made a great 
impression. 

“One evening at the Ministry of War,” said 
that officer, “the attaché of a neighbouring Power 
told me that while visiting his sovereign’s stables he 
had once admired some soft and fragrant hay, of a 
pretty green colour, the finest hay he had ever seen! 
‘Where did it come from?’ I asked him. He did not 
answer, but there seemed to me no doubt about 
its origin. It was the hay Pyrot had stolen. Those 
qualities of verdure, softness, and aroma, are those 
of our national hay. The forage of the neigh- 
bouring Power is grey and brittle; it sounds under 
the fork and smells of dust. One can draw one’s 
own conclusions.” 

Lieutenant-Colonel Hastaing said in the witness- 
box, amid hisses, that he did not believe Pyrot 
guilty. He was immediately seized by the. police 
and thrown into the bottom of a dungeon where, 
amid vipers, toads, and broken glass, he remained 
insensible both to promises and threats. 

The usher called: 

“Count Pierre Maubec de la Dentdulynx.” 

There was deep silence, and a stately but ill- 
dressed nobleman, whose moustaches pointed to 
the skies and whose dark eyes shot forth flashing 
glances, was seen advancing toward the witness-box. 

He approached Colomban and casting upon him 
a look of ineffable disdain: 

‘My evidence,” said he, “here it is: you excre- 
ment!” 

At these words the entire hall burst into en- 
thusiastic applause and jumped up, moved by one of 
those transports that stir men’s hearts and rouse 


240 PENGUIN ISLAND 


them to extraordinary actions. Without another 
word Count Maubec de la Dentdulynx withdrew. 

All those present left the Court and formed a 
procession behind him. Prostrate at his feet, Prin- 
cess des Boscénos held his legs in a close embrace, 
but he went on, stern and impassive, beneath a 
shower of handkerchiefs and flowers. Viscountess 
Olive, clinging to his neck, could not be removed, 
and the calm hero bore her along with him, floating 
on his breast like a light scarf. 

When the court resumed its sitting, which it had 
been compelled to suspend, the President called the 
experts. 

Vermillard, the famous expert in handwriting, 
gave the results of his researches. 

“Having carefully studied,” said he, ‘“‘the papers 
found in Pyrot’s house, in particular his account 
book and his laundry books, I noticed that, though 
apparently not out of the common, they formed an 
impenetrable cryptogram, the key to which, however, 
I discovered. The traitor’s infamy is to be seen in 
every line. In this system of writing the words 
‘Three glasses of beer and twenty francs for Adéle,’ 
mean ‘I have delivered thirty thousand trusses of 
hay to a neighbouring Power.’ From these docu- 
ments I have even been able to establish the com- 
position of the hay delivered by this officer. The 
words waistcoat, drawers, pocket handkerchief, 
collars, drink, tobacco, cigars, mean clover, meadow- 
grass, lucern, burnet, oats, rye-grass, vernal-grass, 
and common cat’s tail grass. And these are pre- 
cisely the constituents of the hay furnished by Count 
Maubec to the Penguin cavalry. In this way Pyrot 
mentioned his crimes in a language that he believed 
would always remain indecipherable. One is con- 


THE COLOMBAN TRIAL 241 


founded by so much astuteness and so great a want 
of conscience.” 

Colomban, pronounced guilty without any ex- 
tenuating circumstances, was condemned to the sever- 
est penalty. The judges immediately signed a war- 
rant consigning him to solitary confinement. 

In the Place du Palais on the sides of a river 
whose banks had during the course of twelve cen- 
turies seen so great a history, fifty thousand persons 
were tumultuously awaiting the result of the trial. 
Here were the heads of the Anti-Pyrotist Associa- 
tion, among whom might be seen Prince des Bos- 
cénos, Count Cléna, Viscount Olive, and M. de La 
Trumelle; here crowded the Reverend Father Agaric 
and the teachers of St. Maél College with their 
pupils; here the monk Douillard and General Car» 
aguel, embracing each other, formed a sublime 
group. The market women and laundry women 
with spits, shovels, tongs, beetles, and kettles full of 
water might be seen running across the Pont-Vieux. 
On the steps in front of the bronze gates were assem- 
bled all the defenders of Pyrot in Alca, professors, 
publicists, workmen, some conservatives, others 
Radicals or Revolutionaries, and by their negligent 
dress and fierce aspect could be recognised com- 
rades Phcenix, Larrivée, Lapersonne, Dagobert, 
and Varambille. Squeezed in his funereal frock- 
coat and wearing his hat of ceremony, Bidault- 
Coquille invoked the sentimental mathematics on 
behalf of Colomban and Colonel Hastaing. Man- 
iflore shone smiling and resplendent on the topmost 
step, anxious, like Leena, to deserve a glorious 
monument, or to be given, like Epicharis, the praises 
of history. 

The seven hundred Pyrotists disguised as lemon- 


242 PENGUIN ISLAND 


ade sellers, gutter-merchants, collectors of odds and 
ends, or as Anti-Pyrotists, wandered round the vast 
building. 

When Colomban appeared, so great an uproar 
burst forth that, struck by the commotion of air 
and water, birds fell from the trees and fishes floated 
on the surface of the stream. 

On all sides there were yells: 

“Duck Colomban, duck him, duck him!” 

There were some cries of “Justice and truth!” 
and a voice was even heard shouting: 

“Down with the Army!” 

This was the signal for a terrible struggle. The 
combatants fell in thousands, and their bodies formed 
howling and moving mounds on top of which fresh 
champions gripped each other by the throats. 
Women, eager, pale, and dishevelled, with clenched 
teeth and frantic nails, rushed on the man, in trans- 
ports that, in the brilliant light of the public square, 
gave to their faces expressions unsurpassed even in 
the shade of curtains and in the hollows of pillows. 
They were going to seize Colomban, to bite him, to 
strangle, dismember and rend him, when Maniflore, 
tall and dignified in her red tunic, stood forth, serene 
and terrible, confronting these furies who recoiled 
from before her in terror. Colomban seemed to be 
saved; his partisans succeeded in clearing a passage 
for him through the Place du Palais and in putting 
him into a cab stationed at the corner of the Pont- 
Vieux. The horse was already in full trot when 
Prince des Boscénos, Count Cléna, and M. de La 
Trumelle knocked the driver off his seat. Then, 
making the animal back and pushing the spokes of 
the wheels, they ran the vehicle on to the parapet of 
the bridge, whence they overturned it into the river 


THE COLOMBAN TRIAL 243 


amid the cheers of the delirious crowd. With a re, 
sounding splash a jet of water rose upwards, and 
then nothing but a slight eddy was to be seen on the 
surface of the stream. 

Almost immediately comrades Dagobert and Var- 
ambile, with the help of the seven hundred dis- 
guised Pyrotists, sent Prince des Boscénos head 
foremost into a river-laundry in which he was la- 
mentably swallowed up. 

Serene night descended over the Place du Palais 
and shed silence and peace upon the frightful ruins 
with which it was strewed. In the mean time, 
Colomban, three hundred yards down the stream, 
cowering beside a lame old horse on a bridge, was 
meditating on the ignorance and injustice of crowds. 

“The business,”’ said he to himself, ‘“‘is even more 
troublesome than I believed. I foresee fresh difh- 
culties.” 

He got up and approached the unhappy animal. 

“What have you, poor friend, done to them?” 
said he. ‘It is on my account they have used you 
so cruelly.” 

He embraced the unfortunate beast and kissed 
the white star on his forehead. Then he took him 
by the bridle and led him, both of them limping, 
through the sleeping city to his house, where sleep 
soon allowed them to forget mankind. 


IX 
FATHER DOUILLARD 


N their minute gentleness and at the 
SAa suggestion of the common father of 
wg the faithful, the bishops, canons, vic- 
ars, curates, abbots, and friars of 
Penguinia resolved to hold a solemn 
service in the cathedral of Alca, and 
to pray that Divine mercy would 
deign to put an end to the troubles that distracted 
one of the noblest countries in Christendom, and 
grant to repentant Penguinia pardon for its crimes 
against God and against ministers of religion. 

The ceremony took place on the fifteenth of June. 
General Caraguel, surrounded by his staff, occupied 
the churchwarden’s pew. ‘The congregation was 
numerous and brilliant. According to M. Bigourd’s 
expression it was both crowded and select. In the 
front rank was to be seen M. de la Bertheoseille, 
Chamberlain to his Highness Prince Crucho. Near 
the pulpit, which was to be ascended by the Rever- 
end Father Douillard, of the Order of St. Francis, 
were gathered, in an attitude of attention with their 
hands crossed upon their wands of office, the great 
dignitaries of the Anti-Pyrotist association, Viscount 
Olive, M. de La Trumelle, Count Cléna, the Duke 
d’Ampoule, and Prince des Boscénos. Father Agaric 
was in the apse with the teachers and pupils of St. 
Maél College. The right-hand transept and aisle 
244 


FATHER DOUILLARD 245 


were reserved for officers and soldiers in uniform, 
this side being thought the more honourable, since 
the Lord leaned his head to the right when he died 
on the Cross. The ladies of the aristocracy, and 
among them Countess Cléna, Viscountess Olive, and 
Princess des Boscénos, occupied reserved seats. In 
the immense building and in the square outside were 
gathered twenty thousand clergy of all sorts, as well 
as thirty thousand of the laity. 

After the expiatory and propitiatory ceremony the 
Reverend Father Douillard ascended the pvlpit. 
The sermon had at first been entrusted to the Rev- 
erend Father Agaric, but, in spite of his merits, he 
was thought unequal to the occasion in zeal and 
doctrine, and the eloquent Capuchin friar, who for 
six months had gone through the barracks preach- 
ing against the enemies of God and authority, had 
been chosen in his place. 

The Reverend Father Douillard, taking as his 
text, ‘““He hath put down the mighty from their 
seat,”’ established that all temporal power has God 
as its principle and its end, and that it is ruined and 
destroyed when it turns aside from the path that 
Providence has traced out for it and from the end to 
which He has directed it. 

Applying these sacred rules to the government of 
Penguinia, he drew a terrible picture of the evils 
that the country’s rulers had been unable either to 
prevent or to foresee. 

“The first author of all these miseries and degra- 
dations, my brethren,” said he, “is only too well 
known to you. He is a monster whose destiny is 
providentially proclaimed by his name, for it is de- 
rived from the Greek word, pyros, which means fire. 
Eternal wisdom warns us by this etymology that a 


246 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Jew was to set ablaze the country that had wel- 
comed him.” 

He depicted the country, persecuted by the per- 
secutors of the Church, and crying in its agony: 

“OQ woe! O glory! Those who have crucified 
my God are crucifying me!” 

At these words a prolonged shudder passed 
through the assembly. 

The powerful orator excited still greater indigna- 
tion when he described the proud and crime-stained 
Colomban, plunged into the stream, all the waters 
of which could not cleanse him. He gathered up all 
the humiliations and all the perils of the Penguins in 
order to reproach the President of the Republic and 
his Prime Minister with them. 

“That Minister,” said he, “having been guilty of 
degrading cowardice in not exterminating the seven 
hundred Pyrotists with their allies and defenders, as 
Saul exterminated the Philistines at Gibeah, has 
rendered himself unworthy of exercising the power 
that God delegated to him, and every good citizen 
ought henceforth to insult his contemptible govern- 
ment. Heaven will look favourably on those who 
despise him. ‘He hath put down the mighty from 
their seat.’ God will depose these pusillanimous 
chiefs and will put in their place strong men who 
will call upon Him. I tell you, gentlemen, I tell 
you officers, non-commissioned officers, and soldiers 
who listen to me, I tell you General of the Penguin 
armies, the hour has come! If you do not obey 
God’s orders, if in His name you do not depose those 
now in authority, if you do not establish a religious 
and strong government in Penguinia, God will none 
the less destroy what He has condemned, He will 
none the less save His people. He will save them, 


FATHER DOUILLARD 247 


but, if you are wanting, He will do so by means of a 
humble artisan or a simple corporal. Hasten! The 
hour will soon be past.”’ 

Excited by this ardent exhortation, the sixty thou- 
sand people present rose up trembling and shouting: 
“To arms! To arms! Death to the Pyrotists! 
Hurrah for Crucho!” and all of them, monks, 
women, soldiers, noblemen, citizens, and loafers, 
who were gathered beneath the superhuman arm up- 
lifted in the pulpit, struck up the hymn, “Let us save 
Penguinia!”” They rushed impetuously from the ba- 
silica and marched along the quays to the Chamber 
of Deputies. 

Left alone in the deserted nave, the wise Corne- 
muse, lifting his arms to heaven, murmured in bro- 
ken accents: 

‘“‘Agnosco fortunam ecclesie penguicane! I see 
but too well whither this will lead us.”’ 

The attack which the crowd made upon the legis- 
lative palace was repulsed. Vigorously charged by 
the police and Alcan guards, the assailants were 
already fleeing in disorder, when the Socialists, run- 
ning from the slums and led by comrades Phenix, 
Dagobert, Lapersonne, and Varambille, threw 
themselves upon them and completed their discom- 
fiture. MM. de La Trumelle and d’Ampoule were 
taken to the police station. Prince des Boscénos, 
after a valiant struggle, fell upon the bloody pave- 
ment with a fractured skull. 

In the enthusiasm of victory, the comrades, min- 
gled with an innumerable crowd of paper-sellers and 
gutter-merchants, ran through the boulevards all 
night, carrying Maniflore in triumph, and breaking 
the mirrors of the cafés and the glasses of the street 
lamps amid cries of “Down with Crucho! Hurrah 


248 PENGUIN ISLAND 


for the Social Revolution!” The Anti-Pyrotists in 
their turn upset the newspaper kiosks and tore down 
the hoardings. 

These were spectacles of which cool reason can- 
not approve and they were fit causes for grief to the 
municipal authorities, who desired to preserve the 
good order of the roads and streets. But what was 
sadder for a man of heart was the sight of the cant- 
ing humbugs, who, from fear of blows, kept at an 
equal distance from the two camps, and who, al- 
though they allowed their selfishness and cowardice 
to be visible, claimed admiration for the generosity 
of their sentiments and the nobility of their souls. 
They rubbed their eyes with onions, gaped like 
whitings, blew violently into their handkerchiefs, 
and, bringing their voices out of the depth of their 
stomachs, groaned forth: ‘“O Penguins, cease these 
fratricidal struggles; cease to rend your mother’s 
bosom!” As if men could live in society without dis- 
putes and without quarrels, and as if civil discords 
were not the necessary conditions of national life 
and progress. They showed themselves hypocritical 
cowards by proposing a compromise between the 
just and the unjust, offending the just in his recti- 
tude and the unjust in his courage. One of these 
creatures, the rich and powerful Machimel, a cham- 
pion coward, rose upon the town like a colossus of 
grief; his tears formed poisonous lakes at his feet 
and his sighs capsized the boats of the fishermen. 

During these stormy nights Bidault-Coquille at 
the top of his old steam-engine, under the serene sky, 
boasted in his heart, while the shooting stars regis- 
tered themselves upon his photographic plates. He 
was fighting for justice. He loved and was loved 
with a sublime passion. Insult and calumny raised 


FATHER DOUILLARD 249 


him to the clouds. A caricature of him in company 
with those of Colomban, Kerdanic, and Colonel 
Hastaing was to be seen in the newspaper kiosks. 
The Anti-Pyrotists proclaimed that he had received 
fifty thousand francs from the big Jewish financiers. 
The reporters of the militarist sheets held interviews 
regarding his scientific knowledge with official 
scholars, who declared he had no knowledge of the 
stars, disputed his most solid observations, denied his 
most certain discoveries, and condemned his most 
ingenious and most fruitful hypotheses. He exulted 
under these flattering blows of hatred and envy. 

He contemplated the black immensity pierced by 
a multitude of lights, without giving a thought to all 
the heavy slumbers, cruel insomnias, vain dreams, 
spoilt pleasures, and infinitely diverse miseries that 
a great city contains. 

“Tt is in this enormous city,” said he to himself, 
“that the just and the unjust are joining battle.” 

And substituting a simple and magnificent poetry 
for the multiple and vulgar reality, he represented 
to himself the Pyrot affair as a struggle between 
good and bad angels. He awaited the eternal tri- 
umph of the Sons of Light and congratulated him- 
self on being a Child of the Day confounding the 
Children of Night. 


xX 
MR. JUSTICE CHAUSSEPIED 


es |] THE RTO blinded by fear, incautious 
YJ and stupid before the bands of Friar 
Douillard and the partisans of Prince 
Crucho, the Republicans at last 
opened their eyes and grasped the 
real meaning of the Pyrot affair. 
The deputies who had for two years 
turned pale at the shouts of the patriotic crowds be- 
came, not indeed more courageous, but altered their 
cowardice and blamed Robin Mielleux for disorders 
which their own compliance had encouraged, and the 
instigators of which they had several times slavishly 
congratulated. They reproached him for having 
imperilled the Republic by a weakness which was 
really theirs and a timidity which they themselves 
had imposed upon him. Some of them began to doubt 
whether it was not to their interest te believe in 
Pyrot’s innocence rather than in his guilt, and thence- 
forward they felt a bitter anguish at the thought 
that the unhappy man might have been wrongly con- 
victed and that in his aerial cage he might be ex- 
piating another man’s crimes. ‘I cannot sleep on 
account of it!’ was what several members of Min- 
ister Guillaumette’s majority used to say. But these 
were ambitious to replace their chief. 

These generous legislators overthrew the cabinet, 
and the President of the Republic put in Robin Miel- 
leux’s place, a patriarchal Republican with a flowing 
230 


IX * 
\} oe 


MR. JUSTICE CHAUSSEPIED — as1 


beard, La Trinité by name, who, like most of the 
Penguins, understood nothing about the affair, but 
thought that too many monks were mixed up in it. 

General Greatauk, before leaving the Ministry of 
War, gave his final advice to Panther, the Chief of 
the Staff. 

“T go and you remain,” said he, as he shook hands 
with him. ‘The Pyrot affair is my daughter; I con- 
fide her to you, she is worthy of your love and your 
care; she is beautiful. Do not forget that her beauty 
loves the shade, is pleased with mystery, and likes 
to remain veiled. Treat her modesty with gentle- 
ness. Too many indiscreet looks have already pro- 
faned her charms. . . . Panther, you desired proofs 
and you obtained them. You have many, perhaps 
too many, in your possession. I see that there will 
be many tiresome interventions and much danger- 
ous curiosity. If I were in your place I would tear 
up all those documents. Believe me, the best of 
proofs is none at all. That is the only one which 
nobody discusses.” 

Alas! General Panther did not realise the wis- 
dom of this advice. The future was only too thor- 
oughly to justify Greatauk’s perspicacity. La Trin- 
ité demanded the documents belonging to the Pyrot 
affair. Péniche, his Minister of War, refused them 
in the superior interests of the national defence, tell- 
ing him that the documents under General Panther’s 
care formed the hugest mass of archives in the world. 
La Trinité studied the case as well as he could, and, 
without penetrating to the bottom of the matter, 
suspected it of irregularity. Conformably to his 
rights and prerogatives he then ordered a fresh trial 
to be held. Immediately, Péniche, his Minister of 
War, accused him of insulting the army and betray- 


252 PENGUIN ISLAND 


ing the country, and flung his portfolio at his head. 
He was replaced by a second, who did the same. To 
him succeeded a third, who imitated these examples, 
and those after him to the number of seventy acted 
like their predecessors, until the venerable La Trin- 
ité groaned beneath the weight of bellicose port- 
folios. The seventy-first Minister of War, van 
Julep, retained office. Not that he was in disagree- 
ment with so many and such noble colleagues, but 
he had been commissioned by them generously to 
betray his Prime Minister, to cover him with shame 
and opprobrium, and to convert the new trial to the 
glory of Greatauk, the satisfaction of the Anti-Pyrot- 
ists, the profit of the monks, and the restoration of 
Prince Crucho. 

General van Julep, though endowed with high 
military virtues, was not intelligent enough to em- 
ploy the subtle conduct and exquisite methods of 
Greatauk. He thought, like General Panther, that 
tangible proofs against Pyrot were necessary, that 
they could never have too many of them, that they 
could never have even enough. He expressed these 
sentiments to his Chief of Staff, who was only too 
inclined to agree with them. 

“Panther,” said he, ‘‘we are at the moment when 
we need abundant and superabundant proofs.” 

“You have said enough, General,” answered 
Panther, “I will complete my piles of documents.” 

Six. months later the proofs against Pyrot filled 
two stories of the Ministry of War. The ceiling 
fell in beneath the weight of the bundles, and the 
avalanche of falling documents crushed two head 
clerks, fourteen second clerks, and sixty copying 
clerks, who were at work upon the ground floor 
arranging a change in the fashion of the cavalry 


MR. JUSTICE CHAUSSEPIED 253 


gaiters. The walls of the huge edifice had to be 
propped. Passers by saw with amazement enor- 
mous beams and monstrous stanchions which reared 
themselves obliquely against the noble front of the 
building now tottering and disjointed, and blocked 
up the streets, stopped the carriages, and presented 
to the motor-omnibuses an obstacle against which 
they dashed with their loads of passengers. 

The judges who had condemned Pyrot were not, 
properly speaking, judges but soldiers. The judges 
who had condemned Colomban were real judges, 
but of inferior rank, wearing seedy black clothes like 
church vergers, unlucky wretches of judges, miser- 
able judgelings. Above them were the superior 
judges who wore ermine robes over their black 
gowns. ‘These, renowned for their knowledge and 
doctrine, formed a court whose terrible name ex- 
pressed power. It was called the Court of Appeal 
(Cassation) so as to make it clear that it was the 
hammer suspended over the judgments and decrees 
of all other jurisdictions. 

One of these superior red judges of the Supreme 
Court, called Chaussepied, led a modest and tran- 
quil life in a suburb of Alca. His soul was pure, his 
heart honest, his spirit just. When he had finished 
studying his documents he used to play the violin 
and cultivate hyacinths. Every Sunday he dined 
with his neighbours the Mesdemoiselles Helbivore. 
His old age was cheerful and robust and his friends 
often praised the amenity of his character. 

For some months, however, he had been irritable 
and touchy, and when he opened a newspaper his 
broad and ruddy face would become covered with 
dolorous wrinkles and darkened with an angry pur- 
ple. Pyrot was the cause of it. Justice Chausse- 


254 PENGUIN ISLAND 


pied could not understand how an officer could have 
committed so black a crime as to hand over eighty 
thousand trusses of military hay to a neighbouring 
and hostile Power. And he could still less conceive 
how a scoundrel should have found official defend- 
ers in Penguinia. The thought that there existed 
in his country a Pyrot, a Colonel Hastaing, a Colom- 
ban, a Kerdanic, a Phenix, spoilt his hyacinths, his 
violin, his heaven, and his earth, all nature, and even 
his dinner with the Mesdemoiselles Helbivore! 

In the mean time the Pyrot case, having been pre- 
sented to the Supreme Court by the Keeper of the 
Seals, it fell to Chaussepied to examine it and dis- 
cover its defects, in case any existed. Although as 
upright and honest as a man can be, and trained by 
long habit to exercise his magistracy without fear 
or favour, he expected to find in the documents to 
be submitted to him proofs of certain guilt and of 
obvious criminality. After lengthened difficulties 
and repeated refusals on the part of General van 
Julep, Justice Chaussepied was allowed to examine 
the documents. Numbered and initialed they ran 
to the number of fourteen millions six hundred and 
twenty-six thousand three hundred and twelve. As 
he studied them the judge was at first surprised, then 
astonished, then stupefied, amazed, and, if I dare 
say so, flabbergasted. He found among the docu- 
ments prospectuses of new fancy shops, newspapers, 
fashion-plates, paper bags, old business letters, exer- 
cise books, brown paper, green paper for rubbing 
parquet floors, playing cards, diagrams, six thousand 
copies of the “Key to Dreams,” but not a single doc- 
ument in which any mention was made of Pyrot. 


XI 
CONCLUSION 


HE appeal was allowed, and Pyrot 
was brought down from his cage. 
But the Anti-Pyrotists did not regard 
themselves as beaten. The military 
judges re-tried Pyrot. Greatauk, in 
this second affair, surpassed himself. 
He obtained a second conviction; he 
obtained it by declaring that the proofs communi- 
cated to the Supreme Court were worth nothing, 
and that great care had been taken to keep back the 
good ones, since they ought to remain secret. In the 
opinion of connoisseurs he had never shown so much 
address. On leaving the court, as he passed through 
the vestibule with a tranquil step, and his hands be- 
hind his back, amidst a crowd of sight-seers, a 
woman dressed in red and with her face covered by 
a black veil rushed at him, brandishing a kitchen 
knife. 

“Die, scoundrel!’ she cried. It was Maniflore. 
Before those present could understand what was 
happening, the general seized her by the wrist, and 
with apparent gentleness, squeezed it so forcibly 
that the knife fell from her aching hand. 

Then he picked it up and handed it to Maniflore. 

“Madam,” said he with a bow, “you have 
dropped a household utensil.” 

He could not prevent the heroine from being taken 
to the police-station; but he had her immediately 
255 


256 PENGUIN ISLAND 


released and afterwards he employed all his in- 
fluence to stop the prosecution. 

The second conviction of Pyrot was Greatauk’s 
last victory. 

Justice Chaussepied, who had formerly liked sol- 
diers so much, and esteemed their justice so highly, 
being now enraged with the military judges, squashed 
their judgments as a monkey cracks nuts. He re- 
habilitated Pyrot a second time; he would, if neces- 
sary, have rehabilitated him five hundred times. 

Furious at having been cowards and at having 
allowed themselves to be deceived and made game 
of, the Republicans turned against the monks and 
clergy. The deputies passed laws of expulsion, 
separation, and spoliation against them. What 
Father Cornemuse had foreseen took place. That 
good monk was driven from the Wood of Conils. 
Treasury officers confiscated his retorts and his stills, 
and the liquidators divided amongst them his 
bottles of St. Orberosian liqueur. The pious dis- 
tiller lost the annual income of three million five hun- 
dred thousand francs that his products procured for 
him. Father Agaric went into exile, abandoning his 
school into the hands of laymen, who soon allowed 
it to fall into decay. Separated from its foster- 
mother, the State, the Church of Penguinia 
withered like a plucked flower. 

The victorious defenders of the innocent man now 
abused each other and overwhelmed each other re- 
ciprocally with insults and calumnies. The vehe- 
ment Kerdanic hurled himself upon Pheenix as if 
ready to devour him. The wealthy Jews and the 
seven hundred Pyrotists turned away with disdain 
from the socialist comrades whose aid they had 
humbly implored in the past. 


CONCLUSION 257 


‘“‘We know you no longer,” said they. “To the 
devil with you and your social justice. Social justice 
is the defence of property.” 

Having been elected a Deputy and chosen to be 
the leader of the new majority, comrade Larrivée 
was appointed by the Chamber and public opinion to 
the Premiership. He showed himself an energetic 
defender of the military tribunals that had con- 
demned Pyrot. When his former socialist comrades 
claimed a little more justice and liberty for the em- 
ployés of the State as well as for manual workers, he 
opposed their proposals in an eloquent speech. 

“Liberty,” said he, “is not licence. Between 
order and disorder my choice is made: revolution 
is impotence. Progress has no more formidable 
enemy than violence. Gentlemen, those who, as I 
am, are anxious for reform, ought to apply them- 
selves before everything else to cure this agitation 
which enfeebles government just as fever exhausts 
those who are ill. It is time to reassure honest 
people.” 

This speech was received with applause. The 
government of the Republic remained in subjection 
to the great financial companies, the army was ex- 
clusively devoted to the defence of capital, while the 
fleet was designed solely to procure fresh orders for 
the mine-owners. Since the rich refused to pay 
their just share of the taxes, the poor, as in the past, 
paid for them. 

In the mean time from the height of his old steam- 
engine, beneath the crowded stars of night, Bidault- 
Coquille gazed sadly at the sleeping city. Maniflore 
had left him. Consumed with a desire for fresh de- 
votions and fresh sacrifices, she had gone in company 
with a young Bulgarian to bear justice and vengeance 


258 PENGUIN ISLAND 


to Sofia. He did not regret her, having perceived, 
after the Affair, that she was less beautiful in form 
and in thought than he had at first imagined. His 
impressions had been modified in the same direction 
concerning many other forms and many other 
thoughts. And what was cruelest of all to him, he 
regarded himself as not so great, not so splendid, 
as he had believed. 

And he reflected: 

“You considered yourself sublime when you had 
but candour and good-will. Of what were you 
proud, Bidault-Coquille? Of having been one of 
the first to know that Pyrot was innocent and Great- 
auk a scoundrel. But three-fourths of those who 
defended Greatauk against the attacks of the seven 
hundred Pyrotists knew that better than you. Of 
what then did you show yourself so proud? Of 
having dared to say what you thought? That is 
civic courage, and, like military courage, it is a mere 
result of imprudence. You have been imprudent. 
So far so good, but that is no reason for praising 
yourself beyond measure. Your imprudence was 
trifling; it exposed you to to trifling perils; you did 
not risk your head by it. The Penguins have lost 
that cruel and sanguinary pride which formerly gave 
a tragic grandeur to their revolutions; it is the fatal 
result of the weakening of beliefs and characters. 
Ought one to look upon oneself as a superior spirit 
for having shown a little more clear-sightedness 
than the vulgar? I am very much afraid, on the 
contrary, Bidault-Coquille, that you have given 
proof of a gross misunderstanding of the conditions 
of the moral and intellectual development of a peo- 
ple. You imagined that social injustices were 
threaded together like pearls and that it would be 


CONCLUSION 259 


enough to pull off one in order to unfasten the whole 
necklace. That is a very ingenuous conception. 
You flattered yourself that at one stroke you were 
establishing justice in your own country and in the 
universe. You were a brave man, an honest idealist, 
though without much experimental philosophy. But 
go home to your own heart and you will recognise 
that you had in you a spice of malice and that your 
ingenuousness was not without cunning. You be- 
lieved you were performing a fine moral action. 
You said to yourself: ‘Here am I, just and coura- 
geous once for all. I can henceforth repose in the 
public esteem and the praise of historians.’ And 
now that you have lost your illusions, now that you 
know how hard it is to redress wrongs, and that the 
task must ever be begun afresh, you are going back 
to your asteroids. You are right; but go back to 
them with modesty, Bidault-Coquille!” 


PLES 


= 


BSE 


> 

~ 
SS 
= 


SSE: 


SS 


j CSS 
YY WLELS 


S= 


CES 


= 
<S 


SS 


—=S 
=> 
,—— 


“Only extreme things are tolerable.” 
Count Robert de Montesquiou. 


I 
MADAME CLARENCE’S DRAWING-ROOM 


P) ADAME CLARENCE the widow of 
y an exalted functionary of the Repub- 
lic, loved to entertain. Every Thurs- 
day she collected together some 
friends of modest condition who 
took pJeasure in conversation. The 
ladies who went to see her, very dif- 
ferent in age and rank, were all without money and 
had all suffered much. There was a duchess who 
looked like a fortune-teller and a fortune-teller who 
looked like a duchess. Madame Clarence was pretty 
enough to maintain some old Jiaisons, but not to 
form new ones, and she generally inspired a quiet 
esteem. She had a very pretty daughter, who, since 
she had no dower, caused some alarm among the 
male guests; for the Penguins were as much afraid 
of portionless girls as they were of the devil himself. 
Eveline Clarence, noticing their reserve and per- 
ceiving its cause, used to hand them their tea with 
an air of disdain. Moreover, she seldom appeared 
at the parties and talked only to the ladies or the 
very young people. Her discreet and retiring pres- 
ence put no restraint upon the conversation, since 
those who took part in it thought either that as she 
was a young girl she would not understand it, or 
that, being twenty-five years old, she might listen to 
everything. 
One Thursday therefore, in Madame Clarence’s 
263 


264 PENGUIN ISLAND 


drawing-room, the conversation turned upon love. 
The ladies spoke of it with pride, delicacy, and mys- 
tery, the men with discretion and fatuity; everyone 
took an interest in the conversation, for each one 
was interested in what he or she said. A great deal 
of wit flowed; brilliant apostrophes were launched 
forth and keen repartees were returned. But when 
Professor Haddock began to speak he overwhelmed 
everybody. 

“It is the same with our ideas on love as with our 
ideas on everything else,” said he, ‘“‘they rest upon 
anterior habits whose very memory has been effaced. 
In morals, the limitations that have lost their 
grounds for existing, the most useless obligations, 
the cruelest and most injurious restraints, are be- 
cause of their profound antiquity and the mystery 
of their origin, the least disputed and the least dis- 
putable as well as the most respected, and they are 
those that cannot be violated without incurring the 
most severe blame. All morality relative to the re- 
lations of the sexes is founded on this principle: 
that a woman once obtained belongs to the man, 
that she is his property like his horse or his weap- 
ons. And this having ceased to be true, absurdities 
result from it, such as the marriage or contract of 
sale of a woman to a man, with clauses restricting 
the right of ownership introduced as a consequence 
of the gradual diminution of the claims of the 
possessor. 

“The obligation imposed on a girl that she should 
bring her virginity to her husband comes from the 
times when girls were married immediately they 
were of a marriageable age. It is ridiculous that a 
girl who marries at twenty-five or thirty should be 


MME. CLARENCE’S DRAWING-ROOM 26> 


subject to that obligation. You will, perhaps, say 
that it is a present with which her husband, if she 
gets one at last, will be gratified; but every moment 
we see men wooing married women and showing 
themselves perfectly satisfied to take them as they 
find them. 

“Still, even in our own day, the duty of girls is de- 
termined in religious morality by the old belief that 
God, the most powerful of warriors, is polygamous, 
that he has reserved all maidens for himself, and 
that men can only take those whom he has left. 
This belief, although traces of it exist in several 
metaphors of mysticism, is abandoned to-day by 
most civilised peoples. However, it still dominates 
the education of girls not only among our believers, 
but even among our free-thinkers, who, as a rule, 
think freely for the reason that they do not think 
at all. 

“Discretion means ability to separate and discern, 
We say that a girl is discreet when she knows noth. 
ing at all. We cultivate her ignorance. In spite of 
all our care the most discreet know something, for 
we cannot conceal from them their own nature and 
their own sensations. But they know badly, they 
know in a wrong way. That is all we obtain by our 
careful education. . . .” 

“Sir,” suddenly said Joseph Boutourlé, the High 
Treasurer of Alca, “‘believe me, there are innocent 
girls, perfectly innocent girls, and it is a great pity. 
I have known three. They married, and the result 
was tragical.”’ 

“T have noticed,’ Professor Haddock went on, 
“that Europeans in general and Penguins in par- 
ticular occupy themselves, after sport and motoring, 


266 PENGUIN ISLAND 


with nothing so much as with love. It is giving a 
great deal of importance to a matter that has very 
little weight.” 

“Then, Professor,” exclaimed Madame Crémeur 
in a choking voice, “when a woman has completely 
surrendered herself to you, you think it is a matter 
of no importance ?”’ 

“No, Madam; it can have its importance,” an- 
swered Professor Haddock, “‘but it is necessary to 
examine if when she surrenders herself to us she 
offers us a delicious fruit-garden or a plot of thistles 
and dandelions. And then, do we not misuse words? 
In love, a woman lends herself rather than gives her- 
self. Look at the pretty Madame Pensée. . . .” 

‘She is my mother,” said a tall, fair young man. 

“Sir, I have the greatest respect for her,” replied 
Professor Haddock; “do not be afraid that I intend 
to say anything in the least offensive about her. 
But allow me to tell you that, as a rule, the opinions 
of sons about their mothers are not to be relied on. 
They do not bear enough in mind that a mother is 
a mother only because she loved, and that she can 
still love. That, however, is the case, and it would 
be deplorable were it otherwise. I have noticed, 
on the contrary, that daughters do not deceive them- 
selves about their mothers’ faculty for loving or 
about the use they make of it; they are rivals; they 
have their eyes upon them.” 

The insupportable Professor spoke a great deal 
longer, adding indecorum to awkwardness, and im- 
pertinence to incivility, accumulating incongruities, 
despising what is respectable, respecting what is 
despicable; but no one listened to him further. 

During this time in a room that was simple with- 
out grace, a room sad for the want of love, a room 


MME. CLARENCE’S DRAWING-ROOM 267 


which, like all young girls’ rooms, had something of 
the cold atmosphere of a place of waiting about it, 
Eveline Clarence turned over the pages of club an- 
nuals and prospectuses of charities in order to obtain 
from them some acquaintance with society. Being 
convinced that her mother, shut up in her own intel- 
lectual but poor world, could neither bring her out 
nor push her into prominence, she decided that she 
herself would seek the best means of winning a hus- 
band. At once calm and obstinate, without dreams 
or illusions, and regarding marriage as but a ticket 
of admission or a passport, she kept before her mind 
a clear notion of the hazards, difficulties, and chances 
of her enterprise. She had the art of pleasing and a 
coldness of temperament that enabled her to turn 
it to its fullest advantage. Her weakness lay in the 
fact that she was dazzled by anything that had an 
aristocratic air. 

When she was alone with her mother she said: 
“Mamma, we will go to-morrow to Father Douil- 
ards retreat.” 


II 
THE CHARITY OF ST. ORBEROSIA 


VERY Friday evening at nine o’clock 
yy the choicest of Alcan society assem- 

bled in the aristocratic church of St. 
Maél for the Reverend Father Douil- 
lard’s retreat. Prince and Princess 
des Boscénos, Viscount and Viscount- 
tess Olive, M. and Madame Bigourd, 
Monsieur and Madame de La Trumelle were never 
absent. ‘The flower of the aristocracy might be seen 
there, and fair Jewish baronesses also adorned it 
by their presence, for the Jewish baronesses of Alca 
were Christians. 

This retreat, like all religious retreats, had for its 
object to procure for those living in the world op- 
portunities for recollection so that they might think 
of their eternal salvation. It was also intended to 
draw down upon so many noble and illustrious 
families the benediction of St. Orberosia, who loves 
the Penguins. The Reverend Father Douillard 
strove for the completion of his task with a truly 
apostolical zeal. He hoped to restore the preroga- 
tives of St. Orberosia as the patron saint of Pen- 
guinia and to dedicate to her a monumental church 
on one of the hills that dominate the city. His 
efforts had been crowned with great success, and for 
the accomplishing of this national enterprise he had 
already united more than a hundred thousand ad- 
herents and collected more than twenty millions 
of francs. 


268 


CHARITY OF ST. ORBEROSIA 269 


It was in the choir of St. Maél’s that St. Ober- 
osia’s new shrine, shining with gold, sparkling with 
precious stones, and surrounded by tapers and 
flowers, had been erected. 

The following account may be read in the “His- 
tory of the Miracles of the Patron Saint of Alca” by 
the Abbé Plantain: 

“The ancient shrine had been melted down dur- 
ing the Terror and the precious relics of the saint 
thrown into a fire that had been lit on the Place de 
Gréve; but a poor woman of great piety, named 
Rouquin, went by night at the peril of her life 
to gather up the calcined bones and the ashes 
of the blessed saint. She preserved them in 
a jam-pot, and when religion was again restored, 
brought them to the venerable Curé of St. Maél’s. 
The woman ended her days piously as a vendor 
of tapers and custodian of seats in the saint’s 
chapel.” 

It is certain that in the time of Father Douillard, 
although faith was declining, the cult of St. Orber- 
osia, which for three hundred years had fallen under 
the criticism of Canon Princeteau and the silence of 
the Doctors of the Church, recovered, and was sur- 
rounded with more pomp, more splendour, and more, 
fervour than ever. The theologians did not now 
subtract a single iota from the legend. They held 
as certainly established all facts related by Abbot 
Simplicissimus, and in particular declared, on the 
testimony of that monk, that the devil, assuming a 
monk’s form had carried off the saint to a cave and 
had there striven with her until she overcame him. 
Neither places nor dates caused them any embar- 
rassment. They paid no heed to exegesis and took 
good care not to grant as much to science as Canon 


270 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Princeteau had formerly conceded. They knew too 
well whither that would lead. 

The church shone with lights and flowers. An 
operatic tenor sang the famous canticle of St. Orber- 
osia 

Virgin of Paradise 

Come, come in the dusky night 
And om us shed 

Thy beams of light. 


Mademoiselle Clarence sat beside her mother and 
in front of Viscount Cléna. She remained kneeling 
during a considerable time, for the attitude of prayer 
is natural to discreet virgins and it shows off their 
figures. 

The Reverend Father Douillard ascended the pul- 
pit. He was a powerful orator and could, at once 
melt, surprise, and rouse his hearers. Women com- 
plained only that he fulminated against vice with 
excessive harshness and in crude terms that made 
them blush. But they liked him none the less for it. 

He treated in his sermon of the seventh trial of 
St. Orberosia, who was tempted by the dragon which 
she went forth to combat. But she did not yield, 
and she disarmed the monster. 

The orator demonstrated without difficulty that 
we, also, by the aid of St. Orberosia, and strong in 
the virtue which she inspires, can in our turn over- 
throw the dragons that dart upon us and are wait- 
ing to devour us, the dragon of doubt, the dragon 
of impiety, the dragon of forgetfulness of religious 
duties. He proved that the charity of St. Orberosia 
was a work of social regeneration, and he concluded 
by an ardent appeal to the faithful ‘‘to become in- 
struments of the Divine mercy, eager upholders and 
supporters of the charity of St. Orberosia, and to 


CHARITY OF ST. ORBEROSIA 271 


furnish it with all the means which it required to 
take its flight and bear its salutary fruits.” * 

After the ceremony, the Reverend Father Douil. 
lard remained in the sacristy at the disposal of those 
of the faithful who desired information concerning 
the charity, or who wished to bring their contribu- 
tions. Mademoiselle Clarence wished to speak to 
Father Douillard, so did Viscount Cléna. The 
crowd was large, and a queue was formed. By 
chance Viscount Cléna and Mademoiselle Clarence 
were side by side and possibly they were squeezed a 
little closely to each other by the crowd. Eveline 
had noticed this fashionable young man, who was al- 
most as well known as his father in the world of 
sport. Cléna had noticed her, and, as he thought 
her pretty, he bowed to her, then apologized and 
pretended to believe that he had been introduced to 
the ladies, but could not remember where. ‘They 
pretended to believe it also. 

He presented himself the following week at Ma- 
dame Clarence’s, thinking that her house was a bit 
fast—a thing not likely to displease him—and when 
he saw Eveline again he felt he had not been mis- 
taken and that she was an extremely pretty girl. 

Viscount Cléna had the finest motor-car in Eu- 
rope. For three months he drove the Clarences 
every day over hills and plains, through woods and 
valleys; they visited famous sites and went over 
celebrated castles. He said to Eveline all that could 
be said and did all that could be done to overcome 
her resistance. She did not conceal from him that 
she loved him, that she would always love him, and 
love no one but him. She remained grave and trem- 

* Cf. J. Ernest Charles in the “Censeur,’ May-August, 1907, p. 
AO Gob Be 


a72 PENGUIN ISLAND 


bling by his side. To his devouring passion she 
opposed the invincible defence of a virtue conscious 
of its danger. At the end of three months, after 
having gone uphill and down hill, turned sharp cor- 
ners and negotiated level crossings, and experienced 
innumerable break-downs, he knew her as well as 
he knew the fly-wheel of his car, but not much better. 
He employed surprises, adventures, sudden stop- 
pages in the depths of forests and before hotels, but 
he had advanced no farther. He said to himself 
that it was absurd; then, taking her again in his 
car he set off at fifty miles an hour quite prepared 
to upset her in a ditch or to smash himself and her 
against a tree. 

One day, having come to take her on some excur- 
sion, he found her more charming than ever, and 
more provoking. He darted upon her as a storm 
falls upon the reeds that border a lake. She bent 
with adorable weakness beneath the breath of the 
storm and twenty times was almost carried away by 
its strength, but twenty times she arose, supple and 
bowing to the wind. After all these shocks one 
would have said that a light breeze had barely 
touched her charming stem; she smiled as if ready 
to be plucked by a bold hand. Then her unhappy 
aggressor, desperate, enraged, and three parts mad, 
fled so as not to kill her, mistook the door, went into 
the bedroom of Madame Clarence, whom he found 
putting on her hat in front of a wardrobe, seized her, 
flung her on the bed, and possessed her before she 
knew what had happened. 

The same day Eveline, who had been making 
inquiries, learned that Viscount Cléna had nothing 
but debts, lived on money given him by an elderly 


273 


lady, and promoted the sale of the latest models of 


CHARITY OF ST. ORBEROSIA 


They separated with 


common accord and Eveline began again disdain- 


fully to serve tea to her mother’s guests. 


a motor-car manufacturer. 


SES 


III 
HIPPOLYTE CERES 


N Madame Clarence’s drawing-room 
the conversation turned upon love, 
and many charming things were said 
about it. 

“Tove is a sacrifice,” sighed Ma- 
dame Crémeur. 
“T agree with you,” replied M. 

Boutourlé with animation. 

But Professor Haddock soon displayed his fas- 
tidious insolence. 

“Tt seems to me,” said he, ‘‘that the Penguin ladies 
have made a great fuss since, through St. Maél’s 
agency, they became viviparous. But there is noth- 
ing to be particularly proud of in that, for it is a 
state they share in common with cows and pigs, and 
even with orange and lemon trees, for the seeds of 
these plants germinate in the pericarp.” 

“The self-importance which the Penguin ladies 
give themselves does not go so far back as that,” 
answered M. Boutourlé. “It dates from the day 
when the holy apostle gave them clothes. But this 
self-importance was long kept in restraint, and dis- 
played itself fully only with increased luxury of 
dress and in a small section of society. For go only 
two leagues from Alca into the country at harvest 
time, and you will see whether women are over- 
precise or self-important.” 

On that day M. Hippolyte Cérés paid his first call. 
274 


Soe ¥ 
TAR 
PLL 
ATLA 


HY 
ies \\ 


> 


Apostle Gave Them Clothes =. 


HIPPOLYTE CERES 275 


He was a deputy of Alca, and one of the youngest 
members of the House. His father was said to 
have kept a dram shop, but he himself was a lawyer 
of robust physique, a good though prolix speaker, 
with a self-important air and a reputation for 
ability. 

““M. Cérés,”’ said the mistress of the house, ‘“‘your 
constituency is one of the finest in Alca.”’ 

“And there are fresh improvements made in it 
every day, Madame.” 

“Unfortunately, it is impossible to take a stroll 
through it any longer,” said M. Boutourlé. 

“Why?” asked M. Cérés. 

“On account of the motors, of course.” 

“Do not give them a bad name,” answered the 
Deputy. ‘‘They are our great national industry.” 

“Tknow. The Penguins of to-day make me think 
of the ancient Egyptians. According to Clement of 
Alexandria, Taine tells us—though he misquotes 
the text—the Egyptians worshipped the crocodiles 
that devoured them. The Penguins to-day worship 
the motors that crush them. Without a doubt the 
future belongs to the metal beast. We are no more 
likely to go back to cabs than we are to go back to 
the diligence. And the long martyrdom of the horse 
will come to an end. The motor, which the fren- 
zied cupidity of manufacturers hurls like a Jugger- 
naut’s car upon the bewildered people and of which 
the idle and fashionable make a foolish though fatal 
elegance, will soon begin to perform its true func- 
tion, and putting its strength at the service of the 
entire people, will behave like a docile, toiling mon- 
ster. But in order that the motor may cease to be 
injurious and become beneficent we must build 
roads suited to its speed, roads which it cannot tear 


276 PENGUIN ISLAND 


up with its ferocious tyres, and from which it will 
send no clouds of poisonous dust into human lungs. 
We ought not to allow slower vehicles or mere 
animals to go upon those roads, and we should 
establish garages upon them and foot-bridges over 
them, and so create order and harmony among the 
means of communication of the future. That is 
the wish of every good citizen.” 

Madame Clarence led the conversation back to 
the improvements in M. Cérés’ constituency. M. 
Cérés showed his enthusiasm for demolitions, tun- 
nelings, constructions, reconstructions, and all other 
fruitful operations. 

“We build to-day in an admirable style,” said he; 
“everywhere majestic avenues are being reared. 
Was ever anything as fine as our arcaded bridges 
and our domed hotels!” 

“You are forgetting that big palace surmounted 
by an immense melon-shaped dome,” grumbled M. 
Daniset, an old art amateur, in a voice of restrained 
rage. “I am amazed at the degree of ugliness 
which a modern city can attain. Alca is becoming 
Americanised. Everywhere we are destroying all 
that is free, unexpected, measured, restrained, hu- 
man, or traditional among the things that are left 
us. Everywhere we are destroying that charming 
object, a piece of an old wall that bears up the 
branches of a tree. Everywhere we are suppressing 
some fragment of light and air, some fragment of 
nature, some fragment of the associations that still 
remain with us, some fragment of our fathers, some 
fragment of ourselves. And we are putting up 
frightful, enormous, infamous houses, surmounted 
in Viennese style by ridiculous domes, or fashioned 
after the models of the ‘new art’ without mouldings, 


HIPPOLYTE CERES 277 


or having profiles with sinister corbels and burlesque 
pinnacles, and such monsters as these shamelessly 
peer over the surrounding buildings. We see bul- 
bous protuberances stuck on the fronts of buildings 
and we are told they are ‘new art’ motives. I have 
seen the ‘new art’ in other countries, but it is not 
so ugly as with us; it has fancy and it has simplicity. 
It is only in our own country that by a sad privilege 
we may behold the newest and most diverse styles 
of architectural ugliness. What an enviable privi- 
lege!” 

“Are you not afraid,” asked M. Cérés severely, 
“are you not afraid that these bitter criticisms tend 
to keep out of our capital the foreigners who flow 
into it from all parts of the world and who leave 
millions behind them?” 

‘You may set your mind at rest about that,” an- 
swered M. Daniset. “Foreigners do not come to 
admire our buildings; they come to see our cour- 
tesans, our dressmakers, and our dancing saloons.” 

‘‘We have one bad habit,” sighed M. Cérés, “‘it is 
that we calumniate ourselves.” 

Madame Clarence as an accomplished hostess 
thought it was time to return to the subject of love 
and asked M. Jumel his opinion of M. Léon Blum’s 
recent book in which the author complained. . . . 

‘*., . That an irrational custom,” went on Pro- 
fessor Haddock, “‘prevents respectable young ladies 
from making love, a thing they would enjoy doing, 
whilst mercenary girls do it too much and without 
getting any enjoyment out of it. It is indeed deplor- 
able. But M. Léon Blum need not fret too much. 
If the evil exists, as he says it does, in our middle- 
class society, I can assure him that everywhere 
else he would see a consoling spectacle. Among 


278 PENGUIN ISLAND 


the people, the mass of the people through town 
and country, girls do not deny themselves that 
pleasure.” 

“Tt is depravity !’’ said Madame Crémeur. 

And she praised the innocence of young girls in 
terms full of modesty and grace. It was charming 
to hear her. 

Professor Haddock’s views on the same subject 
were, on the contrary, painful to listen to. 

‘Respectable young girls,” said he, “are guarded 
and watched over. Besides, men do not, as a rule, 
pursue them much, either through probity, or from 
a fear of grave responsibilities, or because the se- 
duction of a young girl would not be to their credit. 
Even then we do not know what really takes place, 
for the reason that what is hidden is not seen. ‘This 
is a condition necessary to the existence of all society. 
The scruples of respectable young girls could be 
more easily overcome than those of married women 
if the same pressure were brought to bear on them, 
and for this there are two reasons: they have more 
illusions, and their curiosity has not been satisfied. 
Women, for the most part, have been so disap- 
pointed by their husbands that they have not courage 
enough to begin again with somebody else. I my- 
self have been met by this obstacle several times in 
my attempts at seduction.”’ 

At the moment when Professor Haddock ended 
his unpleasant remarks, Mademoiselle Eveline 
Clarence entered the drawing-room and listlessly 
handed about tea with that expression of boredom 
which gave an oriental charm to her beauty. 

“For my part,” said Hippolyte Cérés, looking at 
her, “I declare myself the young ladies’ champion.” 

‘He must be a fool,” thought the girl. 


HIPPOLYTE CERES 279 


Hippolyte Cérés, who had never set foot outside 
of his political world of electors and elected, thought 
Madame Clarence’s drawing-room most select, its 
mistress exquisite, and her daughter amazingly 
beautiful. His visits became frequent and he paid 
court to both of them. Madame Clarence, who 
now liked attention, thought him agreeable. Eve, 
line showed no friendliness towards him, and treated 
him with a hauteur and disdain that he took for 
aristocratic behaviour and fashionable manners, and 
he thought all the more of her on that account. 

This busy man taxed his ingenuity to please them, 
and he sometimes succeeded. He got them cards 
for fashionable functions and boxes at the Opera. 
He furnished Mademoiselle Clarence with several 
opportunities of appearing to great advantage and 
in particular at a garden party which, although given 
by a Minister, was regarded as really fashionable, 
and gained its first success in society circles for the 
Republic. 

At that party Eveline had been much noticed and 
had attracted the special attention of a young diplo- 
mat called Roger Lambilly who, imagining that she 
belonged to a rather fast set, invited her to his 
bachelor’s flat. She thought him handsome and 
believed him rich, and she accepted. A little moved, 
almost disquieted, she very nearly became the victim 
of her daring, and only avoided defeat by an offen- 
sive measure audaciously carried out. This was the 
most foolish escapade in her unmarried life. 

Being now on friendly terms with Ministers and 
with the President, Eveline continued to wear her 
aristocratic and pious affectations, and these won 
for her the sympathy of the chief personages in the 
anti-clerical and democratic Republic. M. Hip- 


280 PENGUIN ISLAND 


polyte Cérés, seeing that she was succeeding and 
doing him credit, liked her still more. He even 
went so far as to fall madly in love with her. 

Henceforth, in spite of everything, she began to 
observe him with interest, being curious to see if his 
passion would increase. He appeared to her with- 
out elegance or grace, and not well bred, but active, 
clear-sighted, full of resource, and not too great a 
bore. She still made fun of him, but he had now 
won her interest. 

One day she wished to test him. It was during 
the elections, when members of Parliament were, as 
the phrase runs, requesting a renewal of their man- 
dates. He had an opponent, who, though not dan- 
gerous at first and not much of an orator, was rich 
and was reported to be gaining votes every day. 
Hippolyte Cérés, banishing both dull security and 
foolish alarm from his mind, redoubled his care. 
His chief method of action was by public meetings 
at which he spoke vehemently against the rival 
candidate. His committee held huge meetings on 
Saturday evenings and at three o’clock on Sunday 
afternoons. One Sunday, as he called on the Clar- 
ences, he found Eveline alone in the drawing-room. 
He had been chatting for about twenty or twenty- 
five minutes, when, taking out his watch, he saw 
that it was a quarter to three. The young girl 
showed herself amiable, engaging, attractive, and 
full of promises. Cérés was fascinated, but he stood 
up to go. 

“Stay a little longer,” said she in a pressing and 
agreeable voice which made him promptly sit down 
again. 

She was full of interest, of abandon, curiosity, 


HIPPOLYTE CERES 281 


and weakness. He blushed, turned pale, and again 
got up. 

Then, in order to keep him still longer, she looked 
at him out of two grey and melting eyes, and though 
her bosom was heaving, she did not say another 
word. He fell at her feet in distraction, but once 
more looking at his watch, he jumped up with a 
terrible oath. 

4D, lea quarter to 7ouc!) limust beonss 

And immediately he rushed down the stairs. 

From that time onwards she had a certain amount 
of esteem for him. 


Neo 


ae 


>™~_~ 


IV 
A POLITICIAN’S MARRIAGE 


aX HE was not quite in love with him, 
but she wished him to be in love 
with her. She was, moreover, very 
reserved with him, and that not solely 
from any want of inclination to be 
otherwise, since in affairs of love 
some things are due to indifference, 
to inattention, to a woman’s instinct, to traditional 
custom and feeling, to a desire to try one’s power, 
and to satisfaction at seeing its results. The reason 
of her prudence was that she knew him to be very 
much infatuated and capable of taking advantage of 
any familiarities she allowed as well as of reproach- 
ing her coarsely afterwards if she discontinued them. 

As he was a professed anti-clerical and free- 
thinker, she thought it a good plan to affect an ap- 
pearance of piety in his presence and to be seen with 
huge prayer-books bound in red morocco, such as 
Queen Marie Leczinska’s or the Dauphiness Marie 
Josephine’s “The Last Two Weeks of Lent.” She 
lost no opportunity either, of showing him the sub- 
scriptions that she collected for the endowment 
of the national cult of St. Orberosia. Eveline did 
not act in this way because she wished to tease him. 
Nor did it spring from a young girl’s archness, or a 
spirit of constraint, or even from snobbishness, 
though there was more than a suspicion of this latter 


in her behaviour. It was but her way of asserting 
282 


A POLITICIAN’S MARRIAGE 283 


herself, of stamping herself with a definite character, 
of increasing her value. To rouse the Deputy’s 
courage she wrapped herself up in religion, just as 
Brunhild surrounded herself with flames so as to 
attract Sigard. Her audacity was successful. He 
thought her still more beautiful thus. Clericalism 
was in his eyes a sign of good form. 

Cérés was re-elected by an enormous majority 
and returned to a House which showed itself more 
inclined to the Left, more advanced, and, as it 
seemed, more eager for reform than its predecessor. 
Perceiving at once that so much zeal was but in- 
tended to hide a fear of change, and a sincere desire 
to do nothing, he determined to adopt a policy that 
would satisfy these aspirations. At the beginning 
of the session he made a great speech, cleverly 
thought out and well arranged, dealing with the 
idea that all reform ought to be put off for a long 
time. He showed himself heated, even fervid; hold- 
ing the principle that an orator should recommend 
moderation with extreme vehemence. He was ap- 
plauded by the entire assembly. The Clarences 
listened to him from the President’s box and Eve- 
line trembled in spite of herself at the solemn sound 
of the applause. On the same bench the fair Ma- 
dame Pensée shivered at the intonations of his 
virile voice. 

As soon as he descended from the tribune, Cérés, 
even while the audience were still clapping, went 
without a moment’s delay to salute the Clarences in 
their box. Eveline saw in him the beauty of success, 
and as he leaned towards the ladies, wiping his 
neck with his handkerchief and receiving their con- 
gratulations with an air of modesty though not with- 
out a tinge of self-conceit, the young girl glanced to- 


284 PENGUIN ISLAND 


wards Madame Pensée and saw her, palpitating 
and breathless, drinking in the hero’s applause with 
her head thrown backwards. It seemed as if she 
were on the point of fainting. Eveline immediately 
smiled tenderly on M. Ceérés. 

The Alcan deputy’s speech had a great vogue. 
In political “spheres” it was regarded as extremely 
able. ‘‘We have at last heard an honest pronounce- 
ment,” said the chief Moderate journal. “It is a 
regular programme!”’ they said in the House. It 
was agreed that he was a man of immense talent. 

Hippolyte Cérés had now established himself as 
leader of the radicals, socialists, and anti-clericals, 
and they appointed him President of their group, 
which was then the most considerable in the House. 
He thus found himself marked out for office in the 
next ministerial combination. 

After a long hesitation Eveline Clarence ac- 
cepted the idea of marrying M. Hippolyte Ceérés. 
The great man was a little common for her taste. 
Nothing had yet proved that he would one day reach 
the point where politics bring in large sums of 
money. But she was entering her twenty-seventh 
year and knew enough of life to see that she must 
not be too fastidious or show herself too difficult 
to please. 

Hippolyte Cérés was celebrated; Hippolyte Cérés 
was happy. He was no longer recognisable; the 
elegance of his clothes and deportment had in- 
creased tremendously. He wore an undue number 
of white gloves. Now that he was too much of a 
society man, Eveline began to doubt if it was not 
worse than being too little of one. Madame Clar- 
ence regarded the engagement with favour. She 
was reassured concerning her daughter’s future and 


A POLITICIAN’S MARRIAGE 285 


pleased to have flowers given her every Thursday 
for her drawing-room. 

The celebration of the marriage raised some 
difficulties. Eveline was pious and wished to re- 
ceive the benediction of the Church. Hippolyte 
Cérés, tolerant but a free-thinker, wanted only a 
civil marriage. There were many discussions and 
even some violent scenes upon the subject. The 
last took place in the young girl’s room at the mo- 
ment when the invitations were being written. Eve- 
line declared that if she did not go to church she 
would not believe herself married. She spoke of 
breaking off the engagement, and of going abroad 
with her mother, or of retiring into a convent. 
Then she became tender, weak, suppliant. She 
sighed, and everything in her virginal chamber 
sighed in chorus, the holy-water font, the palm- 
branch above her white bed, the books of devotion 
on their little shelves, and the blue and white stat- 
uette of St. Orberosia chaining the dragon of 
Cappadocia, that stood upon the marble mantel- 
piece. Hippolyte Cérés was moved, softened, 
melted. 

Beautiful in her grief, her eyes shining with tears, 
her wrists girt by a rosary of lapis lazuli and, so to 
speak, chained by her faith, she suddenly flung 
herself at Hippolyte’s feet, and dishevelled, almost 
dying, she embraced his knees. 

He nearly yielded. 

‘A religious marriage,” he muttered, “a marriage 
in church, I could make my constituents stand that, 
but my committee would not swallow the matter 
so easily... . Still Pll explain it to them... 
toleration, social necessities. .. . They all send 
their daughters to Sunday school. . . . But as for 


286 PENGUIN ISLAND 


office, my dear I am afraid we are going to drown 
all hope of that in your holy water.” 

At these words she stood up grave, generous, 
resigned, conquered also in her turn. 

“My dear, I insist no longer.” 

“Then we won't have a religious marriage. It 
will be better, much better not.” 

“Very well, but be guided by me. I am going 
to try and arrange everything both to your satisfac- 
tion and mine.” 

She sought the Reverend Father Douillard and ex- 
plained the situation. He showed himself even more 
accommodating and yielding than she had hoped. 

“Your husband is an intelligent man, a man of 
order and reason; he will come over to us. You 
will sanctify him. It is not in vain that God has 
granted him the blessing of a Christian wife. The 
Church needs no pomp and ceremonial display for 
her benedictions. Now that she is persecuted, the 
shadow of the crypts and the recesses of the cata- 
combs are in better accord with her festivals. Ma- 
demoiselle, when you have performed the civil for- 
malities come here to my private chapel in walking 
costume with M. Cérés. I will marry you, and I 
will observe the most absolute discretion. I will ob- 
tain the necessary dispensations from the Arch- 
bishop as well as all facilities regarding the banns, 
confession-tickets, etc.” 

Hippolyte, although he thought the combination 
a little dangerous, agreed to it, a good deal flat- 
tered at bottom. 

“T will go in a short coat,” he said. 

He went in a frock coat with white gloves and 
varnished shoes, and he genuflected. 

Politeness:demands-.seen 4 


Vv 
THE VISIRE CABINET 


HE Cerés household was established 
with modest decency in a pretty flat 
situated in a new building. Cérés 
loved his wife in a calm and tranquil 
fashion. He was often kept late 
from home by the Commission on the 
Budget and he worked more than 

three nights a week at a report on the postal finances 

of which he hoped to make a masterpiece. Eveline 
thought she could twist him round her finger, and 
this did not displease him. The bad side of their 
situation was that they had not much money; in truth 
they had very little. The servants of the Republic 
do not grow rich in her service as easily as people 
think. Since the sovereign is no longer there to 
distribute favours, each of them takes what he can, 
and his depredations, limited by the depredations of 
all the others, are reduced to modest proportions. 

Hence that austerity of morals that is noticed in 

democratic leaders. They can only grow rich dur- 

ing periods of great business activity and then they 
find themselves exposed to the envy of their less 

favoured colleagues. Hippolyte Cérés had for a 

long time foreseen such a period. He was one of 

those who had made preparations for its arrival. 

Whilst waiting for it he endured his poverty with 

dignity, and Eveline shared that poverty without 


suffering as much as one might have thought. She 
287 


288 PENGUIN ISLAND 


was in close intimacy with the Reverend Father 
Douillard and frequented the chapel of St. Orber- 
osia, where she met with serious society and people 
in a position to render her useful services. She 
knew how to choose among them and gave her con- 
fidence to none but those who deserved it. She had 
gained experience since her motor excursions with 
Viscount Cléna, and above all she had now acquired 
the value of a married woman. 

The deputy was at first uneasy about these pious 
practices, which were ridiculed by the demagogic 
newspapers, but he was soon reassured, for he saw 
all around him democratic leaders joyfully becoming 
reconciled to the aristocracy and the Church. 

They found that they had reached one of those 
periods (which often recur) when advance had been 
carried a little too far. Hippolyte Cérés gave a 
moderate support to this view. His policy was not a 
policy of persecution but a policy of tolerance. He 
had laid its foundations in his splendid speech on 
the preparations for reform. The Prime Minister 
was looked upon as too advanced. He proposed 
schemes which were admitted to be dangerous to 
capital, and the great financial companies were op- 
posed to him. Of course it followed that the news- 
papers of all views supported the companies. Seeing 
the danger increasing, the Cabinet abandoned its 
schemes, its programme, and its opinions, but it was 
too late. A new administration was already ready. 
An insidious question by Paul Visire which was im- 
mediately made the subject of a resolution, and a 
fine speech by Hippolyte Cérés, overthrew the Cab- 
inet. ; 

The President of the Republic entrusted the for- 
mation of a new Cabinet to this same Paul Visire, 


THE VISIRE CABINET 289 


who, though still very young, had been a Minister 
twice. He was a charming man, spending much of 
his time in the green-rooms of theatres, very artistic, 
a great society man, of amazing ability and industry. 
Paul Visire formed a temporary ministry intended to 
reassure public feeling which had taken alarm, and 
Hippolyte Cérés was invited to hold office in it. 

The new ministry, belonging to all the groups in 
the majority, represented the most diverse and con- 
trary opinions, but they were all moderate and con- 
vinced conservatives.* The Minister of Foreign 
Affairs was retained from the former cabinet. He 
was a little dark man called Crombile, who worked 
fourteen hours a day with the conviction that he 
dealt with tremendous questions. He refused to see 
even his own diplomatic agents, and was terribly un- 
easy, though he did not disturb anybody else, for the 
want of foresight of peoples is infinite and that of 
governments is just as great. 

The office of Public Works was given to a Social- 
ist, Fortuné Lapersonne. It was then a political 
custom and one of the most solemn, most severe, 
most rigorous, and if I may dare say so, the most 
terrible and cruel of all political customs, to include 
a member of the Socialist party in each ministry in- 
tended to oppose Socialism, so that the enemies of 
wealth and property should suffer the shame of be- 
ing attacked by one of their own party, and so that 

* As this ministry exercised considerable influence upon the des- 
tinies of the country and of the world, we think it well to give its 
composition: Minister of the Interior and Prime Minister, Paul 
Visire; Minister of Justice, Pierre Bouc; Foreign Affairs, Victor 
Crombile; Finance, Terrasson; Education, Labillette; Com- 
merce, Posts and ‘Telegraphs, Hippolyte Cérés; Agriculture, 
Aulac; Public Works, Lapersonne; War, General Débonnaire; 
Admiralty, Admiral Vivier des Murénes. 


290 PENGUIN ISLAND 


they could not unite against these forces without 
turning to some one who might possibly attack them- 
selves in the future. Nothing but a profound igno- 
rance of the human heart would permit the belief 
that it was difficult to find a Socialist to occupy these 
functions. Citizen Fortuné Lapersonne entered the 
Visire cabinet of his own free will and without any 
constraint; and he found those who approved of his 
action even among his former friends, so great was 
the fascination that power exercised over the Pen- 
guins ! 

General Débonnaire went to the War Office. He 
was looked upon as one of the ablest generals in the 
army, but he was ruled by a woman, the Baroness 
Bildermann, who, though she had reached the age 
of intrigue, was still beautiful. She was in the pay 
of a neighbouring and hostile Power. 

The new Minister of Marine, the worthy Admiral 
Vivier des Murénes, was generally regarded as an 
excellent seaman. He displayed a piety that would 
have seemed excessive in an anti-clerical minister, 
if the Republic had not recognised that religion was 
of great maritime utility. Acting on the instruction 
of his spiritual director, the Reverend Father Douil- 
lard, the worthy Admiral had dedicated his fleet to 
St. Orberosia and directed canticles in honour of the 
Alcan Virgin to be composed by Christian bards. 
These replaced the national hymn in the music 
played by the navy. 

Prime Minister Visire declared himself to be dis- 
tinctly anticlerical but ready to respect all creeds; 
he asserted that he was a sober-minded reformer. 
Paul Visire and his colleagues desired reforms, and 
it was in order not to compromise reform that they 
proposed none; for they were true politicians and 


‘ 


THE VISIRE CABINET 291 


knew that reforms are compromised the moment 
they are proposed. The government was well 
received, respectable people were reassured, and the 
funds rose. 

The administration announced that four new 
ironclads would be put into commission, that prose- 
cutions would be undertaken against the Socialists, 
and it formally declared its intention to have nothing 
to do with any inquisitorial income-tax. The choice 
of Terrasson as Minister of Finance was warmly ap- 
proved by the press. ‘Terrasson, an old minister fa- 
mous for his financial operations, gave warrant to all 
the hopes of the financiers and shadowed forth a 
period of great business activity. Soon those three 
udders of modern nations, monopolies, bill discount- 
ing, and fraudulent speculation, were swollen with 
the milk of wealth. Already whispers were heard 
of distant enterprises, and of planting colonies, and 
the boldest put forward in the newspapers the 
project of a military and financial protectorate over 
Nigritia. 

Without having yet shown what he was capable 
of, Hippolyte Cérés was considered a man of weight. 
Business people thought highly of him. He was 
congratulated on all sides for having broken with the 
extreme sections, the dangerous men, and for having 
realised the responsibilities of government. 

Madame Cérés shone alone amid the Ministers’ 
wives. Crombile withered away in bachelordom. 
Paul Visire had married money in the person of Ma- 
demoiselle Blampignon, an accomplished, estimable, 
and simple lady who was always ill, and whose feeble 
health compelled her to stay with her mother in the 
depths of a remote province. The other Ministers’ 
wives were not born to charm the sight, and people 


292 PENGUIN ISLAND 


smiled when they read that Madame Labillette had 
appeared at the Presidency Ball wearing a head- 
dress of birds of paradise. Madame Vivier des 
Murénes, a woman of good family, was stout rather 
than tall, had a face like a beef-steak and the voice 
of a newspaper-seller. Madame Débonnaire, tall, 
dry, and florid, was devoted to young officers. She 
ruined herself by her escapades and crimes and only 
regained consideration by dint of ugliness and in- 
solence. 

Madame Cérés was the charm of the Ministry and 
its title to consideration. Young, beautiful, and 
irreproachable, she charmed alike society and the 
masses by her combination of elegant costumes and 
pleasant smiles. 

Her receptions were thronged by the great Jewish 
financiers. She gave the most fashionable garden 
parties in the Republic. The newspapers described 
her dresses and the milliners did not ask her to pay 
for them. She went to Mass; she protected the 
chapel of St. Orberosia from the ill-will of the peo- 
ple; and she aroused in aristocratic hearts the hope 
of a fresh Concordat. 

With her golden hair, grey eyes, and supple and 
slight though rounded figure, she was indeed pretty. 
She enjoyed an excellent reputation and she was so 
adroit, and calm, so much mistress of herself, that 
she would have preserved it intact even if she had 
been discovered in the very act of ruining it. 

The session ended with a victory for the cabinet 
which, amid the almost unanimous applause of the 
House, defeated a proposal for an inquisitorial tax, 
and with a triumph for Madame Cérés who gave 
parties in honour of three kings who were at the 
moment passing through Alca. 


VI 
THE SOFA OF THE FAVOURITE 


HE Prime Minister invited Mon- 
sieur and Madame Cérés to spend a 
couple of weeks of the holidays in a 
little villa that he had taken in the 
mountains, and in which he lived 
alone. The deplorable health of 
Madame Paul Visire did not allow 

her to accompany her husband, and she remained 

with her relatives in one of the southern provinces. 

The villa had belonged to the mistress of one of 
the last Kings of Alca: the drawing-room retained 
its old furniture, and in it was still to be found the 
Sofa of the Favourite. The country was charming; 
a pretty blue stream, the Aiselle, flowed at the foot 
of the hill that dominated the villa. Hippolyte 
Cérés loved fishing; when engaged at this monot- 
onous occupation he often formed his best Parlia- 
mentary combinations, and his happiest oratorical 
inspirations. Trout swarmed in the Aiselle; he 
fished it from morning till evening in a boat that the 
Prime Minister readily placed at his disposal. 

In the mean time, Eveline and Paul Visire some- 
times took a turn together in the garden, or had a 
little chat in the drawing-room. Eveline, although 
she recognised the attraction that Visire had for 
women, had hitherto displayed towards him only an 
intermittent and superficial coquetry, without any 
deep intentions or settled design. He was a con- 
293 


294 PENGUIN ISLAND 


noisseur and saw that she was pretty. The House 
and the Opera had deprived him of all leisure, but, 
in a little villa, the grey eyes and rounded figure of 
Eveline took on a value in his eyes. One day as 
Hippolyte Cérés was fishing in the Aiselle, he made 
her sit beside him on the Sofa of the Favourite. 
Long rays of gold struck Eveline like arrows from a 
hidden Cupid through the chinks of the curtains 
which protected her from the heat and glare of a 
brilliant day. Beneath her white muslin dress her 
rounded yet slender form was outlined in its grace 
and youth. Her skin was cool and fresh, and had 
the fragrance of freshly mown hay. Paul Visire 
behaved as the occasion warranted, and for her part, 
she was opposed neither to the games of chance or 
of society. She believed it would be nothing or a 
trifle; she was mistaken. 

“There was,’ says the famous German ballad, 
‘fon the sunny side of the town square, beside a wall 
whereon the creeper grew, a pretty little letter-box, 
as blue as the corn-flowers, smiling and tranquil. 

‘All day long there came to it, in their heavy 
shoes, small shop-keepers, rich farmers, citizens, the 
tax-collector and the policeman, and they put into it 
their business letters, their invoices, their sum- 
monses, their notices to pay taxes, the judges’ re- 
turns, and orders for the recruits to assemble. It 
remained smiling and tranquil. 

“With joy, or in anxiety, there advanced towards 
it workmen and farm servants, maids and nurse- 
maids, accountants, clerks, and women carrying their 
little children in their arms; they put into it notifica- 
tions of births, marriages, and deaths, letters be- 
tween engaged couples, between husbands and wives, 
from mothers to their sons, and from sons to 


THE SOFA OF THE FAVOURITE 295 


their mothers. It remained smiling and tranquil. 

“At twilight, young lads and young girls slipped 
furtively to it, and put in love-letters, some moist- 
ened with tears that blotted the ink, others with a 
little circle to show the place to kiss, all of them 
very long. It remained smiling and tranquil. 

“Rich merchants came themselves through ex- 
cess of carefulness at the hour of daybreak, and 
put into it registered letters, and letters with five 
red seals, full of bank notes or cheques on the great 
financial establishments of the Empire. It re- 
mained smiling and tranquil. 

“But one day, Gaspar, whom it had never seen, 
and whom it did not know from Adam, came to put 
in a letter, of which nothing is known but that it was 
folded like a little hat. Immediately the pretty 
letter-box fell into a swoon. Henceforth it remains 
no longer in its place; it runs through streets, fields, 
and woods, girdled with ivy, and crowned with 
roses. It keeps running up hill and down dale; the 
country policeman surprises it sometimes, amidst the 
corn, in Gaspar’s arms kissing him upon the mouth.” 

Paul Visire had recovered all his customary non: 
chalance. Eveline remained stretched on the Divan 
of the Favourite in an attitude of delicious astonish- 
ment. 

The Reverend Father Douillard, an excellent 
moral theologian, and a man who in the decadence 
of the Church has preserved his principles, was 
very right to teach, in conformity with the doctrine 
of the Fathers, that while a woman commits a great 
sin by giving herself for money, she commits a much 
greater one by giving herself for nothing. For, in 
the first case she acts to support her life, and that 
is sometimes not merely excuseable but pardonable, 


296 PENGUIN ISLAND 


and even worthy of the Divine Grace, for God for- 
bids suicide, and is unwilling that his creatures 
should destroy themselves. Besides, in giving her- 
self in order to live, she remains humble, and derives 
no pleasure from it, a thing which diminishes the sin. 
But a woman who gives herself for nothing sins with 
pleasure and exults in her fault. The pride and de- 
light with which she burdens her crime increase 
its load of moral guilt. 

Madame Hippolyte Cérés’ example shows the 
profundity of these moral truths. She perceived 
that she had senses. A second was enough to bring 
about this discovery, to change her soul, to alter her 
whole life. To have learned to know herself was at 
first a delight. The yv66i ceavrév of the ancient phil- 
osophy is not a precept the moral fulfilment of which 
procures any pleasure, since one enjoys little satis- 
faction from knowing one’s soul. It is not the same 
with the flesh, for in it sources of pleasure may be 
revealed tous. Eveline immediately felt an obliga- 
tion to her revealer equal to the benefit she had re- 
ceived, and she imagined that he who had discovered 
these heavenly depths was the sole possessor of the 
key to them. Was this an error, and might she not 
be able to find others who also had the golden key? 
It is difficult to decide; and Professor Haddock, 
when the facts were divulged (which happened 
without much delay as we shall see), treated the 
matter from an experimental point of view, in a 
scientific review, and concluded that the chances 
Madam C would have of finding the exact 
equivalent of M. V were in the proportion of 
305 to 975008. ‘This is as much as to say that she 
would never find it. Doubtless her instinct told her 


THE SOFA OF THE FAVOURITE 297 


the same, for she attached herself distractedly to 
him. 

I have related these facts with all the circum- 
stances which seemed to me worthy of attracting the 
attention of meditative and philosophic minds. 
The Sofa of the Favourite is worthy of the majesty 
of history; on it were decided the destinies of a great 
people; nay, on it was accomplished an act whose 
renown was to extend over the neighbouring na- 
tions both friendly and hostile, and even over all 
humanity. Too often events of this nature escape 
the superficial minds and shallow spirits who incon- 
siderately assume the task of writing history. Thus 
the secret springs of events remain hidden from us. 
The fall of Empires and the transmission of domin- 
ions astonish us and remain incomprehensible to us, 
because we have not discovered the imperceptible 
point, or touched the secret spring which when put 
in movement has destroyed and overthrown every- 
thing. The author of this great history knows 
better than anyone else his faults and his weaknesses, 
but he can do himself this justice—that he has always 
kept the moderation, the seriousness, the austerity, 
which an account of affairs of State demands, and 
that he has never departed from the gravity which 
is suitable to a recital of human actions. 


VII 
THE FIRST CONSEQUENCES 


mM HEN Eveline confided to Paul Visire 
em that she had never experienced any- 
thing similar, he did not believe her. 
He had had a good deal to do with 
women and knew that they readily 
say these things to men in order to 
make them more in love with them. 
Thus his experience, as sometimes happens, made 
him disregard the truth. Incredulous, but gratified 
all the same, he soon felt love and something more 
for her. This state at first seemed favourable to his 
intellectual faculties. Visire delivered in the chief 
town of his constituency a speech full of grace, 
brilliant and happy, which was considered to be a 
masterpiece. 

The re-opening of Parliament was serene. A 
few isolated jealousies, a few timid ambitions raised 
their heads in the House, and that was all. A smile 
from the Prime Minister was enough to dissipate 
these shadows. She and he saw each other twice a 
day, and wrote to each other in the interval. He 
was accustomed to intimate relationships, was adroit, 
and knew how to dissimulate; but Eveline displayed 
a foolish imprudence: she made herself conspicu- 
ous with him in drawing-rooms, at the theatre, in 
the House, and at the Embassies; she wore her love 
upon her face, upon her whole person, in her moist 


glances, in the languishing smile of her lips, in the 
298 ; 


THE FIRST CONSEQUENCES — 299 


heaving of her breast, in all her heightened, agitated, 
and distracted beauty. Soon the entire country 
knew of their intimacy. Foreign Courts were in- 
formed of it. The President of the Republic and 
Fveline’s husband alone remained in ignorance. 
The President became acquainted with it in the 
country, through a misplaced police report which 
found its way, it is not known how, into his port- 
manteau. 

Hippolyte Ceres, without being either very subtle, 
or very perspicacious, noticed that there was some- 
thing different in his home. Eveline, who quite 
lately had interested herself in his affairs, and shown, 
if not tenderness, at least affection, towards him, 
displayed henceforth nothing but indifference and 
repulsion. She had always had periods of absence, 
and made prolonged visits to the Charity of St. 
Orberosia; now, she went out in the morning, 
remained out all day, and sat down to dinner at 
nine o’clock in the evening with the face of a som- 
nambulist. Her husband thought it absurd; how- 
ever, he might perhaps have never known the reason 
for this; a profound ignorance of women, a crass 
confidence in his own merit, and in his own fortune, 
might perhaps have always hidden the truth from 
him, if the two lovers had not, so to speak, com- 
pelled him to discover it. 

When Paul Visire went to Eveline’s house and 
found her alone, they used to say, as they embraced 
each other; ‘‘Not here! not here!’”’ and immediately 
they affected an extreme reserve. That was their 
invariable rule. Now, one day, Paul Visire went to 
the house of his colleague Cérés, with whom he had 
an engagement. It was Eveline who received him, 


300 PENGUIN ISLAND 


the Minister of Commerce being delayed by a com- 
mission. 

‘Not here!” said the lovers, smiling. 

They said it, mouth to mouth, embracing, and 
clasping each other. They were still saying it, 
when Hippolyte Cérés entered the drawing-room. 

Paul Visire did not lose his presence of mind. 
He declared to Madame Cérés that he would give up 
his attempt to take the dust out of her eye. By 
this attitude he did not deceive the husband, but he 
was able to leave the room with some dignity. 

Hippolyte Cérés was thunderstruck. Eveline’s 
conduct appeared incomprehensible to him; he 
asked her what reasons she had for it. 

“Why? why?’ he kept repeating continually, 
“why?” 

She denied everything, not to convince him, for 
he had seen them, but from expediency and good 
taste, and to avoid painful explanations. Hip- 
polyte Cérés suffered all the tortures of jealousy. 
He admitted it to himself, he kept saying inwardly, 
“IT am a strong man; I am clad in armour; but 
the wound is underneath, it is in my heart,” and 
turning towards his wife, who looked beautiful in 
her guilt, he would say: 

“It ought not to have been with him.” 

He was right—Eveline ought not to have loved in 
government circles. 

He suffered so much that he took up his revolver, 
exclaiming: “I will go and kill him!” But he re- 
membered that a Minister of Commerce cannot kill 
his own Prime Minister, and he put his revolver 
back into his drawer. 

The weeks passed without calming his sufferings. 
Each morning he buckled his strong man’s armour 


THE FIRST CONSEQUENCES — 301 


over his wound and sought in work and fame the 
peace that fled from him. Every Sunday he in- 
augurated busts, statues, fountains, artesian wells, 
hospitals, dispensaries, railways, canals, public mar- 
kets, drainage systems, triumphal arches, and 
slaughter houses, and delivered moving speeches on 
each of these occasions. His fervid activity de- 
voured whole piles of documents; he changed the 
colours of the postage stamps fourteen times in one 
week. Nevertheless, he gave vent to outbursts of 
grief and rage that drove him insane; for whole 
days his reason abandoned him. If he had been in 
the employment of a private administration this 
would have been noticed immediately, but it is 
much more difficult to discover insanity or frenzy 
in the conduct of affairs of State. At that moment 
the government employés were forming themselves 
into associations and federations amid a ferment 
that was giving alarm both to the Parliament and 
to public feeling. The postmen were especially 
prominent in their enthusiasm for trade unions. 
Hippolyte Cérés informed them in a circular 
that their action was strictly legal. The following 
day he sent out a second circular forbidding all as- 
sociations of government employés as illegal. He 
dismissed one hundred and eighty postmen, rein- 
stated them, reprimanded them, and awarded them 
gratuities. At Cabinet councils he was always on 
the point of bursting forth. The presence of the 
Head of the State scarcely restrained him within 
the limits of the decencies, and as he did not dare 
to attack his rival he consoled himself by heaping 
invectives upon General Débonnaire, the respected 
Minister of War. The General did not hear them, 
for he was deaf and occupied himself in composing 


302 PENGUIN ISLAND 


verses for the Baroness Bildermann. Hippolyte 
Cérés offered an indistinct opposition to everything 
the Prime Minister proposed. Ina word, he was a 
madman. One faculty alone escaped the ruin of 
his intellect: he retained his Parliamentary sense, 
his consciousness of the temper of majorities, his 
thorough knowledge of groups, and his certainty 
of the direction in which affairs were moving. 


VIII 
FURTHER CONSEQUENCES 


HE session ended calmly, and the 
Ministry saw no dangerous signs 
upon the benches where the majority 
sat. It was visible, however, from 
certain articles in the Moderate jour- 
nals, that the demands of the Jewish 
and Christian financiers were increas- 

ing daily, that the patriotism of the banks required a 

civilizing expedition to Nigritia, and that the steel 

trusts, eager in the defence of our coasts and colo- 
nies, were crying out for armoured cruisers and still 
more armoured cruisers. Rumours of war began to 
be heard. Such rumours sprang up every year as 
regularly as the trade winds; serious people paid 
no heed to them and the government usually let 
them die away from their own weakness unless 
they grew stronger and spread. For in that case the 
country would be alarmed. The financiers only 
wanted colonial wars and the people did not want 
any wars at all. It loved to see its government 
proud and even insolent, but at the least suspicion 
that a European war was brewing, its violent emo- 
tion would quickly have reached the House. Paul 

Visire was not uneasy. The European situation 

was in his view completely reassuring. He was only 

irritated by the maniacal silence of his Minister of 

Foreign Affairs. That gnome went to the Cabinet 

meetings with a portfolio bigger than himself stuffed 

303 


304. PENGUIN ISLAND 


full of papers, said nothing, refused to answer all 
questions, even those asked him by the respected 
President of the Republic, and, exhausted by his 
obstinate labours, took a few moments’ sleep in his 
arm-chair in which nothing but the top of his little 
black head was to be seen above the green table- 
cloth. 

In the mean time Hippolyte Cérés became a strong 
man again. In company with his cclleague Laper- 
sonne he formed numerous intimacies with ladies 
of the theatre. They were both to be seen at night 
entering fashionable restaurants in the company 
of ladies whom they over-topped by their lofty 
stature and their new hats, and they were soon reck- 
oned amongst the most sympathetic frequenters 
of the boulevards. Fortuné Lapersonne had his 
own wound beneath his armour. His wife, a young 
milliner whom he carried off from a marquis, had 
gone to live with a chauffeur. He loved her still, and 
could not console himself for her loss, so that very 
often in the private room of a restaurant, in the 
midst of a group of girls who laughed and ate 
crayfish, the two ministers exchanged a look full of 
their common sorrow and wiped away an unbidden 
tear: 

Hippolytes Cérés, although wounded to the heart, 
did not allow himself to be beaten. He swore that 
he would be avenged. 

Madame Paul Visire, whose deplorable health 
forced her to live with her relatives in a distant prov- 
ince, received an anonymous letter specifying that 
M. Paul Visire, who had not a half-penny when he 
married her, was spending her dowry on a married 
woman, E &: , that he gave this woman 
thirty-thousand-franc motor-cars, and pearl neck- 


FURTHER CONSEQUENCES 305 


laces costing twenty-five thousand francs, and that 
he was going straight to dishonour and ruin. Ma- 
dame Paul Visire read the letter, fell into hysterics, 
and handed it to her father. 

“I am going to box your husband’s ears,” said M. 
Blampignon; “‘he is a blackguard who will land you 
in the workhouse unless we look out. He may be 
Prime Minister, but he won’t frighten me.” 

When he stepped off the train M. Blampignon 
presented himself at the Ministry of the Interior, 
and was immediately received. He entered the 
Prime Minister’s room in a fury. 

“I have something to say to you, sir!’ And he 
waved the anonymous letter. 

Paul Visire welcomed him smiling. 

“You are welcome, my dear father. I was go- 
ing to write to you. . . . Yes, to tell you of your 
nomination to the rank of officer of the Legion of 
Honour. I signed the patent this morning.” 

M. Blampignon thanked his son-in-law warmly 
and threw the anonymous letter into the fire. 

He returned to his provincial house and found his 
daughter fretting and agitated. 

“Well! I saw your husband. He is a delight- 
ful fellow. But then, you don’t understand how 
to deal with him.” 

About this time Hippolyte Cérés learned through 
a little scandalous newspaper (it is always through 
the newspapers that ministers are informed of the 
affairs of State) that the Prime Minister dined every 
evening with Mademoiselle Lysiane of the Folies 
Dramatiques, whose charm seemed to have made 
a great impression on him. Thenceforth Cérés 
took a gloomy joy in watching his wife. She came 
in every evening to dine or dress with an air of 


306 PENGUIN ISLAND 


agreeable fatigue and the serenity that comes from 
enjoyment. 

Thinking that she knew nothing, he sent her 
anonymous communications. She read them at the 
table before him and remained still listless and 
smiling. 

He then persuaded himself that she gave no heed 
to these vague reports, and that in order to disturb 
her it would be necessary to enable her to verify her 
lover’s infidelity and treason for herself. There 
were at the Ministry a number of trustworthy agents 
charged with secret inquiries regarding the national 
defence. They were then employed in watching 
the spies of a neighbouring and hostile Power who 
had succeeded in entering the Postal and Telegraphic 
service. M. Cérés ordered them to suspend their 
work for the present and to inquire where, when, and 
how the Minister of the Interior saw Mademoiselle 
Lysiane. ,The agents performed their missions faith- 
fully and told the minister that they had several 
times seen the Prime Minister with a woman, but 
that she was not Mademoiselle Lysiane. Hip- 
polyte Cérés asked them nothing further. He 
was right; the loves of Paul Visire and Lysiane were 
but an alibi invented by Paul Visire himself, with 
Eveline’s approval, for his fame was rather incon- 
venient to her, and she sighed for secrecy and mys- 
tery. 

They were not shadowed by the agents of the 
Ministry of Commerce alone. They were also 
followed by those of the Prefect of Police, and even 
by those of the Minister of the Interior, who dis- 
puted with each other the honour of protecting 
their chief. Then there were the emissaries of 
several royalist, imperialist, and clerical organisa- 


FURTHER CONSEQUENCES 307 


tions, those of eight or ten blackmailers, several 
amateur detectives, a multitude of reporters, and a 
crowd of photographers, who all made their appear- 
ance wherever these two took refuge in their peram- 
bulating love affairs, at big hotels, small hotels, town 
houses, country houses, private apartments, villas, 
museums, palaces, hovels. They kept watch in the 
streets, from neighbouring houses, trees, walls, 
stair-cases, landings, roofs, adjoining rooms, and 
even chimneys. The Minister and his friend saw 
with alarm all round their bed room, gimlets bor- 
ing through doors and shutters, and drills making 
holes in the walls. A photograph of Madame Cérés 
in night attire buttoning her boots was the utmost 
that had been obtained. 

Paul Visire grew impatient and irritable, and often 
lost his good humour and agreeableness. He came 
to the cabinet meetings in a rage and he, too, poured 
invectives upon General Débonnaire—a brave man 
under fire but a lax disciplinarian—and launched his 
sarcasms against the venerable admiral Vivier des 
Murénes whose ships went to the bottom without 
any apparent reason. 

Fortuné Lapersonne listened open-eyed, and grum- 
bled scoffingly between his teeth: 

“He is not satisfied with robbing Hippolyte Céres 
of his wife, but he must go and rob him of his catch- 
words too.” 

These storms were made known by the indiscre- 
tion of some ministers and by the complaints of the 
two old warriors, who declared their intention of 
flinging their portfolios at the beggar’s head, but 
who did nothing of the sort. These outbursts, far 
from injuring the lucky Prime Minister, had an ex- 
cellent effect on Parliament and public opinion, who 


308 PENGUIN ISLAND 


looked on them as signs of a keen solicitude for the 
welfare of the national army and navy. The Prime 
Minister was recipient of general approbation. 

To the congratulations of the various groups and 
of notable personages, he replied with simple firm- 
ness: ‘Those are my principles!” and he had seven 
or eight Socialists put in prison. 

The session ended, and Paul Visire, very ex- 
hausted, went to take the waters. Hippolyte Cérés 
refused to leave his Ministry, where the trade union 
of telephone girls was in tumultuous agitation. 
He opposed it with an unheard of violence, for he 
had now become a woman-hater. On Sundays he 
went into the suburbs to fish along with his colleague 
Lapersonne, wearing the tall hat that never left him 
since he had become a Minister. And both of them, 
forgetting the fish, complained of the inconstancy 
of women and mingled their griefs. 

Hippolyte still loved Eveline and he still suffered. 
However, hope had slipped into his heart. She was 
now separated from her lover, and, thinking to win 
her back, he directed all his efforts to that end. He 
put forth all his skill, showed himself sincere, adapt- 
able, affectionate, devoted, even discreet; his heart 
taught him the delicacies of feeling. He said charm- 
ing and touching things to the faithless one, and, to 
soften her, he told her all that he had suffered. 

Crossing the band of his trousers upon his 
stomach. 

“See,” said he, “how thin I have got.” 

He promised her everything he thought could 
gratify a woman, country parties, hats, jewels. 

Sometimes he thought she would take pity on him. 
She no longer displayed an insolertly happy counte- 


FURTHER CONSEQUENCES 309 


nance. Being separated from Paul, her sadness had 
an air of gentleness. But the moment he made a 
gesture to recover her she turned away fiercely and 
gloomily, girt with her fault as if with a golden 
girdle. 

He did not give up, making himself humble, sup- 
pliant, lamentable. 

One day he went to Lapersonne and said to him 
with tears in his eyes: 

“Will you speak to her ?” 

Lapersonne excused himself, thinking that his 
intervention would be useless, but he gave some 
advice to his friend. 

‘(Make her think that you don’t care about her, 
that you love another, and she will come back to 
you.” 

Hippolyte, adopting this method, inserted in the 
newspapers that he was always to be found in the 
company of Mademoiselle Guinaud of the Opera. 
He came home late or did not come home at all, 
assumed in Eveline’s presence an appearance of in- 
ward joy impossible to restrain, took out of his 
pocket, at dinner, a letter on scented paper which he 
pretended to read with delight, and his lips seemed 
as in a dream to kiss invisible lips. Nothing hap- 
pened. Eveline did not even notice the change. In- 
sensible to all around her, she only came out of her 
lethargy to ask for some louis from her husband, and 
if he did not give them she threw him a look of con- 
tempt, ready to upbraid him with the shame which 
she poured upon him in the sight of the whole world. 
Since she had loved she spent a great deal on dress. 
She needed money, and she had only her husband to 
secure it for her; she was so far faithful to him. 


310 PENGUIN ISLAND 


He lost patience, became furious, and threatened 
her with his revolver. He said one day before her 
to Madame Clarence: 

“T congratulate you, Madame; you have brought 
up your daughter to be a wanton hussy.” 

“Take me away, Mamma,” exclaimed Eveline. 
“T will get a divorce!” 

He loved her more ardently than ever. In his 
jealous rage, suspecting her, not without probability, 
of sending and receiving letters, he swore that he 
would intercept them, re-established a censorship 
over the post, threw private correspondence into 
confusion, delayed stock-exchange quotations, pre- 
vented assignations, brought out bankruptcies, 
thwarted passions, and caused suicides. The in- 
dependent press gave utterance to the complaints 
of the public and indignantly supported them. To 
justify these arbitrary measures, the ministerial 
journals spoke darkly of plots and public dangers, 
and promoted a belief in a monarchical conspiracy. 
The less well-informed sheets gave more precise 
information, told of the seizure of fifty thousand 
guns, and the landing of Prince Crucho. Feeling 
grew throughout the country, and the republican or- 
gans called for the immediate meeting of Parlia- 
ment. Paul Visire returned to Paris, summoned 
his colleagues, held an important Cabinet Council, 
and proclaimed through his agencies that a plot had 
been actually formed against the national represen- 
tation, but that the Prime Minister held the threads 
of it in his hand, and that a judicial inquiry was 
about to be opened. 

He immediately ordered the arrest of thirty 
Socialists, and whilst the entire country was acclaim- 
ing him as its saviour, baffling the watchfulness of 


FURTHER CONSEQUENCES 311 


his six hundred detectives, he secretly took Eveline 
to a little house near the Northern railway station, 
where they remained until night. After their de- 
parture, the maid of their hotel, as she was putting 
their room in order, saw seven little crosses traced 
by a hairpin on the wall at the head of the bed. 

That is all that Hippolyte Cérés obtained as a 
reward of his efforts. 


IX 
THE FINAL CONSEQUENCES 


~ ee 7 EALOUSY is a virtue of democracies 
WG which preserves them from tyrants. 
Ss Deputies began to envy the Prime 
Minister his golden key. Fora year 
his domination over the beauteous 
Madame Cérés had been known to 
the whole universe. The provinces, 
whither news and fashions only arrive after a com- 
plete revolution of the earth round the sun, were at 
last informed of the illegitimate loves of the Cabinet. 
The provinces preserve an austere morality; women 
are more virtuous there than they are in the capital. 
Various reasons have been alleged for this: Educa- 
tion, example, simplicity of life. Professor Had- 
dock asserts that this virtue of provincial ladies is 
solely due to the fact that the heels of their shoes are 
low. ‘‘A woman,” said he, in a learned article in 
the “Anthropological Review,” ‘‘a woman attracts 
a civilized man in proportion as her feet make an 
angle with the ground. If this angle is as much as 
thirty-five degrees, the attraction becomes acute. 
For the position of the feet upon the ground deter- 
mines the whole carriage of the body, and it results 
that provincial women, since they wear low heels, 
are not very attractive, and preserve their virtue 
with ease.” ‘These conclusions were not generally 
accepted. It was objected that under the influence 
of English and American fashions, low heels had 


312 


THE FINAL CONSEQUENCES 313 


been introduced generally without producing the 
results attributed to them by the learned Pro- 
fessor; moreover, it was said that the difference he 
pretended to establish between the morals of the 
metropolis and those of the provinces is perhaps 
illusory, and that if it exists, it is apparently due to 
the fact that great cities offer more advantages and 
facilities for love than small towns provide. How- 
ever that may be, the provinces began to murmur 
against the Prime Minister, and to raise a scandal. 
This was not yet a danger, but there was a possibil- 
ity that it might become one. 

For the moment the peril was nowhere and yet 
everywhere. ‘The majority remained solid; but the 
leaders became stiff and exacting. Perhaps Hip- 
polyte Cérés would never have intentionally sacri- 
ficed his interests to his vengeance. But thinking 
that he could henceforth, without compromising his 
own fortune, secretly damage that of Paul Visire, 
he devoted himself to the skilful and careful prepa- 
ration of difficulties and perils for the Head of the 
Government. Though far from equalling his rival 
in talent, knowledge, and authority, he greatly sur- 
passed him in his skill as a lobbyist. The most 
acute parliamentarians attributed the recent mis- 
fortunes of the majority to his refusal to vote. At 
committees, by a calculated imprudence, he favoured 
motions which he knew the Prime Minister could 
not accept. One day his intentional awkwardness 
provoked a sudden and violent conflict between the 
Minister of the Interior, and his departmental 
Treasurer. Then Cérés became frightened and went 
no further. It would have been dangerous for him 
to overthrow the ministry too soon. His ingenious 
hatred found an issue by circuitous paths. Paul 


314 PENGUIN ISLAND 


Visire had a poor cousin of easy morals who bore his 
name. Cérés, remembering this lady, Céline Visire, 
brought her into prominence, arranged that she 
should become intimate with several foreigners, and 
procured her engagements in the music-halls. One 
summer night, on a stage in the Champs Elysées 
before a tumultuous crowd, she performed risky 
dances to the sounds of wild music which was audi- 
ble in the gardens where the President of the Re- 
public was entertaining Royalty. The name of 
Visire, associated with these scandals, covered the 
walls of the town, filled the newspapers, was re- 
peated in the cafés and at balls, and blazed forth in 
letters of fire upon the boulevards. 

Nobody regarded the Prime Minister as responsi- 
ble for the scandal of his relatives, but a bad idea of 
his family came into existence, and the influence of 
the statesman was diminished. 

Almost immediately he was made to feel this in a 
pretty sharp fashion. One day in the House, on a 
simple question, Labillette, the Minister of Religion 
and Public Worship, who was suffering from an 
attack of liver, and beginning to be exasperated by 
the intentions and intrigues of the clergy, threatened 
to close the Chapel of St. Orberosia, and spoke with- 
out respect of the National Virgin. The entire 
Right rose up in indignation; the Left appeared to 
give but a half-hearted support to the rash Minister. 
The leaders of the majority did not care to attack a 
popular cult which brought thirty millions a year 
into the country. The most moderate of the sup- 
porters of the Right, M. Bigourd, made the question 
the subject of a resolution and endangered the Cab- 
inet. Luckily, Fortuné Lapersonne, the Minister 
of Public Works, always conscious of the obliga- 


THE FINAL CONSEQUENCES | 315 


tions of power, was able in the Prime Minister’s ab- 
sence to repair the awkwardness and indecorum of 
his colleague, the Minister of Public Worship. He 
ascended the tribune and bore witness to the respect 
in which the Government held the heavenly Patron 
of the country, the consoler of so many ills which 
science admitted its powerlessness to relieve. 

When Paul Visire, snatched at last from Eveline’s 
arms, appeared in the House, the administration 
was saved; but the Prime Minister saw himself 
compelled to grant important concessions to the 
upper classes. He proposed in Parliament that six 
armoured cruisers should be laid down, and thus 
won the sympathies of the Steel Trust; he gave new 
assurances that the income tax would not be im- 
posed, and he had eighteen Socialists arrested. 

He was soon to find himself opposed by more 
formidable obstacles. The Chancellor of the neigh- 
bouring Empire in an ingenious and profound speech 
upon the foreign relations of his sovereign, made a 
sly allusion to the intrigues that inspired the policy 
of a great country. This reference, which was re- 
ceived with smiles by the Imperial Parliament, was 
certain to irritate a punctilious republic. It aroused 
the national susceptibility, which directed its wrath 
against its amorous Minister. The Deputies seized 
upon a frivolous pretext to show their dissatisfac- 
tion. A ridiculous incident, the fact that the wife of 
a sub-prefect had danced at the Moulin Rouge, 
forced the minister to face a vote of censure, and he 
was within a few votes of being defeated. Accord- 
ing to general opinion, Paul Visire had never been so 
weak, so vacillating, or so spiritless, as on that oc- 
casion. 

He understood that he could only keep himself in 


316 PENGUIN ISLAND 


office by a great political stroke, and he decided on 
the expedition to Nigritia. This measure was de- 
manded by the great financial and industrial cor- 
porations and was one which would bring conces- 
sions of immense forests to the capitalists, a loan of 
eight millions to the banking companies, as well as 
promotions and decorations to the naval and mili- 
tary oficers. A pretext presented itself; some insult 
needed to be avenged, or some debt to be collected. 
Six battleships, fourteen cruisers, and eighteen trans- 
ports sailed up the mouth of the river Hippopota- 
mus. Six hundred canoes vainly opposed the land- 
ing of the troops. Admiral Vivier des Murénes’ 
cannons produced an appalling effect upon the 
blacks, who replied to them with flights of arrows, 
but in spite of their fanatical courage they were en- 
tirely defeated. Popular enthusiasm was kindled 
by the newspapers which the financiers subsidised, 
and burst into a blaze. Some Socialists alone pro- 
tested against this barbarous, doubtful, and danger- 
ous enterprise. ‘They were at once arrested. 

At that moment when the Minister, supported by 
wealth, and now beloved by the poor, seemed un- 
conquerable, the light of hate showed Hippolyte 
Cérés alone the danger, and looking with a gloomy 
joy at his rival, he muttered between his teeth, ‘“‘He 
is wrecked, the brigand!”’ 

Whilst the country intoxicated itself with glory, 
the neighbouring Empire protested against the eccu- 
pation of Nigritia by a European power, and these 
protests following one another at shorter and shorter 
intervals became more and more vehement. ‘The 
newspapers of the interested Republic concealed all 
causes for uneasiness; but Hippolyte Cérés heard 
the growing menace, and determined at last to risk 


THE FINAL CONSEQUENCES | 317 


everything, even the fate of the ministry, in order to 
ruin his enemy. He got men whom he could trust 
to write and insert articles in several of the official 
journals, which, seeming to express Paul Visire’s 
precise views, attributed warlike intentions to the 
Head of the Government. 

These articles roused a terrible echo abroad, and 
they alarmed the public opinion of a nation which, 
while fond of soldiers, was not fond of war. Ques- 
tioned in the House on the foreign policy of his gov- 
ernment, Paul Visire made a re-assuring statement, 
and promised to maintain a peace compatible with 
the dignity of a great nation. His Minister of For- 
eign Affairs, Crombile, read a declaration which was 
absolutely unintelligible, for the reason that it was 
couched in diplomatic language. The Minister ob- 
tained a large majority. 

But the rumours of war did not cease, and in order 
to avoid a new and dangerous motion, the Prime 
Minister distributed eighty thousand acres of forests 
in Nigritia among the Deputies, and had fourteen 
Socialists arrested. Hippolyte Cérés went gloomily 
about the lobbies, confiding to the Deputies of his 
group that he was endeavouring to induce the Cab- 
inet to adopt a pacific policy, and that he still hoped 
to succeed. Day by day the sinister rumours grew 
in volume, and penetrating amongst the public, 
spread uneasiness and disquiet. Paul Visire him- 
self began to take alarm. What disturbed him most 
were the silence and absence of the Minister of For- 
eign Affairs. Crombile no longer came to the meet- 
ings of the Cabinet. Rising at five o’clock in the 
morning, he worked eighteen hours at his desk, and 
at last fell exhausted into his waste-paper basket, 
from whence the registrars removed him, together 


318 PENGUIN ISLAND 


with the papers which they were going to sell to the 
military attachés of the neighbouring Empire. 

General Débonnaire believed that a campaign 
was imminent, and prepared for it. Far from fear- 
ing war, he prayed for it, and confided his generous 
hopes to Baroness Bildermann, who informed the 
neighbouring nation, which, acting on her informa- 
tion, proceeded to a rapid mobilization. 

The Minister of Finance unintentionally precipi- 
tated events. At the moment, he was speculating 
for a fall, and in order to bring about a panic on the 
Stock Exchange, he spread the rumour that war was 
now inevitable. The neighbouring Empire, deceived 
by this action, and expecting to see its territory in- 
vaded, mobilized its troops in all haste. The terri- 
fied Chamber overthrew the Visire ministry by an 
enormous majority (814 votes to 7, with 28 absten- 
tions). It was too late. The very day of this fall 
the neighbouring and hostile nation recalled its am- 
bassador and flung eight millions of men into Ma- 
dame Céres country. War became universal, and 
the whole world was drowned in a torrent of blood. 


Tue ZENITH OF PENGUIN CIVILIZATION 


cA 
: 


s)ALF a century after the events we 
have just related, Madame Ceérés 
died surrounded with respect and 
veneration, in the eighty-ninth year 
of her age. She had long been the 
widow of a statesman whose name 
she bore with dignity. Her modest 
and quiet funeral was followed by the orphans of 
the parish and the sisters of the Sacred Compas- 
sion. 

The deceased left all her property to the Charity 
of St. Orberosia. 

“Alas!” sighed M. Monnoyer, a canon of St. 
Maél, as he received the pious legacy, “it was high 
time for a generous benefactor to come to the relief 
of our necessities. Rich and poor, learned and ig- 
norant are turning away from us. And when we try 
to lead back these misguided souls, neither threats 
nor promises, neither gentleness nor violence, nor 
anything else is now successful. The Penguin clergy 
pine in desolation; our country priests, reduced to 
following the humblest of trades, are shoeless, and 
compelled to live upon such scraps as they can pick 
up. In our ruined churches the rain of heaven falls 
upon the faithful, and during the holy offices they 
can hear the noise of stones falling from the arches. 
The tower of the cathedral is tottering and will 
soon fall. St. Orberosia is forgotten by the Pen- 
guins, her devotion abandoned, and her sanctuary 
deserted. On her shrine, bereft of its gold and 
319 


WG 
~ 


s 
‘ 
an 
} 


ae PrP TTL AN 


320 PENGUIN ISLAND 


precious stones, the spider silently weaves her web.” 

Hearing these lamentations, Pierre Mille, who at 
the age of ninety-eight years had lost nothing of his 
intellectual and moral power, asked the canon if he 
did not think that St. Orberosia would one day rise 
out of this wrongful oblivion. 

“T hardly dare to hope so,” sighed M. Monnoyer. 

“It is a pity!’ answered Pierre Mille. “Orber- 
osia is a charming figure and her legend is a beauti- 
ful one. I discovered the other day by the merest 
chance, one of her most delightful miracles, the mir- 
acle of Jean Violle. Would you like to hear it, 
M. Monnoyer?” 

“T should be very pleased, M. Mille.” 

“Here it is, then, just as I found it in a fifteenth- 
century manuscript: 

“Cecile, the wife of Nicolas Gaubert, a jeweller on 
the Pont-au-Change, after having led an honest and 
chaste life for many years, and being now past her 
prime, became infatuated with Jean Violle, the 
Countess de Maubec’s page, who lived at the Hotel 
du Paon on the Place de Gréve. He was not yet 
eighteen years old, and his face and figure were at- 
tractive. Not being able to conquer her passion, 
Cécile resolved to satisfy it. She attracted the page 
to her house, loaded him with caresses, supplied him 
with sweetmeats and finally did as she wished with 
him. 

‘‘Now one day, as they were together in the jewel- 
ler’s bed, Master Nicolas came home sooner than 
he was expected. He found the bolt drawn, and 
heard his wife on the other side of the door exclaim- 
ing, ‘My heart! my angel! my love!’ Then sus- 
pecting that she was shut up with a gallant, he struck 
great blows upon the door and began to shout: 


THE FINAL CONSEQUENCES © 321 


‘Slut! hussy! wanton! open so that I may cut off 
your nose and ears!’ In this peril, the jeweller’s 
wife besought St. Orberosia, and vowed her a large 
candle if she helped her and the little page, who was 
dying of fear beside the bed, out of their difficulty. 

“The saint heard the prayer. She immediately 
changed Jean Violle into a girl. Seeing this, Cécile 
was completely reassured, and began to call out to 
her husband: ‘Oh! you brutal villain, you jealous 
wretch! Speak gently if you want the door to be 
opened.’ And scolding in this way, she ran to the 
wardrobe and took out of it an old hood, a pair of 
stays, and a long grey petticoat, in which she hastily 
wrapped the transformed page. Then when this 
was done, ‘Catherine, dear Catherine,’ said she, 
loudly, ‘open the door for your uncle; he is more 
fool than knave, and won't do you any harm.’ The 
boy who had become a girl, obeyed. Master Nicho- 
las entered the room and found in it a young maid 
whom he did not know, and his wife in bed. ‘Big 
booby,’ said the latter to him, ‘don’t stand gaping at 
what you see. Just as I had come to bed because 
I had a stomach ache, I received a visit from Cath- 
erine, the daughter of my sister Jeanne de Palaiseau, 
with whom we quarrelled fifteen years ago. Kiss 
your niece. She is well worth the trouble.’ ‘The 
jeweller gave Violle a hug, and from that moment 
he wanted nothing so much as to be alone with her 
a moment, so that he might embrace her as much 
as he liked. For this reason he led her without any 
delay down to the kitchen, under the pretext of giv- 
ing her some walnuts and wine, and he was no 
sooner there with her than he began to caress her 
very affectionately. He would not have stopped at 
that if St. Orberosia had not inspired his good wife 


G22 PENGUIN ISLAND 


with the idea of seeing what he was about. She 
found him with the pretended niece sitting on his 
knee. She called him a debauched creature, boxed 
his ears, and forced him to beg her pardon. The 
next day Violle resumed his previous form.” 

Having heard this story the venerable Canon 
Monnoyer thanked Pierre Mille for having told it, 
and, taking up his pen, began to write out a list of 
horses that would win at the next race meeting. For 
he was a book-maker’s clerk. 

In the mean time Penguinia gloried in its wealth. 
Those who produced the things necessary for life, 
wanted them; those who did not produce them had 
more than enough. ‘But these,’’ as a member of 
the Institute said, ‘‘are necessary economic fatali- 
ties.’ The great Penguin people had no longer 
either traditions, intellectual culture, or arts. The 
progress of civilisation manifested itself among them 
by murderous industry, infamous speculation, and 
hideous luxury. Its capital assumed, as did all the 
great cities of the time, a cosmopolitan and financial 
character. An immense and regular ugliness 
reigned within it. The country enjoyed perfect tran- 
quillity. It had reached its zenith. 


Ddddaddastadase 


FOTGRE: TIMES 
THE 


EAVDLESS iSTaRY 


Alca is becoming Americanised.—M. 
Daniset. 


And he overthrew those cities, and all 
the plain, and all the inhabitants of the 
cities, and that which grew upon the 
ground.—Genesis xix. 25. 


TH “EdAaSde wevin piv ae Kote ovvTpo- 
gos éott, dpery S& Exaxtos éott, awd TE 
codins Katepyacnevn Kal vopov iaxupov.* 
(Herodotus, Histories, VII. cii.) 


You have not seen angels then—Liber 
Terribilis. 


Basfttfusftpvtuse jufbmbb b up sjufef 
tspjtfucftfngfsfvstbqsftbnpjsqsp dmbnfu- 
s pj tghj ttd mjcfsu f nbgsbodftftut p bnjtfb ef 
tdpnqb hojttgjobo—djfsftr—vjej tqpte- 
oueftsjdifttftevgbzt fuqbsmfn Pzfoevof- 
qsf ttfbdifuffejsjhfboumpqjojno 


Voufnpjoxfsiejruf 


We are now beginning to study a chem- 
istry whick wili deal with effects pro- 
duced by bodies containing a quantity of 
concentrated energy the like of which 
we have not yet had at our disposal.— 
Sir William Ramsay. 


* Poverty has ever been familiar to Greece, but virtue has been ac- 
quired, having been accomplished by wisdom and firm laws. 


—Henry Cary’s Translation, 


FUTURE TIMES e265 


§ 1 


The houses were never high enough to satisfy 
them; they kept on making them still higher and 
built them of thirty or forty storeys with offices, 
shops, banks, societies one above another; they dug 
cellars and tunnels ever deeper downwards. 

Fifteen millions of men laboured in a giant town 
by the light of beacons which shed forth their glare 
both day and night. No light of heaven pierced 
through the smoke of the factories with which the 
town was girt, but sometimes the red disk of a ray- 
less sun might be seen riding in the black firmament 
through which iron bridges ploughed their way, and 
from which there descended a continual shower of 
soot and cinders. It was the most industrial of all 
the cities in the world and the richest. Its organisa- 
tion seemed perfect. None of the ancient aristo- 
cratic or democratic forms remained; everything was 
subordinated to the interests of the trusts. This 
environment gave rise to what anthropologists called 
the multi-millionaire type. The men of this type 
were at once energetic and frail, capable of great ac- 
tivity in forming mental combinations and of pro- 
longed labour in offices, but men whose nervous ir- 
ritability suffered from hereditary troubles which in- 
creased as time went on. 

Like all true aristocrats, like the patricians of 
republican Rome or the squires of old England, these 
powerful men affected a great severity in their habits 
and customs. ‘They were the ascetics of wealth. 
At the meetings of the trusts an observer would have 
noticed their smooth and puffy faces, their lantern 
cheeks, their sunken eyes and wrinkled brows. With 


326 PENGUIN ISLAND 


bodies more withered, complexions yellower, lips 
drier, and eyes filled with a more burning fanaticism 
than those of the old Spanish monks, these multi- 
millionaires gave themselves up with inextinguishable 
ardour to the austerities of banking and industry. 
Several, denying themselves all happiness, all pleas- 
ure, and all rest, spent their miserable lives in rooms 
without light or air, furnished only with electrical 
apparatus, living on eggs and milk, and sleeping on 
camp beds. By doing nothing except pressing 
nickel buttons with their fingers, these mystics heaped 
up riches of which they never even saw the signs, 
and acquired the vain possibility of gratifying de- 
sires that they never experienced. 

The worship of wealth had its martyrs. One 
of these multi-millionaires, the famous Samuel Box, 
preferred to die rather than surrender the smallest 
atom of his property. One of his workmen, the vic- 
tim of an accident while at work, being refused any 
indemnity by his employer, obtained a verdict in 
the courts, but repelled by innumerable obstacles of 
procedure, he fell into the direst poverty. Being 
thus reduced to despair, he succeeded by dint of 
cunning and audacity in confronting his employer 
with a loaded revolver in his hand, and threatened 
to blow out his brains if he did not give him some 
assistance. Samuel Box gave nothing, and let him- 
self be killed for the sake of principle. 

Examples that come from high quarters are fol- 
lowed. Those who possessed some small capital 
(and they were necessarily the greater number), af- 
fected the ideas and habits of the multi-millionaires, 
in order that they might be classed among them. All 
passions which injured the increase or the preser- 
vation of wealth, were regarded as dishonourable; 


FUTURE TIMES B27 


neither indolence, nor idleness, nor the taste for dis- 
interested study, nor love of the arts, nor, above all, 
extravagance, was ever forgiven; pity was con- 
demned as a dangerous weakness. Whilst every 
inclination to licentiousness excited public reproba- 
tion, the violent and brutal satisfaction of an ap- 
petite was, on the contrary, excused; violence, in 
truth, was regarded as less injurious to morality, 
since it manifested a form of social energy. The 
State was firmly based on two great public virtues: 
respect for the rich and contempt for the poor. 
Feeble spirits who were still moved by human suffer- 
ing had no other resource than to take refuge in a 
hypocrisy which it was impossible to blame, since it 
contributed to the maintenance of order and the 
solidity of institutions. 

Thus, among the rich, all were devoted to the 
social order, or seemed to be so; all gave good ex- 
amples, if all did not follow them. Some felt the 
severity of their position cruelly; but they endured 
it either from pride or from duty. Some attempted, 
in secret and by subterfuge, to escape from it for a 
moment. One of these, Edward Martin, the Presi- 
dent of the Steel Trust, sometimes dressed himself 
as a poor man, went forth to beg his bread, and al- 
lowed himself to be jostled by the passers-by. One 
day, as he asked alms on a bridge, he engaged in a 
quarrel with a real beggar, and filled with a fury of 
envy, he strangled him. 

As they devoted their whole intelligence to busi- 
ness, they sought no intellectual pleasures. ‘The the- 
atre, which had formerly been very flourishing 
among them, was now reduced to pantomimes and 
comic dances. Even the pieces in which women 
acted were given up; the taste for pretty forms and 


328 PENGUIN ISLAND 


brilliant toilettes had been lost; the somersaults of 
clowns and the music of negroes were preferred 
above them, and what roused enthusiasm was the 
sight of women upon the stage whose necks were 
bedizened with diamonds, or processions carrying 
golden bars in triumph. Ladies of wealth were 
as much compelled as the men to lead a respectable 
life. According to a tendency common to all civili- 
zations, public feeling set them up as symbols; they 
were, by their austere magnificence, to represent 
both the splendour of wealth and its intangibility. 
The old habits of gallantry had been reformed, but 
fashionable lovers were now secretly replaced by 
muscular labourers or stray grooms. Nevertheless, 
scandals were rare, a foreign journey concealed 
nearly all of them, and the Princesses of the Trusts 
remained objects of universal esteem. 

The rich formed only a small minority, but their 
collaborators, who composed the entire people, had 
been completely won over or completely subjugated 
by them. They formed two classes, the agents of 
commerce or banking, and workers in the factories. 
The former contributed an immense amount of 
work and received large salaries. Some of them 
succeeded in founding establishments of their own; 
for in the constant increase of the public wealth 
the more intelligent and audacious could hope for 
anything. Doubtless it would have been possible 
to find a certain number of discontented and re- 
bellious persons among the immense crowd of 
engineers and accountants, but this powerful society 
had imprinted its firm discipline even on the minds 
of its opponents. ‘The very anarchists were labo- 
rious and regular. 

As for the workmen who toiled in the factories 


FUTURE TIMES 329 


that surrounded the town, their decadence, both 
physical and moral, was terrible; they were exam- 
ples of the type of poverty as it is set forth by an- 
thropology. Although the development among them 
of certain muscles, due to the particular nature of 
their work, might give a false idea of their strength, 
they presented sure signs of morbid debility. Of 
low stature, with small heads and narrow chests, 
they were further distinguished from the com- 
fortable classes by a multitude of physiological 
anomalies, and, in particular, by a common want of 
symmetry between the head and the limbs. And 
they were destined to a gradual and continuous de- 
generation, for the State made soldiers of the more 
robust among them, and the health of these did not 
long withstand the brothels and the drink-shops that 
sprang up around their barracks. The proletarians 
became more and more feeble in mind. The con- 
tinued weakening of their intellectual faculties was 
not entirely due to their manner of life; it resulted 
also from a methodical selection carried out by the 
employers. The latter, fearing that workmen of 
too great ability might be inclined to put forward 
legitimate demands, took care to eliminate them by 
every possible means, and preferred to engage igno- 
rant and stupid labourers, who were incapable of de- 
fending their rights, but were yet intelligent enough 
to perform their toils, which highly perfected ma- 
chines rendered extremely simple. Thus the proleta- 
rians were unable to do anything to improve their 
lot. With difficulty did they succeed by means of 
strikes in maintaining the rate of their wages. Even 
this means began to fail them. The alternations of 
production inherent in the capitalist system caused 
such cessations of work that, in several branches of 


330 PENGUIN ISLAND 


industry, as soon as a strike was declared, the accum- 
mulation of products allowed the employers to dis- 
pense with the strikers. In a word, these miserable 
employees were plunged in a gloomy apathy that 
nothing enlightened and nothing exasperated. They 
were necessary instruments for the social order and 
well adapted to their purpose. 

Upon the whole, this social order seemed the 
most firmly established that had yet been seen, at 
least among mankind, for that of bees and ants is 
incomparably more stable. Nothing could fore- 
shadow the ruin of a system founded on what is 
strongest in human nature, pride and cupidity. 
However, keen observers discovered several grounds 
for uneasiness. The most certain, although the 
least apparent, were of an economic order, and 
consisted in the continually increasing amount of 
over-production, which entailed long and cruel inter- 
ruption of labour, though these were, it is true, uti- 
lized by the manufacturers as a means of breaking 
the power of the workmen, by facing them with 
the prospect of a lock-out. A more obvious peril 
resulted from the physiological state of almost the 
entire population. ‘The health of the poor is 
what it must be,” said the experts in hygiene, “‘but 
that of the rich leaves much to be desired.” It was 
not difficult to find the causes of this. The supply of 
oxygen necessary for life was insufficient in the city, 
and men breathed in an artificial air. The food 
trusts, by means of the most daring chemical syn- 
theses, produced artificial wines, meat, milk, fruit, 
and vegetables, and the diet thus imposed gave rise 
to stomach and brain troubles. The multi-million- 
aires were bald at the age of eighteen; some showed 
from time to time a dangerous weakness of mind. 


FUTURE TIMES 331 


Over-strung and enfeebled, they gave enormous 
sums to ignorant charlatans; and it was a common 
thing for some trumpery bath-attendant or other 
who turned healer or prophet, to make a rapid for- 
tune by the practice of medicine or theology. The 
number of lunatics increased continually; suicides 
multiplied in the world of wealth, and many of them 
were accompanied by atrocious and extraordinary 
circumstances, which bore witness to an unheard 
of perversion of intelligence and sensibility. 
Another fatal symptom created a strong im- 
pression upon average minds. Terrible accidents, 
henceforth periodical and regular, entered into 
people’s calculations, and kept mounting higher and 
higher in statistical tables. Every day, machines 
burst into fragrants, houses fell down, trains laden 
with merchandise fell on to the streets, demolishing 
entire buildings and crushing hundreds of passers-by. 
Through the ground, honey-combed with tunnels, 
two or three storeys of work-shops would often 
crash, engulfing all those who worked in them. 


§ 2 


In the southwestern district of the city, on an 
eminence which had preserved its ancient name of 
Fort Saint-Michel, there stretched a square where 
some old trees still spread their exhausted arms 
above the greensward. Landscape gardeners had 
constructed a cascade, grottos, a torrent, a lake, and 
an island, on its northern slope. From this side 
one could see the whole town with its streets, its 
boulevards, its squares, the multitude of its roofs and 
domes, its air-passages, and its crowds of men, 


332 PENGUIN ISLAND 


covered with a veil of silence, and seemingly en- 
chanted by the distance. This square was the 
healthiest place in the capital; here no smoke ob- 
scured the sky, and children were brought here to 
play. In summer some employees from the neigh- 
bouring offices and laboratories used to resort to it 
for a moment after their luncheons, but they did not 
disturb its solitude and peace. 

It was owing to this custom that, one day in 
June, about mid-day, a telegraph clerk, Caroline 
Meslier, came and sat down ona bench at the end of 
aterrace. In order to refresh her eyes by the sight 
of a little green, she turned her back to the town. 
Dark, with brown eyes, robust and placid, Caroline 
appeared to be from twenty-five to twenty-eight 
years of age. Almost immediately, a clerk in the 
Electricity Trust, George Clair, took his place be- 
side her. Fair, thin, and supple, he had features of 
a feminine delicacy; he was scarcely older than she, 
and looked still younger. As they met almost every 
day in this place, a comradeship had sprung up be- 
tween them, and they enjoyed chatting together. 
But their conversation had never been tender, af- 
fectionate, or even intimate. Caroline, although it 
had happened to her in the past to repent of her 
confidence, might perhaps have been less reserved 
had not George Clair always shown himself ex- 
tremely restrained in his expressions and behaviour. 
He always gavea purely intellectual character to the 
conversation, keeping it within the realm of general 
ideas, and, moreover, expressing himself on all sub- 
jects with the greatest freedom. He spoke fre- 
quently of the organization of society, and the con- 
ditions of labour. 


FUTURE TIMES 333 


“Wealth,” said he, “is one of the means of living 
happily; but people have made it the sole end of ex- 
istence.” 

And this state of things seemed monstrous to both 
of them. 

They returned continually to various scientific 
subjects with which they were both familiar. 

On that day they discussed the evolution of chem- 
istry. 

“From the moment,” said Clair, “that radium 
was seen to be transformed into helium, people 
ceased to affirm the immutability of simple bodies; 
in this way all those old laws about simple relations 
and about the indestructibility of matter were 
abolished.” 

‘“However,”’ said she, ‘‘chemical laws exist.” 

For, being a woman, she had need of belief. 

He resumed carelessly : 

“Now that we can procure radium in sufficient 
quantities, science possesses incomparable means of 
analysis; even at present we get glimpses, within 
what are called simple bodies, of extremely diversi- 
fied complex ones, and we discover energies in matter 
which seem to increase even by reason of its tenuity.”’ 

As they talked, they threw bits of bread to the 
birds, and some children played around them. 

Passing from one subject to another: 

“This hill, in the quaternary epoch,” said Clair, 
“was inhabited by wild horses. Last year, as they 
were tunnelling for the water mains, they found a 
layer of the bones of primeval horses.”’ 

She was anxious to know whether, at that distant 
epoch, man had yet appeared. 

He told her that man used to hunt the primeval 
horse long before he tried to domesticate him. 


334 PENGUIN ISLAND 


“Man,” he added, ‘was at first a hunter, then 
he became a shepherd, a cultivator, a manufac- 
turer . . . and these diverse civilizations succeeded 
each other at intervals of time that the mind cannot 
conceive.” 

He took out his watch. 

Caroline asked if it was already time to go back to 
the office. 

He said it was not, that it was scarcely half-past 
twelve. 

A little girl was making mud pies at the foot of 
their bench; a little boy of seven or eight years was 
playing in front of them. Whilst his mother was 
sewing on an adjoining bench, he played all alone 
at being a run-away horse, and with that power of 
illusion, of which children are capable, he imagined 
that he was at the same time the horse, and those 
who ran after him, and those who fled in terror be- 
fore him. He kept struggling with himself and 
shouting: ‘Stop him, Hi! Hi! This is an awful 
horse, he has got the bit between his teeth.” 

Caroline asked the question: 

“Do you think that men were happy formerly?” 

Her companion answered: 

“They suffered less when they were younger. 
They acted like that little boy: they played; they 
played at arts, at virtues, at vices, at heroism, at 
beliefs, at pleasures; they had illusions; which enter- 
tained them; they made a noise, they amused them- 
Selves me DULDOW.= ayer 

He interrupted himself, and looked again at his 
watch. 

The child, who was running, struck his foot 
against the little girl’s pail, and fell his full length on 
the gravel. He remained a moment stretched out 


FUTURE TIMES 335 


motionless, then raised himself up on the palms of 
his hands. His forehead puckered, his mouth 
opened, and he burst into tears. His mother ran up 
but Caroline had lifted him from the ground and 
was wiping his eyes and mouth with her handker- 
chief. The child kept on sobbing and Clair took 
him in his arms. 

‘Come, don’t cry, my little man! I am going to 
tell you a story. 

“A fisherman once threw his net into the sea and 
drew out a little, sealed, copper pot, which he opened 
with his knife. Smoke came out of it, and as it 
mounted up to the clouds the smoke grew thicker 
and thicker and became a giant who gave such a 
terrible yawn that the whole world was blown to 
caste 2 

Clair stopped himself, gave a dry laugh, and 
handed the child back to his mother. Then he 
took out his watch again, and kneeling on the bench 
with his elbows resting on its back he gazed at the 
town. As far as the eye could reach, the multitude 
of houses stood out in their tiny immensity. 

Caroline turned her eyes in the same direction. 

“What splended weather it is!” said she. ‘“The 
sun’s rays change the smoke on the horizon into 
gold. The worst thing about civilization is that it 
deprives one of the light of day.” 

He did not answer; his looks remained fixed on a 
place in the town. 

After some seconds of silence they saw about half 
a mile away, in the richer district on the other 
side of the river, a sort of tragic fog rearing itself 
upwards. A moment afterwards an explosion was 
heard even where they were sitting, and an immense 
tree of smoke mounted towards the pure sky. Little 


336 PENGUIN ISLAND 


by little the air was filled with an imperceptible 
murmur caused by the shouts of thousands of men. 
Cries burst forth quite close to the square. 

‘‘What has been blown up?” 

The bewilderment was great, for although ac- 
cidents were common, such a violent explosion as 
this one had never been seen, and everybody per- 
ceived that something terribly strange had happened. 

Attempts were made to locate the place of the ac- 
cident; districts, streets, different buildings, clubs, 
theatres, and shops were mentioned. Information 
gradually became more precise and at last the truth 
was known. 

‘The Steel Trust has just been blown up.” 

Clair put his watch back into his pocket. 

Caroline looked at him closely and her eyes filled 
with astonishment. 

At last she whispered in his ear: 

“Did you know it? Were you expecting it? 
IW aS titay Ole pace: 

He answered very calmly: 

“That town ought to be destroyed.” 

She replied in a gentle and thoughtful tone: 

“T think so too.” 

And both of them returned quietly to their work. 


§ 3 


From that day onward, anarchist attempts fol- 
lowed one another every week without interruption. 
The victims were numerous, and almost all of them 
belonged to the poorer classes. These crimes 
roused public resentment. It was among domestic 
servants, hotel-keepers, and the employees of such 
small shops as the Trusts still allowed to exist, that 


FUTURE TIMES 337 


indignation burst forth most vehemently. In popu- 
lar districts women might be heard demanding un- 
usual punishments for the dynamitards. (They 
were called by this old name, although it was hardly 
appropriate to them, since, to these unknown chem- 
ists, dynamite was an innocent material only fit to 
destroy ant-hills, and they considered it mere child’s 
play to explode nitro-glycerine with a cartridge made 
of fulminate of mercury.) Business ceased sud- 
denly, and those who were least rich were the first 
to feel the effects. They spoke of doing justice 
themselves to the anarchists. In the mean time the 
factory workers remained hostile or indifferent to 
violent action. They were threatened, as a result 
of the decline of business, with a likelihood of losing 
their work, or even a lock-out in all the factories. 
The Federation of Trade Unions proposed a general 
strike as the most powerful means of influencing the 
employers, and the best aid that could be given 
to the revolutionists, but all the trades with the ex- 
ception of the gilders refused to cease work. 

The police made numerous arrests. “Troops sum- 
moned from all parts of the National Federation 
protected the offices of the Trusts, the houses of the 
multi-millionaires, the public halls, the banks, and 
the big shops. A fortnight passed without a single 
explosion, and it was concluded that the dynami- 
tards, in all probability but a handful of persons, 
perhaps even still fewer, had all been killed or cap- 
tured, or that they were in hiding, or had taken 
flight. Confidence returned; it returned at first 
among the poorer classes. ‘Two or three hundred 
thousand soldiers, who had been lodged in the most 
closely populated districts, stimulated trade, and 
people began to cry out: “Hurrah for the army!” 


338 PENGUIN ISLAND 


The rich, who had not been so quick to take 
alarm, were reassured more slowly. But at the 
Stock Exchange a group of “‘bulls” spread optimistic 
rumours and by a powerful effort put a brake upon 
the fallin prices. Business improved. Newspapers 
with big circulations supported the movement. 
With patriotic eloquence they depicted capital as 
laughing in its impregnable position at the assaults 
of a few dastardly criminals, and public wealth main- 
taining its serene ascendency in spite of the vain 
threats made against it. They were sincere in their 
attitude, though at the same time they found it bene- 
fited them. Outrages were forgotten or their occur- 
rence denied. On Sundays, at the race-meetings, 
the stands were adorned by women covered with 
pearls and diamonds. It was observed with joy that 
the capitalists had not suffered. Cheers were given 
for the multi-millionaires in the saddling rooms. 

On the following day the Southern Railway Sta- 
tion, the Petroleum Trust, and the huge church built 
at the expense of Thomas Morcellet were all blown 
up. Thirty houses were in flames, and the begin- 
ning of a fire was discovered at the docks. The 
firemen showed amazing intrepidity and zeal. They 
managed their tall fire-escapes with automatic pre- 
cision, and climbed as high as thirty storeys to rescue 
the luckless inhabitants from the flames. The sol- 
diers performed their duties with spirit, and were 
given a double ration of coffee. But these fresh 
casualties started a panic. Millions of people, who 
wanted to take their money with them and leave 
the town at once, crowded the great banking houses. 
These establishments, after paying out money for 
three days, closed their doors amid mutterings of a 
riot. A crowd of fugitives, laden with their bag- 


FUTURE TIMES 339 


gage, beseiged the railway stations and took the 
town by storm. Many who were anxious to lay in 
a stock of provisions and take refuge in the cellars, 
attacked the grocery stores, although they were 
guarded by soldiers with fixed bayonets. The public 
authorities displayed energy. Numerous arrests 
were made and thousands of warrants issued against 
suspected persons. 

During the three weeks that followed no outrage 
was committed. There was a rumour that bombs 
had been found in the Opera House, in the cellars 
of the Town Hall, and beside one of the pillars of 
the Stock Exchange. But it was soon known that 
these were boxes of sweets that had been put in those 
places by practical jokers or lunatics. One of the 
accused, when questioned by a magistrate, declared 
that he was the chief author of the explosions, and 
said that all his accomplices had lost their lives. 
These confessions were published by the newspapers 
and helped to reassure public opinion. It was only 
towards the close of the examination that the mag- 
istrates saw they had to deal with a pretender 
who was in no way connected with any of the 
crimes. 

The experts chosen by the courts discovered noth- 
ing that enabled them to determine the engine em- 
ployed in the work of destruction. According to 
their conjectures the new explosion emanated from 
a gas which radium evolves, and it was supposed 
that electric waves, produced by a special type of 
oscillator, were propagated through space and thus 
caused the explosion. But even the ablest chemist 
could say nothing precise or certain. At last two 
policemen, who were passing in front of the Hotel 
Meyer, found on the pavement, close to a ventilator, 


340 PENGUIN ISLAND 


an egg made of white metal and provided with a 
capsule at each end. They picked it up carefully, 
and, on the orders of their chief, carried it to the 
municipal laboratory. Scarcely had the experts as- 
sembled to examine it, than the egg burst and blew 
up the amphitheatre and the dome. All the experts 
perished, and with them Collin, the General of Ar- 
tillery, and the famous Professor Tigre. 

The capitalist society did not allow itself to be 
daunted by this fresh disaster. The great banks 
re-opened their doors, declaring that they would 
meet demands partly in bullion and partly in paper 
money guaranteed by the State. The Stock Ex- 
change and the Trade Exchange, in spite of the com- 
plete cessation of business, decided not to suspend 
their sittings. 

In the mean time the magisterial investigation 
into the case of those who had been first accused had 
come to an end. Perhaps the evidence brought 
against them might have appeared insufficient under 
other circumstances, but the zeal both of the magis- 
trates and the public made up for this insufficiency. 
On the eve of the day fixed for the trial the Courts 
of Justice were blown up and eight hundred people 
were killed, the greater number of them being judges 
and lawyers. A furious crowd broke into the prison 
and lynched the prisoners. The troops sent to re- 
store order were received with showers of stones and 
revolver shots; several soldiers being dragged from 
their horses and trampled underfoot. The soldiers 
fired on the mob and many persons were killed. At 
last the public authorities succeeded in establishing 
tranquillity. Next day the Bank was blown up. 

From that time onwards unheard-of things took 
place. The factory workers, who had refused to 


FUTURE TIMES 341 


strike, rushed in crowds into the town and set fire to 
the houses. Entire regiments, led by their officers, 
joined the workmen, went with them through the 
town singing revolutionary hymns, and took barrels 
of petroleum from the docks with which to feed the 
fires. Explosions were continual. One morning a 
monstrous tree of smoke, like the ghost of a huge 
palm tree half a mile in height, rose above the giant 
Telegraph Hall which suddenly fell into a complete 
ruin. 

Whilst half the town was in flames, the other half 
pursued its accustomed life. In the mornings, milk 
pails could be heard jingling in the dairy carts. In 
a deserted avenue some old navvy might be seen 
seated against a wall slowly eating hunks of bread 
with perhaps a little meat. Almost all the presi- 
dents of the trusts remained at their posts. Some of 
them performed their duty with heroic simplicity. 
Raphael Box, the son of a martyred multi-million- 
aire, was blown up as he was presiding at the gen- 
eral meeting of the Sugar Trust. He was given a 
magnificent funeral and the procession on its way 
to the cemetery had to climb six times over piles 
of ruins or cross upon planks over the uprooted 
roads. 

The ordinary helpers of the rich, the clerks, em- 
ployees, brokers, and agents, preserved an unshaken 
fidelity. The surviving clerks of the Bank that had 
been blown up, made their way along the ruined 
streets through the midst of smoking houses to hand 
in their bills of exchange, and several were swal- 
lowed up in the flames while endeavouring to pre- 
sent their receipts. 

Nevertheless, any illusion concerning the state of 
affairs was impossible. ‘The enemy was master of 


342 PENGUIN ISLAND 


the town. Instead of silence the noise of explosions 
was now continuous and produced an insurmount- 
able feeling of horror. The lighting apparatus hav- 
ing been destroyed, the city was plunged in dark- 
ness all through the night, and appalling crimes were 
committed. The populous districts alone, having 
suffered the least, still preserved measures of protec- 
tion. They were paraded by patrols of volunteers 
who shot the robbers, and at every street corner one 
stumbled over a body lying in a pool of blood, the 
hands bound behind the back, a handkerchief over 
the face, and a placard pinned upon the breast. 

It became impossible to clear away the ruins or to 
bury the dead. Soon the stench from the corpses 
became intolerable. Epidemics raged and caused 
innumerable deaths, while they also rendered the sur- 
vivors feeble and listless. Famine carried off almost 
all who were left. A hundred and one days after 
the first outrage, whilst six army corps with field 
artillery and siege artillery were marching, at night, 
into the poorest quarter of the city, Caroline and 
Clair, holding each other’s hands, were watching 
from the roof a lofty house, the only one still left 
standing, but now surrounded by smoke and flame. 
Joyous songs ascended from the street, where the 
crowd was dancing in delirium. 

“To-morrow it will be ended,” said the man 
“and it will be better.” 

The young woman, her hair loosened and her face 
shining with the reflection of the flames, gazed with 
a pious joy at the circle of fire that was growing 
closer around them. 

“It will be better,” said she also. 

And throwing herself into the destroyer’s arms 
she pressed a passionate kiss upon his lips. 


FUTURE TIMES 343 


S24 


The other towns of the federation also suffered 
from disturbances and outbreaks, and then order 
was restored. Reforms were introduced into insti- 
tutions and great changes took place in habits and 
customs, but the country never recovered the loss 
of its capital, and never regained its former prosper- 
ity. Commerce and industry dwindled away, and 
civilization abandoned those countries which for so 
long it had preferred to all others. They became 
insalubrious and sterile; the territory that had sup- 
ported so many millions of men became nothing 
more than a desert. On the hill of Fort St. Michel 
wild horses cropped the coarse grass. 

Days flowed by like water from the fountains, and 
the centuries passed like drops falling from the ends 
of stalactites. Hunters came to chase the bears 
upon the hills that covered the forgotten city; shep- 
herds led their flocks upon them; labourers turned 
up the soil with their ploughs; gardeners cultivated 
their lettuces and grafted their pear trees. ‘They 
were not rich, and they had no arts. ‘The walls of 
their cabins were covered with old vines and roses. 
A goat-skin clothed their tanned limbs, while their 
wives dressed themselves with the wool that they 
themselves had spun. The goat-herds moulded 
little figures of men and animals out of clay, or sang 
songs about the young girl who follows her lover 
through woods or among the browsing goats while 
the pine trees whisper together and the water utters 
its murmuring sound. The master of the house grew 
angry with the beetles who devoured his figs; he 
planned snares to protect his fowls from the velvet- 


344 PENGUIN ISLAND 


tailed fox, and he poured out wine for his neighbours 
saying: 

“Drink! ‘The flies have not spoilt my vintage; 
the vines were dry before they came.” 

Then in the course of ages the wealth of the vil- 
lages and the corn that filled the fields were pillaged 
by barbarian invaders. The country changed its 
masters several times. The conquerors built castles 
upon the hills; cultivation increased; mills, forges, 
tanneries, and looms were established; roads were 
opened through the woods and over the marshes; 
the river was covered with boats. The hamlets 
became large villages and joining together formed 
a town which protected itself by deep trenches and 
lofty walls. Later, becoming the capital of a great 
State, it found itself straitened within its now useless 
ramparts, and it converted them into grass-covered 
walks. 

It grew very rich and large beyond measure. The 
houses were never high enough to satisfy the people; 
they kept on making them still higher and built them 
of thirty or forty storeys, with offices, shops, banks, 
societies one above another; they dug cellars and 
tunnels ever deeper downwards. Fifteen millions of 
men laboured in the giant town. 


THE END 


- S>= wey 


mk 


a4 
7 

iy. 
; 


> ea 


~*~ 


643.89 F&Lr TE 1909 


43900] 0080371895 dj 


al 


e Ina 


hy ar 


Z, = a is 
af 7] 7 ie Ee 


Lin Wright
