Narrative of a Journey to the Shores of the Polar Sea, 1819–22 (John Franklin, 1823)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1823 John Murray first edition (https://archive.org/details/Narrativejourne00Fran). Franklin's overland expedition to the Coppermine River and the Arctic coast (1819–22) — the journey of starvation and endurance that made his name.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ae 
cuny 


JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


‘* 


gr fa 
mir xo 
mist ty 


[Ole AAT ©} 


eal A 
a + 
} ae 


{ 


BaP EY > Mp eT AQ paAerary 


aS Be) 


nyt 


‘hE QD Jeep qmery Aq trae cy 


ll eee | i 


. j y i er sh 


BARL RAPBO ANT. 


i 


ee 


NARRATIVE OF A JOURNEY 


TO THE SHORES OF 


THE POLAR SEA, 


1819, 20, 21, ann 22. 
BY 


Gi | 
JOHN FRANKLIN, Caprain R.N., F.R.S., 


’ AND COMMANDER OF THE EXPEDITION. 


| WITH AN APPENDIX ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS RELATING TO 
i _ SCIENCE AND NATURAL HISTORY. 


a ILLUSTRATED BY NUMEROUS PLATES AND MAPS. 


PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL BATHURST. 


Oa 


o LONDON: | 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET. 


MDCCCXXIL. 


Te ak * 
a 


TO | 
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE 


THE EARL BATHURST, K.G. 


ONE OF HIS MAJESTY’S PRINCIPAL SECRETARIES 
: -OF STATE, 


(ores OMS OE 
THE FOLLOWING 

NARRATIVE OF A JOURNEY OF DISCOVERY TO THE NORTHERN 
COAST OF AMERICA, 


UNDERTAKEN BY ORDER AND UNDER THE AUSPICES OF | 
HIS LORDSHIP, — 


IS, BY PERMISSION, INSCRIBED, 
w WITH GREAT RESPECT AND GRATITUDE, 


BY 


THE AUTHOR. 


22 6 


Tay 8 


Y usianoaa 


ANAAMADT, 


PARDO UIA ' 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Departure from England—Transactions at Stromness—Enter Davis’ Straits— 
Perilous Situation on the Shore of Resolution Island—Land on the Coast of 
Labrador—Esquimaux of Savage Islands—Y ork Factory—Preparations for the 
Journey into the Interior 


CHAPTER II. 


Passage up Hayes’, Steel, and Hill Rivers—Cross Swampy Lake—Jack River— 
Knee Lake, and Magnetic Islet-—Trout River—Holey Lake—Weepinapannis 
River— Windy Lake—White-Fall Lake and River—Echemamis and Sea Rivers 
—Play-Green Lake—Lake Winipeg—River sO i daiiate Cedar and 
Pine-Island Lakes Cumberland-House ( : 


CHAPTER ITI. 

Dr. Richardson’s Residence at Cumnbartnd- Boise Fis Account of the Cree 

Indians 
CHAPTER IV.. 

Leave Cumberland-House—Mode of Travelling in Winter—Arrival at Carlton 
House—Stone Indians—Visit to a Buffalo Pound—Goitres—Departure from 
Carlton-House—Isle 4 la Crosse—Arrival at Fort Chipewyan 

CHAPTER Iv*. 

Transactions at Fort Chipewyan—Arrival of Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood—Pre- 

parations for our Journey to the Northward : : : 
CHAPTER V. 


Mr. Hood's Journey to the Basquian Hills—Sojourns with an Indian Party—His 
Journey to Chipewyan 3 : : : . 


27 


59 


94 


142 


167 


Vill CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Departure from Chipewyan—Difliculties of the various Navigations of the Rivers, 


and Lakes, and of the Portages—Slave Lake and Fort Providence—Scarcity of | 


Provisions, and discontent of the Canadian Voyagers—Difficulties with regard 
to the Indian Guides—Refusal to proceed—Visit of Observation to the Upper 


part of Copper-Mine River—Return to the Winter-Quarters of Fort En- 
terprise | 


CHAPTER VII. 
Transactions at Fort Enterprise—Mr. Back’s Narrative of his J ourney to Chipewyan 
and Return - | 
CHAPTER VIII. 
Continuation of Proceedings at Fort Enterprise—Some Account of Copper 
Indians—Preparations for the J ourney to the Northward 
CHAPTER IX. 


Departure from Fort Enterprise—Navigation of the Copper-Mine River—Visit to 
the Copper Mountain—Interview with the Esquimaux—Departure of the In- 
dian Hunters—Arrangements made with them for our return 


_ CHAPTER X. 


Navigation of the Polar Sea, in two Canoes, as far as Cape Turnagain, to the East- 
ward, a distance exceeding Five Hundred and Fifty Miles—Observations on 
the probability of a North-West Passage 


CHAPTER XI. 


Jourmey across the Barren Grounds—Difficulty and delay in crossing Copper-Mine 
River—Melancholy and fatal results thereof —Extreme Misery of the whole 
Party—Murder of Mr. Hood—Death of several of the Canadians—Desolate 
State of Fort Enterprise—Distress suffered at that place—Dr. Richardson’s 
Narrative—Mr. Back’s Narrative—Conclusion. | 


3 Uk9S 


238 


287 


316 


362 


391 


No. 
No. 


No. 


No. 
No. 


Ill. 


IV. 
V. 


CONTENTS, 


APPENDIX. 


Geognostical Observations, by Dr. Richardson 


General Remarks on the Aurora Borealis 

On the Aurora Borealis at Cumberland-House, by Lianne Hood 

Observations on the Magnetic Needle at Cumberland-House; by Lieu- 
tenant Hood 


Observations on the Aurora at Fort Enterprise, by Captain Prankliin 


Notices of the Appearances of the Aurora at Fort Enterprise, 2 : 


Captain Franklin. 
Observations on the Deviations of ais Meagmictic N eedle 
On the Aurora Borealis at Fort Enterprise, by Lieutenant Hood 
Remarks on the Aurora Borealis, by Dr. Richardson 


Remarks and Tables connected with Astronomical Observations . 
Zoological Appendix, by Joseph Sabine, Esq., F.R.S. 


No. VI. Notices of the Fishes, by Dr. Richardson 
VII. Botanical Appendix, by Dr. Richardson 


No. 


. 647 


Page 


497 


539 
541 


547 
549 


554 


. 50 
. 580 
. 596 


629 


705 
729 


LAST OF, PILATES: 


Page 
View from Morgan’s Rocks of the Hill in Hill River . : ‘ . To face 33 / 
The Trout Fall : , i : x Be 2) 
Manner of making a Resting ane ona Winter s Night . , : He 9% 8 

/ Portrait of a Stone Indian : : : A : des 3 ; 104 + 

2. A Buffalo Pound ! , A , : : : , 1s Jd) 

3 Interior of a Cree Indian Tent , : ) i . : : 169 & 
Expedition crossing Lake Prosperous . ey Be : ; : of ON By, 

4. Portrait of Akaitcho and his Son : ‘ a : F F , 203. = 
Marten Lake ~ . . AY, a : 2, of 235 G 
Expedition discovering the Odpper Mine River : A ; . 43 237  /0 
Winter View of Fort Enterprise ; j na % A6 // 

S » Keskarrah a Copper Indian Guide and his sph tiehd — Stockings : o 254 12 

G Portraits of two Esquimaux Interpreters ©. ; ; ) f i 262 /% 
Winter travelling on Great Slave Lake . . 4 : j 4 af 277 14 
A Winter Wolf, and a View of the Dog-rib Rock " 2! . ‘ <s 312; ¢ o~ 
Expedition passing through Point-Lake, on the Ice ie : oh ei a! 323 : SG 
The Bloody Fall ; . + Jat 350 («> 
A view of the Arctic Sea, from the Mouth of ae Copper-Ming Ries at midnight F 365, 7 & 
Expedition doubling Cape Barrow ; : ; : ' ; 3 367__ 19 
Expedition encamped at Point Turnagain § i : : . iy 387 2b 
Canoe broaching too in a Gale of Wind at Sunrise r ; 5 5 » 894 4/ 
Expedition landing in a Storm : : , ; : é P 395 22 

Bek fea The Falls of Wilberforce : ; é c $s 397 2% 
Jamie aja. Preparing an Encampment on Barren Gea bnae for the gathering Tripe de Roche &c. 412 24 
if Plate 25 : * E : : «a “ 4 707 435° 
Plate 26, Back’s Nereus 8 : : : 711 26 
The As pele of Plants at the end of the aay gains and ‘mmediatol cre the Maps. 7: 22 


Maps at the end of the book in 2 the following order. 


Route from York Factory to Isle 4 la Crosse. 
From Isle 4 la Crosse to Slave Lake. 

From Slave Lake to the Arctic Sea. 

General chart of the Arctic Sea. 


INTRODUCTION. 


His Majesty’s Government having determined upon sending an 
Expedition from the Shores of Hudson's Bay by land, to explore 
the Northern Coast of America, from the Mouth of the Copper- 
Mine River to the eastward, I had the honour to be appointed to- 
this service by Earl Bathurst, on the recommendation of the Lords 
Commissioners of the Admiralty; who, at the same time, nominated 
Doctor John Richardson, a Surgeon in the Royal Navy, Mr. George 
Back, and Mr. Robert Hood, two Admiralty Midshipmen, to be 
joined with me in the Expedition. My instructions in substance _ 
informed me, that the main object of the Expedition was that of 
determining the latitudes and longitudes of the Northern Coast of 
North America, and the trending of that Coast from the Mouth of 
the Copper-Mine River to the eastern extremity of that Con- 
tinent; that it was left for me to determine, according to circum- 
stances, whether it might be most advisable to proceed, at once, 
directly to the northward till I arrived at the sea-coast, ‘and proceed 
westerly towards the Copper-Mine River ; or advance, in the first 
instance, by the usual route to’ the Mouth of the Copper-Mine 
River, and from thence easterly till I should arrive at the eastern 
be 


X1i INTRODUCTION. 


extremity of that Continent; that, in the adoption of either of 
these plans, I was to be- guided by the advice and information 
which I should receive from the wintering servants of the Hudson’s 
Bay Company, who would be instructed by their employers to co-ope- 
rate cordially in the prosecution of the objects of the Expedition, 
and who would provide me with the necessary escort of Indians to 
act as guides, interpreters, game-killers, g-c.; and also with such 
articles of clothing, ammunition, snow-shoes, presents, fc., as should 
be deemed expedient for me .to take. That as another principal 
object of the Expedition was to amend the very defective geo- 
graphy of the northern part of North America, I was to be very 
careful to ascertain correctly the latitude and longitude of. every 
remarkable . spot upon. our route, and of all the bays, harbours, 
rivers, headlands, gc. that might occur along the Northern Shore 
of North America.’ That, in proceeding along the coast, I should 
erect conspicuous marks at places where ships might enter, or to 
which a boat could be sent; and to deposit information as to 
the nature of the coast for the use of Lieutenant Parry. That, in 
the Journal of our route, I should register the temperature of . the 
air, at least three times in every twenty-four hours ; together with 
the state of the wind and weather, and any. other: meteorological 
phenomenon. That I should not neglect any opportunity of observing 
and noting down the dip and variation of the magnetic needle, 
and the intensity of the magnetic force ; and should take particular 


notice whether any, and what kind or degree of, influence the 


Aurora Borealis might appear to exert on the magnetic needle ; and . 


to notice whether that phenomenon was attended with any noise; 


INTRODUCTION. xiii 


and to make any other observations that might be likely to tend 
to the further developement of its cause, and the laws by which it 
is governed. 

Mr. Back and Mr. Hood were to assist me in all the obser- 
vations above-mentioned, and to make drawings of the land, of the 
natives, and of the various objects of natural history; and_parti- 
cularly of such as Dr. Richardson, who, to his professional duties 
was to add that of naturalist, might consider to be most curious 
and interesting. | 

I was instructed, on my arrivai at, or near, the Mouth of the 
Copper-Mine River, to make every inquiry as to the situation of 
the spot from whence native copper had been brought down by the 
Indians to the Hudson’s Bay establishment, and to visit and explore 
the place in question; in order that Dr. Richardson might be 
enabled to make such observations as might be useful in a com- 
mercial point of view, or interesting to the science of mineralogy. 

From Joseph Berens, Esq., the Governor of the Hudson’s Bay 
Company, and the Gentlemen of the Committee, I received all 
kinds of assistance and information, communicated in the most 
friendly manner previous to my leaving England; and I had the 
gratification of perusing the orders to their agents and servants in 
North America, containing the fullest directions to promote, by 


: every means, the: progress of the Expedition; and I most cheer- 


fully avail myself:of this opportunity of expressing my gratitude to 
these Gentlemen: for their personal kindness to myself and the 
other officers, as well as for the benefits rendered by them to the 


Expedition ; and the same sentiment is due towards the Gentlemen 


xiv INFRODUCTION. 


ef the North-West, Company, both in England: and América, miore 
particularly to, Simon M‘Gillivray;, Esq., of London, from whom. I 
received much useful information, and cordial letters of recom: 
mendation to the partners. and agents) of that Company, resident on 
our line of route. 

A. short. time, before: I left. London, I had: the pleasure and: ad= 
vantage of an. interview, with: the late Sir Alexander: Mackenzie, 
who. was one of the two,persons. who had visited the coast. we were 
to explore. He afforded me, in the most open and kind manner. 
much, valuable information. and. advice. 

The. provisions, instruments and. other articles. of which I had 
furnished. a, list; by. direction- of the Lords Commissioners: of: the 
Admiralty, were embarked. on. board. the Hudson’s Bay Company’s 
ship Prince of. Wales, appointed. by the Committee to convey 
the . Expedition to York, Factory, their. a establishment in 
Hudson's Bay. 

It will be seen, in. the course of the Narrative as well as in the 
Appendix, how much. reason. I. had to be. satisfied with, and how 
great my obligations are.to,, all the Gentlemen who were associated 
with me in the Expedition, whose kindness, good. conduct,': and 
cordial co-operation, have. made an, impression: which can«never 
be effaced from,my mind:, The unfortunate» death of~Mr. Hood’ 
is. the, only. drawback , which. I | feel from.the- otherwise’ unalloyed» 
pleasure: I. derived from. reflecting: on ‘that cordial unanimity which’ 
at all times. prevailed.among usin the days of sunshine; and*in' 
those of “ sickness and sorrow.” 


To Doctor Richardson,.in particular, the--exchusive: merit ‘is -dué: 


INTRODUCTION. vY 


of whatever collections and observations have been made in the 
department of Natural History; and I am indebted to hint in no 
small degree for his friendly advice and assistance in the prepa- 
ration of the present Narrative. The Appendix is mostly his 
own. 

The charts and drawings were made by Lieutenant Back, and 
the late Lieutenant Hood. Both these gentlemen cheerfully and 
ably assisted me in making the observations and in the daily 
conduct of the Expedition. The paper in the Appendix by 
Mr. Hood, on the various phenomena presented by the Aurora 
Borealis, will, it is presumed, present to the reader some new facts 
connected with this meteor. Mr. Back was mostly prevented from 
turning his attention to objects of science by the many severe duties 
which were required of him, and which obliged him to travel 
almost constantly every winter that we passed in America; to his 
personal exertions indeed, is mainly to be attributed our final 
safety. And here I must be permitted to pay the tribute, which 
is due to the fidelity, exertion, and uniform good conduct in the 
most trying situations, of John Hepburn, an English seaman, and 
our only attendant, to whom in the latter part of our journey we 
owe, under Divine Providence, the preservation of the lives of some 
of the party. 

I ought, perhaps, to crave the reader’s indulgence towards the 
defective style of this work, which I trust will not be refused when 
it is considered that mine has been a life of constant employment 


in my profession from a very early age. I have been prompted 


XV1 NER OPE 


to venture upon the task solely by an mca sense of duty, 
when called upon to undertake it. } ob 

I am indebted to Joseph Sabine, Esq., F.R:S., for the very butler 
account of Quadrupeds and Birds contained in the Appendix. 


A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 
OF 


THE POLAR SEA. 


CHAPTER TI. 


Departure from England—Transactions at Stromness—Enter Davis’ Straits—Perilous Situation 
on the Shore of Resolution Island—Land on the Coast of Labrador—Eskimaux of Savage 
Islands—York Factory—Preparations for the Journey into the Interior. 


May. On Sunday, the 23d of May, the whole of our party em- 


barked at Gravesend on board the ship Prince of Wales, belonging 
to the Hudson’s Bay Company, just as she was in the act of getting 
under weigh, with her consorts the Eddystone and Wear. The wind 
bemg unfavourable, and on the ebb tide being finished, the vessels 
were again anchored ; but they weighed in the night, and beat down 
as far as the Warp, where they were detained two days by a strong 
easterly wind. | 

Having learned from some of the passengers, who were the trading 
Officers of the Company, that the arrival of the ships at either of the 
establishments in Hudson’s Bay, gives full occupation to all the 
boatmen in their service, who are required to convey the necessary 
stores to the different posts in the interior; that it was very pro- 
bable a sufficient number of men might not be procured from this 
indispensable duty ; and, considering that any delay at York Factory 
would materially retard our future operations, I wrote to the Under 

B 


2 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Secretary of State, requesting his permission to provide a few well 
qualified steersmen and bowmen at Stromness, to assist our pro- 
ceedings in the former part of our journey into the interior. 

May 30.—The easterly wind which had retarded the ship’s 
progress so much, that we had only reached Hollesly Bay after a 
week’s beating about, changed to W.S.W. soon after that anchorage 
had been gained. The vessels instantly weighed, and by carrying all 
sail, arrived in Yarmouth roads at seven P.M.; the pilots were 
landed, and our course was continued through the anchorage. At 
midnight, the wind became light and variable, and gradually drew 
round to the N.W.; and as the sky indicated unsettled weather, and 
the wind blew from an unfavourable quarter for ships upon that coast, 
the commander bore up again for Yarmouth, and anchored at 
eight A.M. | 

This return afforded us, at least, the opportunity of comparing 
the longitude of Yarmouth church, as shewn by our chronome- 
ters, with its position as laid down by the Ordnance trigonometrical 
survey; and. it was satisfactory to find, from the small difference 
in their results, that the chronometers had not experienced any 
alteration in their rates, in consequence of their being changed 
from an horizontal position in a room, to that of being carried in the 
pocket. 

An untoward circumstance, while at this anchorage, cast a damp 
on our party at this early period of the voyage. Emboldened by the 
decided appearance of the N.W. sky, several of our officers and pas- 
sengers ventured on shore for a few hours; but we had not been long 
in the town before the wind changed suddenly to 8.E., which caused 
instant motion in the large fleet collected at this anchorage. The 
commander of our ship intimated his intention of proceeding to sea 
by firing guns; and the passengers hastened to embark. Mr. Back, 
however, had unfortunately gone upon some business to a house two 
or three miles distant from Yarmouth, along the line of the coast; 


——— 


—. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. ‘3 


from whence he expected to be able to observe the first symptom of 
moving, which the vessels might make. By some accident, however, 
he did not make his appearance before the captain was obliged to 
make sail, that he might get the ships through the intricate passage 
of the Cockle Gat before it was dark. Fortunately, through the 
kindness of Lieut. Hewit of the Protector, I was enabled to convey a 
note to our missing companion, desiring him to proceed immediately 
by the coach to the Pentland Firth, and from thence across the 
passage to Stromness, which appeared to be the only way of proceed- 
ing by which he could rejoin the party. 

June 3.—The wind continuing favourable after leaving Yarmouth, 
about nine this morning we passed the rugged and bold projecting 
rock termed Johnny Groat’s house, and soon afterwards Duncansby 
Head, and then entered the Pentland Firth. A pilot came from the 
main shore of Scotland, and steered the ship in safety between the 
different islands, to the outer anchorage at Stromness, though the 
atmosphere was too dense for distinguishing any of the objects on 
the land: Almost immediately after the ship had anchored, the 
wind changed to N.W., the rain ceased, and a sight was then first 
obtained of the neighbouring islands, and of the town of Stromness, 
the latter of which, from this point of view, and at this distance, 
presented a pleasing appearance. 

Mr. Geddes, the agent of the Hudson’s Bay Company at this place, 
undertook to communicate my wish for volunteer boatmen to the dif- 
ferent parishes, by a notice on the church-door, which he said was the 
surest and most direct channel for the conveyance of information to 
the lower classes in these islands, as they invariably attend divine ser- 
vice there every Sunday. He informed me that the kind of men we 
were in want of would be difficult to procure, on account of the very 
imereased demand for boatmen for the herring fishery, which has 
recently been established on the shores of these islands: that last year, 
sixty boats and four hundred men only were employed in this service, 

B 2 


4 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


whereas now there were three hundred boats and twelve hundred men 
engaged: and that owing to this unexpected addition to the fishery, 
he had been unable to provide the number of persons required for 
the service of the Hudson’s Bay Company. This was unpleasant in- 
formation, as it increased the apprehension of our being detained at 
York Factory the whole winter, if boatmen were not taken from 
hence. I could not therefore hesitate in requesting Mr. Geddes to 
engage eight or ten men well adapted for our service, on such terms 
as he could procure them, though the Secretary of State’s permission 
had not yet reached me. 

Next to a supply of boatmen, our attention was directed towards 
the procuring of a house conveniently situated for trying the instru- 
ments, and examining the rates of the chronometers. Mr. Geddes 
kindly offered one of his, which, though in an unfinished state, was 
readily accepted, being well situated for our purpose, as it was placed 
on an eminence, had a southern aspect, and was at a sufficient dis- 
tance from the town to secure us from frequent interruption. Ano- 
ther advantage was its proximity to the Manse, the residence of the 
worthy and highly respected minister of Stromness: whose kind hos- 
pitality and polite attention of his family, the party eel ga al- 
most daily during their stay. 

For three days the weather was unsettled, and few observations 
could be made, except for the dip of the needle, which was ascertained 
to be 74° 37° 48", on which occasion a difference of eight degrees and 
a half was perceived between the observations, when the face of the 
instrument was changed from the east to the west, the amount being 
the greatest when it was placed with the face to the west. But on 
the 8th, a westerly wind caused a cloudless sky, which enabled us 
to place the transit instrument in the meridian, and to ascertain the 
variation of the compass, to be 27° 50’ west. The sky becoming 
cloudy in the afternoon, prevented our obtaining the corresponding 
observations to those gained in the morning; and the next day an 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 5 


impervious fog obscured the sky until noon. On the evening of this 
day, we had the gratification of welcoming our absent companion, 
Mr. Back. His return to our society was hailed with sincere pleasure 
by every one, and removed a weight of anxiety from my mind. It 
appears that he had come down to the beach at Caistor, just as the 
ships. were passing by, and had applied to some boatmen to convey 
him on board, which might have been soon accomplished, but they, 
discovering the emergency of his case, demanded an exorbitant re- 
ward which he was not at the instant prepared to satisfy; and in con- 
sequence they positively refused to assist him. Though he had 
travelled nine successive days, almost without rest, he could not be 
prevailed upon to withdraw from the agreeable scene of a ball-room, 
in which he joined us, until a late hour. 

On the 10th, the rain having ceased, the observations for ascer- 
taining the dip of the needle were repeated ; and the results, com- 
pared with the former ones, gave a mean of 74° 33' 20". Nearly 
the same differences were remarked in reversing the face of the in- 
strument.as before. An attempt was also made to ascertain the 
magnetic force, but the wind blew too strong for procuring the 
observation to any degree of accuracy. 

The fineness of the following day induced us to set up the different 
instruments for examination, and to try how nearly the observations 
made by each of them would agree; but a squall passed over just 
before noon, accompanied by heavy rain, and the hoped-for favour- 
able opportunity was entirely lost. In the intervals between the 
observations, and at every opportunity, my companions were occupied 
in those pursuits to which their attention had been more particularly 
directed in my instructions. Whilst Dr. Richardson was collecting 
and examining the various specimens of marine plants, of which 
these islands furnish an abundant and diversified supply, Mr. Back 
and Mr. Hood took views and sketches of the surrounding scenery, 
which is extremely picturesque in many parts, and wants only the 


6 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


addition of trees to make it beautiful. The hills present the bold 
character of rugged sterility, whilst the valleys, at this season, are 
clothed with luxuriant verdure. | 

_It.was not till the 14th, that, by appointment, the boatmen were 
to assemble at the house of Mr. Geddes, to engage to accompany 
the expedition. Several persons collected, but to my great mortifi- 
cation, I found they were all so strongly possessed with the fearful 
apprehension, either that great danger would attend the service, 
or that we should carry them further than they would agree to go, 
that not a single man would engage with us; some of them, how- 
ever, said they would consider the subject, and give me an answer on 
the following day. This indecisive conduct was extremely annoying 
to me, especially as the next evening was fixed for the departure of 
the ships. | 

At the appointed time on the following morning four men only 
presented themselves, and these, after much hesitation, engaged to 
accompany the expedition to Fort Chepewyan, if they should be 
required so far. ‘The bowmen and steersmen were to receive forty 
pounds wages annually, and the middle men thirty-five pounds. 
They stipulated to be sent back to the Orkney Islands, free of 
expense, and to receive their pay until the time of arrival. Only 
these few men could be procured, although our requisition had been 
sent to almost every island, even as far as the northernmost point of 
Ronaldsha. I was much amused with the extreme caution these 
men used before they would sign the agreement; they minutely 
scanned all our intentions, weighed every circumstance, looked nar- 
rowly into the plan of our route, and still more circumspectly to 
the prospect of return. Such caution on the part of the northern 
mariners forms a singular contrast with the ready and thoughtless 
manner in which an English seaman enters upon any enterprise, 
however hazardous, without inquiring, or desirmg to know, where 
he is going, or what he 1s going about. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 7 


_ The brig Harmony, belonging to the Moravian Missionary Society, 


and bound to their settlement at Nain, on the coast of Labrador, 


was lying at anchor. With the view of collecting some Esquimaux 
words and sentences, or gaining any information respecting the 
manners and habits of that people, Doctor Richardson and myself 
paid her a visit. We found the passengers, who were going out as 
Missionaries, extremely disposed to communicate; but as they only 
spoke the German and Esquimaux languages, of which we were 
ignorant, our conversation was necessarily much confined: by the 
aid, however, of an Esquimaux and German Dictionary, some few 
words were collected, which we considered might be useful. There 
were on board a very interesting girl, and a young man, who were 
natives of Disco, in Old Greenland; both of them had fair com- 
plexions, rather handsome features, and a lively manner; the former 
was going to be married to a resident Missionary, and the latter to 
officiate in that character. The commander of the vessel gave me 
a translation of the Gospel of St. John in the Esquimaux language, 
printed by the Moravian Society in London. 

June 16.—The wind being unfavourable for sailing, I went on 
shore with Dr. Richardson, and took several lunar observations 
at the place of our former residence. The result obtained was, 
latitude 58° 56’ 56" N., longitude 3° 28’ 28" W., variation 27° 50’ W.; 
dip of the magnetic needle, 74° 33' 20’. In the afternoon the 
wind changed in a squall some points towards the north, and 
the Prince of Wales made the preparatory signal for sea. At 
three P.M. the ships weighed, an hour too early for the tide; 
as soon as this served we entered into the passage between Hoy 
and Pomona, and had to beat through against a very heavy swell, 
which the meeting of a weather tide and a strong breeze had 
oceasioned. 

Some dangerous rocks lie near the Pomona shore, and on this side 
also the tide appeared to run with the greatest strength. On clearing 


3: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the outward projecting points of Hoy and Pomona, we entered at 
once into the Atlantic, and commenced our voyage to Hudson’s Bay— 
having the Eddystone, Wear, and Harmony Missionary brig in 
company. 

The comparisons of the chronometers this day indicated that 
Arnold’s Nos. 2148 and 2147, had slightly changed their rates since 
they had been brought on board ; fortunately the rate of the former 
seems to have increased nearly in the same ratio as the other has lost, 
and the mean longitude will not be materially. affected. 

Being now fairly launched into the Atlantic, I issued a general 
memorandum for the guidance of the officers, during the prosecution 
of the service on which we were engaged, and communicated to them 
the several points of information that were expected from us by my 
instructions. I also furnished them with copies of the signals, which 
had been agreed upon between Lieutenant Parry and myself, to be 
used in the event of our reaching the northern coast of i 
and falling in with each other. 

At the end of the month of June, our progress was found to have 
been extremely slow, owing to a determined N.W. wind and much 
sea. We had numerous birds hovering round the ship; principally 
fulmars (procellaria glacialis,) and shearwaters, (procellaria puffinus, ) 
and not unfrequently saw shoals of grampusses sporting about, which 
the Greenland seamen term finners from their large dorsal fin. Some 
porpoises occasionally appeared, and whenever they did, the crew 
were sanguine in their expectation of having a speedy change in the 
wind, which had been so vexatiously contrary, but they were disap- 
pointed in every instance. | 

Thursday, July 1.—The month of July set in more Pavourallife f 
and, aided by fresh breezes, we advanced rapidly to the westward, 
attended daily by numerous fulmars and shearwaters. The Mis- 
sionary brig had parted company on the 22d of June. We passed 
directly over that part of the ocean where the “Sunken Land of 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 9 


Buss” is laid down in the old, and continued in the Admiralty 
charts. Mr. Bell, the commander of the Eddystone, informed me, 
that the pilot, who brought his ship down the Thames, told him that 
he had gained soundings in twelve feet somewhere hereabout ; and 
iI am rather inclined to attribute the very unusual and cross sea we 
had in this neighbourhood, to the existence of a bank, than to the 
effect of a gale of wind which we had just before experienced ; and I 
cannot but regret that the commander of the ship did not try for 
soundings at frequent intervals. | 

By the 25th July we had opened the entrance of Davis’ Straits, and 
in the afternoon we spoke the Andrew Marvel, bound to England 
with a cargo of fourteen fish. The master informed us that the ice 
had been heavier this season in Davis Straits than he had ever recol- 
lected, and that it lay particularly close to the westward, being con- 
nected with the shore to the northward of Resolution Island, and 
extending from thence within a short distance of the Greenland 
coast; that whales had been abundant, but the ice so extremely 
cross, that few could be killed. His ship, as well as'several others, 
had suffered material injury, and two vessels had been entirely crushed 
between vast masses of ice in latitude 74° 40 N., but the crews 
were saved. We inquired anxiously, but in vain, for intelligence 
respecting Lieutenant Parry, and the ships under his command; but 
‘as hé mentioned that the wind had been blowing strong from the 
northward for some time, which would, probably, have cleared Baffin’s 
Bay of ice, we were disposed to hope favourably of his progress. _ 
The clouds assumed so much the appearance of icebergs this 
evening as to deceive most of the passengers and crew; but their 
imaginations had been excited by the intelligence we had received 
from the Andrew Marvel, that she had only parted from a cluster of 
them two days previous to our meeting. 
On the 27th, being in latitude 57° 44°21" N., longitude 47° 31’ 14 
W., and the weather calm, we tried for soundings but did not reach 

c 


10 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the bottom. The register thermometer was attached to the line just 
above the lead, and is supposed to have descended six hundred. 


and fifty fathoms. A well-corked bottle was also fastened to the line, 


two hundred fathoms above the lead, and went down four hundred 
and fifty fathoms. The change in temperature, shewn by the register 
thermometer during the descent, was from 52° to 40.5’; and it 
stood at the latter point, when taken out of the tin case. The tem- 
perature of the water brought up in the bottle was 41°, being half a 
degree higher at four hundred and fifty than at six hundred and fifty 


fathoms, and four degrees colder than the water at the surface which 


was then at 45°, whilst that of the air was 46°. This experiment, in 
shewing the water to be colder at a great depth than at the surface, 
and in proportion to the increase of the descent, coincides with the 
observations of Captain Ross and Lieutenant Parry, on their late 
voyage to these seas, but is contrary to the results obtained by 
Captain Buchan and myself; on our recent voyage to the north, 
between Spitzbergen and Greenland, in which sea we invariably 
found the water brought from mul great depth to be warmer than 
that at the surface. 

On the 28th we tacked to ahoitl an extensive stream of sailing ice. 
The temperature of the water fell to 39.5°, when we were near it, 
but was at 41°, when at the distance of half a mile. The thermo- 
meter in the air remained steadily at 40°. Thus the proximity of 
this ice was not so decidedly indicated by the decrease of the tem- 
perature of either the air or water, as I have before witnessed, which 
_ was probably owing to the recent arrival of the stream at this point, 
and its passing at too quick a rate for the effectual diffusion of its 
chilling influence beyond a short distance. Still the decrease in both 
cases was sufficient to have given timely warning for a ship’s per- 
forming any evolution that would have prevented the coming in 
contact with it, had the thickness of the weather panda’ a distant 
view of the danger. , 


OF THE POLAR SEA. Il 


The approach to ice would be more evidently pointed out. in the 
Atlantic, or wherever the surface is not so continually chilled by the 
passing and the melting of ice as in this sea; and: I should. strongly 
recommend a strict hourly attention to the thermometrical, state. of 
the water at the surface, in all parts where ships are exposed to the 
dangerous concussion of sailing icebergs, as a principal means of 
security. 

The following day our ship came near another stream of ice, and 
the approach to it was indicated by a decrease of the temperature of 
the water at the surface from 44° to 42°. -A- small pine-tree was 
picked up much shattered by the ice. In the afternoon of the 30th, a 
very dense fog came on; and, about six P.M., when sailing before a 
fresh breeze, we were suddenly involved in a heavy stream of ice. 
Considerable difficulty was experienced in steering through the 
narrow channels between the different masses in this foggy weather, 
and the ship received several severe blows. 

The water, as usual in the centre of the stream, was quite smooth, 
but we heard the waves beating violently against the outer edge of 
the ice. There was some earthy matter on several of the pieces, and 
the whole body bore the appearance of recent separation from the 
land. In the space of two hours we again got into the open sea, 
but had left our two consorts far behind; but they followed our track 
by the guns we discharged. The temperature of the surface water 
was 35° when amongst the ice, 38° when just clear of it, and 41.5° at 
two miles distant. 

On the 3d of August, when in latitude 59° 58’ N., longitude 
59° 53’ W., we first fellin with large icebergs ; and in the evening 
were encompassed by several of considerable magnitude, which 
obliged us to tack the ship in order to prevent our getting entangled 
amongst them. The estimated distance from the nearest part of the 
Labrador coast was then eighty-eight miles ; here we tried for sound- 
ings, without gaining the bottom. The ship passed through some 

c 2 


12 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


strong riplings, which evidently indicated a current, but its direction 
was not ascertained. We found, however, by the recent observa- 
tions, that the ship had been set daily to the southward, since we 
had opened Davis’ Straits. The variation of the compass was ob- 
served to be 52° 41° W. | 

At nine P.M., brilliant coruscations of the Aurora Borealis ap- 
peared, of a pale ochre colour, with a slight tinge of red, in an 
arched form, crossing the zenith from N.W. to 8.E., but afterwards 
they assumed various shapes, and had a rapid motion. 

On the 5th of August, a party of the officers endeavoured to get on 
one of the larger icebergs, but ineffectually, owing to the steepness 
and smoothness of its sides, and the swell produced by its undu- 
lating motion. This was one of the largest we saw, and Mr. Hood 
ascertained its height to be one hundred and forty-nine feet; but 
these masses of ice are frequently magnified to an immense size, 
through the illusive medium of a hazy atmosphere, and on this ac- 
count their dimensions have often been exaggerated by voyagers. 

~In the morning of the 7th, the Island of Resolution was indis- 
tinctly seen through the haze, but was soon afterwards entirely 
hidden by a very dense fog. The favourable breeze subsided into a 
perfect calm, and left the ship surrounded by loose ice. At this time 
the Eddystone was perceived to be driving with rapidity towards some 
of the larger masses; the stern boats of this ship and of the Wear 
were despatched to assist in towing her clear of them. At ten, a 
momentary clearness presented the land distinctly at the distance of 
two miles; the ship was quite unmanageable, and under the sole 
governance of the currents, which ran in strong eddies between the 
masses of ice. Our consorts were also seen, the Wear being within 
hail, and the Eddystone at a short distance from us. ‘Two attempts 
were ineffectually made to gain soundings, and the extreme density of 
the fog precluded us from any other means of ascertaining the direc- 
tion in which we were driving until half past twelve, when we had the 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 13 


alarming view of a barren rugged shore within a few yards, towering 
over the mast-heads. Almost instantly afterwards the ship struck 
violently on a point of rocks, projecting from the island; and the 
ship’s side was brought so near to the shore, that poles were pre- 
pared to push her off. This blow displaced the rudder, and raised 
it several inches, but it fortunately had been previously confined by 
tackles. A gentle swell freed the ship from this perilous situation, 
but the current hurried us along in contact with the rocky shore, 
and the prospect was most alarming. On the outward bow was 
perceived a rugged and precipitous cliff whose summit was hid in 
the fog, and the vessel’s head was pointed towards the bottom of a 
small bay, into which we were rapidly driving. There now seemed 
to be no probability of escaping shipwreck, being without wind, 
and having the rudder in its present useless state; the only assist- 
ance was that of a boat employed in towing, which had been placed 
in the water between the ship and the shore, at the imminent risk 
of its being crushed. The ship again struck in passing over a ledge 
of rocks, and happily the blow replaced the rudder, which enabled 
us to take advantage of a light breeze, and to direct the ship’s head 
without the projecting cliff But the breeze was only momentary, 
and the ship was a third time driven on shore on the rocky termina- 
tion of the cliff Here we remained stationary for some seconds, 
and with little prospect of being removed from this perilous  situa- 
tion; but we were once more extricated by the swell from this ledge 
also, and carried still farther along the shore. The coast became 
now more rugged, and our view of it was terminated by another 
high projecting point on the starboard bow. Happily, before we had 
reached it, a light breeze enabled us to turn the ship’s head to 
seaward, and we had the gratification to find, when the sails were 
trimmed, that she drew off the shore. We had made but little 
progress, however, when she was violently forced by the current 
against a large iceberg lying aground, 


14 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


' - Our prospect was now more alarming than at any preceding period; 
and it would be difficult, for me to portray the anxiety and dismay 
depicted on the countenances of the female passengers and children, 
who were rushing on deck in spite of the endeavours of the officers to 
keep them below, out of the danger which was apprehended if the 
masts should be carried away. After the first concussion the ship 
was driven along the steep and rugged side of this iceberg, with such 
amazing rapidity, that the destruction of the masts seemed. inevi- 
table, and every one expected we should again be forced on the rocks 
in the most. disabled state; but we providentially escaped this pe- 
rilous result, which must have been. decisive. | 

The dense fog now cleared away for-a short time, and we disco- 
vered: the Eddystone close to some rocks, having three boats em- 
ployed in towing; but the Wear was not visible. 

Our ship received water very fast; the pumps were instantly 
manned and kept in continual use, and signals of distress were made 
to the Eddystone, whose commander promptly came on board, and 
then ordered to our assistance his carpenter and all the men he could. 
spare, together with the carpenter and boat’s crew of the Wear, who 
had. gone on board the Eddystone in the morning, and were prevented 
from returning to their own vessel by the fog. As the wind was in- 
creasing, and the sky appeared very unsettled, it was determined the 
Eddystone should take the ship in tow, that the undivided attention 
of the passengers and crew might be directed to pumping, and clear- 
ing the holds to examine whether there was a possibility of stopping 
the leak. We soon had reason to suppose the principal injury had 
been received from a blow near the stern-post, and, after cutting away 
part of the ceiling, the carpenters endeavoured to stop the rushing in 
of the water, by forcing oakum between the timbers ; but this had not 
the desired effect, and the leak, in spite of all our efforts at the pumps, 
increased so much, that parties of the officers and passengers were sta- 
tioned to bail out the water in buckets at different parts of the hold. 


OF THE’ POLAR SEA. — 


A heavy gale came on, blowing from the land, as the night advanced ; 
the sails were split, the ship was encompassed by heavy ice, and, in 
forcing through a closely-connected stream, the tow-rope broke, and 
obliged us to take a portion of the seamen from the pumps, and ap- 
point them to the management of the ship. 

Fatigue, indeed, had caused us to relax in our exertions at the 
pumps during a part of the night of the 8th, and on the following 
morning upwards of five feet water was found in the well. Renewed 
exertions were now put forth by every person, and before eight A.M. 
the water was so much reduced as to enable the carpenters to get at 
other defective places: but the remedies they could apply were in- 
sufficient to repress the water from rushing in, and our labours could 
but just keep the ship in the same state throughout the day, until 
six P.M.; when the strength of every one began to fail, the expe- 
dient of thrusting in felt, as well as oakum, was resorted to, and a 
plank nailed over all. After this operation a perceptible diminution 
in the water was made, and being encouraged by the change, we put 
forth our utmost exertion in bailing and pumping, and before night, 
to our infinite joy, the leak was so overpowered that the pumps were 
only required to be used at intervals of ten minutes. A sail, covered 
with every substance that could be carried into the leaks by the 
pressure of the water, was drawn under the quarter of the ship, and 
secured by ropes on each side. 

As a matter of precaution in the event of having to abandon the 
ship, which was for some time doubtful, the elderly women and 
children were removed to the Eddystone when the wind was mode- 
rate this afternoon, but the young women remained to assist at the 
pumps, and their services were highly valuable, both for their per- 
‘sonal labour, and for the phtaumasemes their example and perse- 
verance gave to the men. 

_At day-light, on the 9th, every eye was anxiously cast around the 
horizon in search of the Wear, but in vain; and the recollection of 


16 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


our own recent peril caused us to entertain considerable apprehensions 
for her safety. This anxiety quickened our efforts to exchange our 
shattered sails for new ones, that the ship might be got, as speedily 
as possible, near to the land, which was but just in sight, and a care- 
ful search be made for her along the coast. We were rejoiced to find 
that our leak did not increase by carrying sail, and we ventured in 
the evening to remove the sail which had been placed under the 
part where the injury had been received, as it greatly impeded our 
advance. 

We passed many icebergs on the 10th, and in the evening we 
tacked from a level field of ice, which extended northward as far as 
the eye could reach. Our leak remained in the same state; the 
pumps discharged in three minutes the quantity of water which had 
been received in fifteen. 

The ship could not be got near to the land before the afternoon of 
the 11th. At four P.M. we hove to, opposite to, and about five miles 
distant from, the spot on which we had first struck on Saturday. Every 
glass was directed along the shore (as they had been throughout the 
day), to discover any trace of our absent consort; but, as none was seen, 
our solicitude respecting her was much increased, and we feared the 
crew might be wrecked on this inhospitable shore. Guns were fre- 
quently fired to apprize any who might be near of our approach ; but, 
as no one appeared, and no signal was returned, and the loose ice was 
setting down towards the ship, we bore up to proceed to the next ap- 
pointed rendezvous. At eight P.M. we were abreast of the S.W. 
end of the island called Cape Resolution, which is a low point, but 
indicated at a distance by a lofty round backed hill that rises above 
it. We entered Hudson’s Straits soon afterwards. 

The coast of Resolution Island should be approached with caution, 
as the tides appear to be strong and uncertain in their course. Some 
dangerous rocks lie above and below the water’s edge, at the distance 
of five or six miles from East Bluff, bearing §. 32° E. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. — 


_ August 12.—Having had afresh gale through the night, we reached 
Saddleback Island by noon—the place. of rendezvous; and looked 
anxiously but in vain for the Wear. Several guns were fired, supposing 
she might be hid from our view by the land; but, as she did. not ap- 
pear, Captain Davidson, having remained two hours, deemed further 
delay inexpedient, and bore up to keep the advantage of the fair 
wind. ‘The outline of this island is rugged; the hummock on its 
northern extremity appeared to me to resemble a decayed martello 
tower more than a saddle. 

Azimuths were obtained this evening that gave the variation 
58° 45’ W., which is greater than is laid down in the charts, or than 
the officers of the Hudson’s Bay ships have been accustomed to’allow. 
We arrived abreast of the Upper Savage Island early in the morning, 
and as the breeze was moderate, the ship was steered as near to the 
shore as the wind would permit, to give the Esquimaux inhabitants 
an opportunity of coming off to barter, which they soon embraced. 

Their shouts at a distance intimated’ their approach: some time 


before we descried the canoes paddling towards us; the headmost’ of 


them reached us at. eleven; these were quickly followed by others, 
and before noon about forty canoes, each holding one man, were 
assembled around the two ships. In the afternoon, when we ap- 
proached nearer to the shore, five or six larger Guess containing the 
women and children, came up. | 

The Esquimaux immediately evinced their desire to barter, and dis- 
played no small cunning in making their bargains, taking care not to 
exhibit too many articles at first. Their principal commodities were, 
oil, sea-horse teeth, whalebone, seal-skin dresses, caps and boots, deer- 
skins and horns, and models of their canoes; and they received in ex- 
change small saws, knives, nails, tin-kettles, and needles, It was pleas- 
ing to behold the exultation, and to hear the shouts of the whole party, 
when an acquisition was made by any one; and not a little ludicrous 
to behold the eagerness with which the fortunate person licked éach 


D 


18 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


article with his tongue, on receiving it, as a finish to the bargain, and 
an act of appropriation. ‘They in no instance omitted this strange 
practice, however small the article; the needles even passed indi- 
vidually through the ceremony. The women brought imitations of 
men, women, animals, and birds, carved with labour and ingenuity 
out of sea-horse teeth. The dresses, and the figures of the animals, 
were not badly executed, but there was no attempt at the delinea- 
tion of the countenances; and most of the figures were without 
eyes, ears, and fingers, the execution of which would, perhaps, 
have required more delicate instruments than they possess. The 
men set most value on saws; kuttee-swa-bak, the name by which 
they distinguish them, was a constant cry. Knives were held next 
in estimation. An old sword was bartered from the Eddystone, and 
{ shall long remember the universal burst of joy on the happy man’s 
receiving it. It was delightful to witness the general interest ex- 
cited by individual acquisitions. ‘There was no desire shewn by any 
one to over-reach his neighbour, or to press towards any part of the 
ship where a bargain was making, until the person in possession of 
the place had completed his exchange and removed; and, if any ar- 
ticle happened to be demanded from the outer canoes, the men 
nearest assisted willingly in passing the thing across. Supposing the 
party to belong to one tribe, the total number of the tribe must 
exceed two hundred persons, as there were, probably, one hundred 
and fifty around the ships, and few of these were elderly persons or 
male children. 

Their faces were broad and flat, the eyes were small. The men 
were in general stout. Some of the younger women and the children 
had rather pleasing countenances, but the difference between these 
and the more aged of that sex, bore strong testimony to the effects 
which a few years produce in this ungenial climate. Most of the 
party had sore eyes, all of them appeared of a plethoric habit of 
body; several were observed bleeding at the nose during their stay 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 19 


near the ship. ‘The men’s dresses consisted of a jacket of seal-skin, 
the trowsers of bear-skin, and several had caps of the white fox-skin. 
The female dresses were made of the same materials, but differently 
shaped, having a hood in which the infants were carried. . We 
thought their manner very lively and agreeable. They were fond of 
mimicking our speech and gestures; but nothing afforded them 
greater amusement than when we attempted to retaliate by pro- 
nouncing any of their words. 

The canoes were of seal-skin, and similar in every respect to those 
used by the Esquimaux in Greenland; they were generally new and 
very complete in their appointments. Those appropriated to the 
women are of ruder construction, and only calculated for fine wea- 
ther; they are, however, useful vessels, being capable of containing 
twenty persons with their luggage. An elderly man officiates as 
steersman, and the women paddle, but they have also a mast which 
carries a sail, made of dressed whale-gut. 

When the women had disposed of all their articles of trade they 
resorted to entreaty; and the putting in practice of many enticing 
gestures was managed with so much address, as to procure them pre- 
sents of a variety of beads, needles, and other articles in great demand 
among females. 

It is probable these Esquimaux go from this shore to some part of 
Labrador to pass the winter, as parties of them have been frequently 
seen by the homeward-bound .Hudson’s Bay ships in the act of 
crossing the Strait. 

They appear to speak the same language as the tribe of Waal 
maux, who reside near to the Moravian settlements in Labrador ; for 
we perceived they used several of the words which had been given to 
us by the Missionaries at Stromness. 

Towards evening, the Captain, being desirous to get rid of his 
visitors, took an effectual method by tacking from the shore; our 
friends then departed apparently in high glee at the harvest they had 


D 2 


20 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


reaped. They paddled away very swiftly, and would, doubtless, soon 
reach the shore though it was distant ten or twelve miles. 

Not having encountered any of the ice, which usually arrests the 
progress of ships in their outward passage through the Straits, and 
being consequently deprived of the usual means of replenishing our 
stock of water, which had become short, the Captain resolved on 
going to the coast of Labrador for a supply. Dr. Richardson and I 
gladly embraced this opportunity to land, and examine this part of 
the coast. [ was also desirous to observe the variation on shore, as 
the azimuths which had been taken on board both ships since our en- 
trance into the Straits, had shewn a greater amount than we had 
been led to expect; but, unluckily, the sun became obscured. The 
beach consisted of large rolled stones of gneiss and sienite, amongst 
which many pieces of ice had grounded, and it was with difficulty 
that we effected a landing in a small cove under a steep cliff. These 
stones were worn perfectly smooth; neither in the interstices, nor 
at the bottom of the water, which was very clear, were there any 
vestiges of sea-weed. | 

The cliff was from forty to fifty feet high and quite perpendicular, 
and had at its base a small slip of soil formed of the debris of a bed 
of clay-slate. From this narrow spot Dr. Richardson collected spe- 
cimens of thirty different species of plants; and we were about to 
scramble up a shelving part of the rock, and go into the interior, 
when we perceived the signal of recal, which the master had caused 
to be made, in consequence of a sudden change in the appearance of 
the weather. | | 
- On the evening of the 19th, we passed Digges’ Islands, the termi- 
nation of Hudson’s Strait. Here the Eddystone parted company, 
being bound to Moose Factory, at the bottom of the Bay. A strong 
north wind came on, which prevented our getting round the north 
end of Mansfield ; and, as it continued to blow with equal strength 
for the next five days, we were most vexatiously detained in beating 


OF THE POLAR SEA. Al 


along the Labrador coast, and near the dangerous chain of islands, 
the Sleepers, which are said to extend from the latitude of 60° 10’ 
to 57° 00 N. The press of sail, which of necessity we carried, 
caused the leak to increase, and the pumps were kept in constant 
use. 

A. favouring wind at length enabled us, on the 25th, to shape our 
course across Hudson’s Bay. Nothing worthy of remark occurred 
during this passage, except the rapid decrease in the variation of the 
magnetic needle, which will be seen in a subsequent table, together 
with the positions of the different points in Hudson’s Straits; near 
to which we had the opportunity of getting observations. The few 
remarks respecting the appearance of the land, which we were able 
to make in our quick passage through these Straits, were transmitted 
‘to the Admiralty; but, as they will not be interesting to the general 
reader, and may not be sufficiently accurate for the guidance of the 
Navigator, they are omitted in this narrative. 

On the 28th we discovered the land to the southward of Cape Tat- 
‘nam, which is so extremely low, that the tops of the trees were first 
discerned ; the soundings at the time were seventeen fathoms, which 
gradually decreased to five as the shore was approached. Cape Tatnam 
is not otherwise remarkable than as being the point from which the 
coast inclines rather more to the westward towards York Factory. 

The opening of the morning of the 30th presented’ to our view 
the anchorage at York Flats, and the gratifying sight of a vessel at 
anchor, which we recognised, after an anxious examination, to be the 
Wear. A strong breeze blowing from the direction of the Flats, 
caused the water to be more shallow than usual on the sandy bar, 
which lies on the seaward side of the anchorage, and we could 
not get over it before two P.M., when the tide was nearly at its 
height. 

Immediately after our arrival Mr. Williams, the Governor of the 
Hudson’s Bay Company’s posts, came on board, accompanied by the 


22 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Commander of the Wear. The pleasure we felt in welcoming the 
latter gentleman can easily be imagined, when it is considered what 
reason we had for the apprehension that he and his crew had been 
numbered with the dead. We learnt that one of the larger masses 
of ice had providentially drifted between the vessel’s side and the 
rocks just at the time he expected to strike, to which he secured her 
until a breeze sprang up, and enabled him to pursue his voyage. 

The Governor acquainted me that he had received information 
from the Committee of the Hudson’s Bay Company of the equip- 
ment of the Expedition, and that the officers would come out in the 
first ship. In the evening Dr. Richardson, Mr. Hood, and I, aceom- 
panied the Governor to York Factory, which we reached after dark ; 
it is distant from the Flats seven miles. arly next morning the 
Governor conferred the honour of a salute on the members of the 
Expedition. 

Having communicated to the Governor the objects of the Expe 
dition, and that I had been directed to consult with him and the 
senior servants of the Company as to the best mode of proceeding 
towards the execution of the service, I was gratified by his assurance 
that his instructions from the Committee directed that every possible 
assistance should be given to forward our progress, and that he should 
feel peculiar pleasure in performing this part of his duty. He intro- 
duced me at once to Messrs. Charles, Swaine, and Snodie, masters 
of districts, who, from long residence in the country, were per- 
fectly acquainted with the different modes of travelling, and the ob- 
structions which might be anticipated. At the desire of these gentle- 
men, I drew up a series of questions on the points on which we re- 
quired information ; to which they had the kindness to return very 
explicit and satisfactory answers two days afterwards; and on re- 
ceiving them I requested the Governor to favour me with his senti- 
ments on the same subject in writing, which he delivered to me on 
the following day. | 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 93 


Having learned that Messrs. Shaw, M‘Tavish, and several other 
partners of the N.W. Company. were under detention at this place, 
we took the earliest opportunity of visiting them ; when, having pre- 
sented the general circular, and other introductory letters, with 
which I had been furnished by their agent Mr. Simon M‘Gillivray, 


we received from them the most friendly and full assurance of the 


cordial endeavours of the wintering partners of their Company to pro- 
mote the interests of the Expedition, The knowledge we had now 
gained of the state of the violent commercial opposition existing in 
the country, rendered this assurance highly gratifying; and these 
gentlemen added to the obligation by freely communicating the in- 
formation respecting the interior of the country, which their intelli- 
gence and long residence so fully qualified them to give. 

I deemed it expedient to issue a memorandum to the officers of 
the Expedition, strictly prohibiting any interference whatever in the 
existing quarrels, or any that might arise, between the two Com- 
panies; and on presenting it to the principals of both the parties, 
they expressed their satisfaction at the step I had taken. 

The opinions of all the gentlemen were so decidedly in favour of 
the route by Cumberland House, and through the chain of posts to 
the Great Slave Lake, that I determined on pursuing it, and imme- 
diately communicated my intention to the Governor, with a request 
that he would furnish me with the means of conveyance for the 
party as speedily as possible. ; 

It was suggested in my instructions, that we might probably 
procure a schooner at this place, to proceed north as far as Wager 
Bay; but the vessel alluded to was lymg at Moose Factory, com- 
pletely out of repair ; independently of which, the route directly to 
the northward, was rendered. impracticable by the impossibility of 
procuring hunters and guides upon the coast. 

_ I found that as the Esquimaux inhabitants had left Churchill a 
month previous to our arrival, no interpreter from: that quarter 


QA, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


could be procured before their return in the following spring. The 
Governor, however, undertook to forward to us. next season the 
only one amongst them who understood English, if he could be 
induced to go. 

The Governor selected one of the largest of the Company’s boats 
for our use on the journey, and directed the carpenters to commence 
refitting it immediately ; but he was only able to furnish us with a 
steersman ; and we were obliged to make up the rest of the crew 
with the boatmen brought from Stromness, and our two attendants. 

York Factory, the principal depét of the Hudson’s Bay Company, 
stands on the west bank of Hayes River, about five miles above its 
mouth, on the marshy peninsula which separates the Hayes and 
Nelson rivers. The surrounding country is flat and swampy, and 
covered with willows, poplars, larch, spruce, and birch trees, but the 
requisition for fuel has expended all the wood in the vicinity of the 
fort, and the residents have now to send a considerable distance for 
this necessary material. The soil is alluvial clay and contains im- 
bedded rolled stones. Though the bank of the river is elevated 
about twenty feet, it is frequently overflown by the spring floods, 
and large portions of it are annually carried away by the disruption 
of the ice; by these portions grounding in the stream, several muddy 
islands have been formed. These interruptions, together with the 
_various collections of stones that are hid at high water render the 
navigation of the river difficult ; but vessels of two hundred tons 
burthen may be brought through the proper channels as high as the 
Factory. | 

The principal buildings are placed in the form of a square, having 
an octagonal court in the centre; they are two stories in height, and 
have flat roofs covered with lead. The officers dwell in one portion 
of this square, and in the other parts the articles of merchandise are 
kept: the workshops, storehouses for the furs, and the servants’ 
houses, are ranged on the outside of the square, and the whole is 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 25 


surrounded by a stockade twenty feet high. A. platform is laid from 
the house to the pier on the bank for the convenience of transporting 
the stones and. furs, which is the only promenade the residents have 
on this-marshy spot during the summer season. The few Indians, 
who now frequent this éStablishment, belong to the Swampy Crees. 
There were several of them encamped on the outside of the stockade. 
Their tents were rudely constructed by tying twenty or thirty poles 
together at the top, and spreading them out at the base so as to form 
a cone; these were covered with dressed moose-skins. The fire is 
placed in the centre, and a hole is left for the escape of the smoke. 
The inmates had a squalid look, and were suffering under the com- 
bined afflictions of hooping-cough and measles; but even these mi- 
series did not keep them from an excessive indulgence in the use of 
spirits, which they unhappily can procure from the traders with too 
much facility; and they nightly serenaded us with their monotonous 
drunken songs. Their sickness, at this time, was particularly felt by 
the traders, this being the season of the year when the exertion of 
every hunter is required to procure their winter's stock of geese, 
which resort in immense flocks to the extensive flats in this neigh- 
bourhood. These birds, during the summer, retire far to the north, 
and breed in security ; but, when the approach of winter compels 
them to seek a more southern climate, they generally alight on the 
marshes of this bay, and fatten there for three weeks or a month, 
before they take their final departure from the country. They also 
make a short halt at the same spots in their progress northwards in 
the spring. Their arrival is welcomed with joy, and the period of 
the goose hunt is one of the most plentiful seasons of the year. The 
ducks frequent the swamps all the summer. 

The weather was extremely unfavourable for celestial observations 
during our stay, and it was only by watching the momentary appear- 
ances of the sun, that we were enabled to obtain fresh rates for the 
chronometers, and allow for their errors from Greenwich time. The 


E 


26 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


dip of the needle was observed to be 79° 29’ 07’, and the difference 
produced by reversing the face of the instrument was 11°3 40". A 
succession of fresh breezes prevented our ascertaining the intensity 
of the magnetic force. The position of York Factory, by our ob- 
servations, is in latitude 57° 00’ 03’ N., longitude 92° 26 W. The 
variation of the compass 6° 00' 21" E. 


” 


OF THE POLAR SEA. Q7 


CHAPTER IL. 


Passage up Hayes’, Steel, and Hill Rivers—Cross Swampy Lake—Jack River—Knee Lake 
and Magnetic Islet-—Trout River—Holey Lake—Weepinapannis River—Windy Lake— 
White-Fall Lake and River—Echemamis and Lea Rivers—Play-Green Lakes—Lake Wi- 
nipeg—River Saskatchawan—Cross, Cedar, and Pine-Island Lakes—Cumberland House. 


1819. 


September. On the 9th of September, our boat: being completed, 
arrangements were made for our departure as soon as the tide, 
should serve. But, when the stores were brought down to the beach 
it was found that the boat would not contain them all. ~The whole, 
therefore, of the bacon, and part of the flour, rice, tobacco, and ammuni- 
tion, were returned into the store. ‘The bacon was too bulky an article 
to be forwarded under any circumstances ; but the Governor under- 
took to forward the rest next season. In making the selection of ar- 
ticles to carry with us, I was guided by the judgment of Governor Wil- 
liams, who assured me that tobacco, ammunition, and spirits, could be 
procured in the interior, otherwise I should have been very unwilling 
to have left these essential articles behind. We embarked at noon, and 
were honoured with a salute of eight guns and three cheers from the 
Governor and all the inmates of the fort, assembled to witness our 
departure. We gratefully returned their cheers, and then made sail, 
much delighted at having now commenced our voyage into the interior 
of America. The wind and tide failing us at the distance of six miles 
above the Factory, and the current bemg too rapid for using oars to 
advantage, the crew had to commence tracking, or dragging the boat 


by a line, to which they were harnessed. This‘operation is extremely 


laborious in these rivers. Our men were obliged to walk along the 
steep declivity of a high bank, rendered at this season. soft and. slip- 


E 2 


28 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


pery by frequent rains, and their progress was often further impeded 
by fallen trees which, having slipped from the verge of the thick wood 
above, hung on the face of the bank in a great variety of directions. 
Notwithstanding these obstacles, however, we advanced at the rate 
of two miles an hour, one-half of the crew relieving the other at in- 
tervals of an hour and a half. The banks of the river, and its islands, 
composed of alluvial soil, are well covered with pines, larches, pop- 
lars, and willows. The breadth of the stream some distance above 
the Factory is about half a mile, and its depth during this day’s 
voyage varied from three to nine feet. 

At sunset we landed, and pitched the tent for the night, having 
made a progress of twelve miles. A large fire was quickly kindled, 
supper speedily prepared, and as readily despatched, when we retired 
with our buffalo robes on, and enjoyed a night of sound repose. 

It may here be stated that the survey of the river was made by 
taking the bearings of every point with a pocket compass, estimating 
the distances, and making a connected eye-sketch of the whole. 
This part of the survey was allotted to Messrs. Back and Hood con- 
jointly : Mr. Hood also protracted the route every evening on a ruled 
map, after the courses and distances had been corrected by observa- 
tions for latitude and longitude, taken by myself as often as the wea- 
ther would allow. The extraordinary talent of this young officer in 
this line of service proved of the greatest advantage to the Expe- 
dition, and he continued to perform that duty until his lamented 
death, with a degree of zeal and accuracy that characterized all his 
pursuits. 

The next morning our camp was in motion at five A.M., and we 
soon afterwards embarked with the flattering accompaniment of a 
fair wind: it proved, however, too light to enable us to stem the 
stream, and we were obliged to resume the fatiguing operation of 
tracking, sometimes under cliffs so steep that the men could scarcely 
find a footing, and not unfrequently over spots rendered so miry, by 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 29 


the small streams that trickled from above, as to be almost impass- 
able. In the course of the day we passed the scene of a very me- 
lancholy accident. Some years ago, two families of Indians, induced 
by the flatness of a small beach, which lay betwixt the cliff and the 
river, chose it as the site of their encampment. They retired 
quietly to rest, not aware that the precipice, detached from the bank, 
and urged by an accumulation of water in the crevice behind, was 
tottering to its base. It fell during the night, and the whole party 
was buried under its ruins. 

The length of our voyage to-day was, in a direct line, sixteen 
miles and a quarter, on a S.S.W. course. We encamped soon after 
sunset, and the tent was scarcely pitched when it began to rain 
heavily, and continued to do so all night. 

Sixteen miles on the 11th, and five on the following morning, 
brought us to the commencement of Hayes’ River, which is formed 
by the confluence of the Shamattawa and Steel Rivers. Our 
observations place this spot in latitude 56° 22' 32" N., longitude 
93° 137° W. It is forty-eight miles and a half from York Factory, 
including the windings of the river. Steel River, through which our 
course lay, is about three hundred yards wide at its mouth; its 
banks have more elevation than those of Hayes’ River, but they 
shelve more gradually down to the stream, and afford a tolerably 
good towing path, which compensates, in some degree, for the 
rapids and frequent shoals that impede its navigation. We suc- 
ceeded in getting about ten miles above the mouth of the river, 
before the close of day compelled us to disembark. 

We made an effort, on the morning of the 13th, to stem the cur- 
rent under sail, but as the course of the river was very serpentine, 
we found that greater progress could be made by tracking. Steel 
River presents much beautiful scenery ; it winds through a narrow, 
but well-wooded, valley, which at every turn disclosed to us an 
agreeable variety of prospect, rendered more picturesque by the 


310 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


effect of the season on the foliage, now ready to drop from the 
trees. The light yellow of the fading poplars formed a fine contrast 
to the dark evergreen of the spruce, whilst the willows, of an inter- 
mediate hue, served to shade the two principal masses of colour into 
each other. The scene was occasionally enlivened by the bright 
purple tints of the dogwood, blended with the browner shades of 
the dwarf birch, and frequently intermixed with the gay yellow 
flowers of the shrubby cinquefoil: \ With all these charms, the scene 
appeared desolate from the want of the human species. The still- 
ness was so great, that even the twittering of the whiskey-johneesh, 
or cinereous crow, caused us to start. Our voyage to-day was sixteen 
miles on a S: W. course. 

Sept. 19.—We had much rain during the night, and also in the 
morning, which detained us in our encampment later than usual. 
We set out as soon as the weather cleared up, and in a short time 
arrived at the head of Steel River, where it is formed by the junction 
of Fox and Hill Rivers. These two rivers are nearly of equal 
width, but the latter is the most rapid. Mr. M‘Donald, on his way 
to Red River, ina small canoe, manned by two Indians, overtook us 
at this place. It may be mentioned as a proof of the dexterity of 
the Indians, and the skill with which they steal upon their game, 
that they had on the preceding day, with no other arms than a 
hatchet, killed two deer, a hawk, a curlew, and a sturgeon. Three 
of the Company’s boats joined us in the course of the morning, and 
we pursued our course up Hill Riverin company. The water in this 
river was so low, and the rapids so bad, that we were obliged several 
times, in the course of the day, to jump into the water, and. assist 
in lifting the boat over the large stones which impeded the naviga- 
tion. ‘The length of our voyage to-day was only six miles and three 
quarters. | 

The four boats commenced operations together at five o'clock the 
following morning; but our boat being overladen, we soon found that 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 3] 


we were unable to keep pace with the others ; and therefore proposed 
to the gentlemen in charge of the Company’s boats, that they should 
relieve us of part of our cargo. This they declined doing, under the 
plea of not having received orders to that. effect, notwithstanding 
that the circular, with which I was furnished by Governor Williams, 
strictly enjoined all the Company’s servants to afford us every assist- 
ance. In consequence of this refusal we dropt. behind, and our 
steersman, who was inexperienced, being thus deprived of the advan- 
tage of observing the route followed by the guide, who was in the 
foremost boat, frequently took a wrong channel. The tow-line broke 
twice, and the boat was. only prevented from going broadside down the 
stream, and breaking to pieces against the stones, by the officers and 
men leaping into the water, and holding her head to the current 
until the line could be carried again to the shore. It is but justice 
to say, that in these trying situations we received much assistance 
from Mr. Thomas Swayne, who with great kindness waited for us 
with the boat under his charge, at such places as he apprehended 
would be most difficult. to pass. We encamped. at sunset, completely 
jaded with toil. Our distance made good this day was twelve miles 
and a quarter. 

The labours of the 16th:commenced at half past five, and for some 
time the difficulty of getting the boats over the rapids was equal to 
what we experienced yesterday. Having passed a small brook, how- 
ever, termed Half-way Creek, the river became deeper, and although 
rapid, it was smooth enough to be named by our Orkney boatmen 
Siill-water. We were further relieved by the Company’s clerks con- 
senting to take a few boxes of our stores into their boats. Still we 
made only eleven miles in the course of the day. 

The banks of Hill River are higher, and have a more broken out- 
line, than those of Steel or Hayes’ Rivers. _ The cliffs of alluvial clay 
rose in some places to the height of eighty or ninety feet above the 
stream, and were surmounted by hills about two hundred feet high, 


32 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


but the thickness. of. the wood. prevented. us from seeing far beyond 
the mere banks’ of. the river. ~ ‘h 
September 17. — About. half past five in ie: morning we commenced 
tracking, and ‘soon. came to a ridge of rock which extended across the 
stream... From’ this’ place the boat was ‘dragged. up several. narrow 
rocky channels, until we came'to the Rock-Portage, where the stream, 
pent. in by a range. of small islands, forms several cascades. In as- 
cending the river, ‘the boats*with their cargoes are carried over one 
of the islands, but ‘in the descent they are shot down the most 
shelving of the cascades. Having performed the operations of car- 
rying, launching, and re- -stowing the cargo, we plied the oars for a 
short: distance and landed ata depét called Rock-House. Here we 
were informed that the rapids in the upper parts of Hill River were 
much worse and more numerous than those we had passed, particu- 
larly in the present season owing to the unusual lowness of the water. 
This intelligence was very mortifying, especially as the gentlemen in 
charge of the Company’s boats declared that they were unable to 
carry any part of our stores beyond this place; and the traders, 
guides, and most experienced of the boatmen, were of opinion, that 
unless our boat was still further lightened, the winter would put a 
stop to our progress before we could reach Cumberland House, or any 
eligible post. Sixteen pieces were therefore necessarily left with Mr. 
Bunn, the gentleman in charge of the post, to be forwarded by the 
Athabasca canoes next season, this being their place of rendezvous. 
After this we recommenced our voyage, and having pulled nearly 
a mile, arrived at Borrowick’s Fall, where the boat was dragged up 
with a line, after part of the cargo had been carried over a small 
portage. From this place'to the Mud Portage, a distance of a mile 
and, three quarters, the boats.were pushed on with poles against a 
very rapid stream. Here we encamped, having come seven miles 
during the day on a S.W. course. We had several snow showers in 
the course of the day, and the thermometer at bed-time stood at 30°. 


Drawn tay lism, Hood, RAY 


f 

lr 

t= 
ai 
el 


He 


aa 
A ode 
Suvi 


Tike 


A 


; if 
TRA Ty Ua 
eS ee ee 


ivi 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 33 


On the morning of the 18th, the country was clothed in the livery 
of winter, a heavy fall of snow having taken place during the night. 
We embarked at the usual hour, and, in the course of the day, 
crossed the Point of Rocks and Brassa Portages, and dragged. the 
boats through several minor rapids. -In: this tedious way we only 
made good about nine miles, 

On Sunday the 19th we hauled the boats up several short rapids, 
or, as the boatmen term them, expressively enough, spouts, and carried 
them over the Portages of Lower Burntwood and Morgan’s Rocks ; 
on the latter of which we encamped, having puogeeded, during the 
whole day, only one mile and three quarters. 

The upper part of Hill River swells out considerably, and at 
Morgan's Rocks, where it is three quarters of a mile wide, we were 
gratified with a more extensive prospect of the country than any we 
had enjoyed since leaving York Factory. The banks of the river 
here, consisting of low flat rocks with intermediate swamps, per- 
mitted us to obtain views of the interior, the surface of which is 
broken into a multitude of cone-shaped hills. The highest of these 
hills, which gives a name to the river, has an elevation not exceeding 
six hundred feet. From its summit, thirty-six lakes are said to be 
visible. The beauty of the scenery, dressed in the tints of autumn, 
called forth our admiration, and was the subject of Mr. Hood’s ac- | 
curate pencil. On the 20th we passed Upper Burntwood and Rocky 
Ledge Portages, besides several strong spouts; and in the evening 
arrived at Smooth Rock Portage, where we encamped, having come 
three miles and a half. It is not easy for any but an eye-witness to 
form an adequate idea of the exertions of the Orkney boatmen in the 
navigation of this river. The necessity they are under of frequently 
jumping into the water to lift the boats over the rocks, compels them 
to remain the whole day in wet clothes, at a season when the 
temperature is far below the freezing point. The immense loads 
too, which they carry over the portages, is not more a matter of 

F 


34 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


surprise than the alacrity with which they perform these laborious 
duties. | 

_ At:six on the morning of the 21st, we left our encampment, and 
soon after arrived at the Mossy Portage, where the cargoes were 
catried through a deep bog for a quarter of amile. The river swells 
out, above this portage, to the breadth of several miles, and as the 
islands are numerous there are a great variety of channels. Night 
overtook us before we arrived at the Second Portage, so named from 
its being the second in the passage down the river. Our whole 
distance this day was one mile and a quarter. 

On the 22d our route led us amongst many wooded islands, which 
lying in long vistas, produced scenes of much beauty. Inthe course 
of the day we crossed the Upper Portage, surmounted the Devil’s 
Landing Place, and urged the boat with poles through Groundwater 
Creek. At the upper end of this creek, our bowman having given 
the boat too broad a sheer, to avoid the rock, it was caught on the 
broadside by the current, and, in defiance of our utmost exertions, 
hurried down the rapid. Fortunately, however, it grounded against 
a rock high enough to prevent the current from oversetting it, and 
the crews of the other boats having come to our assistance, we suc- 
ceeded, after several trials, in throwing a rope to them, with which 
they dragged our almost sinking vessel stern foremost up the stream, 
and rescued us‘from our perilous situation. We encamped in the 
dusk of the evening amidst a heavy thunder-storm, having advanced 
two miles and three quarters. 

‘About ten in the morning of the 23d we arrived at the Dram- 
stone, which is hailed with pleasure by the boats’ crews, as marking 
the termination of the laborious ascent of Hill River. We complied 
with the custom from whence it derives its name, and soon after land- 
ing upon Sail Island prepared breakfast. In the mean time our boat- 
men cut down and rigged a new mast, the old one having been 
thrown overboard at the mouth of Steel River, where it ceased to be 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 35 


useful. We left Sail Island with a fair wind, and soon afterwards 
arrived at a depét situated on Swampy Lake, where we received a 
supply of mouldy pemmican*. Mr. Calder and his attendant were 
the only tenants of this cheerless abode, .and their only food was the 
wretched stuff with which they supplied us, the lake not yielding 
fish at this season. After a short delay at this post, we sailed through 
the remainder of Swampy Lake, and slept at the Lower Portage in 
Jack River; the distance sailed to-day being sixteen miles and a half. 

Jack River is only eight miles long ; but being full of bad rapids, 
it detained us considerably. At seven in the morning of the 24th, 
we crossed the Long Portage, where the woods, having caught fire 
in the summer, were still smoking. This is a common accident, 
owing to the neglect of the Indians and voyagers in not putting 
out their fires, and in a dry season the woods may be seen blazing to 
the extent of many miles. We afterwards crossed the Second, or 
Swampy Portage, and in the evening encamped on the Upper Port- 
age, where we were overtaken by an Indian bringing an answer from 
Governor Williams to a letter I had written to him on the 15th, in 
which he renewed his injunctions to the gentlemen of the boats ac- 
companying us, to afford us every assistance in their power. The 
Aurora Borealis appeared this evening in form of a bright arch, ex- 
tending across the zenith in a N.W. and S.E. direction. The extent 
of our voyage to-day was two miles. 

About noon on the 25th we entered Knee Lake, which has a very 
irregular form, and near its middle takes a sudden turn, from whence 
it derives its name. Jt is thickly studded with islands, and its shores 
are low and well-wooded. The surrounding country, as far as we 
could see, is flat, being destitute even of the moderate elevations 
which occur near the upper part of Hill River. The weather was 
remarkably fine, and the setting sun threw the richest tints over 
the scene that I remember ever to have witnessed. 


* Buffalo meat, dried and pounded, and mixed with melted fat. 
F 2 


36 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


_ About half a mile from the bend or knee of the lake, there is a small. 
rocky islet, composed of magnetic iron ore, which affects’ the mag- 
netic needle ata shiksitdokble distance. Having received previous 
information respecting this circumstance, we watched our compasses 
carefully, and perceived that they were affected at the distance of 
three hundred yards, both on the approach to and departure from the 
rock : on decreasing the distance, they became gradually more and 
more unsteady, and on landing they were rendered quite useless ; and 
“it was evident that the general magnetic influence was totally over- 
powered by the local attraction of the ore. When Kater’s compass 
was held near to the ground’ on the N.W. side of the island, the 
needle dipped so much that the card could not be made to traverse 
by any adjustment of the hand; but on moving the same compass 
about thirty yards to the west part of the islet, the needle became 
horizontal, traversed freely, and pointed to the magnetic north. The 
dipping needle being landed on the S.W. point of the islet, was 

adjusted as nearly as possible on the magnetic meridian by the sun’s 

NS bearings, and found to vibrate freely, when the face of the instru- 

ment was directed to ‘the east or west: The mean dip it gave was 

80° 37 50’. When ‘the instrument was removed from the N.W. to 

the 8.E. point, about twenty yards distant, and placed on the meri- 

dian, the needle ceased to traverse, but remained steady at an angle 

of 60°. On changing the face of the instrument, so as to give a S.E. 

“and N.W. direction-to the needle, it hung vertically. The position 

“of the slaty strata of the magnetic ore is also vertical. Their direc- 

tion is extremely irregular, being much contorted. 

“Knee Lake towards its upper end becomes narrower, and its rocky 
‘shores are broken into conical and rounded eminences, destitute of 
soil,” and of course devoid of trees. We slept at the western extre- 
~ mity of the lake, having come pares the day nineteen miles and a 
‘ uae on a S.W. course. | ; 
We began the ascent of Trout River early in the morning of the 


o 7 


dw Finder. 


se 


Saved by 


od, RUIN, 


Drawn by lieut, Ho 


y, : ' da 
Nae eine atte 
ee hath 


ay a 


an a 
i ‘i 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 37 


27th, and in the course of the day passed. three portages and several 
rapids. At the first of these portages the river falls between two 
rocks about sixteen feet, and it 1s necessary to launch the boat over 
a precipitous rocky bank. ‘This cascade is named the Trout-Fall, 
and the beauty of the scenery afforded a subject for Mr. Hood’s pen- 
eil. The rocks which form the bed of this river are slaty, and pre- 
sent sharp fragments, by which the feet of the boatmen are much 
lacerated. The Second Portage, in particular, obtains the expressive 
name of Knife Portage. The length of our voyage to-day was three 
miles. 

On the 28th we passed through the remainder of Trout River ; 
and, at noon, arrived at Oxford House, on Holey Lake. This was 
formerly a post of some consequence to the Hudson’s Bay Com- 
pany, but at present it exhibits unequivocal signs of decay. The 
Indians have of late years been gradually deserting the low or 
swampy country, and ascending the Saskatchawan, where animals 
are more abundant. A few Crees were at this time encamped in 
front of the fort.. They were suffering under the combined maladies 
of hooping-cough and measles, and looked miserably dejected. We 
endeavoured in vain to prevail on one of them to accompany us for 
the purpose of killing ducks, which were numerous, but too shy for 
our sportsmen. We had the satisfaction, however, of exchanging 
the mouldy pemmican, obtained at Swampy Lake, for a better kind, 
and received, moreover, a small, but very acceptable, supply of 
fish. Holey Lake, viewed from an eminence behind Oxford House, 
exhibits a pleasing prospect; and its numerous islands, varying 
much in shape and elevation, contribute to break that uniformity 
of scenery which proves so palling to a traveller in this country. 
Trout of a great. size, frequently exceeding forty pounds weight, 
abound in this lake. We left Oxford House in the afternoon, and 
encamped on an island about eight miles distant, having come, 
during the day, nine miles and a quarter. 


38 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


At noon, on the 29th, after passing through the remainder of 
Holey Lake, we entered the Weepinapannis, a narrow grassy river, 
which runs parallel to the lake for a considerable distance, and forms 
its south bank into a narrow peninsula. In the morning we arrived 
at the Swampy Portage, where two of the boats were broken against 
the rocks. The length of the day’s voyage was nineteen miles and 
a half. 7 

In consequence of the accident yesterday evening, we were de- 
tained a considerable time this morning, until the boats were re- 
paired, when we set out, and, after ascending a strong rapid, arrived 
at the Portage by John Moore’s Island. Here the river rushes with 
irresistible force through the channels formed by two rocky islands ; 
and we learnt, that last year a poor man, in hauling a boat up.one of 
these channels, was, by the breaking of the line, precipitated. into the 
stream and hurried down the cascade with such rapidity, that all 
efforts to save him were ineffectual. His body was afterwards found 
and interred near the spot. 

The Weepinapannis is composed of several branches which separate 
and unite, again and again, intersecting the country ina great variety 
of directions. We pursued the principal channel, and having passed 
the Crooked Spout, with several inferior rapids, and erossed.a small 
piece of water, named Windy Lake, we entered a smooth deep stream 
about three hundred yards wide, which has got the absurd appellation 
of the Rabbit Ground. The marshy banks of this river are skirted 
by low barren rocks, behind which there are some groups of stunted 
trees, As we advanced, the country becoming flatter, gradually 
opened to our ‘view, and we at length arrived at a shallow, reedy 
lake, the direct course through which leads to the Hull Portage. 
This route thas, however, of late years been disused, and we therefore 
turned towards the north, and crossing a small arm of the lake, ar- 
rived at Hill Gates by sunset ; having come this day eleven miles. 

October 1.—Hill Gates isthe name imposed on a romantic defile, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 39 


whose rocky walls rising perpendicularly to the height of sixty or 
eighty feet, hem in the stream for three quarters of a mile, in many 
places so narrowly, that there is a want of room to ply the oars. In 
passing through this chasm we were naturally led to contemplate the 
inighty but, probably, slow and gradual effects of the water in wearing 
down ‘such vast ‘masses of rock ; but in the midst of our speculations, 
the attention was excited anew to a grand and picturesque rapid, 
which, surrounded by the most wild and majestic scenery, terminated 
the defile. The brown fishing-eagle had built its nest on one of the 
projecting cliffs. In the course of the day we surmounted this and 
another dangerous portage, called the Upper and Lower Hull Gate 
Portages, ‘crossed ‘a small sheet of water, termed the White-Fall 
Lake, and entering the river of the same name, arrived at the White 
Fall about an hour after sunset, have come fourteen miles on a 
5. W. course. | 

The whole of the 2d of October was spent in carrying the cargoes 
over a portage of thirteen hundred yards im length, and in launching 
the empty boats over three several ridges of rock which obstruct the 
channel and ‘produce as many cascades. I shall long remember the 
rude and characteristic ‘wildness of the scenery which surrounded 
these falls; rocks piled on rocks hung in rude and shapeless masses 
over the agitated torrents which swept their bases, whilst the bright 
and variegated tints of the mosses and lichens, that covered the face 
of the cliffs, contrasting with the dark green of the pines, which 
crowned their summits, added both beauty and grandeur to the ge- 
neral effect of the scene. Our two companions, Back and Heod, 
made accurate sketches of these falls. At this place we observed a 
conspicuous lop-stick, a kind of land-mark, which I have not hitherto 
noticed, notwithstanding its ereat use in pointing out the frequented 
routes. It is a pine-tree divested of its lower branches, and having 
only a small tuft at the top remaining. This operation is usually 
performed at the instance of some individual emulous of fame. He 


AQ A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


treats his companions with rum, and they in return, strip ae tree of 
its branches, and ever after designate it by his name. | 

In.the afternoon, whilst on my way to superintend the operations 
of the men, a stratum of loose moss gave way under my feet, and I 
had the misfortune to slip from the summit of a rock into the river, 
betwixt two of the falls. My attempts to regain the bank were, for 
a time, ineffectual, owing to the rocks within my reach having been 
worn smooth by the action of the water, but after I had been carried 
a considerable distance down the stream, I caught hold of a willow, 
by which I held until two gentlemen of the Hudson’s Bay Company 
came in a boat to my assistance. The only bad consequence of this 
accident was an injury sustained by a very valuable chronometer, 
(No. 1733,) belonging to Daniel Moore, Esq., of Lincoln’s Inn. One 
of the gentlemen, to whom I delivered it immediately on landing, in 
his agitation let it fall, whereby the minute-hand was broken, but 
the works were not in the smallest degree injured, and the loss of the 
hand was afterwards supplied. 

During the night the frost was severe, and at sun-rise, on the 3d, 
the thermometer stood at 25°. After leaving our encampment at the 
White Fall, we passed through several small lakes connected with 
each other by narrow, deep, grassy streams, and at noon arrived at 
the Painted Stone. Numbers of musk-rats frequent these streams, 
and we observed, in the course of the morning, many of their mud- 
houses rising in a conical form to the height of two or three feet 
above the grass of the swamps in which they are built. | 

The Painted Stone is a low rock, ten or twelve yards across, re- 
markable for the marshy streams which arise on each side of it, taking 
different courses. On ¢he one side, the water-course which we had 
navigated from York Factory commences. ‘This spot may therefore 
be considered as one of the smaller sources of Hayes’ River. On the 
other side of the stone the Echemamis arises, and taking a westerly 
direction falls into Nelson River. It is said that there was formerly 


OF THE-POLAR SEA. Al 


a stone placed near the centre of this portage on which figures were 


annually traced, and offerings deposited, by the Indians ; but the stone 
has been removed many years, and the spot has ceased to be held in 
veneration. . Here we were overtaken by Governor Williams, who 
left York Factory on the 20th of last month in an Indian canoe. He 
expressed much regret at our having been obliged to leave part’ of 
our stores at the Rock depét, and would have brought them up with 
him had he been able to procure and man a boat, or a canoe of suf- 
ficient size. 

Having launched the boats. over the rock, we commenced the 
descent of the Echemamis. This small stream has its course through 
a’morass, and in dry seasons its channel contains, instead of water, 
merely a foot or two of thin mud. On these occasions it is customary 
to build dams, that it may be rendered navigable by the accumulation 


' of its waters. As the beavers perform this operation very effectually, 


endeavours have been made to encourage them to breed in this place, 
but it has not hitherto been possible to restrain the Indians from’ 
killing that useful animal whenever they discover its retreats). On 
the present occasion there was no want of water, the principal im- 
pediment we experienced being from the narrowness of the channel, 
which permitted the willows of éach bank to’ meet over our heads, 
and obstruct the men at the oars. After proceeding down the stream 
for some-time, we came to a recently constructed beaver-dam through | 
which an opening was made sufficient to admit the boat to’ pass. 
We were assured that the breach would be closed by the industrious - 
creature ina single night. We encamped about eight miles from the 
source of the river, having come during the day seventeen’ miles:and — 
a half. ou 
- On the 4th we embarked amidst a heavy rain,and pursued: our 
route down the Echemamis. In many parts the morass, by which : 
the river is nourished, and through which it flows, is intersected by 
ridges of rock which cross the channel, and’ require the boat tobe 
2 


49 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


lifted over them. . In the afternoon we passed through a shallow 
piece of water overgrown with bulrushes, and hence named Hairy 
Lake; and, in the evening, encamped on the banks of Blackwater- 
Creek, by which this lake empties itself into Sea River; having come 
during the day twenty miles and three quarters. 

On the morning of the 5th, we entered Sea River, one of the many 
branches of Nelson River. It is about four hundred yards wide, 
and its waters are of a muddy white colour. After ascending the 
stream for an hour or two, and passing through Carpenter’s Lake, 
which is merely an expansion of the river to about a mile in breadth, 
we came to the Sea River. Portage, where the boat was launched 
across a smooth rock, to avoid a fall of four or five feet. Re-em- 
barking at the upper end of the portage, we ran before a fresh gale 
through. the remainder of Sea River, the lower part of Play Green 
Lake, and. entering Little Jack River, landed and pitched our tents. 
Here. there is a small log-hut, the residence of a fisherman, who 
supplies Norway House with trout and sturgeon. He gave us a few 
of these. fish, which afforded an acceptable supper. The length of 
our voyage this day was thirty-four miles. 

October 6.—Little- Jack: River is the name given to a channel that 
winds among several large islands which separate Upper and Lower 
Play Green, Lakes. At the lower end of this channel, Big Jack 
River, a stream of considerable magnitude, falls into the lake. 
Play Green is a translation of the appellation given to that lake by 
two bands of Indians,.who met and held a festival on an island situated 
near its centre. After leaving our encampment we sailed through 
Upper Play Green Lake, and. arrived at Norway Point in the fore- 
noon. | 

The waters of Lake Winipeg, and of the rivers that run into it, 
the Saskatchawan. in particular, are rendered turbid by the suspen- 
sion of a,large quantity of white clay... Play Green Lake and Nelson 
River, being. the-discharges, of the Winipeg, are equally opaque, a 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 43 


circumstance that renders the sunken rocks, so frequent in these 
waters, very dangerous to boats in a fresh breeze. Owing to this, one 
of the boats that accompanied us, sailing at the rate of seven miles 
an hour, struck wpon one of these rocks. \ Its mast was carried away 
by the shock, but fortunately no other damage sustained. The In- 
dians ascribe the muddiness of these lakes to an adventure of one 
of their deities, a mischievous fellow, a sort of Robin Puck, whom 
they hold in very little esteem. This deity, who is named Weesak- 
ootchaht, possesses considerable power, but'makes a capricious use 
of it, and delights in tormenting the poor Indians: He is not, 
however, invincible, and was foiled in one of his attempts by the 
artifice of an old woman, who succeeded in taking him captive. She 
called in all the women of the tribe to aid in his punishment, and he 
escaped from their hands in a condition so filthy that it required all the 
waters of the Great Lake to wash him clean; and ever since that period 
it has been entitled to the appellation of Winipeg, or Muddy Water. 
Norway Point forms the extremity of a narrow-‘peninsula which 
separates Play Green and Winipeg Lakes. «Buildings were: first 
erected here by a party of Norwegians, who were driven away from the 
colony at Red River by the commotions which took place some time 
ago. It is nowa trading post belonging to the Hudson’s Bay Com- 
pany. On landing at Norway House we met: with Lord Selkirk’s 
colonists, who had started from York Factory the day before us.— 
These poor people were exceedingly pleased at meeting with us again 
in this wild country ; having accompanied them across the: Atlantic, 
they viewed us in the light of old acquaintances. This post: was under 
the charge of Mr. James Sutherland, to whom Iam indebted for rez 
placing a minute-hand on the chronometer, which was broken at the 
White Fall, and I had afterwards the satisfaction of finding that it 

went with extraordinary regularity. 
The morning of the 7th October was beautifully clear, and the ob- 
‘servations we obtained place Norway House in latitude 53° 41' 38’ N., 

G2 


AA A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


and longitude 98° 1 24" W.; the variation of the magnetic needle 
14° 12°41" E., and its dip 83° 40 10°. The dip, it will be perceived, 
has gradually increased, though our route from York Factory has 
rather inclined to the 8.W. The difference produced by reversing 
the face of the instrument was 7° 39. There was too much wind to 
admit of our observing, with any degree of accuracy, the quantity of 
the magnetic force. 

We left Norway House soon after noon, and the wind being 
favourable, sailed along the northern shore of Lake Winipeg the 
whole of the ensuing night; and on the morning of the 8th landed 
on a narrow ridge of sand, which, running out twenty miles to the 
westward, separates Limestone Bay from the body of the Lake. When 
the wind blows hard from the southward, it is customary to carry 
boats across this isthmus, and to pull wp under its lee. From Nor- 
wegian Point to Limestone Bay the shore consists of high clay cliffs, 
against which the waves beat with much violence during strong 
southerly winds. When the wind blows from the land, and the 
waters of the lake are low, a narrow sandy beach is uncovered, and 
affords a landing-place for boats. ‘The shores of Limestone Bay are 
covered with small fragments of calcareous stones. During the night 
the Aurora Borealis was quick in its motions, and various and vivid 
in its colours. After breakfasting we re-embarked, and continued 
our voyage until three P.M., when a strong westerly wind arising, 
we were obliged to shelter ourselves on a small island, which les 
near the extremity of the above-mentioned peninsula. This island 
is formed of a collection of small rolled pieces of limestone, and was 
remembered by some of our boatmen to have been formerly covered 
with water. For the last ten or twelve years the waters of the lake 
have been low, but our information did not enable us to judge whe- 
ther the decrease was merely casual, or going on continually, or pe- 
riodical. The distance of this island from Norway House is thirty- 
eight miles and a half. _ 


OF THE POLAR SEA. AS 


The westerly winds detained us all the morning of the 9th, but, 
at two P.M., the wind chopped round to the eastward; we imme- 
diately embarked, and the breeze afterwards freshening, we reached 
the mouth of the Saskatchawan at midnight, having run thirty-two 
miles. 

Sunday, October 10.—The whole of this day was occupied in 
getting the boats from the mouth of the river to the foot of the 
grand rapid, a distance of two miles. There are ‘several rapids in 
this short distance, during which the river varies its breadth from 
five hundred yards to half a mile. Its channel is stony. At the 
grand rapid, the Saskatchawan forms a sudden bend, from south to 
east, and works its way through a narrow channel, deeply worn into 
the limestone strata. The stream, rushing with impetuous force 
over a rocky and uneven hottom, presents a sheet of foam, and 
seems to bear with impatience the straitened confinement of its 
lofty banks. A ‘flock of pelicans, and two or three brown fishing 
eagles, were fishing in its agitated waters, seemingly with great 
success. ‘There is a good sturgeon fishery at the foot of the rapid. 
Several golden plovers, Canadian gros-beaks, cross-bills, wood- 
peckers, and pin-tailed grouse, were shot to-day; and Mr. Back 
killed a small striped marmot. This beautiful little animal was 
busily employed in carrying in its distended pouches the seeds of 
the American vetch to its winter hoards. 

The portage is eighteen hundred yards long, and its western extre- 
mity was found to be in 53° 08 25" North latitude, and 99° 28’ 02” 
West longitude. The route from Canada to the Athabasca joins 
that from York Factory at the mouth of the Saskatchawan, and 
we saw traces of a recent encampment of the Canadian voyagers: 
Our companions in the Hudson’s Bay boats, dreading an attack from 
their rivals in trade, were on the alert at this place. They examined 
minutely the spot of encampment, to form a judgment of the num- 
ber of canoes that had preceded them; and they’ advanced, armed, 


46 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


and with great caution, through the woods. Their fears, however, 
were fortunately, ou this occasion, groundless. 

By noon, on the 12th, the boats and their cargoes having been 
conveyed across the portage, we embarked, and pursued our course. 
The Saskatchawan becomes wider above the Grand Rapid, and the 
scenery improves. The banks are high, composed of white clay and 
limestone, and their summits are richly clothed with a variety of 
firs, poplars, birches; and willows. The current runs with great 
rapidity, and the channel is, in many places, intricate and dangerous, 
from broken ridges of rock jutting into the stream. We pitched our 
tents at the entrance of Cross Lake, having advanced only five miles 
and a half: 

Cross Lake is extensive, running towards the N.E., it is said, for 
forty miles. We crossed it at a narrow part, and pulling through 
several winding channels, formed by a group of islands; entered 
Cedar Lake, which, next to Lake Winipeg, is the largest sheet of 
fresh water we had hitherto seen. Ducks and geese resort hither in 
immense flocks in the spring and autumn. These birds are now 
beginning to go off, owing to its muddy shores having become quite 
hard through the nightly frosts. At this place the Aurora Borealis 
was extremely brilliant in the night, its coruscations darting, at 
times, over the whole sky, and assuming various prismatic tints, of 
which the violet and yellow were predominant. 

After pulling, on the 14th, seven miles and a quarter on the lake, 
a violent wind drove us for shelter to a small island, or rather a 
ridge of rolled stones, thrown up by the frequent storms which agi- 
tate this lake.. The weather did not moderate the whole day, and 
we were obliged to pass the night on this exposed spot. The delay, 
however, enabled us to obtain some lunar observations. The wind 
having subsided, we left our resting-place the following morning, 
crossed. the remainder of the lake; and, in the afternoon, arrived at 
Muddy Lake, which is very appropriately named, as it consists 


OF THE POLAR SEA. AT 


merely of a few channels, winding amongst extensive mud_ banks, 
which are overflowed during the spring floods. We landed at an 
Indian tent, which contained two numerous families, amounting to 
thirty souls. These poor creatures were badly clothed, and reduced 
to a miserable condition by the ravages of the hooping-cough and 
measles. At the time of our arrival they were busy in preparing a 
sweating-house for the sick. This is a remedy, which they consider, 
with the addition of singing and drumming, to be the grand specific 
for all diseases. Our companions having obtained some geese, in 
exchange for rum and tobacco, we proceeded afew more miles, and 
encamped on Devil’s Drum Island, having come, during the day, 
twenty miles and a half. A second party of Indians were encamped 
on an adjoining island, a situation chosen for the purpose of killing 
geese and ducks. | 
_ On the 16th we proceeded eighteen miles up the Saskatchawan. 
Its banks are low, covered with willows, and lined with drift timber. 
The surrounding country is swampy, and intersected by the nume- 
rous arms of the river. After passing for twenty or thirty yards 
through the willow thicket on the banks of the stream, we entered 
upon, an extensive marsh, varied only by a distant line of willows, 
which marks the course of a creek or branch of the river. The 
branch. we navigated. to-day is almost. five hundred yards wide. The 
exhalations from the marshy soil produced a low fog, although the 
sky above was perfectly clear. In the course of the day we passed 
an Indian encampment of three tents, whose inmates appeared. to be 
in, a still more miserable condition than those we saw yesterday. 
They had just: finished the ceremony of conjuration over some of 
their sick companions; and a dog, which was recently killed as a 
sacrifice to some deity, was hanging to a tree, where it would be left 
(Z was told) when they moved: their encampment. 

We continued. our voyage up the river to the 20th with little va- 
nlation of scenery or incident, travelling in that time about thirty 


48 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


miles. The near approach of winter was. marked by severe frosts. 
which continued all day unless when the sun chanced to be unusually 
bright, and the geese and ducks were observed to take a southerly 
course.in large flocks. On the. morning of the 20th we came. to 
a party of Indians, encamped behind the bank of the river on the 
borders of a small marshy lake, for the purpose of killing water-fowl. 
Here we were gratified with the view of a very large tent. Its length 
was about forty feet, its breadth eighteen, and its covering was moose 
deer leather, with apertures for the escape of the smoke from the. 
fires which were placed at each end; a ledge of wood was placed on 
the ground on both sides the whole length of the tent, within which 
were the. sleeping places, arranged. probably according to families ; 
and the drums and other instruments of enchantment were piled up 
in the centre. Amongst the Indians there were a great many half- 
breeds, who led an Indian life. Governor Williams gave a dram:and 
a piece of tobacco to each of the males of the party. | 

On the morning of the 21st a heavy fall of snow. took place, which 
lasted until two in the afternoon. In the evening we left the Sas- 
katchawan, and entered the Little River, one of the two streams by 
which Pine Island Lake discharges its waters. We advanced.to-day 
fourteen miles and a quarter. On the 22d the weather was extremely 
cold and stormy, and we had to contend. against a strong head wind.. 
The spray froze as it fell, and the oars were so loaded with ice as to 
be almost unmanageable. The length of our voyage this day. was’ 
eleven miles. | 

The following morning was very cold; we embarked at. day-light, 
and pulled across a part of Pine Island Lake, about three miles and a 
half to Cumberland House. The margin of the lake was so encrusted 
with ice, that we had to break through a considerable space of it to 
approach the landing place. When we considered that. this was the 
effect of only.a few days’ frost at the commencement of winter, we 
were convinced of the impracticability of advancing further by water: 


a, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 49 


this season, and therefore resolved on accepting Governor Williams’s 
kind invitation to remain with him at this post. We immediately 
visited Mr. Connolly, the resident partner of the North-West Com- 
pany, and presented to him Mr. Mac Gillivray’s circular letter... He 
assured us that he should be most desirous to forward our progress 
by every means in his power, and we subsequently had ample proofs 
of his sincerity and kindness. The unexpected addition of our party 
to the winter residents at this post, rendered an increase of apart- 
ments necessary ; and our men were immediately appointed to com- 
plete and arrange an, unfinished building as speedily as possible. 
November 8.—Some mild weather succeeded to the severe frosts we 
had at our arrival; and the lake had not been entirely frozen before the 
Oth; but this morning the ice was sufficiently firm to admit of sledges 
crossing it. The dogs were harnessed at a very early hour, and the 
winter operations commenced by sending for a supply of fish from 
Swampy River, where men had been stationed to collect it, just before 
the frost set in. Both men and dogs appeared to enjoy the change ; 
they started in full glee, and drove rapidly along. An Indian, who 
had come to the house on the preceding evening to request some 
provision for his family, whom he represented to be in a state of 
starvation, accompanied them. His party had been suffering greatly 
under the epidemic diseases of the hooping-cough and measles; and 
the hunters were still in too debilitated a state to go out and provide 
them with meat. <A supply was given to him, and the men were di- 
rected to bring his father, an old and faithful hunter, to the house, 
that he might have the comforts of nourishment and warmth. He 
was brought accordingly, but these attentions were unavailing as he 
died a few days afterwards. Two days before his death I was sur- 
prised to observe him sitting for near three hours, in a piercingly sharp 
day, in the saw-pit, employed in gathering the dust, and throwing it 
by handfuls over his body, which was naked to the waist. As the 
man was in possession of his mental faculties, I conceived he was per-— 
H 


50 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


forming some devotional act preparatory to his departure, which he 
felt approaching; and, induced by the novelty of the incident, I 
went twice to observe him more closely ; but when he perceived that 
he was noticed, he immediately ceased his operation, hung down his 
head, and by his demeanour, intimated that he considered my ap- 
pearance an intrusion. The residents at the fort could give me no 
information on the subject, and I could not learn that the Indians in 
general observe any particular ceremony on the approach of death. 

November 15.—The sky had been overcast during the last week; 
the sun shone forth once only, and then not sufficiently for the pur- 
pose of obtaining observations. Faint coruscations of the Aurora 
Borealis appeared one evening, but their presence did not in the 
least affect the electrometer nor the compass. The ice daily became 
thicker in the lake, and the frost had now nearly overpowered the 
rapid current of the Saskatchawan River; indeed, parties of men 
who were sent from both the forts to search for the Indians, and 
procure whatever skins and provisions they might have collected, 
crossed that stream this day on the ice; the white partridges made 
their first appearance near to the house. These birds are considered 
as the infallible harbingers of severe weather. 

Monday, November 22.—The Saskatchawan, and every other river, 
were now completely covered with ice, except a small stream near to 
the fort through which the current ran very powerfully. In the 
course of the week we removed into the house our men had been 
preparing for us since our arrival. We found it at first extremely 
cold notwithstanding a good fire was kept in each aparment, and we 
frequently experienced the extremes of heat and cold on opposite 
sides of the body. 

November 24.—We this day obtained observations for the dip of 
the needle and intensity of the magnetic force in a spare room. The 
dip was 83° 9’ 45°, and the difference produced by reversing the face 
of the instrument 13° 3’ 6". When the needle was faced to the west 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 51 


it hung nearly perpendicular. The Aurora Borealis was faintly 
visible for a short time last evening. Some Indians arrived in search 
of provision, having been totally incapacitated from hunting by sick- 
ness; the poor creatures looked miserably ill, and they represented 
their distress to have been extreme. Few recitals are more affecting 
than those of their sufferings durmg unfavourable seasons, and in bad 
situations for hunting and fishing. Many assurances have been given 
me that men and women are yet living who have been reduced to 
feed upon the bodies of their own family, to prevent actual starva- 
tion ; and a shocking case was cited to us of a woman who had been 
principal agent in the destruction of several persons, and amongst 
the number her husband and nearest relatives, in order to support 
life. ; 

November 28.—The atmosphere had been clear every day during 
the last week, about the end of which snow fell, when the thermo- 
meter rose from 20° below to 16° above zero. The Aurora Borealis 
was twice visible, but faint on both occasions. Its appearance did 
not affect the electrometer, nor could we perceive the compass to be 
disturbed. 

The men brought supplies of moose meat from the hunter’s tent, 
which is pitched near the Basquiau Hill, at the distance of forty or 
fifty miles from the house, and from whence the greatest part of the 
meat is procured. The residents have to send nearly the same dis- 
tance for their fish, and on this service horse-sledges are used. Nets 
are daily set in Pine Island Lake which occasionally procure some 
fine sturgeon, tittameg and trout, but not more than sufficient to 
supply the officers’ table. 

December 1.—This day was so remarkably fine, that we procured 
another set of observations for the dip of the needle in the open 
air; the instrument being placed firmly on a rock, the results gave 
83° 14° 22". The change produced by reversing the face of the in- 
strument was 12° 50’ 55”. 


32 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


There was a determined thaw during the last three days, which 
caused the Saskatchawan River, and some parts of the lake, to break 
up, and rendered the travelling across either of them dangerous. On 
this account the absence of Wilks, one of our men, caused no small 
anxiety. He had incautiously undertaken the charge of conducting 
a sledge and dogs, in company with a person, going to Swampy 
River for fish. On their return, being unaccustomed to driving, he 
became fatigued, and seated himself on his sledge, in which situation 
his companion left him, presuming that he would soon rise and hasten 
to follow his track. He however returned safe in the morning, and 
reported that, foreseeing night would set.in before he could get across 
the lake, he prudently retired into the woods before dark, where he 
remained until daylight; when the men, who had been despatched 
to look for him, met him returning to the house, shivering with 
cold, he having been unprovided with the materials for lighting a 
fire; which an experienced voyager never neglects to carry. 

We had mild weather until the 20th of December. On the 13th 
there had been a decided thaw, which caused the Saskatchawan, which 
had again frozen, to re-open, and the passage across it was inter- 
rupted for two days. We now received more agreeable accounts 
from the Indians, who are recovering strength, and beginning to 
hunt a little; but it is generally feared that their spirits have been 
so much depressed by the loss of their children and relatives, that 
the season will be far advanced before they can be roused to any 
exertion in searching for animals beyond what may be necessary for 
their own support. It is much to be regretted that these poor men, 
during their long intercourse with Europeans, have not been taught 
how pernicious is the grief which produces total inactivity, and that 
they have not been furnished with any of the consolations which the 
Christian religion never fails to afford. This, however, could hardly 
have been expected from persons who have permitted their own off- 
spring, the half-casts, to remain in lamentable ignorance on a subject 


OF THE POLAR SEA. O38 


of such vital importance. . It is probable, however, that an improve- 
ment will soon take place among the latter class, as Governor Williams 
proposes to make the children attend a Sunday school, and has already 
begun to have divine service performed at his post. 

. The conversations which I have had with the gentlemen in 
charge of these posts, convinced me of the necessity of proceeding 
during the winter into the Athabasca department, the residents of 
which are best acquainted with the nature and resources of the 
country lying to the north of the Great Slave Lake ; and from whence 
only guides, hunters, and interpreters can be procured. I had pre- 
viously written to the partners of the North West Company in that 
quarter, requesting their assistance in forwarding the Expedition, 
and stating what we should require of them; but, on reviewing the 
matter, and reflecting upon the accidents that might delay these 
letters on the road, TI determined on proceeding to the Athabasca. as 
soon asl possibly could, and communicated my intention to Gover- 
nor Williams and Mr. Connolly, with a request that I might be fur- 
nished, by the middle of January, with the means of conveyance 
for three persons, intending that Mr. Back and Hepburn should 
accompany me, whilst Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood remained till 
the spring at Cumberland House. 

After the 20th December the weather became cold, the thermometer 
constantly below zero. Christmas-day was particularly stormy ; but the 
gale did not prevent the full enjoyment of the festivities which are 
annually given at Cumberland House on this day. All the men who 
had been despatched to different parts in search of provision or furs 
returned to the fort on the occasion, and were regaled with a sar 
stantial dinner and a dance in the evening. 

1820. The new year was ushered in by repeated discharges of 
January 1. musketry ; a ceremony which has been observed by the men 
of both the trading Companies for many years. Our party dined 
with Mr. Connolly, and were regaled with a beaver, which we found 


54 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


extremely delicate. In the evening his men were entertained with 
a dance, in which the Canadians exhibited some grace and much 
agility; and they contrived to infuse some portion of their activity 
and spirits into the steps of their female companions. The half- 
breed women are passionately fond of this amusement, but a stranger 
would imagine the contrary on witnessing their apparent want of 
animation. On such occasions they affect a sobriety of demeanour 
which I understand to be the very opposite to their general cha- 
racter. 

January 10.—This day I wrote to Governor Williams and Mr. Con- 
nolly, requesting them to prepare two canoes, with crews and ap- 
pointments, for the conveyance of Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood with 
the stores to Chipewyan as soon as the navigation should open, and 
had the satisfaction of receiving from both these gentlemen renewed 
assurances of their desire to promote the objects of the Expedition. 
I conceived it to be necessary, previous to my departure, to make 
some arrangement respecting the men who were engaged at Strom- 
ness. Only one of them was disposed to extend his engagement, 
and proceed beyond the Athabasca Lake; and, as I found there was 
much uncertainty whether the remaiming three could get from the 
Athabasca to York Factory sufficiently early to secure them a passage 
in the next Hudson’s Bay ship, I resolved not to take them forward, 
unless Dr. ‘Richardson and Mr. Hood should fail in procuring other 
men from these establishments next spring, but to despatch them 
down to York to bring up our stores to this place: after which they 
might return to the coast in time to secure their passage in the 
first ship. 

I delivered to Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood a memorandum, 
containing the arrangements which had been made with the two 
Companies, respecting their being forwarded in the spring, and some 
other points of instruction for their guidance in my absence ; to- 
gether with directions to forward the map of our route, which had 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 55 


been finished, since our arrival, by Mr. Hood, the drawings and 
the collections of natural history, by the first opportunity to York 
Factory, for conveyance to England *. 

The houses of the two Companies, at this post, are situated close 
to each other, at the upper extremity of a narrow island, which 
separates Pine Island Lake from the Saskatchawan River, and are 
about two miles and three quarters distant from the latter, in a 
northern direction. They are log-houses, built without much atten- 
tion to comfort, surrounded by lofty stockades, and flanked with 
wooden bastions. The difficulty of conveying glass into the interior 
has precluded the use of that material in the construction of the 
windows, and its place is poorly supplied by parchment, imperfectly 
made by the native women from the skin of the rein-deer. Should 
this post, however, continue to be the residence of Governor Wil- 
liams, it will be much improved in a few years, as he is devoting his 
attention to that poimt. The land around Cumberland House is 
low, but the soil, from having a considerable intermixture of limestone, 
is good, and capable of producing abundance of corn, and vegetables 
of every description. Many kinds of pot-herbs have already been 
brought to some perfection, and the potatoes bid fair to equal those 
of England. ‘The spontaneous productions of nature would afford 
ample nourishment for all the European animals. Horses feed ex- 
tremely well even during the winter, and so would oxen, if provided 
with hay, which may be easily done}. Pigs also improve, but require 


* As Samuel Wilks, who had accompanied the Expedition from England, proved to be 
quite unequal to the fatigue of the journey, I directed him to be discharged in the spring, 
and sent to England by the next ship. 

+ “The wild buffalo scrapes away the snow with its feet to get at the herbage 
beneath, and the horse, which was introduced by the Spanish mvaders of Mexico, and 
may be said to have become naturalized, does the same; but it is worthy of remark, that 
the ox, more lately brought from Europe, has not yet acquired an art so necessary for 
procurme its food.”—(Extract from Dr. Richardson’s Journal.) 


s 


56 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


to be kept warm in the winter. Hence it appears, that the residents 
might,. with. common attention, render themselves far. less: de- 
pendant on the Indians for support, and be relieved from the great 
anxiety which they too often suffer when the hunters are unsuccess- 
ful. The neighbourhood of the houses has been much cleared of 
wood, from the great demand for fuel; there is, therefore, little to 
admire in the surrounding. scenery, especially in its winter garb ; 
few animated. objects occur to enliven the scene ;.an occasional fox, 
marten, rabbit, or wolf, and.a few birds, contribute the only variety. 
The birds which remained, were ravens, magpies, partridges, cross- 
bills, and woodpeckers. In this universal stillness, the residents at 
a post feel little disposed to wander abroad, except when called 
forth by their occupations; and as ours were of a kind best per- 
formed in a warm» room, we imperceptibly acquired a_ sedentary 
habit. In going out, however, we never suffered the slightest in- 
convenience from the change of temperature, though the ther- 
‘mometer, in the open air, stood occasionally thirty degrees below 
Zero. | | 

The tribe of Indians who reside in the vicinity, and frequent these 
establishments, is that of the Crees, or Knisteneaux. They were 
formerly a powerful and numerous nation, which ranged. over a very 
extensive country, and were most successful in their. predatory excur- 
sions against their neighbours, particularly the northern Indians, and 
some tribes on the Saskatchawan and Beaver Rivers;: but they have 
long ceased to be held in any fear, and are now, perhaps, the most 
harmless and inoffensive of the whole Indian race. This change is 
entirely to be attributed to their intercourse with Europeans; and 
the vast reduction in their numbers occasioned, I fear, in a consider- 
able degree, by the injudicious introduction amongst them of ardent 
spirits. They are so passionately fond of this poison, that they will 
make any sacrifice to obtain it. They are esteemed good hunters, 


va 


OF THE POLAR SEA. BY 


and are generally assiduous in the occupation. Having laid the 
bow and arrow altogether aside, and the use of snares, except for 
rabbits and partridges, they depend entirely on the Europeans for 
the means of gaining their subsistence, as they require guns, and 
a constant supply of powder and shot; so that these Indians are 
probably more completely under the power of the trader than any 
of the other tribes. As I only saw a few straggling parties of 
them during short intervals, and under unfavourable circumstances 
of sickness and famine, I am unable to give, from personal ob- 
servation, any account of their manners and customs; I must 
refer the reader, therefore, to Dr. Richardson’s account of them, 
which will be found in the following chapter. That gentleman, 
during his longer residence at the post, had many opportunities 
of seeing the natives, and made considerable progress in their lan- 
guage. 

January 17.—This morning the sporting part of our society had 
rather a novel diversion: intelligence having been brought that a 
wolf had borne away a steel trap, in which he had been caught, a 
party went in search of the marauder, and took two English bull- 
dogs and a terrier, which had been brought into the country this 
season. On the first sight of the animal the dogs became alarmed, 
and stood barking at a distance, and probably would not have ven- 
tured to advance, had they not seen the wolf fall by a shot from 
one of the gentlemen; they then, however, went up, and behaved‘ 
courageously, and were enraged by the bites they received. The 
wolf soon died of its wounds, and the body was brought to the 
house, where a drawing of it was taken by Mr. Hood, and the 
skin preserved by Dr. Richardson. Its general features bore a strong 
resemblance to many of the dogs about the fort, but it was larger, 
and had a more ferocious aspect. Mr. Back and I were too much 
occupied in preparing for our departure on the following day to join 
this excursion. 7 

I 


58 | A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


‘The position of Cumberland House, by our observations, is, lati- 
tude 53° 56 40° N., longitude 102° 16° 41° W., by the chronome- 
ters; variation 17° 17' 20" E., dip of the needle, 83° 12’ 50°. The 
whole of the travelling settee between York Factory and Cunis 
berland House is about six hundred and ninety miles. 


{ 
4 
: 
: 
I 
i 
! 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 59 


CHAPTER III. 


Dr. BRichardson’s Residence at Cumberland House—His Account of the Cree Indians. 


1820 


Janay 19. LH ROM the departure of Messrs. Franklin and Back, 
on the 19th of January for Chepewyan, until the opening of the 
navigation in the spring, the occurrences connected with the 
Expedition were so much in the ordinary routine of a winter’s resi- 
dence at Fort Cumberland, that they may be, perhaps, appropriately 
blended with the following general but brief account of that district 
and its inhabitants. 

' Cumberland House was originally built by Hearne, a year or two 
after his return from the Coppermine River, and has ever since been 
considered by the Hudson’s Bay Company as a post of considerable 
importance. Previous to that time, the natives carried their furs 
down to the shores of Hudson’s Bay, or disposed of them nearer 
home to the French Canadian traders, who visited this aa of the 
country as early as the year 1697. 

The Cumberland House district, extending about one hundred 
and fifty miles from east to west along the banks of the Saskatchawan, 
and about as far from north to south, comprehends, on a rough cal- 
culation, upwards of twenty thousand square miles, and is frequented 
at present by about one hundred and twenty Indian hunters. Of 
these a few have several wives, but the majority have only one, and 
as some are unmarried, we shall not err greatly in considering the 
number of married women as only slightly exceeding that of the 

I 2 


60 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


hunters. The women marry very young, have a custom of suckling 
their children for several years, and are besides exposed constantly to 
fatigue and often to famine ; hence they are not prolific, bearing upon 
an average not more than four children, of whom two may attain 
the age of puberty. Upon these data, the amount of each family 
may be stated at five, and the whole Indian population in the dis- 
trict at five hundred. 

This is but a small population for such an extent of country, yet 
their mode of life occasionally subjects them to great privations. The 
winter of our residence at Cumberland House proved extremely 
severe to the Indians. The hooping-cough made its appearance 
amongst them in the autumn, and was followed by the. measles, 
which, in the course of the winter spread through the tribe. -. Many 
died, and most of the survivors were so enfeebled as to .be un- 
able to pursue the necessary avocations of hunting and fishing. 
Even those who experienced only a slight attack, or escaped the sick- 
ness altogether, dispirited by the scenes of misery which environed 
them, were rendered incapable of affording relief to their distressed 
relations, and spent their time in conjuring and drumming to avert 
the pestilence. Those who were able came to the fort and received 
relief, but many who had retired with their families to distant 
corners, to pursue their winter hunts, experienced all the horrors of 
famine. Oneevening, early in the month of January, a poor Indian 
entered the North-West Company’s House, carrying his only child 
in his arms, and followed by his starving wife. They had been 
hunting apart from the other bands, had been unsuccessful, and 
whilst in want were seized with the epidemical disease. An Indian 
is accustomed. to starve, and it is not easy to.elicit from him an 
account of his sufferings. This poor man’s story was very brief; as 
soon as the fever abated, he set out with his wife for Cumberland 
House, having been previously reduced to feed on the bits of skin 
and offal, which remained about their encampment. Even this 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 61 


miserable fare was exhausted, and they walked several days without 
eating, yet exerting themselves far beyond their strength that they 
might save the life of the infant. It died almost within sight of the 
house. Mr. Connolly, who was then in charge of the post, received 
them with the utmost humanity, and instantly placed food before 
them; but no language can describe the manner in which the miser- 
able father dashed the morsel from his lips and deplored the loss of 
his child. Misery may harden a disposition scsi bad, but it 
never fails to soften the heart of a good man. 

The origin of the Crees, to which nation the Cumberland House 
Indians belong, is, like that of the other Aborigines of America, in- 
volved in obscurity. Perhaps the researches, now making into the 
nature and affinities of the languages spoken by the different Indian 
tribes, may eventually throw some light on the subject. Indeed the 
American philologists seem to have succeeded already in classing the 
known dialects into three languages:—Ist. The Floridean, spoken 
by the Creeks, Chickesaws, Choctaws, Cherokees, Pascagoulas, and 
some other tribes, who inhabit the southern parts of the United 
States. 2d. The Iroquois, spoken by the Mengwe, or Six Nations, 
the Wyandots, the Nadowessies, and Asseeneepoytuck. 3d. The 
Lenni-lenapé, spoken by a great family more widely spread than the 
other two, and from which, together with a vast number of other tribes, 
are sprung our Crees. Mr. Heckewelder, a Missionary, who resided 
long amongst these people, and from whose paper, (published in the 
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society,) the above clas- 
sification is taken, states that the Lenape have a tradition amongst 
them, of their ancestors having come from the westward, and taking 
possession of the whole country from the Missouri to the Atlantic, 
after driving:away or destroying the original inhabitants of the land, 
whom they termed Alligewi. In this migration and contest, which 
endured for a series of years, the Mengwe, or Iroquois, kept pace 
with them, moving in a parallel but more northerly line, and finally 


62 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


settling on the banks of the St. Lawrence, and the great lakes from. 
whence it flows. ‘The Lenapé, being more numerous, peopled not 
only the greater part of the country at present occupied by the Wnited 
States, but also sent detachments to the northward as far as the banks 
of the River Mississippi and. the shores of Hudson’s Bay. The prin- 
cipal of their northern tribes are now known under the names of 
Saulteurs or Chippeways, and Crees; the former inhabiting the country 
betwixt. Lakes Winipeg and Superior, the latter frequenting the 
shores of Hudson’s Bay, from Moose to Churchill, and the country 
from thence as far to the westward as the plains which lie betwixt the 
forks of the Saskatchawan. 

These Crees, formerly known by the French Canadian traders 
under the appellation of Knisteneaux, generally designate themselves 
as Kithinyoowue (men), or, when they wish to discriminate them- 
selves from the other Indian nations, as Nathehwywithinyoowuc 
(Southern-men)*. 


* Much confusion has arisen from the great variety of names, applied without discrimi- 
nation to the various tribes of Saulteurs and Crees. Heckewelder considers the Crees of 
Moose Factory to be a branch of that tribe of the Lenapé, which is named Minsi, or Wolf 
Tribe. He has been led to form this opinion, from the similarity of the name given to 
these people by Monsieur Jeremie, namely, Monsonies; but the truth is, that their real 
name is Mongsoa-eythinyoowuc, or Moose-deer Indians; hence the name of the factory 
and river on which it is built. The name Knisteneaux, Kristeneaux, or Killisteneaux, was 
anciently applied to a tribe of Crees, now termed Maskegons, who inhabit the river Wi- 
nipeg. This small tribe still retains the peculiarities of customs and dress, for which it was 
remarkable many years ago, as mentioned by Mr. Henry, in the interesting account of his 
journeys in these countries. They are said to be great rascals. The great body of the Crees 
were at that time named Opimmitish Ininiwuc, or Men of the Woods. It would, how- 
ever, be an endless task to attempt to determine the precise people designated by the early 
French writers. Every small band, naming itself from its hunting grounds, was described 
as a different nation. The Chippeways who frequented the Lake of the Woods were 
named from a particular act of pillage—Puliers, or Robbers: and the name Saulteurs, ap- 
plied to a principal band that frequented the Sault St. Marie, has been by degrees extended. 
to the whole tribe. It is frequently pronounced and written Sotoos. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 63 


The original character of the Crees must have been much modified 
by their long intercourse with Europeans; hence it is to be under- 
stood, that we confine ourselves in the following sketch to their pre- 
sent condition, and more particularly to the Crees of Cumberland 
House. The moral character of a hunter is acted upon by the 
nature of the land he inhabits, the abundance or scarcity of food, 
and we may add, in the present case, his means of access to spi- 
rituous liquors. In a country so various in these respects as that 
inhabited by the Crees, the causes alluded to must operate strongly 
in producing a considerable difference of character amongst the va- 
rious hordes. It may be proper to bear in mind also, that we are 
about to draw the character of a people whose only rule of conduct 
is public opinion, and to try them by a morality founded on divine 
revelation ; as we are not aware that it is in the power of any one, 
who has been educated in a land to which the blessings of the Gos- 
pel have extended, to use any other standard. 

Bearing these considerations in mind then, we may state the Crees 
to be a vain, fickle, improvident, and indolent race, and not very strict 
in their adherence to truth, being great boasters; but, on the other 
hand, they strictly regard the rights of property, are susceptible of the 
kinder affections, capable of friendship, very hospitable, tolerably 
kind to their women, and withal inclined to peace. 


Much of the faulty part of their character, no doubt, originates” 


in their mode of life: accustomed as a hunter to depend greatly on 
chance for his subsistence, the Cree takes little thought of to-morrow ; 
and the most offensive part of his behaviour—the habit of boasting— 
has been probably assumed as a necessary part of his armour, which 
operates upon the fears of his enemies. They are countenanced, 
however, in this failing by the practice of the ancient Greeks, and 
perhaps by that of every other nation in its ruder state. Every Cree 
fears the medical or conjuring powers of his neighbour; but at the 
same time exalts his own attainments to the skies. “I am God-like” 


64, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES © 


Is a common expression amongst them, and they prove their divinity- 
ship by eating live coals, and by various tricks of a similar nature. 
A medicine bag is an indispensable part of a hunter’s equipment. 
It is generally furnished with a little bit of indigo, blue vitriol, ver- 
milion, or some other showy article; and is, when in the hands of a 
noted conjuror, such an object of terror to the rest of the tribe, that 
its possessor is enabled to fatten at his ease upon the labours of his 
deluded countrymen. | 

A fellow of this description came to Cumberland House in the 
winter of 1819. Notwithstanding the then miserable state of the 
Indians, the rapacity of this wretch had been preying upon their 
necessities, and a poor hunter was actually at the moment pining 
away under the influence of his threats. The mighty conjuror, im- 
mediately on his arrival at the house, began to trumpet forth his 
powers, boasting, among other things, that although his hands and 
feet were tied as securely as possible, yet, when placed in a con- 
juring-house, he would speedily disengage himself by the aid of two 
or three familiar spirits, who were attendant on his call. He was 
instantly taken at his word, and that his exertions might not be 
without an aim, a capot or great coat was promised as the reward of 
his success. A conjuring-house having been erected in the usual 
form, that is, by sticking four willows in the ground and tying their 
tops to a hoop at the height of six or eight feet, he was fettered com- 
pletely by winding several fathoms of rope round his body and ex- 
tremities, and placed in its narrow apartment, not exceeding two feet 
in diameter. A moose skin being then thrown over the frame, 
secluded him from our view. He forthwith began to chant a kind 
of hymn in a very monotonous tone. The rest of the Indians, who 
seemed in some doubt respecting the powers of a devil when put in 
competition with those of a white man, ranged themselves around, and 
watched the result with anxiety. Nothing remarkable occurred for 
along time. The conjuror continued his song at intervals, and it 


ile 


6 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 65 


was occasionally taken up by those without. In this manner an hour 


= 


and a half elapsed; but at length our attention, which had begun to 
flag, was roused by the violent shaking of the conjuring-house. It 
was instantly whispered round the circle, that at least one devil had 
crept. under the moose-skin. But it proved to be only the “ God- 
like man” trembling with cold. He had entered the lists, stript to 
the skin, and the thermometer stood very low that evening. His 
attempts were continued, however, with considerable resolution for half 
an hour longer, when he reluctantly gave in. He had found no diffi- 
culty in slipping through the noose when it was formed by his coun- 
trymen ; but, in the present instance, the knot was tied by Governor 
Williams, who is an expert sailor. After this unsuccessful exhibition 
his credit sunk amazingly, and he took the earliest opportunity of 
sneaking away from the fort. 
_ About two years ago a conjuror paid more dearly for his: a 2 


das a quarrel with an Indian he threw out some. obscure threats of 


vengeance, which passed unnoticed at the time, but were afterwards 
remembered. ‘They met in the spring at Carlton House, after passing 


the winter in different parts of the country, during which the In- 


dian’s child died. The conjuror had the folly to boast that: he had 


caused its death, and the enraged father shot him dead on the spot. 


-It.may be remarked, however, that both these Indians were inha- 


bitants of the plains, and had been taught, by their intercourse with 
the turbulent Stone Indians, to set but comparatively little value on 
the life of a.man. 

It might.be thought seat the Crees have benefited by élyeie lhe 
intercourse with civilized. nations.. That this is not so much the case 
as it ought to be, 1s not entirely. their own fault. They are capable 
of being,. and I believe. willing to be, taught; but no pains -have 


hitherto been taken, to inform their minds, and their white acquaint- 
ances seem in general to find it easier to descend to the Indian cus- 


toms, and modes of thinking, particularly with respect to women, 


K 


66 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


than to attempt to raise the Indians to theirs. Indeed, such a 
lamentable want of morality has been ‘displayed by the white tradérs 
in their contests for the interests of their respective companies, that 
it would require a long series of good conduct to efface from the 
minds of the native population the ideas they have formed of the 
white character. Notwithstanding the frequent violations of the 
rights of property they have witnessed, and but too often expe- 
rienced, in their own persons, these savages, as they are termed, 
remain strictly honest. During their visits to a post, they are suf- 
fered to enter every apartment in the house, without the least 
restraint, and although articles of value to them are scattered about, 
nothing is ever missed. They even scrupulously avoid moving any 
thing from its place, although they are often prompted by curiosity 
to examine it. In some cases, indeed, they carry this principle to‘a 
degree of self-denial which would hardly be expected. It often hap- 
pens that meat, which has been paid for, Gf the poisonous draught 
it procures them can be considered as payment,) is left at their lodges 
until a convenient opportunity occurs of carrying it away. They 
will rather pass several days without eating than touch the meat 
thus intrusted to their charge, even when there exists a prospect of 
replacing it. 

The hospitality of the Crees is unbounded. They afford a certain 
asylum to the half-breed children when deserted by their unnatural 
white fathers; and the infirm, and indeed every individual in ‘an 
encampment, share the provisions of a successful hunter as long as 
they last. Fond too as’a Cree is of spirituous liquors, he is not 
happy unless all his neighbours partake with him. It 1s not easy, 
however, to say what share ostentation may have in the ‘apparent 
munificence in the latter article; for when an Indian, by a good hunt, 
is enabled to treat the others with a keg of rum, he becomes the 
chief of a night, assumes no little stateliness of manner, ‘and is 
tréated with deference by those who regale at his expense. Prompted 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 67 


also by the desire of gaining a name, .they lavish away the articles 
they purchase at the trading posts, and are well satisfied if repaid in 
praise. | 

Gaming is not.uncommon ,amongst the Crees of all the different 
districts, but it is pursued to greater lengths by those bands who fre- 
quent the plains, and who, fromthe ease with which they obtain food, 
have abundant leisure. ‘The.game most in.use amongst them, termed 
puckesann, is played with the.stones of a species of prunus which, 
from this cireumstance, they term puckesann-meena. ‘The difficulty 
lies in guessing the number of stones which are tossed out of a 
small wooden dish, and the hunters will spend whole nights at the 
destructive sport, staking their most valuable articles, powder and shot. 

It has been remarked by some writers that the aboriginal inhabi- 
tants of America are deficient in.passion for the fair sex. This is 
by no means the case with the Crees; on the contrary, their practice 
of seducing each: other’s wives, proves the most fertile source of their 
quarrels. ‘When the guilty pair are detected, the woman generally 
receives a severe beating, but the husband is, for the most part, 
afraid to reproach the male culprit until they get drunk together at 
the fort; then the remembrance of the offence is revived, a struggle 


ensues, and the affair is terminated by the loss of afew handfuls of 


hair. Some husbands, however, feel more deeply the injury done to 
their honour, and seek revenge even in their sober moments. In 
such cases it is not uncommon. for the offended party to walk with 
great gravity up to the other, and deliberately seizing,his gun, or 
some other article.of value, to break it before his face. The adul- 
terer looks on in silence, afraid to make any attempt to save his pro- 
perty. In this respect, indeed, the Indian character seems to differ 
from the European, that an Indian, instead of letting his anger in- 
crease with that of his antagonist, assumes the utmost coolness, lest 
he should push him to. extremities. 3 
Although adultery is sometimes punished amongst the Crees in the 
K 2 


68 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


manner above described, yet it is no crime, provided the husband 
receives a valuable consideration for his wife’s prostitution. In this 
ease she is only lent to a friend. Neither is chastity considered as a 
virtue in a female before marriage, that is, before she becomes the 
exclusive property of one hunter. 

- The Cree women are not in general treated harshly fig their 
husbands, and possess considerable influence over them. They often 
eat, and even get drunk, in consort with the men; a considerable 
portion of the labour, however, falls to the lot of the wife. She 
makes the hut, cooks, dresses the skins, and, for the most. part, 
carries the heaviest load; but, when she is unable to perform her 
task, the husband does not consider it beneath his dignity to assist 
her. In illustration of this remark, I may quote the case of an 
Indian who visited the fort in winter. This poor man’s wife had 
lost her feet by the frost, and he was compelled, not only to hunt, 
and do all the menial offices himself, but in winter to drag his wife 
with their stock of furniture from one encampment to another. In 
the performance of this duty, as he could not keep pace with the 
rest. of the tribe in their movements, he, more than once, nearly 
perished of hunger. 

These Indians, however, capable as they are of behaving thus 
kindly, affect in their discourse to despise the softer sex, and on 
solemn occasions, will not suffer them to eat before them or even 
come into their presence.- In this they are countenanced by the 


white residents, most of whom have Indian or half-breed wives, 
but ‘seem afraid- of treating them with the tenderness or attention — 


due to every female, lest they should themselves be despised by the 


Indians. At least, this is the only reason they assign for their 


neglect of those whom <Hey make partners of their beds and mothers 


‘of their children. - 


Both sexes are fond of, and excessively ere to, their children. 
The father never punishes them, and if the mother, more hasty in 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 69 


her temper, sometimes bestows a blow or two on a troublesome 
child, her heart is instantly softened by the roar which follows, and she 
mingles her tears with those that streak the smoky face of her darling. 
It may be fairly said, then, that restraint or punishment forms no 
part of the education of an Indian child, nor are they early trained 
to that command over their temper which they exhibit in after 
years. | | 

The discourse of the parents is never restrained by the presence 
of their children, every transaction between the sexes being openly 
talked of before them. This is done from principle, that a child may 
not grow up ignorant of what they consider as necessary to be 
known; accordingly a boy is, from his infancy, acquainted with all 
the mysteries of the sex, and the mother takes care that the girls 
shall not fall short of their brothers in their education. 

The Crees having early obtained arms from the European traders, 
were enabled to make harassing inroads on the lands of their neigh- 
bours, and are known to have made war excursions as far to the 
westward as the Rocky Mountains, and to the northward as far as 
M‘Kenzie’s River; but their enemies being now as well armed as 
themselves, the case is much altered. 

- They shew great fortitude in the endurance of hunger, and the 
other evils incident to a hunter’s life: but any unusual accident dis- 
pizits them at once, and they seldom venture to meet their enemies 
im open warfare, or to attack them even by surprise, unless with the 
advantage of superiority of numbers. Perhaps they are much dete- 
riorated in this respect by their intercourse with Europeans. Their 
existence at present hangs upon the supplies of ammunition and 
clothing they receive from the traders, and they deeply feel their 
dependant situation. But their character has been. still more debased 
by the passion for spirituous liquors, so assiduously fostered among 
them. . To obtain the noxious beverage, they descend to the most 
humiliating entreaties, and assume an abjectness of behaviour which 


70 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


does not seem natural to them, and of which not a vestige is to be 
seen in their: mtercourse with each other. Their character has sunk 
among the neighbouring nations. They are no longer the warriors 
who drove ‘before them the inhabitants of the Saskatchawan and 
Missinippi. ‘The Cumberland House Crees in particular, have been 
long disused to war. Betwixt them and their ancient enemies, the 
Slave nations, lie the extensive plains of the Saskatchawan, inhabited 
by the powerful Asseeneepoytuck, or Stone Indians, who having, 
whilst yet a small tribe, entered the country under the patronage of 
the Crees, now render back the protection they received. The 
manners and customs of the Crees have, probably, since their ac- 
quaintance with Europeans, undergone a change, at least, equal 
to that which has taken place in their moral character; and, al- 
though we heard of many practices peculiar to them, yet they ap- 
peared to be nearly as much honoured in the breach as the obser- 
vance. We shall, however, briefly notice a few of the most remark- 
able customs. 

When a hunter marries his first wife, he usually takes up his 
abode in the tent of his father-in-law, and of course hunts for the 
family ; but when he becomes a father, the families are at liberty to 
separate, or remain together, as their inclinations prompt them. 
His second wife is for the most part the sister of the first, but not 
necessarily so, for an Indian of another family often presses -his 
daughter wpon a hunter whom he knows to be capable of maintaining 
her well. The first wife always remains the mistress of the tent, 
and assumes an authority over the others, which is not in every case 
quietly submitted to. It may be remarked, that whilst an Indian 
resides with his wife’s family, itis extremely improper for his mother- 
in-law to speak, or even look at him; and when she has a communi- 
cation to make, it is the etiquette that she should turn her back upon 
him, and address him only through the medium of a third person. 
This singular custom is not very creditable to the Indians, if it really 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 71 


had its origin in the cause which they at present assign for it, namely, 
thatia woman's speaking to her son-in-law is a sure indication of her 
having conceived..a criminal affection for him. 

It appears also to have been an ancient practice for an Indian to 
avoid eating or sitting down in the presence of the father-in-law. 
We received no;account of the origin of this custom, and it is now 
almost obsolete amongst the Cumberland House Crees, though still 
partially observed by those who frequent. Carlton. 

Tattooing is almost universal with the Crees. ‘The women are in 
general content with having one or two lines,drawn from the corners 
of the mouth towards the,angles of the lower jaw; but.some of the 
men have their bodies covered with a great variety of lines and 
figures. It seems to be considered by most rather as a proof of 
courage than an ornament, the operation being very painful, and, if 
the figures are numerous and intricate, lasting several,days. The 
lines on the face are formed by dexterously running an awl under the 
cuticle, and then drawing a: cord, dipt in charcoal and. water, through 
the canal thus:formed. The punctures on the body are formed by 
needles of various sizes set in a frame. A number of hawk bells 
attached to this frame serve by their noise to cover the suppressed 
groans of the sufferer, and, probably for the same reason, the pro- 
cess is accompanied with singing. An indelible stain is produced by 


rubbing a little finely-powdered willow-charcoal into the punctures. 


A half-breed, whose arm I amputated, declared, that tattooing was 
not only the most painful operation of the two, but rendered 
infinitely more. difficult to bear by its tediousness, haying lasted in 
his case three. days. | 

A. Cree woman, when visited by the periodical disorder incident 
to the sex, is laid under considerable -restraint. They are far, how- 
ever, from carrying matters to the extremities mentioned by Hearne 
in his description of the Chepewyans, or Northern Indians. She 
hives apart from her husband also for two months if she has borne a 


12 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


boy, and for three if she has given birth to’a girl. Some mothers 
preserve a piece of the navel-string, sew it up in a bag neatly.orna- 
mented, and suspend it as an amulet to Pag outer garment of the 
child. | : 

Many of the Cree hunters are careful to prevent a woman from 
partaking of the head of a moose-deer, lest it should spoil their future 
hunts; and for the same reason they avoid bringing it to a fort, fear- 
ing lest the white people should give the bones to the dogs. 

The games or sports of the Crees are various. One, termed the 
game of the Mitten, is played with four balls, three of which are 
plain, and one marked. These being hid under as many mittens, 
the opposite party is required to fix on that which is marked. He 
gives or receives a feather according as he guesses right or wrong. 
‘When-the feathers, which are ten in number, have all passed into one 
hand, a new division is made; but when one of the parties obtains 
possession of them thrice, he seizes on the stakes. i sit 

The game of Platter is more intricate, and is played with the 
claws of a bear, or some other animal, marked with various lines and 
characters. These dice, which are eight in number, and cut flat at 
their large end, are shook together in a wooden dish, tossed into the 
air and caught again. ‘The lines, traced on such claws as’ happen to 
alight on the platter in an erect position, indicate what number of 
counters the caster is to receive from his opponent. | 

‘They have, however, a much more manly amusement sraksehta the 
Cross, although they do not engage even in it without depositing 
considerable stakes. An extensive meadow is chosen for this sport, 
and the articles staked are tied to a post, or deposited’in the custody 
of two old men. ‘The combatants being stript and. pamted, and each 
provided with a kind of battledore or racket, in shape resembling 
the letter P, with a handle about two feet long, and a-head loosely 
wrought with net-work, so as to form a shallow ‘bag, range them- 
selves on different sides. A ball being now tossed up in the middle, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 73 


each party endeavours to drive it to their respective goals, and much 
dexterity and agility is displayed in the contest. When a nimble 
runner gets the ball in his cross, he sets off towards the goal with 
the utmost speed, and is followed by the rest, who endeavour to 
jostle him and shake it out; but, if hard pressed, he discharges it 
with a jerk, to be forwarded by his own party, or bandied back by 
their opponents, until the victory is decided by its passing the goal. 

Of the religious opinions of the Crees, it is difficult to give a cor- 
rect account, not only because they shew a disinclination to enter 
upon the subject, but because their ancient traditions are mingled 
with the information they have more recently obtained, by their 
intercourse with Europeans. 

None of them ventured to describe the original formation of the 
world, but they all spoke of an universal deluge, caused by an at- 
tempt of the fish to drown Weesack-ootchacht, a kind of demi- 
god, with whom they had quarrelled. Having constructed a raft, he 
embarked with his family, and all kinds of birds and beasts. After 
the flood had continued for some time, he ordered several water-fowl 
to dive to the bottom; they were all drowned: but a musk-rat having 
been despatched on the same errand, was more successful, and _re- 
turned with a mouthful of mud, out of which Weesack-ootchacht, 
imitating the mode in which the rats construct their houses, formed 
anew earth. First, a small conical hill of mud appeared above the 
water ;_ by-and-by, its base gradually spreading out, it became an ex- 
tensive bank, which the rays of the sun at length hardened into 
firm land. Notwithstanding the power that Wesack-ootchacht here 
displayed, his person is held in very little reverence by the Indians ; 
and, in return, he seizes every opportunity of tormenting them. 
His conduct is far from being moral, and his amours, and the dis- 
guises he assumes in the prosecution of them, are more various and 
extraordinary than those of the Grecian Jupiter himself: but as 
his adventures are more remarkable for their eccentricity than their 

L 


74, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


delicacy, it is better to pass them over in silence. Before we quit 
him, however, we may remark, that he converses with all kinds of 
birds and beasts in their own languages, constantly addressing them 
by the title of brother, but through an inherent suspicion of his 
intentions, they are seldom willing to admit of his claims of rela- 
tionship. ‘The Indians make no sacrifices to him, not even to avert 
his wrath. They pay a kind of worship, however, and make offer- 
ings to a being, whom they term Kepoochikawn. 

This deity is represented sometimes by rude images of the human 
figure, but more commonly merely by tying the tops of a few willow 
bushes together; and the offerings to him consist of every thing 
that is valuable to an Indian; yet they treat him with considerable 
familiarity, interlarding their most solemn speeches with expostula- 
tions and threats of neglect, if he fails in complying with their re- 
quests. As most of their petitions are for plenty of food, they do 
not trust entirely to the favour of Kepoochikawn, but endeavour, at 
the same time, to propitiate the animal, an imaginary representa- 
tive of the whole race of larger quadrupeds that are objects of the 
chase. : 

In the month of May, whilst I was at Carlton House, the Cree 
hunter, engaged to attend that post, resolved upon dedicating several 
articles to Kepoochikawn, and as I had made some inquiries of 
him respecting their modes of worship, he gave me an invitation 
to be present. The ceremony took place in a sweating-house, or as 
it may be designated from its more important use, a temple, which 
was erected for the occasion by the worshipper’s two wives. It was 
framed of arched willows, interlaced so as to form a vault capable 
of containing ten or- twelve men, ranged closely side by side, and 
high enough to admit of their sitting erect. It was very similar in 
shape to an oven, or the kraal of a Hottentot, and was closely 
covered with moose skins, except at the east end, which was left 
open for a'door. Near the centre of the building there was a hole 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 5 


in the ground, which contained ten or twelve red-hot stones, 
having a few leaves of the taccohaymenan, a species of prunus, 
strewed around them. When the women had completed the prepa- 
rations, the hunter made his appearance, perfectly naked, carrying 
in his hand an image of Kepoochikawn, rudely carved, and about 
two feet long. He placed his god at the upper end of the sweating- 
house, with his face towards the door, and proceeded to tie round 
its neck his offerings, consisting of a cotton handkerchief, a looking- 
glass, a tin pan, a piece of riband, and a bit of tobacco, which he 
had procured the same day, at the expense of fifteen or twenty 
skins. Whilst he was thus occupied, several other Crees, who were 
encamped in the neighbourhood, having been informed of what 
was going on, arrived, and stripping at the door of the temple, 
entered, and ranged themselves on each side; the hunter himself 
squatted down at the right hand of Kepoochikawn. The atmosphere 
of the temple having become so hot that none but zealous worship- 
pers would venture in, the interpreter and myself sat down on the 
threshold, and the two women remained on the outside as at- 
tendants. : 

The hunter, who throughout officiated as high priest, commenced 
by making a speech to Kepoochikawn, in which he requested him to 
be propitious, told him of the value of the things now presented, and 
cautioned him against ingratitude. This oration was delivered in a 
monotonous tone, and with great rapidity of utterance, and the 
speaker retained his squatting posture, but turned his face to his 
god. At its conclusion the priest began a hymn, of which the 
burthen was, “ I will walk with God, I will go with the animal;” 
and, at the end of each stanza, the rest joined im an insignificant 
chorus. He next took up a calumet, filled with a mixture of to- 
bacco, and bear-berry leaves, and holding its stem by the middle, in 
a horizontal position, over the hot stones, turned it slowly in a. cir- 
cular manner, following the course of the sun. Its mouth-piece 

L2 


"6 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES. 


being then, with much formality, held for a few seconds to the face of 
Kepoochikawn, it was next presented to the earth, having been pre- 
viously turned a second time over the hot stones; and afterwards, 
with equal ceremony, pointed in succession to the four quarters of the 
sky; then drawing a few whiffs from the calumet himself, he handed 
it to his left-hand neighbour, by whom it was gravely passed round 
the circle; the interpreter and myself, who were seated at the door, 
were asked to partake in our turn, but requested to keep the head 
of the calumet within the threshold of the sweating-house. When 
the tobacco was exhausted by passing several times round, the 
hunter made another speech, similar to the former; but was, if pos- 
sible, still more urgent in his requests.. A second hymn followed, 
and a quantity of water being sprinkled on the hot stones, the at- 
tendants were ordered to close the temple, which they did, by very 
carefully covering it wp with moose skins. We had no means of ascer- 
taining the temperature of the sweating-house; but before it was 
closed, not only those within, but also the spectators without, were 
perspiring freely. They continued in the vapour bath for thirty- 
five minutes, during which time a third speech was made, and a 
hymn was sung, and water occasionally sprinkled on the stones, 
which still retained much heat, as was evident from the hissing 
noise they made. The coverings were then thrown off, and the poor 
half-stewed worshippers exposed freely to the air; but they kept 
their squatting postures until a fourth speech was made, in which 
the deity was strongly reminded of the value of the gifts, and ex- 
horted to take an early opportunity of shewing his gratitude. The 
ceremony concluded by the sweaters scampering down to the river, 
and plunging into the stream. It may be remarked, that the door 
of the temple, and, of course, the face of the god, was turned to 
the rising sun; and the spectators were desired not to block up 
entirely the front of the building, but to leave a lane for the en- 
trance or exit of some influence of which they could: not. give me a 


QF THE POLAR SEA. . (7 


correct description. _ Several Indians, who lay on the outside of the 
sweating-house as spectators, seemed to regard the proceedings with 
very little awe, and were extremely free in the remarks and jokes 
they passed. upon the condition of the sweaters, and even of Kepoo- 
chikawn himself. One of them made a remark, that the shawl 
would have been much better bestowed upon himself than upon 
Kepoochikawn, but the same fellow afterwards stripped and joined 
in the ceremony. 

I did not learn that the Indians worship any other god by a 
specific name. They often refer, however, to the Keetchee-Maneeto, 
or Great Master of Life; and to an evil spirit, or Maatche-Maneeto. 
They also speak of Weettako, a kind of vampyre or devil, into which 
those who have fed on human flesh are transformed: 

Whilst at Carlton, I took an opportunity of asking a communi- 
cative old Indian, of the Blackfoot nation, his opinion of a future 
state; he replied, that they had heard from their: fathers, that the 
souls of the departed have to scramble with great labour up the 
sides of a steep mountain, upon attaining the summit of which they 
are rewarded with the prospect of an extensive plain, interspersed 
here and there with new tents, pitched in agreeable situations, and 
abounding in all sorts of game. Whilst they are absorbed in the 
contemplation of this delightful scene, they are descried by the in- 
habitants of the happy land, who, clothed in new skins, approach 
and welcome with every demonstration of kindness those Indians 
who have led good lives; but the bad Indians, who have imbrued 
their hands in the blood of their countrymen, are told to return 
from whence they came, and without more ceremony precipitated 
down the steep sides of the mountain. 

Women, who have been guilty of infanticide, never reach the 
mountain at all, but are compelled to hover round the seats of their 
crimes, with branches of trees tied to their legs. The melancholy 
sounds, which are heard: in the still summer evenings, and which: 


78 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the ignorance of the white people considers as the screams of the 
goat-sucker, are really, according to my: informant, the moanings of 
these unhappy beings. . : 

The Crees have somewhat similar notions, but as they inhabit a 
country widely different from the mountainous lands of the Black- 
foot Indians, the difficulty of their journey lies in walking along a 
slender and slippery tree, laid as a bridge across a rapid stream of 
stinking and muddy water. The night owl is regarded by the Crees 
with the same dread that it has been viewed by other nations. One 
small species, which is known to them by its melancholy nocturnal 
hootings, (for'as it never appears in the day, few even of the hun- 
ters have ever seen it) is particularly ominous. They call it the 
cheepat-peethees, or death bird, and never fail to whistle when they 
hear its note. If it does not reply to the whistle uy its hootings, the 
speedy death of the inquirer is augured. 

When a Cree dies, that part of his property, which he has not 
given away before his death, is burned with him, and his relations 
take care to place near the grave little heaps of fire-wood, food: 
pieces of tobacco, and such things as he is likely to need in his 
journey. Similar offerings are made when they revisit the grave: 
and as kettles, and other articles of value, are sometimes offered, 
they are frequently carried off by passengers, yet the relations are 
not displeased, provided sufficient respect has been shewn to the 
dead, by putting some other article, although of inferior value, in 
the place of that which has been taken away. 

The Crees are wont to celebrate the returns of the seasons by 
religious festivals, but we are unable to describe the ceremonial in 
use on these joyous occasions from personal observation. The fol- 
lowing brief notice of a feast, which was given by an old Cree chief, 
according to his annual custom, on the first croaking of the frogs, 
is drawn up from the information of one of the guests. A large 
oblong tent, or lodge, was prepared for the important occasion, by 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 79 


the men of the party, none of the women being suffered to inter- 
fere. It faced the setting sun, and great care was taken that every 
thing about it should be as neat and clean as possible. Three fire- 
places were raised within it, at equal distances, and little holes were 
dug in the corners to contain the ashes of their pipes. In a recess, 
at its upper end, one large image of Kepoochikawn, and many 
smaller ones, were ranged with their faces towards the door. The 
food was prepared by the chief’s wife, and consisted of .marrow-pem- 
mican, berries boiled with fat, and various other delicacies that had 
been preserved for the occasion. 

The preparations being completed, and a slave, whom the chief 
had taken in war, having warned the guests to the feast by the mys- 
terious word peenasheway, they came, dressed out in their best gar- 
ments, and ranged themselves according to their seniority, the elders 
seating themselves next the chief at the upper end, and the young 
men near the door. 

The chief commenced by addressing his deities in an appropriate 
speech, in which he told them, that he had hastened as soon as 
summer was indicated by the croaking of the frogs, to solicit their 
favour for himself and his young men, and hoped that they would 
send him a pleasant and plentiful season. His oration was con- 
cluded by an invocation to all the animals in the land, and a signal 
being given to the slave at the door, he invited them severally by 
their names to come and partake of the feast. 

The Cree chief having by this very general invitation displayed 
his unbounded hospitality, next ordered one of the young men to 
distribute a mess to each of the guests. This was done in new dishes 
of birch bark, and the utmost diligence was displayed in emptying 
them, it being considered extremely improper in a man to leave 
any part of that which is placed before him on such occasions. It is 
not inconsistent with good manners however, but rather considered 
as a piece of politeness, that a guest who has been too liberally sup- 


30 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


plied, should hand the surplus to his neighbour. When the viandg 
had disappeared, each filled his calumet and began to smoke with 
great assiduity, and in the course of the evening several songs were 
sung to the responsive sounds of the drum and seeseequay, their 
usual accompaniments, 

The Cree drum is double-headed, but possessing very little depth, 
it strongly resembles a tambourine in shape. Its want of depth is 
compensated, however, by its diameter, which frequently exceeds 
three feet. It is covered with moose skin parchment, painted with 
rude figures of men and beasts, having various fantastic additions, 
and is beat with a stick. The seeseequay is merely a rattle, formed 
by enclosing a few grains of shot in a piece of dried hide. These 
two instruments are used in all their religious ceremonies, except 
those which take place in a sweating-house. 

A. Cree places great reliance on his drum, and I cannot adduce a 
stronger instance than that of the poor man who is mentioned in a 
preceding page, as having lost his only child by famine, almost 
within sight of the fort. Notwithstanding his exhausted state, he 
travelled with an enormous drum tied to his back. 

Many of the Crees make vows to abstain from particular kinds of 
food, either for a specific time, or for the remainder of their life, 
esteeming such abstinence to be a certain.means of acquiring some 
supernatural powers, or at least of entailing upon themselyes a 
succession of good fortune. 

One of the wives of the Carlton hunter, of vaio we have already 
spoken as the worshipper of Kepoochikawn, made a determination 
not to eat of the flesh of the Wawaskeesh, or American stag; but 
during our abode at that place, she was induced to feed heartily 
upon it, through the intentional deceit of her husband, who told her 
that it was buffalo meat. When she had finished her meal, her hus- 
band told her of the trick, and seemed to enjoy the terror with which 
she contemplated the consequences of the involuntary breach of her 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 8] 


vow... Vows of this nature are often made by a Cree before he joins 
a war party, and they sometimes, like the eastern bonzes, walk for 
a certain number of days on all fours, or impose upon themselves 
some other penance, equally ridiculous. By such means the Cree 
warrior becomes godlike; but unless he kills an enemy before his 
return, his newly-acquired powers are esteemed to be productive in 
future of some direful consequence to himself. 

_ As we did not witness any of the Cree dances ourselves, we shall 
merely mention, that like the other North American nations, they 
are accustomed to practise that amusement on meeting with strange 
tribes, before going to war, and on other solemn occasions. 

The ‘habitual intoxication of the Cumberland House Crees has 
induced such a disregard of personal appearance, that they are 
squalid and dirty in the extreme; hence a minute description of their 
clothing would be by no means interesting. We shall, therefore, 
only remark in a general manner, that the dress of the males consists 
of a blanket thrown over the shoulders, a leathern shirt or jacket, and 
a piece of cloth tied round the middle. The women have in ‘addition 
a long petticoat; and both sexes wear a kind of wide hose, which 
reaching from the ancle to the middle of the thigh, are suspended by 
strings to the girdle. These hose, or as they are termed, Indian 
stockings, are commonly ornamented with beads or ribands, and from 
their convenience, have been universally adopted by the white resi- 
dents, as an essential part of their winter clothing. Their shoes, or 
rather short boots, for they tie round the ancle, are made of soft 
dressed moose skins, and during the winter they wrap several pieces 
of blanket round their feet. , 

_ They are fond of European articles of dress, considering it as mean 

_ to be dressed entirely in leather, and the hunters are generally fur- 
nished annually with a capot or great coat, and the women: with 
shawls, printed calicoes, and other things very unsuitable to their 
mode’ of life, but which they wear in imitation of the wives of the — 
M 


99 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


traders; all these articles, however showy they maybe at first, are 
soon reduced to a very filthy condition by the Indian custom of 
greasing the face and hair with soft fat or marrow, instead of 
washing them with water. This practice they say preserves the skin 
soft, and protects it from cold in the winter, and the moschetoes in 
summer, but it renders their presence. disagreeable to the olfactory 
organs of an European, particularly when they are seated in a close 
tent and near a hot fire. 

The only peculiarity which we observed, in their mode of rearing 
children ‘consists in the use of a sort of cradle, extremely well adapted 
to their mode of life. The infant is placed) in the bag having its 
lower extremities wrapt up in. soft sphagnum or bog-moss, and may 
be hung up.in the tent, or to the branch of a tree, without the least 
danger of tumbling out; or ina journey suspended on the mother’s 
back, by a band which crosses the forehead, so as to leave her hands 
perfectly free. It is one of the neatest articles of furniture they 
possess, being generally ornamented with beads, and bits of scarlet 
cloth, but it bears a very strong resemblance in its form to a mummy 
case. | 

The:sphagnum in which the child is laid, forms a soft elastic bed, 
which absorbs moisture very readily, and affords such a protection 
from the cold of a rigorous winter, that its place would be ill sup- 
plied by cloth. 

~The mothers are careful to collect a sufficient quantity in autumn 
for winter use; but when through accident their stock fails, they 
have recourse to the soft down of the typha, or reed mace, the dust 
of rotten wood, or even feathers, although none of these articles 
are so cleanly, or so easily changed, as the sphagnum. 

‘The above is a brief sketch of such parts of the manners, cha- 
racter, and. customs of the Crees, as: wecould collect from personal 
observation, or from the: information of the most intelligent half- 
breeds we met with ; and: we-shall merely add a few remarks on 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 83 


the manner in which the trade is conducted at the different inland 
posts of the fur Companies. — 

The standard of exchange in all mercantile transactions with the 
natives is a beaver skin, the relative value of which, as originally 
established by the traders, differs considerably from the present 
worth of the articles it represents ; but the Indians are averse to 
change. Three martin, eight musk-rat, or a single lynx, or wol- 
verene skin, are equivalent to one beaver ; a silver fox, white fox, or 
otter, are reckoned two beavers, and a black fox, or large black bear, 
are equal to four; a mode of reckoning which has very little con- 
nexion with the real value of these different furs in the European 
market. Neither has any attention been paid to the original: cost 
of European articles, in fixing the tarif by which they are sold to 
the Indians. A coarse butcher’s knife is one skin, a woollen blanket 
or a fathom of coarse cloth, eight, and a fowling-piece fifteen. The 
Indians receive their principal. outfit of clothing and ammunition 
on credit in the autumn, to be repaid by their winter hunts; the 
amount intrusted to each of the hunters, varying with their reputations 
for industry and skill, from twenty to one hundred and fifty skins. 
The Indians are generally anxious to pay off the debt thus incurred, 
but their good intentions are often frustrated by the arts of the 
rival traders. Each of the Companies keeps men constantly employed 
travelling over the country during the winter, to collect the furs 
from the different bands of hunters as fast as they are procured. 
The poor Indian endeavours to behave honestly, and when he has 
gathered a few skins:sends notice to the post from whence he pro- 
cured. his supphes, but if discovered in the mean time by the op- 
posite party, he is seldom proof against the temptation to which he 
is exposed. However firm he may be in his denials at first, his 
resolutions are enfeebled by the sight of a little rum, and when he 
has tasted the intoxicating beverage, they vanish. like. smoke, and 
he brings forth his store of. furs, which he has carefully concealed 

M 2 


84: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


from the scrutinizing eyes of his visitors. This mode of carrying on 
the trade not only causes the amount of furs, collected by either-of 
the two Companies, to depend more upon the activity of their agents, 
the knowledge they possess of ‘the motions of the Indians, and the 
quantity of rum they carry, than upon the liberality of the credits 
they give, but is also productive of an increasing deterioration’ of 
the character of the Indians, and will, probably, ultimately prove 
destructive to the fur trade itself. Indeed the evil has already, in 
part, recoiled upon the traders; for the Indians, long deceived, have 
become deceivers in their turn, and not unfrequently after having 
incurred a heavy debt at one post, move off to another, to play the 
same game. In some cases the rival posts have entered. into a 
mutual agreement, to trade only with the Indians they have re- 
spectively fitted out; but such treaties, being seldom rigidly adhered 
to, prove a fertile subject for disputes, and the differences have 
been more than once. decided by force of arms. To carry on the 
contest, the two Companies are obliged to employ a great many 
servants, whom they maintain often with much difficulty, and 
always at a considerable expense. 

‘There are thirty men belonging to the Hudson’s Bay Fort at 
Cumberland, and nearly as many women.and children. 

The inhabitants of the North West Company’s house are still 
more numerous. These large families are fed during the greatest 
part of the year on fish, which are principally procured at Beaver 
Lake, about fifty miles distant. The fishery commencing with the 
first frosts in autumn, continues abundant till January, and the 
produce is dragged over the snow on sledges, each drawn by three 
dogs, and carrying about two hundred and fifty pounds. The journey 
to and from the lake occupies five days, and every sledge requires 
a driver. About three thousand fish, averaging three pounds: a 
piece, were caught by the Hudson’s Bay fishermen last season ; in ad- 
dition to which a few sturgeon were occasionally caught in Pine 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 85 


Island Lake; and towards the spring a considerable quantity of 
“moose meat was procured from the Basquian Hill, sixty or seventy 
miles distant.. The rest of our winter’s provision consisted of geese, 
salted in the autumn, and of dried meats and pemmican, obtained 
from the’ provision posts on the plains of the Saskatchawan. A good 
many potatoes are also raised at this post, and a small supply of tea 
and sugar is brought, from the depét at York Factory. The provi- 
sions obtained from these various sources were amply sufficient in the 
winter of 1819-20; but through improvidence ly post has in former 
seasons been reduced to great straits. 

Many of. the labourers, and a great majority of the agents and 
clerks employed by the two Companies, have Indian or half-breed 
wives, and the mixed offspring thus Sona: has become extremely 
numerous. 

These métifs, or as the @antiilites term them, dois-brulés, are 
upon the whole a good looking people, and where the experiment 
has been made, have shewn much aptness in learning, and willing- 
ness to be taught ; they have, however, been sadly neglected. The 
example of their fathers has released them from the restraint im- 
posed by the Indian opinions of good and bad behaviour; and, 
generally speaking, no pains have been taken to fill the void with 
better principles. Hence it is not surprising that the males, trained 
up in a high opinion of the authority and rights of the Company to 
which: their fathers belonged, and unacquainted with the laws of 
the civilized world, should be ready to engage in any. measure what- 
ever, that they are prompted to believe will forward the interests 
of the cause they espouse. Nor that the girls, taught a certain 
degree of refinement by the acquisition of an European language, 
sheuld be inflamed by the unrestrained discourse of their Indian 
relations, and very early give up all pretensions to chastity. It is, 
however, but justice to remark, that there is a very decided dif. 
ference 1 in the conduct of the children of the Orkney men employed 


86 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


by the Hudson’s Bay Company and those of the Canadian voyagers. 
Some trouble is occasionally bestowed in teaching the former, and it 
is not thrown away ; but all the good that can be said of the latter 
is, that they are not quite so licentious as their fathers are. 

Many of the half-breeds, both male and female, are brought up 
amongst, and intermarry with, the Indians ; and there are few tents 
wherein the paler children of such marriages are not to be seen. It 
has been remarked, I do not know with what truth, that half-breeds 
shew more personal courage than the pure Crees. | 

A. singular change takes place in the physical constitution of the 
Indian females who become inmates ofa fort ; namely, they bear 
children more frequently and longer, but, at the same time, are 
rendered liable to indurations of the mammz and. prolapsus of the 
uterus; evils from which they are, in a great measure, exempt 
whilst they lead a wandering and laborious life. 

The girls at the forts, particularly the daughters of Canadians, 
are given in marriage very young; they are very frequently wives at 
twelve years of age, and mothers at fourteen. Nay, more than one 
instance came under our observation, of the master of a post hav- 
ing permitted a voyager to take to wife a poor child that had 
scarcely attained the age of ten years. The masters and wintering 
partners of the Companies deemed this criminal indulgence to the 
vices of their servants, necessary to stimulate them to exertion: for 
the interest of their respective concerns. Another practice may 
also be noticed, as shewing the state of moral feeling on these sub- 
jects amongst the white residents of the fur countries. It was. not 
very uncommon, amongst.the Canadian voyagers, for one woman to 
be common to, and maintained at the joint expense of, two men; 
nor for a voyager to sell his wife, either for a season, or altogether, 
for a sum of money, proportioned to her beauty and good qualities, 
but always inferior to the price of a team of dogs. 

The country around Cumberland House is flat and swampy, and 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 97 


is much intersected by small lakes. A very new magnesian lime- 
stone 1s found every where under a thin stratum of soil, and it not un- 
frequently shows itself above the surface. It lies in strata generally 
horizontal, but in one spot near the fort, dipping to the northward 
at an angle of 40°... Some portions of this rock contain very perfect 
shells. With respect to the vegetable productions of the district, 
the populus. trepida, or aspen, which thrives in moist situations, is, 
perhaps, the most. abundant tree on the banks of the Saskatchawan, 
and is much prized as fire-wood, burning well when cut green. The 
populus balsamifera, called by the Crees matheh metoos, or ugly pop- 
lar, in allusion to its rough bark and naked. stem, crowned, in an aged 
state, with a few. distorted branches, is scarcely less plentiful. It is 
an inferior fire-wood, and does not burn well, unless when cut in 
the spring, and: dried during the summer ; but it affords a great 
quantity of potash. » A decoction of its resinous buds has been 
sometimes used by the Indians with success in cases of snow-blind- 
ness, but its application to the inflamed eye produces much pain. 
Of pines, the white spruce is the most common here; the red and 
black spruce,’ the balsam: of Gilead. fir, and Jersey pine, also occur 
frequently. The larch is found only in swampy spots, and is stunted 
and unhealthy. ‘The canoe birch attains a considerable size in this 
latitude, but from the great demand for its wood to make sledges, 
it has become rare... The alder abounds on the margin of the little 
grassy lakes, so common in the neighbourhood. A decoction of its 
inner bark is used as an emetic by the Indians, who also extract 
from it a yellow dye. A great variety of willows occur:on the banks 
of the streams; andthe hazel is met with sparingly in the woods, 
The sugar maple; elm, ash, and the arbor vite, termed by the Ca- 
nadian voyagers: cedar, grow on various parts of the Saskatchawan ; 
but that river seems to form their northern boundary... Two kinds 
of prunus also grow: here, one of which, a handsome. small. tree, 
produces a black fruit, having a very. astringent taste, whence the 


88 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


term choke-cherry applied to it. The Crees call it tasquoy-meena, 
and esteem it to be, when dried and bruised, a good addition to 
pemmican. The other species is a less elegant shrub, but is said to 
bear a bright red’ cherry, of a pleasant sweet taste. Its Cree name 
is passee-awey-meenan, and it is known to occur as far north as Great 
Slave Lake. Horney wal kiout 

The most esteemed fruit of the country, however, is the produce 
of the aronia ovalis. Under the name of meesasscootoomeena it is a 
favourite dish at most of the Indian feasts, and mixed with pem- 
mican, it renders that greasy food actually palatable. A great 
variety of currants and gooseberries: are also mentioned by the na- 
tives, under the name of sappoom-meena, but we only found three 
species in the neighbourhood of Cumberland House. The straw- 
berry, called by the Crees otei-meena, or heart-berry, is found in 
abundance, and rasps are common on the sandy banks of the rivers. 
The fruits hitherto mentioned fall in the autumn, but the following 
berries remained hanging on the bushes in the spring, and are con- 
sidered as much mellowed by exposure to the colds of winter. The 
red whortleberry (arbutus vitis idea) is found every where, but-is 
most abundant in rocky places. It is aptly termed by the Crees 
weesawgum-meena, sour-berry. The common cranberry (emycoccos 
palustris,) is distinguished from the preceding by its growing on 
moist sphagnous spots, and is hence called maskego-meena, swamp- 
berry. ‘The American guelder rose, whose fruits so strongly resem- 
bles the cranberry, is also common.’ There are two kinds of it, 
(viburnum oxycoccos, and. edule,) one termed by the natives peepoon- 
meena, winter-berry, and the other mon@soa-meena, moose-berry. 
There is also a berry of a bluish white colour, the produce of the 
white cornel tree, which is named -musqua-meena, bear-berry, 
because these animals are said to fatten on it. ‘The dwarf Canadian 
cornel, bears a corymb of red berries, which are. highly - ornamental 
to the woods throughout the country, but are not otherwise worthy 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 89 


of notice, for they have an insipid farinaceous taste, and are seldom 
gathered. The Crees extract some beautiful colours from several of 
their native vegetables. They dye their porcupine quills a beautiful 
scarlet, with the roots of two species of bed-straw, (galium tinc- 
torium, and boreale) which they indiscriminately term sawoyan. The 
roots, after being carefully washed, are boiled gently in a clean 
copper kettle, and a quantity of the juice of the moose berry, straw- 
berry, cranberry, or arctic raspberry, is added together with a few 
red tufts of pistils of the larch. The porcupine quills are plunged 
into the liquor before it. becomes quite cold, and are soon tinged of 
a beautiful scarlet. The process sometimes fails, and produces only 
a dirty brown, a circumstance which ought: probably to be ascribed 
to the use of an undue quantity of acid. They dye black with an 
ink made of elder bark, anda little bog-iron-ore, dried and pounded, 
and they have various modes of producing yellow. The deepest 
colour is obtained from the dried root of a plant, which from their 
description appears to be the cow-bane (cicuta virosa..) An inferior 
colour is obtained from the bruised buds of the Dutch myrtle, and 
they have discovered methods of dyeing with various lichens. 

The quadrupeds that are hunted for food in this part of the 
country, are the moose and the rein-deer, the former termed by the 
Crees, mongsoa or moosoa, the latter atiekh. The buffalo or bison, 
(moostocosh,) the red-deer or American-stag, (2wamwaskeeshoo,) and 
the apistatchekoos, a species of antelope, animals that frequent the 
plains above the forks of the Saskatchawan, are not found in the 
neighbourhood of Cumberland House. i 

Of fur-bearing animals, various kinds of foxes ( ahaha 
are found in the district, distinguished by the traders under the 
names of black, silver, cross, red, and blue foxes. The two former 
are considered by the Indians to be the same kind, varying acci- — 
dentally m the colour of the pelt. The black foxes are. very rare, 
and fetch a high price. The cross and red foxes differ from each 

N 


“e i ‘ 
ALI 


90 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


other only in colour, being of the same shape and size. Their shades 


‘of colour are not disposed in any determinate manner, some imdi- 


viduals approaching in that respect very nearly to the silver fox, 
others exhibiting every link of the chain down to a nearly uniform 
deep or orange-yellow, the distinguishing colour of a pure red fox. 
Tt is reported both by Indians and traders, that all the varieties 
have been found in the same litter. The blue fox is seldom seen 
here, and is supposed to come from the southward. The gray wolf 
(mahaygan,.) is common here. In the month of March the females 
frequently entice the domestic dog from the forts, although at other 
seasons a strong antipathy seemed to subsist between them. ‘Some 
black wolves are océasionally seen. The black and red varieties of 
the American bear (musquah) are also found near Cumberland 
House, though not frequently ; a black bear often has red cubs, and 
vice versd. The grizzly bear, so much dreaded by the Indians for its 
strength and ferocity, inhabits a tract of country nearer the Rocky 
Mountains. It is extraordinary that although I made inquiries ex- 
tensively amongst the Indians, I met with but one who said that he. 
had killed a she-bear with young in the womb. 

The wolverene, in cree okeckoohawgees, or ommecthatsees, is an 
animal of great strength and cunning, and is much hated by the 
hunters, on account of the mischief it does to their marten-traps. The 
Canadian lynx (peeshew ) is a timid but well-armed animal, which preys 
upon the American hare. Itsfur is esteemed. The marten (wapeestan, ) 
is one of the most common furred animals in the country. The 
fisher, notwithstanding its name, is an inhabitant of the land, living 
like the common marten principally on mice. It is the oichek of 
the Crees, and the pekan of the Canadians. The mink, (atjackash, ) 
has been often confounded by writers with the fisher. It is a much 
smaller animal, inhabits the banks of rivers, and swims well; its prey 
is fish. The otter; (neekcek,) is larger than the English species, 
and produces a much more valuable fur. | 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 91 


The musk rat (watsuss, or musquash,) is very abundant in all the 
small grassy lakes. They build small conical houses with a mixture 
of hay and earth; those which build early raising. their houses on 
the mud of the marshes, and those which build later in the season 
founding their habitations uponthe surface of the ice itself The 
house covers a hole in the ice, which permits’ them to go into the 
water in search of the roots on which they feed. In severe winters 
when the small lakes are frozen to the bottom, and these animals 
cannot procure their usual food, they prey upon each other. In 
this way great numbers are destroyed. 

The beaver (ammisk) furnishes the staple fur of the country. 
Many surprising stories have been told of the sagacity with which 
this animal suits the form of its habitation, retreats, and dam, to 
local circumstances; and I compared the account of its manners. 
given by Cuvier, in his Régne Animal, with the reports of the In- 
dians, and found them to.agree exactly. They have been often seen 
in the act of constructing their houses in the moon-light nights, and 
the observers agree, that the stones, wood, or other materials, are 
carried in their teeth, and generally leaning against the shoulder. 
When they have placed it.to their mind, they turn round and give 
it.a smart blow with their flat tail. In the act. of diving they give 
a similar stroke to the surface of the water. They keep their pro- 
vision of wood under, water in front.of the house. Their favourite 
food is the bark of the aspen, birch, and willow; they also eat the 
alder, but seldom touch any of the pine tribe unless from necessity ; 
they are fond of the large roots of the nuphar luteum, and grow 
fat upon it, but.it gives. their flesh a strong rancid taste. In the sea- 
son of love their call resembles a groan, that of the male being the 
hoarsest, but the voice of the young is exactly like the cry of a 
child. They are very playful, as the following anecdote will shew :— 
One day a gentleman, long resident in this country, espied five 
young beavers sporting in the water, leaping upon the trunk of a 

N 2 


92 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


tree, pushing one another off, and playing a thousand interesting 
tricks. He approached softly, under cover of the bushes, and pre- 
pared to fire on the unsuspecting creatures, but a nearer approach 
discovered to him such a similitude betwixt their gestures and the 
infantile caresses of his own children, that he threw aside his gun. 
This gentleman’s feelings are to be envied, but few traders in fur 
would have acted so feelingly. The musk rat frequently inhabits the 
same lodge with the beaver, and the otter also thrusts himself in 
occasionally : the latter, however, is not always a civil guest, as 
he sometimes devours his host. 

These are the animals most interesting in an economical point of 
view. ‘The American hare, and several kinds of grouse and ptarmi- 
gan, also contribute towards the support of the natives; and the 
geese, in their periodical flights in the spring and autumn, likewise 
prove a valuable resource both to the Indians and white residents ; 
but the principal article of food, after the moose-deer, is fish; in- 
deed, it forms almost the sole support of the traders at some of the 
posts. The most esteemed fish is a species of salmo, the attih- 
hawmeg of the Crees, and the white-fish of the Americans. Its 
usual weight is between three and four pounds, but it has been 
known to reach sixteen or eighteen pounds. Three fish of the ordi- 
nary size is the daily allowance to each man at the fort, and is con- 
sidered as equivalent to two geese, or eight pounds of solid moose- 
meat. The fishery for the attihhawmeg lasts the whole year, but 
is most productive in the spawning season, from the middle of Sep- 
tember to the middle of October. ‘The ottonneebees, another species 
‘of salmo, closely resembles the last. Three species of carp are 
also found abundantly in all the lakes, their Cree names are namay- 
peeth, meethquawmaypeeth, and wapawhawkeeshew. The occow, or 
river perch, termed also horn-fish, piccarel, or doré, is common, but 
is not so much esteemed as the attihhawmeg. It attains the length 
of twenty inches in these lakes. The methy is another common 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 93 


fish ; it is the gadus lota, or burbot, of Europe. Its length is about 
two feet, its gullet is capacious, and it preys upon fish large enough 
to distend its body to nearly twice its proper size. It is never eaten, 
not even by the dogs unless through necessity, but its liver and roe 
are considered. as delicacies. 

The pike is also plentiful, and being readily caught in the winter 


- time with the hook, is so much prized on that account by the 


natives, as to receive from them the name of ezthinyoo-cannooshaoo, 
or Indian fish. The common trout, or nammecous, grows here to 
an enormous size, being caught in particular lakes, weighing upwards 
of sixty pounds; thirty pounds is no uncommon size at Beaver Lake, 
from whence Cumberland House is supplied. The oweepeetcheesees, 
or gold-eye, is a beautiful small fish, of the genus esox, and re- 
sembling the gar-fish. 

One of the largest fish is the mathemegh, cat-fish, or barbue. It 
belongs to the genus sélurus. It is rare, but is highly prized as 
food. 

The sturgeon is also taken in the Saskatchawan, and lakes com- 
municating with it, and furnishes an excellent, but rather rich, 
article of food. | 


04, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


CHAPTER IV. 


Leave Cumberland House—Mode, of Travelling in Winter—Arrival at Carlton House—Stone 
Indians—Visit toa Buffalo Pound—Goitres—Departure from Carlton House—Isle a la 
Crosse—Arrival at Fort Chipeywan. 


ete NN ‘Tats day we set out from Cumberland House for Carl- 


ton House; but previously to detailing the events of the journey, it 
may be proper to describe the necessary equipments of a winter 
traveller in this region, which I cannot do better than by extracting 
the following brief, but accurate, account of it from Mr. Hood’s 
journal :-— | 

« A snow-shoe is made of two light bars of wood, fastened to- 
gether at their extremities, and projected into curves by transverse 
bars. The side bars have been so shaped by a frame, and dried be- 
fore a fire, that the front part of the shoe turns up, like the prow 
of a boat, and the part behind terminates in an acute angle; the 
spaces between the bars are filled up with a fine netting of leathern 
thongs, except that part behind the main bar, which is occupied by 
the feet; the netting is there close and strong, and the foot is at- 
tached to the main bar by straps passing round the heel, but only 
fixing the toes, so that the heel rises after each step, and the tail of 
the shoe is dragged on the snow. Between the main bar and 
another in front of it, a small space is left, permitting the toes to 
descend a little in the act of raising the heel to make the step for- 
ward, which prevents their extremities from chafing. The length of 
a show-shoe is from four to six feet, and the breadth one foot and a 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 95 


half; or one foot and three quarters, bem¢ adapted to the size of the 
wearer. The motion of walking in them is perfectly natural, for 
‘one shoe is level with the snow, when the edge of the other is pass- 
‘ing over it. It is not easy to use them among bushes, without fre- 
quent overthrows, nor to rise afterwards without help. Each shoe 
weighs about two pounds when unclogged with snow. 'The northern 
Indian snow shoes differ a little from those of the southern In- 
dians, having a greater curvature on the outside of each shoe; one 
advantage of which is, that when the foot rises the over-balanced 
side descends and throws off the snow. All the superiority of Kuro- 
pean art has been unable to improve the native contrivance of this 
useful machine. 

“ Sledges are made of two or three flat boards, curving upwards 
im front, and fastened together by transverse pieces of wood above: 
They are so thin that, if heavily laden, they bend with the inequa- 
lities of the surface over which they pass. The ordinary dog-sledges. 
are eight or ten feet long, and very narrow, but the lading is se- 
cured toa lacing round the edges. The cariole used by the traders 
is merely a covering of leather for the lower part of the body, af- 
fixed to the common sledge, which is painted and ornamented ac- 
cording to the taste of the proprietor. Besides snow shoes, each 
individual carries his blanket, hatchet, steel, flint, and tinder, and 
generally fire-arms.” 

The general dress of the winter traveller is a capot, having a hood 
to put up under the fur cap in windy weather, or in the woods, to 
keep the snow from his neck ; leathern trowsers and Indian stockings, 
which are closed at the ankles, round the upper part of his mo- 
cassins, or Indian shoes, to prevent the snow from getting into 
them. Over these he wears a blanket, or leathern coat, which is 
secured by a belt round his waist, to which his fire-bag, knife, and 
hatchet are suspended. 

Mr. Back and I were accompanied by the seaman, John Hep- 


96 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


burn; we were provided with two carioles and two sledges; and 
their drivers and dogs were furnished in equal proportions by the 
two Companies. Fifteen days’ provision so completely filled the 
sledges, that it was with difficulty we found room for a small sex- 
tant, one suit of clothes, and three changes of linen, together with 
our bedding. Notwithstanding we thus restricted ourselves, and 
even leaded the carioles with part of the luggage, instead of em- 
barking in them ourselves, we did not set out without consider- 
able grumbling from the voyagers of both Companies, respecting 
the overlading of their dogs.. However, we left the matter to be 
settled by our friends at the fort, who were more conversant with 
winter travelling than ourselves. Indeed, the loads appeared to us 


so great that we should have been inclined to listen to the com- 


plaints of the drivers. The weight usually placed upon a sledge, 
drawn by three dogs, cannot, at the commencement of a journey, 
be estimated at less than three hundred pounds, which, however, 
suffers a daily diminution from the consumption of provisions. The 
sledge itself weighs about thirty pounds. When the snow is hard: 
frozen, or the track well trodden, the rate of travelling is about two 
miles and a half an hour including rests, or about fifteen miles a 


day. If the snow is loose, the speed is necessarily much less and 


the fatigue greater. 
At eight i in the morning of the 18th, we quitted the fort, aids 


took leave of our hospitable friend, Governor Williams, whose kind- 
ness and attention I shall ever remember with gratitude. Dr. Rich- 
ardson, Mr. Hood, and Mr. Connolly, accompanied us along the 
Saskatchawan until the snow became too deep for their walking 
without. snow-shoes. We then parted from our associates, with 
sincere regret at the prospect of a long separation. eimg accom- 


panied by Mr. Mackenzie, of the Hudson’s Bay Company, who 


was going to Isle a la Crosse, with four sledges under his charge, 
we formed quite a procession, keeping in an Indian file, m the track 


a 


taved by 


o 


En 


awn by Lieut. Ba 


r 


Carey 


ay rt Pay 


OF THE POLAR SEA. O7 


of the man who preceded the foremost dogs; but, as the snow was 
deep, we proceeded slowly on the surface of the river, which is 
about three hundred and fifty yards wide, for the distance of six 
miles, which we went to-day. Its alluvial banks and islands are 
clothed with willows. At the place of our encampment we could 
scarcely find sufficient pine branches to floor “ the hut,” as the 
Orkney men term the place where travellers rest. Its preparation, 
however, consists only in clearing away the snow to the ground, and 
covering that space with pine branches, over which the party spread 
their blankets and coats, and sleep in warmth and comfort, by 
keeping a good fire at their feet, without any other canopy than the 
heaven, even though the thermometer should be far below zero. 

The arrival at the place of encampment gives immediate occupa- 
tion to every one of the party; and it is not until the sleeping- 
place has been arranged, and a sufficiency of wood collected as fuel 
for the night, that the fire is allowed to be kindled. The dogs alone 
remain inactive during this busy scene, being kept harnessed to 
their burdens until the men have leisure to unstow the sledges, and 
hang upon the trees every species of provision out of the reach of 
these rapacious animals. We had ample experience, before morning, 
of the necessity of this precaution, as they contrived to steal a con- 
siderable part of our stores, almost from underneath Hepburn’s 
head, notwithstanding their having been well fed at supper. 
_ This evening we found the mercury of our thermometer had sunk 
into the bulb, and was frozen. It arose again into the tube on 
being held to the fire, but quickly re-descended into the bulb on 
being removed into the air; we could not, therefore, ascertain by it 
the temperature of the atmosphere, either then or during our journey. 
The weather was perfectly clear. | 

January 19.—We arose this morning after the enjoyment of a 
sound and comfortable repose, and recommenced our journey at 
sun-rise, but made slow progress through the deep snow. The task 

O 


98 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


of beating the track for the dogs was so very fatiguing, that each of 
the men took the lead in turn, for an hour and a half. The 
scenery of the banks of the river improved as we advanced to-day ; 
some firs and poplars were intermixed with the willows. We passed 
through two creeks, formed by islands, and encamped on a -pleasant 
spot on the north shore, having only made six miles and three 
quarters actual distance. 

The next day we pursued our course along the river ; the dogs had 
the greatest difficulty in dragging their heavy burdens through 
the snow. We halted to refresh them at the foot of Sturgeon 
River, and obtained the latitude 53°51 41” N. This is a small 
stream, which issues from a neighbouring lake. We encamped 
near to Musquito Point, having walked about nine miles, The ter- 
mination of the day’s journey was a great relief to me, who had been 
suffering during the greater part of it, in consequence of my feet 
having been galled by the snow-shoes ; this, however, is an evil which 
few escape on their initiation to winter travelling. It excites no 
pity from the more experienced companions of the journey, who 
travel on as fast as they can, regardless of the pain of the sufferer. 

Mr. Isbester, and an Orkney man, joined us from Cumberland 
House, and brought some pemmican which we had left behind; a 
supply which was very seasonable after our recent loss. The general 
occupation of Mr. Isbester during the winter, is to follow or find out 
the Indians, and collect their furs, and his present journey will 
appear adventurous to persons accustomed to the certainty of travel- 
ling on a well-known road. He is going in search of a band of 
Indians, of whom no information had. been received since last Oc- 
tober, and his only guide for finding them was their promise to hunt 
in a certain quarter; but he looked at the jaunt with indifference, 
and calculated on meeting them in six or seven days, for which time 
only he had provision. Few persons in this country suffer more 
from want of food than those occasionally do who are employed on 


OF THE POLAR SEA. |. 99 


this service. They are furnished with a sufficiency of provision to 
serve until they reach the part where the Indians are expected. to be; 
but it frequently occurs that, on their arrival at the spot, they have 
gone elsewhere, and that a recent fall of snow has hidden their 
track, in. which case the voyagers have to wander about in search of 
them ; and it often happens, when they succeed in finding the In- 
dians, that they are unprovided with meat. Mr. Isbester had been 
placed in this distressing situation only a few weeks ago, and passed 
four days without either himself or his dogs tasting food. At length, 
when he had determined on killing one of the dogs to satisfy his 
hunger, he happily met with a beaten track, which led him to some 
Indian lodges, where he obtained a supply of food. 

The morning of the 21st was cold, but pleasant for travelling. 
We left Mr. Isbester and his companion, and crossed the peninsula 
of Musquito Point, to avoid a detour of several miles which the 
river makes. ‘Though we put up at an early hour, we gained eleven 
miles this day. Our encampment was at the lower extremity of 
Tobin’s Falls. ‘The snow being less deep on the rough ice which 
enclosed this rapid, we proceeded, on the 22d, at a quicker pace 
than usual, though at the expense of great suffering to Mr. Back, 
myself, and Hepburn, all our feet beng much galled. After passing 
Tobin’s Falls, the river expands to the breadth of five hundred 
yards, and its banks are well wooded with pines, poplars, birch, 
and willows. Many tracks of moose-deer and wolves were observed 
near the encampment. 

On the 23d the sky was generally overcast, and there were several 
snow showers. We saw two wolves and some foxes cross the river in 
the course of the day, and passed many tracks of the moose and red 
deer. Soon after we had encamped the snow fell heavily, which was 
an advantage to us after we had retired to rest, by its affording an 
_ additional covering to our blankets. The next morning, whilst at 
breakfast, two men arrived from Carlton on their way to Cumberland. 

0 2 


100 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Having the benefit of their track, we were, to our great joy, able to 
get on at a quick pace without snow shoes. My only regret was, 
that the party proceeded too fast to allow of Mr. Back’s halting oc- 
casionally, to note the bearings of the points, and delineate the course 
of the river*, without being left behind. As the provisions were 
getting short, I could not, therefore, with propriety, check the pro- 
gress by interrupting the party; and, indeed, it appeared to me less 
necessary, as I understood the river had been carefully surveyed. In 
the afternoon, we had to resume the incumbrance of the snow-shoes, 
and to pass over a rugged part where the ice had been piled over a 
collection of stones. The tracks of animals were very abundant on 
the river, particularly near the remains of an old establishment, 
called the Lower Nippéween. 

So much snow had fallen on the night of the 24th, that the track 
we intended to follow was completely covered, and our march to-day 
was very fatiguing. We passed the remains of two red-deer, lying 
at the basis of perpendicular cliffs, from the summits of which they 
had, probably, been forced by the wolves. These voracious animals, 
who are inferior in speed to the moose and red-deer, are said fre- 
quently to have recourse to this expedient in places where extensive 
plains are bounded by precipitous cliffs. Whilst the deer are quietly 
grazing, the wolves assemble in great numbers, and, forming a 
crescent, creep slowly towards the herd so as not to alarm them much 
at first, but when they perceive that they have fairly hemmed in the 
unsuspecting creatures, and cut off their retreat across the plain, 
they move more quickly, and with hideous yells terrify their prey and 
urge them to flight by the only open way, which is that towards the 
precipice; appearing to know, that when the herd is once at full 
speed, it is easily driven over the cliff, the rearmost urging on those 
that are before. The wolves then descend at their leisure, and feast: 


* This was afterwards done by Dr. Richardson during a voyage to Carlton in the spring. 


OF THE POLAR SEA, I0l 


on the mangled carcasses. One of these ferocious animals passed 
close to the person who was beating the track, but did not offer any 
violence. We encamped at sunset, after walking thirteen miles. 

_ On the 26th, we were rejoiced at passing the half-way point, be- 
tween Cumberland and Carlton. The scenery of the river was less 
agreeable beyond this point, as there was a scarcity of wood. One of 
our men was despatched. after a red-deer that appeared on the bank. 
He contrived to approach near enough to fire twice, though without 
success, before the animal moved away. After a fatiguing march of 
seventeen miles, we put up at the upper Nippéween, a deserted estab- 
lishment; and performed the comfortable operations of shaving and. 
washing for the first time since our departure from Cumberland, the 
weather having been hitherto too severe. We passed an uncom- 
fortable and sleepless night, and agreed next morning to encamp 
in future, in the open air, as preferable to the imperfect. shelter of 
a deserted house without doors or windows. : 

The morning was extremely cold, but fortunately the wind was 
light, which prevented our feeling it severely; experience indeed. 
had taught us that the sensation of cold depends less upon the state 
of temperature, than the force of the wind. An attempt was made 
to obtain the latitude, which failed, in consequence of the screw, 
which adjusts the telescope of the sextant, being immovably fixed, 
from the moisture upon it having frozen. The instrument could 
not be replaced in its case before the ice was thawed by the fire in 
the evening. 

In the course of the day we passed the confluence of the south 
branch of the Saskatchawan, which rises from the rocky mountains 
near the sources of the northern branch of the Missouri. At 
Coles Falls which commence a short distance from the branch 
we found the surface of the ice very uneven, and many spots of 


open water. 


We passed the ruins of an establishment, which the traders had. 


102 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


been compelled to abandon, in consequence of the intractable 
conduct and pilfering habits of the Assinéboine Indians; and 
we learnt that all the residents at a post on the south branch, 
had been cut off by the same tribe some years ago. We travelled 
twelve miles to-day. The wolves serenaded us through the night 
with a chorus of their agreeable howling, but none of them ventured 
near the encampment. Mr. Back’s repose was disturbed by a more 
serious evil; his buffalo robe caught fire, and the shoes on his feet, 
being contracted by the heat, gave him such pain, that he jumped 
up in the cold, and ran into the snow as the only means of obtaining 
relief. 

On the 28th we had a strong and piercing wind from N.W. in 
our faces, and much snow-drift, we were compelled to walk as quick 
as we could, and to keep constantly rubbing the exposed parts of 
the skin, to prevent their being frozen, but some of the party suf- 
fered in spite of every precaution. We descried three red-deer on 
the banks of the river, and were about to send the best marksmen 
after them, when they espied the party, and ran away. <A supply 
of meat would have been very seasonable, as the men’s provision 
became scanty, and the dogs were without food, except a little burnt 
leather. Owing to the scarcity of wood, we had to walk until a 
late hour, before a good spot for an encampment could be found, 
and had then come only eleven miles. The night was miserably 
cold; our tea froze in the tin pots before we could drink it, and 
even a mixture of spirits and water became quite thick by con- 
gelation; yet, after we lay down to rest, we felt no inconvenience, 
and heeded not the wolves, though they were howling within view. — 

The 29th was also very cold, until the sun burst forth, when the 
travelling became pleasant. ‘The banks of the river are very scantily 
supplied with wood through the part we passed to-day. A long 
track on the south shore, called Holms Plains, is destitute of any 
thing like a tree, and the opposite bank has only stunted willows; 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 108 


but, after walking sixteen miles, we came to a spot better wooded, 
and encamped opposite to a remarkable place, called by the voyagers 
“« The Neck of Land.” 

On the thirtieth we directed our course round The Néck of Land, 
which is well clothed with pines and firs; though the opposite or 
western bank is nearly destitute of wood. This contrast between 
the two banks continued until we reached the commencement of 
what our companions called the barren grounds, when both the 
banks were alike bare. Vast plains extend behind the southern 
bank, which afford excellent pasturage for the buffalo, or other 
grazing animals. In the evening we saw a herd of the former, but 
could not get near to them. After walking fifteen miles we en- 
camped. ‘The men’s provision having been entirely expended last 
night, we shared our small stock with them. The poor dogs had 
been toiling some days on the most scanty fare; their rapacity, in 
consequence, was unbounded ; they forced open a deal box, containing 
tea, &e., to get at a small piece of meat which had been incautiously 
placed in it, 

_ As soon as daylight permitted, the party pimenned their march, 
in the expectation of reaching Carlton House to breakfast, but we 
did not arrive until noon, although the track was good. We were 
received by Mr. Prudens, the gentleman in charge of the post, with 
that friendly attention which Governor Williams’s circular was cal- 
culated to ensure at every station; and were soon afterwards regaled 
with a substantial dish of buffalo steaks, which would have been 
thought excellent under any circumstances, but were particularly 
relished by us, though eaten without either bread or vegetables, 
after our travelling fare of dried meat and pemmican. After this 
repast, we had the comfort of changing our travelling dresses, which 
had been worn for fourteen days. ‘This was a gratification which 
can only be truly estimated by those who may have been placed 
under similar circumstances.. I, was still in too great pain from 


104 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


_ swellings in the ankles to proceed to La Montée, the North-West 
Company’s establishment, distant about three miles; but Mr. Hallet, 
the gentleman in charge, came the following morning, and I pre- 
sented to him the circular from Mr. 8. Mac Gillivray. -He had 
already been furnished, however, with a copy of it from Mr. Connolly 
and was quite prepared to contribute any assistance that we might 
require to forward our advance to the Athabasca. 

Mr. Back and I having been very desirous to see some of the 
Stone Indians, who reside on the plains in this vicinity, learned with 
regret that a large band of them had left the house on the pre- 
ceding day; but our curiosity was amply gratified by the appearance 
of some individuals, on the following and every subsequent day 
during our stay. n> 

The looks of these people would have prepossessed me in their 
favour, but from the assurances I had received from the gentle- 
men of the posts, of their gross and habitual treachery. Their 
countenances are affable and pleasing, their eyes large and expressive, 
nose aquiline, teeth white and regular, the forehead bold, the cheek- 
bones rather high. Their figure is usually good, above the middle 
size, with slender, but well proportioned, limbs. Their colour is a 
light copper, and they have a profusion of very black hair, which 
hangs over the ears, and shades the face. Their dress, which I 
think extremely neat and convenient, consists of a vest and trowsers 
of leather fitted to the body; over these a buffalo robe is tastefully 
thrown. ‘These dresses are in general cleaned with shite-mud, a 
sort of marl, though some use red-earth, a kind of bog-iron-ore; but 
this colour neither looks so light, nor forms such an agreeable con- 
trast as the white with the black hair of the robe. Their quiver hangs 
behind them, and in the hand is carried the bow, with an arrow 
always ready for attack or defence, and sometimes they have a gun; 
they also carry a bag containing materials for making a fire, some 
tobacco, the calumet or pipe, and whatever valuables they may 


‘UBPUOT ADIN UYOL AG' SOT YLone WOYSNONT 


‘NVIGNI INOLS V £0 LIVUELMOd 


NY PUTA TAT Ag umn 


*OF THE POLAR SEA. 105 


‘possess. This bag is neatly ornamented with porcupine quills. 
‘Thus equipped, the Stone Indian bears himself with an air of 
- perfect independence. 

~The only articles of European commerce they require in exchange 
for the meat they furnish to the trading post, are tobacco, knives, 
ammunition, and spirits, and occasionally some beads, but more 
frequently buttons,» which they string in their hair as ornaments. 
A: suecessful hunter will probably have two or three dozen of them 
‘hanging at equal distances on locks of hair, from each side of the fore- 
head. At the end of these small coral bells are sometimes attached, 
which tingle at every motion of the head; a noise which seems 
greatly to delight the wearer ; sometimes a string of them is bound 
round the head like a tiara; and a bunch of feathers gracefully 
‘crowns the head. 

The Stone Indians steal whatever’ they can, particularly horses ; 
these animals they maintain are common property, sent by the 
Almighty for the general use of man, and therefore may be taken 
wherever met with; still they admit of the right of the owners to 
watch them, and to prevent theft if possible. This avowed disposi- 
tion on their part calls forth the strictest vigilance at the different 
posts ; notwithstanding which the most daring attacks are often suc- 
cessfully made, sometimes on parties of three or four, but oftener 
on individuals. About two years ago a band of them had the auda- 
city to-attempt to take away some horses which were grazing before 
the gate of the N.W. Company’s fort ; and, after braving the fire 
from: the few people then at the establishment through the whole 
day, and returning their shots occasionally, they actually succeeded 
in their enterprise. One man was killed on each side. They usually 
strip defenceless persons whom they meet of all their garments, but 
particularly of those which have buttons, and leave them to travel 
‘home in that state, however severe the weather. If resistance is 
-expected, they not unfrequently murder before they attempt to rob. 

P 


106 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


The traders, when they travel, invariably keep some men on guard 
to prevent surprise, whilst the others sleep ; and often practise the 
stratagem of lighting a fire at sunset, which they leave burning, and 
move on after dark to a more distant encampment—yet these pre- 
cautions do not always baffle the depredators. Such is the descrip- 
tion of men whom the traders of this river have constantly to guard 
against. It must require a long residence among them, and much 
experience of their manners, to overcome the painful apprehensions 
their hostility and threats are calenlated to excite. Through fear ‘of 
having their provision and supplies entirely cut off, the traders are 
often obliged to overlook the grossest offences, even murder, though 
the delinquents present themselves with unblushing effrontery almost 
immediately after the fact, and perhaps boast of having committed 
it. ‘They do not, on detection, consider themselves under any 
obligation to deliver up what they have stolen without receiving 
an equivalent. 

The Stone Indians keep in amity with their neighbours the Crees 
from motives of interest; and the two tribes unite in determined 
hostility against’ the nations dwelling to the westward, which are 
generally called Slave Indians—a term of reproach applied by the 
Crees to those tribes against whom they have waged successful wars. 
‘The Slave Indians are said greatly to resemble the Stone Indians, 
- being equally desperate and daring in their acts of aggression and 
dishonesty towards the traders. ‘ 

These parties go to war almost every summer, and sometimes mus- 
ter three or four hundred horsemen on each side. Their leaders, in 
approaching the foe, exercise all the caution of the most skilful 
generals ; and whenever either party considers that it has gained the 
best ground, or finds it can surprise the other, the attack is made. 
They advance at once to close quarters, and the slaughter is conse-' 
quently great, though the battle may be short. The prisoners of 
either sex are seldom spared, but slain on the spot with wanton 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 107 


cruelty... The dead are scalped, and he is considered the bravest 
person. who bears the greatest number of scalps from the. field. 
These are afterwards attached to his war dress, and worn as proofs 
of his prowess. The victorious party, during a certain time, blacken 
their faces and every part of their dress in token of joy, and in 
that state they often come to the establishment, if near, to testify, 
their delight by dancing and singing, bearing all the horrid insignia 
of war, to display their individual feats. When in mourning they 
completely cover their dress and hair with white mud. 

The Crees in the vicinity of Carlton House have the same cast. of 
countenance as those about Cumberland, but are much superior to 
them in appearance, which is to be attributed to their living in a 
more abundant country. These men are more docile, tractable, and 
industrious, than the Stone Indians, and bring greater supplies of 
provision and furs to the posts. Their general mode of dress re- 
sembles that of the Stone Indians; but sometimes they wear cloth 
leggins, blankets, and other useful articles, when they can afford to 
purchase them. They decorate their hair with buttons, like the 
others. 

The Crees procure guns from the traders, and use them in pre- 
ference to the bow and arrow; and from them the Stone Indians 
often get supplied, either by stealth, gaming, or traffic. Like the 
rest of their nation, these Crees are remarkably fond of spirits, and. - 
would make any sacrifice to obtain them. I regretted to find the 
demand for this pernicious article had greatly increased in this de- 
partment within the few last years. The following notice of these 
Indians is extracted from Dr. Richardson’s Journal :— 

“The Asseenaboine, termed by the Crees Asseeneepoytuck, or 
Stone Indians, are a tribe of Sioux, who speak a dialect of the Iro- 
quois, one of the great divisions under which the American philolo- 
gists have classed the known dialects of the Aborigines of North 
America. ‘The Stone Indians, or, as they name themselves, Eascad, 

P 2 


108 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


originally entered this part of the country under the protection. of 
the Crees, and in concert with them attacked and drove to the west- 
ward the former inhabitants. of the banks of the Saskatchawan. 
They are still the allies of the Crees, but have now become more 
numerous than their former protectors. They exhibit all the bad 
qualities ascribed to the Mengwe or Iroquois, the stock from whence 
they are sprung. Of their actual number I could obtain no precise 
information, but it is very great. ‘The Crees, who inhabit the plains, 
being fur hunters are better known to the traders. 

“ They are divided into two distinct bands, the Ammisk-watcheé- 
thinyoowuc or Beaver Hill Crees, who have about forty tents, and 
the Sackaweé-thinyoowuc, or Thick Wood Crees, who have thirty- 
five. The tents average nearly ten inmates each, which gives. a 
population of seven hundred and fifty to the whole. 

“ The nations who were driven to the westward by the. Eascab 
and Crees are termed, in general, by. the latter, Yatcheé-thin- 
yoowuc, which has been translated Slave Indians, but more properly 
signifies Strangers. 

“« They now inhabit the country around Fort Augustus, and 
towards the foot of the rocky mountains, and have increased in 
strength until they have become an object of terror to the LKascab: 
themselves. They rear a great- number of horses, make use of fire- 
arms, and are fond of European articles; in order to purchase which 
they hunt beaver and other furred animals, but they depend prin- 
cipally on the buffalo for subsistence. 

« They are divided into five nations :—First, the Pawaustic- 
eythin-yoowue, or Fall Indians, so named from their former residence 
on the falls of the Saskatchawan. They are the Minetarres, with 
whom Captain Lewis's party had a conflict on their return from the. 
Missouri. They have about four hundred and fifty or five tare 
tents; their language is very guttural and difficult. 

« Second, the Peganoo-eythinyoowuc Pegans, or Muddy River 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 109 


Indians, named in their own language Peganoe-koon, have. four 
hundred tents. 

“« Third, the. eee cant hirricomane or Blood Indians, named 
by themselves. Kaince’-koon, have three hundred tents. 

“ Fourth, the Cuskceteh-waw-thésseetuck, or Black-foot Indians, 
in their own language Saxoekoe-koon, have three hundred and fifty 
tents. _ | 

“ The last three nations, or tribes, the Pegans, Blood Indians, 
and Black-feet, speak the same language. It is pronounced in a 
slow and distinct tone, has much softness, and is easily acquired by 
their neighbours. I am assured by the best interpreters in the 
country, that it bears no affinity to. Me ei 98 Sioux, or Chipewyan 
languages. 

“ Lastly, the Sassees, or Gieore. een one hundred and _ fifty: 
tents; they speak the same language with their neighbours, the 
Snare Indians, who are a tribe of the extensive family of the 
Chipewyans*.” 

On the 6th of February we accompanied Mr. Prudens on a visit 
to a Cree encampment, and to see a buffalo pound, both of them 
situated about. six miles from the house; we found seven tents 
pitched within a small cluster of pines, which adjoined the pound. 
The largest, which we entered, belonged to the chief, who was. 


* < As the subject may be interesting to philologists, I subjoin a few words of the 
Blackfoot language :— 


Peestah kan, tobacco. _ Stoo-an, a knife. 
Moohksee, an. awl. Sassoopats,, ammunition. 
Nappee-odhkee, rum. Meenee, beads, 
Cook keet, give me. Poommees, fat. 
Keninee, buffalo. Miss ta poot, keep off. 
Pooxapoot, come here. Saw, no. 

_ Kat cet sits, none, Ihave none. } Stwee, cold; it is cold... 
Keet sta kee, _a beaver. | Pennakomit, a horse, 


Naum’, a bow. | Ahseeu, good.” 


110 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


absent, but came: in directly afterwards, on being informed. of our 
arrival. ‘The old man (about sixty) welcomed us with a hearty shake 
of the hand, and the customary salutation of “ What cheer?” an 
expression which they have gained from the traders. As we had 
been expected, they had caused the tent to be neatly arranged, fresh 
grass was spread on the ground, buffalo robes were placed on the 
side opposite the door for us to sit on, and a kettle was on the fire ‘to 
boil meat for us. | ve. 
After a few minutes’ conversation, an invitation was given to the 
Chief and his hunters to smoke the calumet with us, as a tcken 
of our friendship: this was loudly announced through the camp, and 
ten men. from the other tents immediately joined our party. On 
their entrance the women and children, whose presence on such 
occasions is contrary to etiquette, withdrew. The calumet, having 
been prepared and lighted by Mr. Prudens’s clerk, was presented to 
the Chief, who, on receiving it, performed the followmg ceremony 
before he commenced smoking :—He first pointed the stem to the 
south, then to the west, north, and east, and afterwards to the heavens, 
the earth, and the fire, as an offering to the presiding spirits ;—he 
took three whiffs only, and then passed the pipe to his next com- 
panion, who took the samé number of whiffs, and so did each per- 
son as it went round. After the calumet had been replenished, the 
person, who then commenced repeated only the latter part of the 
ceremony, pointing the stem to the heaven, the earth, and the fire. 
Some spirits, mixed with water, were presented to the old man, 
who, before he drank, demanded a feather, which he dipped into 
the cup several times, and sprinkled the moisture on the ground, 
pronouncing each time a prayer. His first address to the Keetchee 
Manitou, or Great Spirit, was, that buffalo might be abundant every 
where, and that plenty might come into their pound. He next prayed, 
that the other animals might be numerous, and particularly those 
which were valuable for their furs, and then desired that the party 


OF THE POLAR SEA. ‘Ti 


‘present might escape the sickness which was then prevalent, and be 
blessed with constant health. Some other supplications followed, 
which we could not get interpreted without interrupting the whole 
proceeding. 'To each of these supplications the whole Indian party 
assented by exclaiming Aha; when he had finished them the old 
man drank a little and passed the cup round. After these ceremo- 
nies each person smoked at his leisure, and they engaged in a general 
conversation, which I regretted not understanding, as it seemed 
to be very humorous, exciting frequent bursts of laughter. The 
younger men, in particular, appeared to ridicule the abstinence of 
one of the party, who neither drank nor smoked. He bore their 
jeering with perfect composure, and assured them, as I was told, 
they would be better if they would follow his example. I was 
happy to learn from Mr. Prudens, that this man was not only one 
of the best hunters, but the most cheerful and contented man of 
the tribe. 

Four Stone Indians arrived at this time, and were invited into the 
tent, but one only accepted the invitation and partook of the fare. 
When Mr. Prudens heard the others refuse, he gave immediate direc- 
tions that our horses should be narrowly watched, as he suspected 
these fellows wished to carry them off. Having learned that they 
considered Mr. Back and myself to be war chiefs, possessing great 
power, and that they expected we should make some address to 
them, I desired them to be kind to the traders, and to be indus- 
trious in procuring them provision and furs, and to refrain from 
stealing their stores and horses ; and I assured them, if I heard of 
their continuing to behave kindly, that I would mention their good 
conduct in the strongest terms to their Great Father across the 
sea, (by which appellation they designate the King), whose favour- 
able consideration they had been taught by the traders to value most 
highly. | | | 
They all promised to follow my advice, and assured me it was 


1}f2 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


not they, but the Stone Indians, who robbed and annoyed the 
traders.. The Stone Indian who was present, heard this ‘accusation 
against his tribe quite unmoved, but he probably did not understand 
the whole of the communication. We left them to finish their rum, 
and went to look round the lodges, and examine the pound. 

The greatest proportion of labour, in savage life, falls to the wo- 
men; we now saw them employed in dressing skins, and conveying 
‘wood, water, and provision. As they have often to fetch the meat 
from some distance, they are assisted in this duty by their dogs, 
‘which are not harnessed in sledges, but carry their burthens in a 
manner peculiarly adapted to this level country. Two long poles 
are fastened by a collar to the dog’s neck, their ends trail on the 
ground, and are kept at a proper distance by a hoop, which is lashed 
between them, immediately behind the dog’s tail; the hoop is co- 
‘vered with network, upon which the load is placed. 

The boys were amusing themselves by shooting arrows at a mark, 
and thus training to become hunters. The Stone Indians are so 
expert with the bow and arrow, that they can strike a very small 
object at a considerable distance, and will shoot with sufficient. force 

to pierce through the body of a buffalo when near. 

_ The buffalo pound was a fenced circular space of about a hun- 
dred yards in diameter; the entrance was banked up with snow, to 
a sufficient height to prevent the retreat of the animals that may 
once have entered. For about a mile on each side of the road lead- 
ing to the pound, stakes were driven into the ground at nearly equal 
“distances of about twenty yards; these were intended to look like 
men, and to deter the animals from attempting to break out on either 
side. Within fifty or sixty yards from the pound, branches of trees 
were placed . between these’ stakes to screen the Indians, who lie 
down behind them to await the approach of the buffalo. _ 

The principal dexterity in this species of chase is shewn by the 
horsemen, who havé to manceuvre round the herd in the plains so as 


AR“ £EEEL Uf. Ry EULA GS 


DEGLY VOT 


O1VIINE V 


M1 pS dhe Ses 


TWePERE Mp Ty Aq pear 


SUW SBR _ Mery Aq wweaqe 


eh a 
ano i 


oan | 


yoy 
fy Se 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 113 


to urge them to enter the roadway, which is about a quarter of a 
mile broad. When this has been accomplished, they raise loud shouts, 
and, pressing close upon the animals, so terrify them that they 
rush heedlessly forward towards the snare. When they have ad- 
vanced as far as the men who are lying in ambush, they also rise, and 
increase the consternation by violent shouting and firing guns. The 
affrighted beasts, having no alternative, run directly into the pound, 
where they are quickly despatched, either with an arrow or gun. 

There was a tree in the centre of the pound, on which the Indians 
had hung strips of buffalo flesh and pieces of cloth as tributary or 
grateful offerings to the Great Master of Life; and we were told 
that they occasionally place a man in the tree to sing to the pre- 
siding spirit as the buffaloes are advancing, who must keep his station 
until the whole that have entered are killed. The annexed print, 
from a sketch by Mr. Back, will shew clearly the nature of this spe- 
cies of hunting, which, in fact, is very similar to that of taking ele- 
phants on the Island of Ceylon, but upon a smaller scale. 

The Crees complained to us of the audacity of a party of Stone 
Indians; who, two nights before, had stripped their revered tree of 
many of its offerings, and had injured their pound by setting their 
stakes out of the proper places. 

Other modes of killing the buffalo are practised by the Indians 
with suecess:—of these the hunting them on horseback requires 
most dexterity. An expert hunter, when well mounted, dashes at 
the herd, and chooses an individual which he endeavours to separate 
from the rest. If he succeeds, he contrives to keep him apart by the 
proper management of his horse, though going at full speed. When- 
ever he can get sufficiently near for a ball to penetrate the beast’s 
hide, he fires, and seldom fails of bringing the animal down ; though 
of course he cannot rest the piece against the shoulder, nor take a 
deliberate aim. On this service the hunter is often exposed to con- 
siderable danger from the fall of his horse in the numerous holes 

Q 


114, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


which the badgers make in these plains, and also from the rage of 
the buffalo, which, when closely pressed, often turns suddenly, and, 
rushing furiously on the horse, frequently succeeds in wounding it, 
or dismounting the rider... Whenever the animal shews this disposi- 
tion, which the experienced hunter will: readily perceive, he imme- 
diately pulls up his horse, and goes off in another direction. 

When the buffaloes are on their guard, horses cannot be used in 
approaching them ; but the hunter dismounts at some distance, and 
erawls in the snow towards the herd, pushing his gun before him. 
If the buffaloes happen to look towards him, he stops, and keeps quite 
motionless, until their eyes are turned’ in another direction ;_ by this 
cautious proceeding a skilful person will get so near as to be able to 
kill two or three out of the herd. It will easily be imagined this 
service cannot be very agreeable when the thermometer stands 30° or 
40° below zero, as sometimes happens in this country. 

As we were returning from the tents, the dogs that. were harnessed 
to three sledges, in one of which Mr. Back was seated, set off in 
pursuit of a buffalo-calf. Myr. Back was speedily thrown’ from his 
vehicle, and had to join me in my horse-cariole. Mr. Herriot having 
gone to recover the dogs, found them lying exhausted beside the 
calf, which they had baited until it was’as exhausted as themselves. 
Mr. Herriot, to shew us. the mode of hunting on horseback, or, as 
the traders term it, running of the buffalo, went in chase of a cow, 
and killed it after firing three shots. 

The buffalo is a huge and shapeless animal, quite devoid of grace 
or beauty ; particularly awkward in running, but by no means slow ; 
when put to his speed, he plunges through the deep snow very expe- 
ditiously; the ‘hair is dark brown, very shaggy, curling about the 
head, neck, and hump, and almost covering the eye, particularly in 
the bull, which is larger and more unsightly than the cow. The 
most esteemed part of the animalis the hump, called by the Cana- 
dians bos, by the Hudson’s Bay people the wig’; it is merely a strong 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 115 


muscle, on which nature at certain seasons forms a considerable quan- 
tity of fat. It is attached to the long spinous processes of the first 
dorsal vertebrae, and seems to be destined to support the enormous 
head of the animal. The meat which covers the spinal processes 
themselves, after the wig is removed, is next in esteem for its flavour 
and juiciness, and is more exclusively termed the hump. by the 
hunters. | 

The party was prevented from visiting a Stone Indian encamp- 
ment by a heavy fall of snow, which made it impracticable to go and 
return the same day. We were dissuaded from sleeping at their 
tents by the interpreter at the N.W. post, who told us they consi- 
dered the diseases of hooping-cough and measles, under which they 
were now suffering, to have been introduced by some white people 
recently arrived in the country, and that he feared those who had 
lost relatives, imagining we were the persons, might vent their 
revenge on us. We regretted to learn these diseases have been very 
destructive among the tribes along the Saskatchawan, and that they 
have carried off about three hundred persons, Crees and Asseenaboines, 
within the trading circle of these establishments. The interpreter also 
informed us of another bad trait peculiar to the Stone Indians. Though 
they receive a visitor kindly at their tents, and treat him very hos- 
pitably during his stay, yet it is very probable they will despatch 
some young men to way-lay and rob him in going towards the post : 
indeed all the traders assured us it was more necessary to be vigi- 
lantly on our guard on the occasion of a visit to them, than at any 
other time. | 

Carlton House, (which our observations place in latitude 52° 50’ 
47" N., longitude, 106° 12° 42” W., variation 20° 44° 47" E.) is 
pleasantly situated about a quarter of a mile from the river’s side on 
the flat ground under the shelter of the high banks that bound the 
plains. The land is fertile, and produces, with little trouble, ample 
returns of wheat, barley, oats and potatoes. The ground is prepared 

Q 2 


116 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


for the reception of these vegetables, about the middle of April, and 
when Dr. Richardson visited this place on May 10th, the blade of 
wheat looked strong and healthy. There were only five acres in 
cultivation at the period of my visit. The prospect from the fort 
must be pretty in summer, owing to the luxuriant verdure of this 
fertile soil; but in the uniform and cheerless garb of winter, it has 
little to gratify the eye. 

Beyond the steep bank behind the house, commences the vast 
plain, whose boundaries are but imperfectly known; it extends along 
the south branch of the Saskatchawan, and towards the sources of 
the Missouri, and Asseenaboine rivers, being interrupted through the 
whole of this great space, by few hills, or even rismg grounds. The 
excellent pasturage furnishes food in abundance, to a variety of 
grazing animals, of which the buffalo, red-deer, and a species of ante- 


_ lope, are the most considerable. Their presence naturally attracts great 


hordes of wolves, which are of two kinds, the large, and the small. 
Many bears prowl about the banks of this river in summer; of these 
the grizzle bear is the most ferocious, and is held in dread both by. 
Indians and Europeans. The traveller, in crossing these plains, 
not only suffers from the want of wood and water, but is also ex- 
posed to hazard from his horse stumbling in the numerous badger- 
holes. In many large districts, the only fuel is the dried dung of 
the buffalo; and when a thirsty traveller reaches a spring, he has 
not unfrequently the mortification to find that it consists of salt 


water. 


Carlton House, and La Montée, are provision-posts, an incon- 
siderable quantity of furs being obtained at either of them. The 
provisions are procured in the winter season from the Indians, in 
the form of dried meat and fat, and when converted by mixture into 
pemmican, furnish the principal support of the voyagers, in their 
passages to and from the depdts in the summer. A considerable 
quantity of it is also kept for winter use, at most of the fur-posts, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 117 


as the least bulky article that can be taken on a winter journey. 
The mode of making pemmican is very simple, the meat is dried by 
the Indians in the sun, or over a fire, and pounded by beating it 
with stones when spread on a skin. In this state it is brought to 
the forts, where the admixture of hair is partially sifted out, and a 
third part of melted fat incorporated with it, partly by turning 
them over with a wooden shovel, partly by kneading them together 
with the hands. The pemmican is now firmly pressed into leathern 
bags, each capable of containing eighty-five pounds, and being 
placed in an airy place to cool, is fit for use. It keeps in this state, 
if not allowed to get wet, very well for one year, and with great care 
it may be preserved good for two. Between three and four hundred 
bags were made here by each of the companies this year. 

There were eight men, besides Mr. Prudens and his clerk, be- 
longing to Carlton House. At La Montée there were seventy 
Canadians and half-breeds, and sixty women and children, who con- 
sumed upwards of seven hundred pounds of buffalo meat daily, the 
allowance per diem for each man being eight pounds. 

There are other provision posts, Fort Augustus and Edmonton, 
farther up the river, from whence some furs are also procured. The 
Stone Indians have threatened to cut off the supplies in going up 
to these establishments, to prevent their enemies from obtaining 
ammunition, and other European articles; but as these menaces 
have been so frequently made without being put in execution, the 
traders now hear them without any great alarm, though they take 
every precaution to prevent being surprised. Mr. Back and I were 
present. when an old Cree communicated to Mr. Prudens, that the 
Indians spoke of killing all the white people in that vicinity this 
year, which information he received with perfect composure, and 
was amused, as well as ourselves, with the man’s judicious remark 
which immediately followed, “A pretty state we shall then be in, 
without the goods you bring us.” 


118 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


The following remarks on a well-known disease are extracted from 
Dr. Richardson’s journal :— 

“ Bronchocele, or Goitre, is a common disorder at Edmonton. I 
examined several of the individuals afflicted with it, and endea- 
voured. to obtain every information on the subject from the most 
authentic sources. The following facts may be depended upon. 
The disorder attacks those. only who drink the water of the river. 
It is indeed in its worst state confined almost entirely to the half- 
breed women and children, who reside constantly at the fort, and 
make use of river water, drawn in the winter through a hole made 
in the ice. The men, from being often from home on journies 
through the plain, when their drink is melted snow, are less affected; 
and, if any of them exhibit, during the winter, some incipient symp- 
toms of the complaint, the annual summer voyage to the sea coast 
generally effects a cure. The natives who confine themselves to 
snow water in the winter, and drink of the small rivulets which 
flow through the plains in the summer, are exempt from the attacks. 
of this disease. | 

These facts are curious, inasmuch as they militate against the 
generally-received opinion that the disease is caused by drinking 
snow water; an opinion which seems to have originated from bron- 
chocele being endemial to sub-alpine districts. 

“ The Saskatchawan, at Edmonton, is clear in the winter, and also 
in the summer, except during the May and July floods. The 
distance from the rocky mountains, (which I suppose to be of pri- 
mitive formation,) is upwards of one hundred and thirty miles. ‘The 
neighbouring plains are alluvial, the soil is calcareous, and contains 
numerous travelled fragments of a very new magnesian limestone. 
At a considerable distance below Edmonton, the river, continuing its 
course through the plains, becomes turbid, and acquires a white colour. 
In this state it is drunk by the inmates of Carlton House, where the 
disease is known only by name. It is said that the inhabitants of 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 119 


Rocky Mountain House, sixty miles nearer the source of the river 
are more severely affected than those at Edmonton. The same 
disease occurs near the sources of Elk and Peace Rivers; but, in 
those parts of the country which are distant from the Rocky Moun- 
tain Chain, it is unknown, although melted snow forms the only 
drink of the natives for nine months of the year. 

« A residence of a single year at. Edmonton is sufficient to render 
a family bronchocelous. Many of the goitres acquire great. size. 
Burnt sponge has been tried, and found to remove the disease, but 
an exposure to the same cause immediately reproduces it. 

“ A great proportion of the children of women who have goitres, 
are born idiots, with large heads, and the other distinguishing marks 
of cretins. I could not learn whether it was necessary that both 
parents should have goitres, to produce’ cretin children; indeed the 
want of chastity in the half-breed women would be a bar to the 
deduction of any inference on this head.” 

February 8.—Having recovered from the swellings and pains 
which our late march from Cumberland had occasioned, we prepared 
for the commencement of our journey to Isle a la Crosse, and requi- 
sitions were made on both the establishments for the means of con- 
veyance, and the necessary supply of provisions for the party, which 
were readily furnished. On the 9th the carioles and sledges were 
loaded, and sent off after breakfast ; but Mr. Back and I remained till 
the afternoon, as Mr. Prudens had offered that his horses should con- 
vey us tothe encampment. At 3 P.M. we parted from our kind host, 
and in passing through the gate were honoured with a salute of mus- 
ketry. After riding'six miles, we joined the men at their encamp- 
ment, which was made under the shelter of a few poplars. The 
dogs had been so much fatigued in wading through the very deep 
snow with their heavy burdens, having to drag upwards of ninety 
pounds weight each, that they could get no farther. Soon after our 


j 


120 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


arrival, the snow began to fall heavily, and it continued through the 


greater part of the night. 

Our next day’s march was therefore particularly tedious, the snow 
being deep, and the route lying across an unvarying level, destitute 
of wood, except one small cluster of willows. In the afternoon we 
reached the end of the pla, and came to an elevation, on which 
poplars, willows, and some pines grew, where we encamped, having 
travelled ten miles. We crossed three small lakes, two of fresh 
water, and one of salt, near the latter of which we encamped, and 
were, In consequence, obliged to use for our tea water made from 
snow, which has always a disagreeable taste. 

We had scarcely ascended the hill on the following morning, when 
a large herd of red deer was perceived grazing at a little distance; 
and, though we were amply supplied with provision, our Canadian 
companions could not resist the temptation of endeavouring to add 
to our stock. A half-breed hunter was therefore sent after them. 
He succeeded in wounding one, but not so as to prevent its running 
off with the herd, in a direction wide of our course. A couple of 
rabbits and a brace of wood partridges were shot in the afternoon. 
There was an agreeable variety of hill and dale in the scenery we 
passed through to-day; and sufficient wood for ornament, but not 
enough to crowd the picture. The valleys were intersected by several 
small lakes and pools, whose snowy covering was happily contrasted 
with the dark green of the pine-trees which surrounded them. After 
ascending a moderately high hill by a winding path through a close 
wood, we opened suddenly upon Lake Iroquois, and had a full view 
of its picturesque shores. We crossed it and encamped, 

Though the sky was cloudless, yet the weather was warm. We 
had the gratification of finding a beaten track soon after we started 
on the morning of the 12th, and were thus enabled to walk briskly: 
We crossed at least twenty hills, and found a small lake or pool at 


OF. THE POLAR SEA. 121 


the foot of each. The destructive ravages of fire were visible during 
the greater part of the day. The only wood we saw for miles toge- 
_ther consisted of pine-trees, stript of their branches and bark by this 
element: in other parts poplars alone were growing, which we have 
remarked invariably to succeed the pine after a conflagration, We 
walked twenty miles to-day, but the direct distance was only sixteen 
miles. 

The remains of an Indian hut were found in a deep glen, and 
close to it was placed a pile of wood, which our companions sup- 
posed. to cover a deposit of provision. Our Canadian voyagers, in- 
duced. by an insatiable desire of procuring food, proceeded to remove 
the upper pieces, and examine its contents; when, to.their surprise, 
they found the body of a female, clothed in leather, which appeared 
to have been recently placed there. Her former garments, the ma- 
terials for making a fire, a fishing-line, a hatchet, and a bark dish, 
were laid beside the corpse. The wood was carefully replaced. A 
small owl, perched on a tree near the spot, called forth many singular 
remarks from our companions, as to its being a good or bad omen. 

We walked the whole of the 13th over flat meadow-land, which 
is much resorted to by the buffalo at all seasons. We saw some 
herds, but our hunters were too unskilful to get within shot. In 
the afternoon we reached the Stinking Lake, which is nearly of an 
oval form. Its shores are very low and swampy, to which circum- 
stances, and not to the bad quality of the waters, it owes its Indian 
name. Our observations place its western part in latitude 53° 25! 24" 
N., longitude 107° 18 58° W., variation 20° 32’ 10° E. 

_ After a march of fifteen miles and a half; we encamped among a 

few pines, at the only spot at which we saw sufficient wood for making 

our fire during the day. The next morning, about an hour after 

we had commenced our march, we came upon a beaten track, and 

perceived recent marks of snow-shoes. In a short time an Iroquois 

joined us, who was residing with a party of Cree Indians, to secure 
R 


129 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the meat and furs they should collect, for the North-West Company. 
He accompanied us as far as the stage on which his meat was placed, 
and then gave us a very pressing invitation to halt for the day and 
partake of his fare; which, as the hour was too early, we declined, 
much to the annoyance of our Canadian companions, who had been 
cherishing the prospect of indulging their amazing appetites at this 
well-furnished store, ever since the man had been with us. He gave 
them, however, a small supply previous to our party. The route 
now crossed some ranges of hills, on which fir, birch, and poplar, grew 
so thickly, that we had much difficulty in getting the sledges through 
the narrow pathway between them. In the evening we descended 
from the elevated ground, crossed three swampy meadows, and en- 
camped at their northern extremity, within a cluster of large pine- 
trees, the branches of which were elegantly decorated with abun- 
dance of a greenish yellow lichen. Our march was ten miles. The 
weather was very mild, almost too warm for the exercise we were 
taking. 

We had a strong gale from the N.W. during the night, which sub- 
sided as the morning opened. One of the sledges had been so much 
broken yesterday amongst the trees, that we had to divide its cargo 
among the others. We started after this had been arranged, and 
finding almost immediately a firm track, we soon arrived at some 
Indian lodges to which it led. The inhabitants were Crees, be- 
longing to the posts on the Saskatchawan, from whence they had 
come to hunt beaver. We made but a short stay, and proceeded 
through a Swamp to Pelican Lake. Our view to the right was 
bounded by a range of lofty hills, which extended for several miles 
in a north and south direction, which, it may be remarked, has been 
that of all the hilly land we have passed since quitting the plain. 

Pelican Lake is of an irregular form, about six miles from east to 
west, and eight from north to south; it decreases to the breadth of 
a mile towards the northern extremity, and is there terminated by a 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 123 


creek. We went up this creek for a short distance, and then struck 
into the woods, and encamped among a cluster of the firs, which the 
Canadians term cyprés (pinus inops ); having come fourteen miles 
and a half. | 

February 16.—Shortly after commencing the journey to- ian we 
met an Indian and his family who had come from the houses at 
Green Lake; they informed us the track was well beaten the whole 
way. We, therefore, put forth our utmost speed in the hope of 
reaching them by night; but were disappointed, and had to halt at 
dark, about twelve miles from them, in a fisherman’s hut, which was 
unoccupied. Frequent showers of snow fell during the day, and the 
atmosphere was thick and gloomy. | 

We started at an early hour the following morning, and reached 
the Hudson’s Bay Company’s post to breakfast, and were received very 
kindly by Mr. Mac Farlane, the gentleman in charge. The other 
establishment, situated on the opposite side of the river, was under 
the direction of Mr. Dugald Cameron, one of the partners of the 
North-West Company, on whom Mr. Back and I called soon after 
our arrival, and were honoured with a salute of musquetry. 

These establishments are small, but said to be well situated for the 
procuring of furs; as the numerous creeks in their vicinity are much 
resorted to by the beaver, otter, and musquash. The residents 
usually obtain a superabundant supply of provision. This season, 
however, they have barely had sufficient for their own support, owing 
to the epidemic which has incapacitated the Indians for hunting. 
The Green Lake lies nearly north and south, is eighteen miles in 
length, and does not exceed one mile and a half of breadth in any 
part. The water is deep, and it is in consequence one of the last 
lakes in the country that is frozen. Excellent tittameg and trout 
are caught in it from March to December, but after that time most 
of the fish remove to some larger lake. | 

We remained two days, awaiting the return of some men who had 

R 2 


124; A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


been sent to the Indian lodges for meat, and who were to go on with 
us. Mr. Back and I didnot need this rest, having completely sur- 
mounted. the pain which the walking in snow-shoes had occasioned. 
We dined twice with Mr. Cameron, and received from him many useful 
suggestions respecting our future operations. This gentleman having 
informed us that provisions would, probably, be very scarce next 
spring in the Athabasca department, in consequence of the sickness 
of the Indians during the hunting season, undertook at my request 
to cause a supply of pemmican to be conveyed from the Saskatchawan 
to Isle a la Crosse for our use during the winter, and I wrote to 
apprize Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood, that they would find it at 
the latter post when they passed ; and also to desire them to bring 
as much as the canoes would stow from Cumberland. 

The atmosphere was clear and cold during our stay; observations 
were obtained at the Hudson Bay fort, lat. 54° 16 10’ N., long. 
107° 29' 2” W.., var. 22° 6 36° E. 

February 20.—Having been equipped with carioles, sledges, and 
provisions, from the two posts, we this day recommenced’ our 
journey, and were much amused by the novelty of the salute given 
at our departure, the guns being principally fired by the half-breed 
women in the absence of the men. Our course was directed to the 
end of the lake, and for a short distance along a small river; we then 
crossed the woods to the beaver river, which we found to be narrow 
and very serpentine, having moderately high banks. We encamped 
about one mile and a half further up among poplars. The next day 
we proceeded along the river; it was winding, and about two hundred 
yards broad. We passed the mouths of two rivers whose waters it 
receives; the latter one, we were informed, is a channel by which 
the Indians go to'the Lesser Slave Lake. The banks of the river 
became higher as we advanced, and were furnished with pines, pop- 
lars, and, willows. 

Though the weather was very cold, we travelled more comfortably 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 125 


than at any preceding time since our departure from Cumberland, as 
we were enabled, by having light carioles, to ride nearly the whole 
day, and to be warmly covered up with a buffalo robe. Mr. M‘Leod, 
‘of the North-West Company, joined us. He had kindly brought 
some things from Green Lake, which our sledges could not carry. 
Pursuing our route along the river, we reached at an early hour the 
upper extremity of the “Grand Rapid,” where the ice was so rough 
that the carioles and sledges had to be conveyed across a point of land. 
Soon after noon we left the river, inclinmg N.E., and directed our 
course N.W., until we reached Long Lake, and encamped at its 
northern extremity, having come twenty-three miles.. This lake is 
about fourteen miles long, and from three quarters to one mile and 
a half broad; its shores and islands low, but well wooded. ‘There 
were frequent snow-showers during the day. 

February 23.—The night was very stormy, but the wind became 
more moderate in the morning. We passed to-day through several 
nameless lakes and swamps before we came to Train Lake, which 
received-its name from being the place where the traders procured 
the birch to make the sledges, or traineaux; but this wood has 
been all used, and there only remain pines and a few poplars. We 
met some sledges laden with fish, kindly sent to meet us by Mr. 
Clark, of the Hudson’s Bay Company, directly he heard of our 
approach. ‘Towards the evening the weather became much more 
unpleasant ; we were exposed to a piercingly cold wind, and much 
snow-drift, in traversing Isle 4 la Crosse Lake; we were, therefore, 
highly pleased at reaching the Hudson’s Bay House by six P.M. We 
were received in the most friendly manner by Mr. Clark, and 
honoured by volleys of musketry on our arrival. Similar marks of 
attention were shewn to us on the following day by Mr. Bethune, 
the partner in charge of the North-West Company’s fort. I found 
here the letters which I had addressed to the partners of the North- 
West Company, in the Athabasca, from Cumberland, in November 


126 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


last. ‘This circumstance convinced. us of the necessity of our present 
journey. Pi 

These establishments are situated on the southern side of the 
lake, and close to each other. They are forts of considerable im- 
portance, being placed at a point. of communication with the English 
River, the Athabasca, and Columbia Districts. The country around 
them is low, and intersected with water, and was formerly much 
frequented by beavers and otters, which, however, have been so much 
hunted by the Indians, that their number is greatly decreased. The 
Indians frequenting these forts are the Crees and some Chipewyans ; 
they scarcely ever come except in the spring and autumn; in the 
former season to bring their winter’s collection of furs, and in the 
latter to get the stores they require. 

Three Chipewyan lads came in during our stay, to report what 
furs the band to which they belonged had collected, and to desire 
they might be sent for; the Indians having declined bringing either 
furs or meat themselves, since the opposition between the Com- 
panies commenced. Mr. Back drew the portrait of one of the 
boys. phy 

Isle a la Crosse lake receives its name from an island situated 
near the forts, on which the Indians formerly assembled annually to 
amuse themselves at the game of the Cross. It is justly celebrated 
for abundance of the finest tittameg, which weigh from five to fifteen 
pounds. The residents live principally upon this most delicious 
fish, which fortunately can be eaten a long time without producing 
any disrelish. They are plentifully caught with nets throughout 
the year, except for two or three months. 

March 4.—We witnessed the Aurora Borealis very brilliant. for 
the second time since our departure from Cumberland. A winter 
encampment is not a favourable situation for viewing this pheno- 
menon, as the trees in general hide the sky. Arrangements had 
been made for recommencing our journey to-day, but the wind was 


OF THE POLAR SEA. ; 127 


stormy, and the snow had drifted too much for travelling with 
comfort; we therefore stayed and dined with Mr. Bethune, who 
promised to render every assistance in getting pemmican conveyed 
to us from the Saskatchawan, to be in readiness for our canoes, when 
they might arrive in the spring; Mr. Clark has also engaged to 
procure six bags for us, and to furnish our canoes with any other 
supplies which may be wanted, and can be spared from his post, and 
to contribute his aid in forwarding the pemmican to the Athabasca, 
if our canoes cannot carry it all. | 

I feel greatly indebted to Mr. Clark, for much valuable inform- 
ation respecting the country and the Indians residing to the north 
of Slave Lake, and for furnishing me with a list of stores he sup- 
posed we should require. This gentleman had resided some years on 
Mackenzie’s River, and had been once so far towards its mouth as to 
meet the Esquimaux in great numbers. But they assumed such a 
hostile attitude, that he deemed it unadvisable to attempt opening 
any communication with them, and retreated as speedily as he 
could. 

The observations we obtained here shewed that the chronometers 
had varied their rates a little, in consequence of the jolting of the 
carioles in which we rode; but their errors and rates were ascer- 
tained previous to our departure. We observed the position of this 
fort to be latitude 55° 25° 35’ N., longitude 107° 51’ 00" W., by 
lunars reduced back from Fort Chipewyan, variation 22° 15’ 48" W., 
dip 84° 13’ 35". | 

March 5.—We recommenced our journey this morning, having 
been supplied with the means of conveyance by both the companies 
in equal proportions. Mr. Clark accompanied us with the intention 
of going as far as the boundary of his district. This gentleman was 
an. experienced winter traveller, and we derived much benefit from 
his suggestions; he caused the men to arrange the encampment 
with more attention to comfort and shelter than our former com- 


128 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


panions had done. After marching eighteen miles we put up on 
Gravel Point, in the Deep River. 

At nine the next morning, we came to the commencement of 
Clear Lake. We crossed its southern extremes, and then went over 
a point of land to Buffalo Lake, and encamped after travelling 
twenty-six miles. After supper we were entertained until. mid- 
night with paddling songs, by our Canadians. who required very 
little stimulus beside their natural. vivacity, to. afford us this 
diversion. The next morning we arrived at the establishments 
which are situated on the western side of the lake, near to a small 
stream, called the Beaver River. ‘They were small log buildings, 
hastily erected last October, for the convenience of the Indians 
who hunt in the vicinity. Mr. Mac Murray, a partner, in the 
N.W. Company, having sent to Isle a la Crosse an invitation. to 
Mr. Back and me, our carioles were driven to his post, and we 
experienced the kindest reception. These posts are frequented by 
only a few Indians, Crees, and Chipewyans. ‘The country. round 
is not sufficiently stocked with animals to afford support to many 
families, and the traders almost entirely subsist on fish caught in 
the autumn, prior to the lake being frozen. The water being 
shallow, the fish remove to a deeper part, as soon as the lake is co- 
vered with ice. The Aurora Borealis was brilliantly displayed on 
both the nights we remained here, but particularly on the 7th, when 
its appearances were most diversified, and the motion extremely 
rapid. Its coruscations occasionally concealed from sight stars of 
the first magnitude in passing over them, at other times these were 
faintly discerned. through them; once I perceived a stream of light 
to illumine the under surface of some clouds as it passed along. 
There was no perceptible noise. 

Mr. Mac Murray gave a dance to nate voyagers and the half-breed 
women; this is a treat which they expect on the arrival of any 
stranger at the, post. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 129 


‘We were presented by this gentleman, with the valuable skin 
of a black fox, which he had entrapped some days before our arrival ; 
it. was forwarded to England with other specimens. 

Our observations place the North-West. Company’s house in 
latitude 55° 53° 00" N.,. longitude 108° 51’ 10" W.; variation 292° 
33° 22° FE. 

-The shores. of Buffalo Lake are of moderate height, and well 
wooded, but immediately beyond the bank the country is very 
swampy and intersected: with water in every direction. . At some 
distance from the western side there is a conspicuous hill, which we 
hailed with much pleasure, as being the first interruption to the 
tediously uniform scene we had for some time passed through. 

On the 10th we recommenced our journey after breakfast and 
travelled quickly, as we had the advantage of a well-beaten track. 
At the end of eighteen miles we entered upon the river “ Loche” 
which has a serpentine course, and is confined between alluvial banks 
that support stunted willows and.a few pines; we encamped about 
three miles further on; and in the course of the next day’s march 
perceived several holes in the ice, and many unsafe places for the 
sledges. Our companions-said the ice of this river is always in the 
‘same insecure state, even during the most severe winter, which they 
attributed to warm springs. Quitting the river we crossed a portage 
and came upon the Methye Lake, and soon afterwards arrived 
at the trading posts situated.on the western side of it. These were 
perfect huts, which had been hastily built after the commencement 
of the: last winter. We here saw two hunters who were Chipewyan 
‘halfbreeds, and made many inquiries of them respecting the coun- 
‘tries we expected to visit, but we found them quite ignorant of 
-every part beyond the Athabasca Lake. They spoke of Mr. Hearne 
-and of his companion Matonnabee, but did not add to our stock of 
anformation respecting that journey. It had happened before their 

s 


130 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


birth, but they remembered the expedition of Sir Alexander Mac- 
kenzie towards the sea. | 

This is a picturesque lake, about ten miles long and six broad, 
and receives its name from a species of fish caught in it. This fish, 
the methye, 1s not much esteemed; the residents never eat any part 
but the liver except through necessity, the dogs dislike even that. 
The tittameg and trout are also caught in the fall of the year. The 
position of the houses by our observations is latitude 56° 24 20'N.,, 
longitude 109° 23' 06" W.., variation 22° 50 28° Ki. 

On the 13th we renewed our journey and parted from Mr. Clark, 
to whom we were much obliged for his hospitality and kindness. 
We soon reached the Methye portage, and had a very pleasant ride 
across it in our carioles. The track was good and led through 
groups of pines, so happily placed that it would not have required 
a great stretch of imagination to fancy ourselves driving through a 
well arranged park. We had now to cross a small lake, and then 
sradually ascended hills beyond it, until we arrived at the summit of 
a lofty chain of mountains commanding the most picturesque and 
romantic prospect we had yet seen in this country. Two ranges 
of high hills run parallel to each other for several miles, until the 
faint blue haze' hides their particular characters, when they slightly 
change theur course, and: are lost to the view. The space between 
them is occupied by nearly a level plain, through which a river 
pursues a meandering course, and receives supplies from the 
creeks and rills; issuing from the mountains on each side} The 
prospect was delightful even amid the snow, and though marked 
with all the cheerless characters of winter; how much more charm- 
ing must it be when the trees are in leaf, and. the ground is arrayed 
in summer verdure! Some faint idea of the difference was conveyed 
to my mind by witnessing the effect of the departing rays of a bril- 
liant sun. The distant prospect, however, is surpassed in grandeur 


OF THE POLAR SEA. I3l 


by the wild scenery which appeared immediately below our feet. 
There the eye penetrates into vast ravines from two to three hun- 
dred feet in depth, that are clothed with trees, and lie on either side 
of the narrow pathway descending to the river over eight successive 
ridges of hills. At one spot termed the Cockscomb, the passenger 
stands insulated as it were on a small slip, where a false step might | 
precipitate him into the glen. From this place Mr. Back took an 
interesting and accurate sketch of the view, to enable him to do 
which, we encamped early, having come twenty-one miles. 

The Methye Portage is about twelve miles in extent, and over this 
space the canoes and all their cargoes are carried, both in going to 
and from the Athabasca department. It is part of the range of 
mountains which separates the waters flowing south from those flow- 
ing north. According to Sir Alexander Mac Kenzie, “ this range of 
hills continues in a S.W. direction until its local height is lost be- 
tween the Saskatchawan and Elk Rivers, close on the banks of the 
former, in latitude 53° 36’ N., longitude 113° 45’ W., when it appears 
to take its course due north.” Observations, taken in the spring by 
Mr. Hood, place the north side of the portage im latitude 56° 41'40°N., 
longitude 109° 52’ 15" W., variation 25° 2’ 30" E., dip 85°.:7' 27". 

At daylight on the 14th we began to. descend: the range of hills 
leading towards the river, and no small ‘care was required to pre- 
vent the sledges from being broken in going: down these almost 
perpendicular heights, or being precipitated into: the glens on each 
side. As a precautionary measure the dogs: were taken off, and 
the sledges guided by the men, notwithstanding which they de- 
scended with amazing rapidity, and the men were thrown into the 
most ridiculous attitudes,in endeavouring to stop them. When we 
had arrived at the bottom I could not but feel astonished at the labo- 
rious task which the voyagers have twice in the year to encounter at 
this place, in conveying their stores backwards ‘and forwards. We 
went across the Clear Water River, which runs at the bases ‘of these 

S$ 2 


132 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


hills, and followed an Indian track along its northern bank, by which 
we avoided the White Mud and Good Portages. We afterwards 
followed the river as far as the Pine Portage, when we passed through: 
a very romantic defile of rocks, which presented the appearance of 
Gothic ruins, and their rude characters were happily contrasted. with 
the softness of the snow, and the darker foliage of the pines which 
crowned their summits. We next crossed the Cascade Portage, 
which is the last on the way to the Athabasca Lake, and. we soon 
afterwards came to some Indian tents, containing five families, 
belonging to the Chipewyan tribe. We smoked the calumet in the 
Chief’s tent, whose name was the Thumb, and distributed some to- 
bacco and a weak mixture of spirits and water among the men. 
They received this civility with much less grace than the Crees, and: 
seemed to consider it a matter of course. There was an utter neg- 
lect of cleanliness, and a total want of comfort in their tents; and 
the poor creatures were miserably clothed. Mr. Frazer, who accom- 
panied us from the Methye Lake, accounted for their being in this 
forlorn condition by explaining, that this band of Indians had re- 
cently destroyed every thing they possessed, as a token of their great 
grief for the loss of their relatives in the prevailing sickness, It 
appears that no article is spared by these unhappy men’ when a near 
relative dies; their clothes and tents are cut to pieces, their guns 
broken, ‘and every other weapon rendered useless, if some person do 
not remove these articles from their sight, which is seldom done.— 
Mr. Back sketched one of the children. This delighted the father 
very much, who charged the boy to be very good now, since his 
picture had been drawn by a great Chief. We learned that they 
prize pictures very highly, and esteem any they can get, however 
badly executed, as efficient charms. They were unable to give us 
any information: respecting the country beyond the Athabasea Lake, 
which is the boundary of their peregrinations to the northward. 
Having been apprized of our coming, they had prepared an encamp- 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 133 


ment for us; but we had witnessed too many proofs of their impor- 
tunity to expect that we could pass the night near them in any com- 
fort, whilst either spirits, tobacco, or sugar, remained in our posses- 
sion; and therefore preferred to go about two miles further along 
the river, and to encamp among a cluster of fine pine-trees, after a 
journey of sixteen miles. 

On the morning of the 15th, in proceeding along the river, we 
perceived a strong smell of sulphur, and on the north shore found a 
quantity of it scattered, which seemed to have been deposited by 
some spring in the neighbourhood : it appeared very pure and good. 
We continued our course the whole day along the river, which 1s 
about four hundred yards wide, has some islands, and is confined 
between low land, extending from the bases of the mountains on 
each side. We put up at the end of thirteen miles, and were then 
joined by a Chipewyan, who came, as we supposed, to serve as our 
guide to Pierre au Calumet, but as none of the party could commu- 
nicate with our new friend, otherwise than by signs, we waited pa- 
tiently until the morning to see what he intended to do. The wind 
blew a gale during the night, and the snow fell heavily. The next 
day our guide led us to the Pembina River, which comes from the 
southward, where we found traces of Indians, who appeared. to have 
quitted this station the day before; we had, therefore, the benefit of 
a good track, which our dogs much required, as they were greatly fa- 
tigued, by having dragged their loads through very deep snow for the 
last two days. A moose deer crossed the river just before the party : 
this animal is plentiful in the vicinity. _We encamped in. a. pleasant. 
well sheltered place, having travelled fourteen miles. 

We had made but a short distance the following morning, when 
we came to some Indian lodges, which belonged to an old Chipewyan 
chief, named the Sun, and his family, consisting of five hunters, 
their wives, and children. They were delighted to see us, and when 
the object of our expedition had been explained. to them, ex- 


134 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


pressed themselves much interested. in our progress ; but they could 
give no particle of information respecting the countries beyond the 
Athabasca Lake: We smoked with them, and gave each person a 
glass of mixed spirits and some tobacco... We learned from a Cana- 
dian servant of the North-West Company, who. was residing with 
them, that this family had lost numerous relatives, and that the de- 
struction of property, which had been made after their deaths, was 
the only cause for the pitiable condition in which we saw them. He 
said the whole family were industrious hunters, and, therefore, were 
usually better provided with clothes, and. other useful articles, than 
most of the Indians. -We purchased from them a pair of snow- 
shoes, in exchange for. some ammunition. The Chipewyans are 
celebrated for making them good and easy to walk in; we saw some 
here upwards of six feet long, and three broad: with these unwieldy 
clogs an active hunter, in the spring, when there is a crust on the 
surface of the snow, will run down a moose.or red deer. 

We made very slow progress after leaving this party, on account 
of the deep snow, but continued along the river until we reached 
its junction with the Athabasca, or Elk River. We obtained obser- 
vations on an island, a little below the Forks, which gave, longitude 
111° 8 42" W., variation 24° 18' 20" E. Very little wood has been 
seen during this day’s march: . The western shore, near the Forks, 
is destitute of trees; it is composed of lofty perpendicular cliffs, 
which are now covered with snow. The eastern. shore supports a 
few pines. 

March 18.—Soon after our departure from the encampment 
we met two men, from the establishment at Pierre au Calumet; 
who gave us correct information of the. situation and. distance. 
Having the benefit of their track, we marched’ at a tolerably quick 
pace, and made twenty-two miles in the course of the day, though 
the weather was very disagreeable for travelling, being stormy, with 
constant snow. We kept along the river the whole time: its 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 135 


_ breadth is about two miles. The islands appear better furnished 
with wood than its banks, the summits of which are almost bare. 
Soon after we had encamped our Indian guide rejoined us; he had 
remained behind yesterday, to accompany a friend on a hunting ex- 
cursion, without consulting us. On his return this evening he made 
no endeavour to explain the reason of his absence, but sat down 
coolly, and began to prepare his supper. This behaviour made us 
sensible that little dependence is to be placed on the continuance 
of an Indian guide; when his inclination leads him away. 

Karly the next morning we sent forward the Indian and a Ca- 
nadian, to apprize the gentleman in charge of Pierre au Calumet of 
our approach; and, after breakfast, the rest of the party proceeded 
along the river for the station, which we reached in the afternoon. 
Mr. John Stuart was in charge of the post, the senior partner of the 
North-West: Company in the Athabasca department. ‘Though he 
was quite ignorant until this morning of our being in the country, 
we found him prepared to receive us with great kindness, and ready 
to afford every information and assistance, agreeably to the desire 
conveyed in Mr. Simon M‘Gillivray’s circular letter. This: gen- 
tleman has twice. traversed this continent, and reached the Pacific 
by the Columbia River; he was, therefore, fully conversant with the 
different ‘modes of travelling, and with the obstacles that may be 
expected in passing through unfrequented countries. His sugges- 
tions and advice were consequently very valuable to us. Not having 
been to the northward of the Great Slave Lake, he had no know- 
ledge of that line of country, except what he had gained from the 
reports of Indians. He was of opinion, however, that positive in- 
formation, on which our course of proceedings may safely be deter- 
mined, may be procured from the Indians that frequent the north 
side of the lake, but not before the spring when they come to the 
forts. | He recommended my writing to the partner in charge of 
that department, requesting him to collect all the intelligence he 


136 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


could, and to provide guides and hunters from the tribe whichis 
best acquainted with the country we proposed to travel through. 

To our great regret, Mr. Stuart expressed much doubt as to our 
prevailing upon any experienced Canadian voyagers to accompany us 
to the sea, in consequence of their dread of the Esquimaux; who, he 
informed us, had already destroyed the crew of one canoe, which 
had been sent under Mr. Livingstone, to open a trading commu- 
nication with those who reside near the mouth of the Mackenzie 
River ; and he mentioned, that the same tribe had driven away the 
canoes under Mr. Clark’s direction, going to them on a similar object, 
to which circumstance I have alluded in my remarks at Isle a la 
Crosse. | 

This was unpleasant information; but we were comforted by 
Mr. Stuart’s assurance that himself and his partners would use every 
endeavour to remove their fears, as well as to promote our views in 
every other way; and he undertook, as a necessary part of our 
equipment in the spring, to prepare the bark and other materials for 
constructing at this post two canoes. 

Mr. Stuart informed us that the residents at Fort Chipewyan, 
from the recent sickness of their Indian hunters, have been reduced 
to subsist entirely on the produce of their fishing-nets, which did 
not then yield more than a bare sufficiency for their support ; and he 
kindly proposed to us to remain with him until the spring; but, as 
we were most desirous to gain all the information we could as early 
as possible, and Mr. Stuart assured us that the addition of ‘three 
persons would not be materially felt in their large family at 
Chipewyan, we determined on proceeding aa and fixed on the 
22d for the day of our departure. 

This house receives its name from the place where the ‘stone is 
procured, of which many of the pipes used by the Canadians and 
Indians are made. It is a clayey limestone, impregnated with 
various shells. The house is built on the summit of a steep bank, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 137 


rising almost perpendicular to the height of one hundred and. eighty 
feet, and from it an extensive prospect is commanded along this fine 
river, and over the extensive plains which stretch out several miles at 
the back of it—and are bounded by hills of considerable height, which 
seem to be better furnished with wood than the neighbourhood of the 
fort, where the trees grow very scantily. There had been an esta- 
blishment belonging to the Hudson’s Bay Company on the opposite 
bank of the river, but it was abandoned in December last, on account 
of the residents not being able to procure provision from their 
hunters, having been disabled ‘by the epidemic. sickness, which has 
carried off one-third. of the Indians in these parts. They belong to 
the Northern Crees, a name given them from their residing in 
the Athabasca department. There are now but few families of these 
men; who, formerly, by their numbers and predatory habits, spread 
terror among the natives of this part of the country. 

There are springs of bituminous matter on several of the islands 
near to these houses; and the stones on the river-bank are much 
impregnated with this useful substance. There is also another re- 
markable place at which salt may be procured, which is deposited on 
the surface of a round backed hill about half a mile from the beach, 
and on the marshy ground underneath it, which is carried down 
from the reservoir by several small streams. We visited these places 
at a subsequent period of the. journey, and descriptions of them will 
appear in Dr. Richardson’s Mineralogical Notices. 

The latitude of the North-West Company’s House is 57°24 06" N.., 
but this was the only observation we could obtain, owing to the 
atmosphere being cloudy during our stay. Mr. Stuart had an ex- 
cellent: thermometer, which indicated the lowest state of tempera- 
ture to be 43° below zero. He told me 45° is the lowest tem- 
perature he had ever witnessed at the Athabasca or Great Slave 
Lake, after many years’ residence. On the 21st it rose above zero, 
and at noon attained the height of 43°; the atmosphere was sultry, 

me | 


138 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


snow fell constantly, and there was quite an appearance of a change 
in the season. On the 22d we parted from our hospitable friend, 
and re-commenced our journey, but under the expectation of seeing 
him again in May; at which time the partners of the Company 
usually assemble at Fort Chipewyan, when we hope the necessary ar- 
rangements for our future proceedings will be completed. We en- 
camped at sunset, at the end of fourteen miles, having walked the 
whole way along the river, which preserves nearly a true north 
course, and is from four hundred to six hundred yards broad. The 
banks are high, and well furnished with the liard, spruce, fir, alder, 
birch-tree, and willows. Having come nineteen miles and a half, 
on the 23d, we encamped among pines of a great height and girth. 
Showers of snow fell until noon on the following day, but we con- 
tinued our journey along the river, whose banks and islands became 
gradually lower as we advanced, and less abundantly supplied with 
wood, except willows. We came up with an old Canadian, who was 
resting his wearied dogs during the heat of the sun. He was car- 
rying meat from some Indian lodges to Fort Chipewyan, having a 
burden exceeding two hundred and fifty pounds on his sledge, which 
was dragged by two miserable dogs. He came up to our encamp- 
ment after dark. We were much amused by the altercation that 
took place between him and our Canadian companions as to the qua- 
lifications of their respective dogs. This, however, is such a general 
topic of conversation among the voyagers in the encampment, that 
we should not probably have remarked it, had not the old man fre- 
quently offered to bet the whole of his wages that his two dogs, 
poor and lean as they were, would drag their load to the Athabasca 
Lake in less time than any three of theirs could. Having expressed 
our surprise at his apparent temerity, he coolly said the men from 
the lower countries did not understand the management of their 
dogs, and that he depended on his superior skill in driving; and we 
soon gathered from his remarks, that the voyagers of the Athabasca 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 139 


department consider themselves as very superior to any other. The 
only reasons which he could assign were, that they had borne their 
burdens across the terrible Methye Portage, and that they were 
accustomed. to live harder and more precariously. 

March 25.—Having now the guidance of the old Canadian, we 
sent forward the Indian, and one of our men, with letters to the 
gentleman at the Athabasca lake. The rest of the party set off 
afterwards, and kept along the river until ten, when we branched 
off by portages into the Embarras River, the usual channel of com- 
munication in canoes with the lake. It is a narrow and serpentine 
stream, confined between alluvial banks which support pines, poplars, 
and willows. We had not advanced far before we came up with the 
two men despatched by us this morning. The stormy weather 
had compelled them to encamp, as there was too much drifting of 
the snow for any attempt being made to cross the lake. We were 
obliged, though most reluctantly, to follow their example; but we 
comforted. ourselves with the reflection that this was the first time 
we had been stopped by the weather during our long journey, which 
was so near at anend. The gale afterwards increased, the squalls 
at night became very violent, disburthened the trees of the snow, 
and gave us the benefit of a continual fall of patches from them, 
in addition to the constant shower. We therefore quickly despatched 
our suppers, and retired under the shelter of our blankets. 

March 26.—Yhe boisterous weather continued through the night, 
and it was not before six this morning, that the wind became appa- 
rently moderate and the snow ceased. Two of the Canadians were. 
immediately sent off with letters to the gentlemen at Fort Chipewyan: 
After breakfast we also started, but our Indian friend, having a 
great indisposition to move in such weather, remained by the fire. 
We soon quitted the river, and after crossing a portage, a small lake, 
and. a point of land, came to the borders of the Mam-ma-wee Lake, 
We then found our error as to the strength of the wind; and that the 

T 2 


140 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


gale still blew violently, and there was so much drifting of the snow 
as to cover the distant objects by which our course could be directed. 
We fortunately got a glimpse through this cloud of a cluster of 
islands in the direction of the houses, and decided on walking 
towards them; but in doing this we suffered very much from the 
cold, and were obliged to halt under the shelter of them, and await 
the arrival of our Indian guide.. He conducted us between these 
islands, over a small lake, and by a swampy river, into the Atha- 
basca Lake, from whence the establishments were visible. At four 
P.M. we had the pleasure of arriving at Fort Chipewyan, and of 
being received by Messrs. Keith and Black, the partners of the 
North-West Company in charge, in the most kind and hospitable 
manner. ‘I’hus has terminated.a winter’s journey of eight hundred 
and fifty-seven miles, in the progress of which there has been a great 
intermixture of agreeable and disagreeable circumstances. Could 
the amount of each be balanced, I suspect the latter would much 
preponderate ; and amongst these the initiation into the practice of 
walking in snow-shoes must be considered as prominent. The suf- 
fering it occasions can be but faintly imagined by a person who 
thinks upon the inconvenience of marching with a weight of between 
two and three pounds constantly attached to galled feet, and swelled 
ancles. Perseverance and practice only will enable the novice to 
surmount this pain. | 

The next evil is the being constantly exposed to witness the wan- 
ton and unnecessary cruelty of the men to their dogs, especially 
those of the Canadians, who beat them unmercifully, and habitually 
vent on them the most dreadful and disgusting imprecations. There 
are other inconveniences which though keenly felt during the day’s 
journey are speedily forgotten, when stretched out in the encamp- 
ment before a large fire, you enjoy the social mirth of your com- 
panions, who usually pass the evening in recounting their former 
feats in travelling. At this time the Canadians are always cheerful 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 14] 


and merry, and the only bar to their comfort arises from the 
frequent interruption occasioned by the dogs, who are constantly 
prowling about the circle, and snatching at every kind of food that 
happens to be within their reach. These useful animals are a com- 
fort to them afterwards, by the warmth they impart when lying 
down by their side or feet, as they usually do. But the greatest 
gratifications a traveller in these regions enjoys, are derived from the 
hospitable welcome he receives at every trading post, however 
poor the means of the host may be; and from being disrobed even 
for a short time of the trappings of a voyager, and experiencing the 
pleasures of cleanliness. 

The following are the estimated distances, in statute miles, which 
Mr. Back and I have travelled since our departure from Cumberland : 


From Cumberland House to Carlton House . : sur 263 


From Carlton to Isle 4 la Crosse . : ! ; . 280 
From Isle 4 la Crosse to north side of the Methye Portage 124 


From the Methye Portage to Fort Chipewyan . . 240 
| 857 Miles. 


142 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


CHAPTER IV. 


Transactions at Fort Chipewyan—Arrival of Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood—Preparations for 
our Journey to the Northward. 


Mets ON the day after our arrival at Fort Chipewyan we called 


upon Mr. Mac Donald, the gentleman in charge of the Hudson’s 
Bay Establishment. called Fort Wedderburne, and delivered to him 
Governor Williams’s circular letter, which desired that every assist- 
ance should be given to further our progress, and a statement of the 
requisitions which we should have to make on his post. 

Our first object was to obtain some certain information respect- 
ing our future route; and accordingly we received from one of the 
North-West Company’s interpreters, named Beaulieu, a half-breed, 
who had been brought up amongst the Dog-ribbed and Copper- 
Indians, some satisfactory information, which we afterwards found 
tolerably correct, respecting the mode of reaching the Copper-mine 
River, which he had descended a considerable way, as well as of the 
course of that river to its mouth. The Copper Indians, however, he 
said, would. be able to give us more accurate information as to the 
latter part of its course, as they occasionally pursue it to the sea. 
He sketched on the floor a representation of the river, and a line of 
coast according to his idea of it. Just as he had finished, an old 
Chipewyan Indian, named Black Meat, unexpectedly came in, and 
instantly recognised the plan. He then took the charcoal from 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 143 


Beaulieu, and inserted a track along the sea-coast, which he had 
followed in returning from a war excursion, made by his tribe against 
the Esquimaux. He detailed several particulars of the coast and 
the sea, which he represented as studded with well-wooded islands, 
and free from ice, close to the shore, but not to a great distance, in 
the month of July. He described two other rivers to the eastward 
of the Copper-mine River, which also fall into the Northern Ocean. 
The Anatessy, which issues from the Contway-to or Rum Lake, and 
the Thloueea-tessy or Fish River, which rises near the eastern 
boundary of the Great Slave Lake; but he represented them both 
as being shallow, and too much interrupted by barriers for being 
navigated in any other than small Indian canoes. 

Having received this satisfactory intelligence, I wrote immediately 
to Mr. Smith, of the North-West Company, and Mr. M‘Vicar, of the 
Hudson’s Bay Company, the gentlemen in charge of. the posts at 
the Great Slave Lake, to communicate the object of the Expedition, 
and our proposed route; and to solicit any information they pos- 
sessed, or could collect, from the Indians, relative to the countries 
we had to pass through, and the best manner of proceeding. As 
the Copper Indians frequent the establishment on the north side of 
the lake, I particularly requested them to explain to that tribe the 
object of our visit, and to endeavour to procure from them some 
guides and hunters to accompany our party. Two Canadians were 
sent by Mr. Keith with these letters. 

The month of April commenced with fine and clear but extremely 
cold weather ; unfortunately we were still without a thermometer, 
and could not ascertain the degrees of temperature. The corusca- 
tions of the Aurora were very brilliant almost every evening of the 
first week, and were generally of the most variable kind. On the 
3d, they were particularly changeable. The first appearance exhi- 
bited three illuminated beams issuing from the horizon in the north, 
east, and west points, and directed towards the zenith; in a few 


144, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


seconds these disappeared, and a complete circle was displayed, 
bounding the horizon at an elevation of fifteen degrees. There was 
a quick lateral motion in the attenuated beams of which this zone 
was composed. Its colour was a pale yellow, with an occasional 
tinge of red. | 

On the 8th of April the Indians saw some geese in the vicinity 
of this lake, but none of the migratory birds appeared near to the 
houses before the 15th, when some swans flew over. These are 
generally the first that arrive; the weather had been very stormy 
for the four preceding days, and this in all probability kept the 
birds from venturing farther north than where the Indians had first 
seen them. ubeses 

In the middle of the month the snow began to waste daily, and 
by degrees it disappeared from the hills and the surface of the lake. 
On the 17th and 19th the Aurora appeared very brilliant in patches 
of light, bearing N.W. An old Cree Indian having found a beaver 
lodge near to the fort, Mr. Keith, Back, and L accompanied him 
to see the method of breaking into it, and their mode of taking 
those interesting animals. The lodge was constructed on the side 
of a rock in a small lake, having the entrance into it beneath the 
ice. ‘The frames were formed of layers of sticks, the interstices 
being filled with mud, and the outside was plastered with earth 
and stones, which the frost had so completely consolidated, that 
to break through required great labour, with the aid of the ice 
chisel, and the other iron instruments which the beaver hunters 
use. The chase, however, was unsuccessful, as the beaver had. pre- 
viously evacuated the lodge. 

The first geese we observed flying near to the fort were seen on 
the 21st, and some were brought to the house on the 30th, but 
they were very lean; on the 25th flies were seen sporting in the 
sun, and on the 26th the ice on the lake, near the channel of the 


river, was overflowed, in consequence of the Athabasca river having 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 145 


broken, up; but except where this water spread, there was no ap- 
pearance of decay in the ice. 

May.— During the first part of this month, the wind blew from 
the N.W., and the sky was cloudy. It generally thawed during the 
day, but froze through the night. On the 2nd the Aurora faintly 
gleamed through very dense clouds. | 

We had.a long conversation with Mr. Dease of the North-West 
Company, who had recently arrived from his station at the bottom 
of the Athabasca Lake. This gentleman, having passed several 
winters on the Mackenzie’s River, and at the posts to the northward 
of Slave Lake, possessed considerable information respecting the 
Indians, and those parts of the country to which our inquiries were 
directed, which he very promptly and kindly communicated. During 
our conversation, an old Chipewyan Indian, named the Rabbit’s Head, 
entered the room, to whom Mr. Dease referred for information on 
some point. We found from his answer that he was a step son of 
the late Chief Matonnabee, who had accompanied Mr. .Hearne on 
his journey to the sea, and that he had himself been of the party, 
but. being then a mere boy, he had forgotten many of the circum- 
stances. He confirms, however, the leading incidents related by 
Hearne, and was positive he reached the sea, though he admitted 
that none of the party had tasted the water. He represented him- 
self to be the only survivor of that party. As he was esteemed a 
good Indian, I presented him with a medal, which he received 
gratefully, and. concluded a long speech upon the. occasion, by 
assuring me he should preserve it carefully all his life. The old 
man afterwards became more communicative, and unsolicited began 
to relate the tradition of his tribe, respecting the discovery of the 
Copper Mine, which we thought amusing; and as the subject is 
somewhat connected with our future researches, I will insert the 
translation of it which was given at the time by Mr. Dease, though 
a slight mention of it has been made by Hearne. 


U 


146 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


“The Chipewyans suppose the Esquimaux originally inhabited 
some land to the northward which is separated by the sea from this 
country; and that in the earliest ages of the world a party of these 
men came over, and stole a woman from their tribe, whom they 
carried to this distant country and kept in a state of slavery. She 
was very unhappy in her situation, and effected her escape after 
many years’ residence among them. The forlorn creature wandered 
about, for some days, in a state of uncertainty what direction to take, 
when she chanced. to fall upon a beaten path, which she followed, 
and was led to the sea. At the sight of the ocean her hope of 
being able to return to her native country vanished, and she sat 
herself down in despair, and wept. A wolf now advanced to caress 
her, and having licked the tears from her eyes, walked into the water, 
and she perceived with joy that it did not reach up to the body 
of the animal; emboldened by this appearance, she instantly arose, 
having determined on venturing after the wolf, and she immediately 
provided two sticks to support herself. The first and second nights 
she proceeded on, without finding any increase in the depth of the 
water, and when fatigued, rested herself on the sticks, whose upper 
ends she fastened together for the purpose. She was alarmed on 
the third morning, by arriving at a deeper part, but she resolved on 
going forward at any risk, rather than return; and her daring perse- 
verance was crowned with success, by her attaining her native shore 
on the fifth day. She fortunately came to a part where there was 
a beaten path, which she knew to be the track made by the rein- 
deer in their migrations. Here she halted, and prepared some sort 
of weapon for killing them; as soon as this was completed, she had 
the gratification to behold several herds of them advancing along 
the road, and had the happiness of killing a sufficient number for 
her winter’s subsistence, which she determined to pass at that place, 
and therefore formed a house for herself, after the manner she had 
learned from the Esquimaux. When spring came, and she emerged 


_ OF THE POLAR SEA. 147 


from her subterraneous dwelling, (for such the Chipewyans suppose 
it to have been,) she was astonished by observing a luminous glit- 
tering appearance on a distant hill, which she knew was not pro- 
duced by the reflection of the sun, and being at a loss to assign any 
other cause for it, she resolved on going up to the shining object, 
and then found the hill was entirely composed of metal. She broke 
off several pieces, and perceiving that it yielded so readily to her 
beating, it occurred to her this copper (for that was the metal,) 
would be very serviceable to her countrymen, if she could find them 
again. While she was meditating on what was to be done, the 
thought struck her that it would be advisable to attach as many 
pieces of copper to her dress as she could, and then proceed. into 
the interior, in search of some inhabitants, who, she supposed, would 
give her a favourable reception, on account of the valuable treasure 
she had brought. 

«Tt happened that she met her own relations, and the young men, 
elated with the account she had given of the hill, made her instantly 
return with them; which she was enabled to do, having taken the 
precaution of putting up marks to indicate the path. The party 
reached the spot in safety, but the story had a melancholy cata- 
strophe. These youths, overcome by excess of joy, gave loose to 
their unrestrained passions, and offered the grossest insults to their , 
kind benefactress. She powerfully resisted them for some time, and — 
when her strength was failing, she fled to the point of the mountain, 
as the only place of security. Immediately she had gained the sum- 
mit, the earth opened, and ingulphed both herself and the mountain, 
to the utter dismay of the men, who were not more astonished: at 
its sudden disappearance, than sorrowful for this just punishment 
of their wickedness. Ever since this event, the copper has only 
been found in small detached pieces on the surface of the earth.” 

On the 10th of May we were gratified by the appearance of spring, - 


U 2 


148 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


though the ice remained firm on the lake. The anemone (pulsatilla, 
pasque flower,) appeared this day in flower, the trees began to put 
forth their leaves, and the musquitoes visited the warm rooms. On 
the 17th and 18th there were frequent showers of rain, and much 
thunder and lightning. This moist weather caused the ice to waste 
so rapidly, that by the 24th it had entirely disappeared from the 
lake. The gentlemen belonging to both the Companies quickly 
arrived from the different posts in this department, bringing their 
winter’s collection of furs, which are forwarded from these establish- 
ments to the depéts. 

I immediately waited-on Mr. Colin Robertson, the :agent of the 
Hudson’s Bay Company, and. communicated to him, as I had done 
before to the several partners of the North-West Company, our plan, 
and the requisitions we should have to make on each Company, and I 
requested of all the gentlemen the favour of their advice and sug- 
gestions. As I perceived that the arrangement of their winter ac- 
counts, and other business, fully occupied them, I forbore further 
pressing the subject of our concerns for some days, and until there 
was an appearance of despatching the first brigade of canoes. It 
then became necessary to urge their attention to them; but it was 
evident, from the determined commercial opposition, and the total 
want of intercourse between the two Companies, that we could not 
expect to receive any cordial advice, or the assurance of the aid of 
both, without devising some expedient to bring the parties together. 
I therefore caused a tent to be pitched at a distance from both esta- 
blishments, and solicited the gentlemen of both Companies to meet 
Mr, Back and me there, for the purpose of affording us their com- 
bined assistance. 

This request was immediately complied with; and on May 25th 
we were joined at the tent by Mr. Stuart and Mr. Grant, of the 
North-West Company, and Mr. Colin Robertson, of the Hudson’s 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 149 


Bay Company, all of whom kindly gave very satisfactory answers to 
a series of questions which we had drawn up for the occasion, and 
promised all the aid in their power. 

Furnished with the information thus obtained, we proceeded to 
make some arrangements respecting the obtaining of men, and the 
stores we should require for their equipment, as well as for presents 
for the Indians; and on the following day a requisition was made 
on the Companies for eight men each, and whatever useful stores 
they could supply. We learnt with regret, that, in consequence of 
the recent lavish expenditure of their goods in support of the oppo- 
sition, their supply to us would, of necessity, be very limited. The 
men, too, were backward in offering their services, especially those of 
the Hudson’s Bay Company, who demanded a much higher rate of 
wages than I considered it would be proper to grant. 

June 3.—Mr. Smith, a partner of the North-West Company, ar- 
rived from the Great Slave Lake, and was the bearer of the very 
gratifying intelligence that the principal Chief of the Copper Indians 
had received the communication of our arrival with joy, and given 
all the intelligence he possessed respecting the route to the sea-coast 
by the Copper-Mine River; and that he and a party of his men, at 
the instance of Mr. Wentzel, a clerk of the North-West Company, 
whom they wished might go along with them, had engaged to accom- 
pany the Expedition as guides and hunters. They were to await 
our arrival at Fort Providence, on the north side of the Slave Lake. 
Their information coincided with that given by Beaulieu. They 
had no doubt of our being able to obtain the means of subsistence 
in travelling to the coast. This agreeable intelligence had a happy 
effect upon the minds of the Canadian voyagers, many of their fears 
being removed: several of them seemed now disposed to volunteer ; 
indeed, on the same evening, two men from the North-West Com- 
pany offered themselves and were accepted. 

June 5.—This day Mr. Back and I went over to Fort Wedder- 


150 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


burne, to see Mr. Robertson respecting his quota of men. We 
learned from him that, notwithstanding his endeavours. to persuade 
them, his most experienced voyagers still declined engaging without 
very exorbitant wages. After some hesitation, however, six men 
engaged with us, who were represented to be active and steady ; and 
I got Mr. Robertson’s permission for St. Germain, an interpreter 
belonging to this Company, to accompany us from Slave Lake, if he 
should choose. The bow-men and steers-men were to receive one 
thousand six hundred livres Halifax per annum, and the middle 
men one thousand two hundred, exclusive of their necessary equip- 
ments; and they stipulated that their wages should be continued 
until their arrival in Montreal, or their rejoming the service of their 
present employers. 

I delivered to Mr. Robertson an official request, that the stores 
we had left at York Factory and the Rock Depét, with some other 
supplies, might be forwarded to Slave Lake by the first brigade of 
canoes which should come in. He also took charge of my letters 
addressed to the Admiralty. Five men were afterwards engaged 
from the North-West Company for the same wages, and under the 
same stipulations, as the others, besides an interpreter for the Copper 
Indians; but this man required three thousand livres Halifax 
currency, which we were obliged to give him, as his services were 
indispensable. 

The extreme scarcity of provision at the posts rendered it neces- 
sary to despatch all our men to the Mammawee Lake, where they 
might procure their own subsistence by fishing. ‘The women and 
children were also sent away for the same purpose; and no other 
families were permitted to remain at the houses after the departure 
of the canoes, than those belonging to the men who were required 
to carry on the daily duty. 

The large party of officers and men, which had assembled here 
from the different posts in the department, was again quickly dis- 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 15] 


persed. The first brigade of canoes, laden with furs, was despatched 
to the depét on May 30th, and the others followed in two or three 
days afterwards. Mr. Stuart, the senior partner of the North- 
West Company, quitted us for the same destination, on June 4th ; 
Mr. Robertson, for his depét, on the next day; and on the 9th we 
parted with our friend Mr. Keith, to whose unremitting kindness 
we felt much indebted. I intrusted to his care a box containing 
some drawings by Mr. Back, the map of our route from Cumberland 
House, and the skin of a black beaver, (presented to the Expedition 
by Mr. Smith,) with my official letters, addressed to the Under 
Secretary of State. I wrote by each of these gentlemen to inform 
Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood of the scarcity of stores at these 
posts, and to request them to procure all they possibly could on 
their route. Mr. Smith was left in charge of this post during the 
summer ; this gentleman soon evinced his desire to further our pro- 
gress, by directing a new canoe to be built for our use, which was 
commenced. upon immediately. 

June 21.—This day an opportunity offered of sailaale letters 
to the Great Slave Lake; and I availed myself of it, to request 
Mr. Wentzel would accompany the Expedition agreeably to the 
desire of the Copper Indians, communicating to him that I had 
received permission for him to do so from the partners of the North- 
West Company. Should he be disposed to comply with my invi- 
tation, I desired that he would go over to Fort Providence, and 
remain near the Indians whom he had engaged for our service. 
I feared lest they should become impatient at our unexpected 
delay, and, with the usual fickleness of the Indian character, remove 
from the establishment before we could arrive. It had been my 
intention to go to them myself, could the articles, with which they 
expected to be presented on my arrival, have been provided at these 
establishments; but as they could not be procured, I was compelled 
to defer my visit until our canoes should arrive. Mr. Smith sup- 


152 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


posed that my appearance amongst) them, without the means of 
satisfying any of their desires, would give them an unfavourable 
impression respecting the expedition, which would make them indif- 
ferent. to exertion, if it did not even cause them to withdraw from 
their engagements. 

The establishments at this place, Forts Chipewyan and Wed- 
derburne, the chief posts of the companies in this department, are 
conveniently situated for communicating with the Slave and Peace 
Rivers, from whence the canoes assemble in the spring and autumn; 
on the first occasion they bring the collection of furs which has been 
made at the different outposts during the winter; and at the latter 
season they receive a supply of stores for the equipment of the 
Indians in their vicinity. Fort Wedderburne is a small house, 
which was constructed on Coal Island about five years ago, when 
the Hudson’s Bay Company recommenced trading in this part of 
the country. Fort Chipewyan has been built many years, and 
is an establishment of very considerable extent, conspicuously 
situated on a rocky point of the northern shore; it has a tower 
which can be seen at a considerable distance. ‘This addition’ was 
made about eight years ago, for the purpose of watching the 
motions of the Indians, who intended, as it was then reported, 
to destroy the house and all its inhabitants. They had been in- 
stigated to this rash design by the delusive stories of one among 
them, who had acquired great influence over his companions by 
his supposed skill in necromancy. This fellow had prophesied 
that there would soon be a complete change in the face of their 
country; that fertility and plenty would succeed to the present 
sterility; and that the present race of white inhabitants, unless 
they became subservient to the Indians, would be removed, and 
their place be filled by other traders, who would supply their wants 
in every possible manner. The poor deluded wretches, imagining 


they would hasten this happy change by destroying their present 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 153 


traders, of whose submission there was no prospect, threatened, to 
extirpate them. None of these menaces, however, were put, in 
execution. They were probably deterred from the attempt by 
perceiving that a most vigilant guard was kept. over them. | 

The portion of this extensive lake which is near to the establish- 
ments, is called “ The Lake of the Hills” not improperly, as the 
northern shore and. the islands are high and rocky. The south 
side, however, is quite level, consisting of alluvial land, subject to be 
flooded, lying betwixt the different mouths of the Elk River, and 
much intersected by water. The rocks on the northern shore are 
composed of syenite over which the soil is thinly spread; it is, how- 
ever, sufficient. to support.a variety of firs and poplars, and many 
shrubs, lichens and mosses. The trees are now in full foliage, and. 
the plants generally in flower, and the whole scene is quite en- 
livening. There can scarcely bea higher gratification than that which 
is enjoyed in this country in witnessing the rapid change which 
takes place in the course of a few days in the spring; scarcely does 
the snow disappear from the ground, before the trees are clothed 
with thick foliage, the shrubs open their leaves.and put forth their 
variegated flowers, and the whole prospect becomes animating. The 
spaces between the rocky hills, being for the most part swampy, 
support willows anda few poplars. These spots are the favourite 
resort of the musquitoes, which incessantly torment the unfortunate 
persons who have to pass through them. 

Some of the hills attain an elevation of five or six hundred feet, 
at. the distance of a mile from the house; and from their summits 
a very picturesque view is commanded of the lake, and of the sur- 
rounding country. The land above the Great Point at the con- 
fluence of the main stream of the Elk River is six or seven hundred 
feet high, and stretches in a southern direction behind Pierre au 
Calumet. Opposite to that establishment, on the west side of the 
river, at some distance in the interior, the Bark Mountain rises and 

Xx 


154 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


ranges to the N.W., until it reaches Clear Lake, about thirty miles 
to the southward of the fort, and then goes to the south-westward, 
The Cree Indians generally procure from this range their provision, 
as well as the bark for the making of the canoes. There is another 
range of hills on the south shore, which runs towards the Peace 
River. | 

The residents of these establishments depend for subsistence 
almost entirely on the fish which this lake affords; they are usually 
caught in sufficient abundance throughout the winter, though at 
the distance of eighteen miles from the houses; on the thawing 
of the ice, the fish remove into some smaller lakes, and the rivers 
on the south shore. Though they are nearer to the forts than in 
winter, it frequently happens that high winds prevent the canoes 
from transporting them thither, and the residents are kept in con- 
sequence without a supply of food for two or three days together. 
The fish caught in the net are the tittameg, trout, carp, methye, 
and pike. 

The traders here also get supplied by the hunters with buffalo 
and moose deer meat (which animals are found at some distance from 
the forts), but the greater part of it is either in a dried state, or 
pounded ready for making pemmican ; and is required for the men 
whom they keep travelling during the winter to collect the furs. from 
the Indians, and for the crews of the canoes on their outward pas- 
sage to the depdts in spring. There was a great want of provision 
this season, and both the companies had much difficulty to provide a 
bare sufficiency, for the use of their different brigades of canoes. 
Mr. Smith assured me he had only five hundred pounds of meat re- 
maining after the canoes had been despatched for the use of the men 
who might travel from the post during the summer, and that five years 
preceding, there had been thirty thousand pounds in store under 
similar circumstances. He ascribed this amazing difference more to 
the indolent habits which the Indians had acquired since the com- 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 155 


mercial struggle commenced, than to their recent sickness, mention- 
ing in confirmation of his opinion that they could now, by the pro- 
duce of little exertion, obtain whatever they demanded, from either 
establishment. 

At the opening of the water in spring, the Indians resort to the 
establishments to settle their accounts with the traders, and to pro- 
~ cure the necessaries they require for the summer. ‘This meeting is 
generally a scene of much riot and confusion, for the hunters receive 
such quantities of spirits as to keep them in a state of intoxication 
for several days. This spring, however, owing to the great deficiency 
of spirits, we had the gratification of seeing them generally sober. 
They belong to the great family of the Chipewyan, or Northern, 
Indians, dialects of their language being spoken in the Peace, and 
M‘Kenzie’s Rivers, and by the populous tribes in New Caledonia, 
as ascertained by Sir Alexander M‘Kenzie in his journey to the 
Pacific. They style themselves generally Dinneh men, or Indians, 
but each tribe, or horde, adds some distinctive epithet taken from 
the name of the river, or lake, on which they hunt, or the district 
from which they last migrated. Those who come to Fort Chipewyan 
term themselves Saw-eessaw-dinneh, (Indians from the rising sun, or 
Eastern Indians,) their original hunting grounds being between the 
Athabasca, and Great Slave Lakes, and Churchill River. This dis- 
trict, more particularly termed the Chipewyan lands, or barren 
country, is frequented by numerous herds of rein-deer, which furnish 
easy subsistence, and clothing to the Indians; but the traders en- 
deavour to keep them in the parts to the westward where the beavers 
resort. There are about one hundred and sixty hunters who carry 
their furs to the Great Slave Lake, forty to Hay River, and two hun- 
dred and forty to fort Chipewyan. A few Northern Indians also resort 
to the posts at the bottom of the Lake of the Hills, on Red Deer 
Lake, and to Churchill. The distance, however, of the latter post 


from their hunting grounds, and the sufferings to which. they are 
xX 2 


156 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


exposed in going thither from want of food, have induced those who 
were formerly accustomed to visit it, to convey their furs to some 
nearer station. 

These people are so minutely described by Hearne and M‘Kenzie, 
that little can be added by a passing stranger, whose observations 
were made during short interviews, and when they were at the forts, 
where they lay aside many of their distinguishing characteristics, 
and strive at an imitation of the manners of the voyagers and 
traders. 

The Chipewyans are by no means prepossessing in their appear- 
ance; they have broad faces, projecting cheek-bones and wide 
nostrils ; but they have generally good teeth, and fine eyes. When 
at the fort they imitate the dress of the Canadians, except that, 
instead of trowsers, they prefer the Indian stockings, which only 
- reach from the thigh to the ancle, and in place of the waistband they 
have a piece of cloth round the middle which hangs down loosely 
before and behind. Their hunting dress consists of a leathern shirt 
and stockings, over which a blanket is thrown, the head being covered 
with a fur cap or band. Their manner is reserved, and their habits 
are selfish; they beg with unceasing importunity for every thing 
they see. I never saw men who either received or bestowed a gift 
with such bad grace; they almost snatch the thing from you in the 
one instance, and throw it at you in the other. It could not be 
expected that such men should display in their tents, the amiable 
hospitality which prevails generally amongst the Indians of this 
country. A stranger may go away hungry from their lodges, unless 
he possesses sufficient impudence to thrust, uninvited, his knife into 
the kettle, and help himself. The owner, indeed, never deigns to 
take any notice of such an act of rudeness, except by a frown, it 
being beneath the dignity of a hunter, to make disturbance about 
a piece of meat. | 

As some relief to the darker shades of their character it should 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 157 


be stated that instances of theft are extremely rare amongst them. 
They profess strong affection for their children, and some regard 
for their relations, who are: often numerous, as they trace very far 
the ties of consanguinity. A curious instance of the former was 
mentioned to.us, and so well authenticated, that I shall venture to 
give it in the words of Dr. Richardson’s Journal. 

“A young Chipewyan had separated from the rest of his band 
for the purpose of trenching beaver, when his wife who was his sole 
companion, and in her first pregnancy, was seized. with the pains 
of labour. She died on the third day after she had given birth to 
a boy. The husband was inconsolable, and vowed in his anguish 
never to take another woman to wife, but his grief was soon in some 
degree absorbed in anxiety for the fate of his infant son. To pre- 
serve its life he descended to the office of nurse, so degrading in 
the eyes of a Chipewyan, as partaking of the duties of a woman. 
He swaddled it in soft moss, fed it with broth made from the flesh 
of the deer, and to still its cries applied it to his breast, praying 
earnestly to the great Master of Life, to assist his endeavours. The 
force of the powerful passion by which he was actuated produced. 
the same effect in his case, as it has done in some others which are 
recorded; a flow of milk actually took place from his breast. He 
succeeded in rearing his child, taught him to be a hunter, and when 
he attaimed the age of manhood, chose him a wife from the tribe. 
The old man kept his vow in never taking a second wife himself, 
but he delighted in tending his son’s children, and when his 
daughter-in-law used to interfere, saying, that it was not the occu- 
pation of a man, he was wont to reply, that he had promised to the 
great Master of Life, if his child was spared, never to be proud, 
like the other Indians. He used to mention, too, as a certain proof 
of the approbation of Providence, that. although he was always 
obliged to carry his child on his back while hunting, yet that it 
never roused a moose by its cries, being always particularly still at 


158 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


those times. Our informant* added that he had often seen this 
Indian in his old age, and that his left breast, even then, retained 
the unusual size, it had acquired in his occupation of nurse.” 

We had proof of their sensibility towards their relations, in their 
declining to pitch their tents where they had been accustomed to do 
for many years, alleging a fear of being reminded of the happy hours 
they had formerly spent there, in the society of the affectionate 
relatives whom the sickness had recently carried off. The change 
of situation, however, had not the effect of relieving them from 
sorrowful impressions, and they occasionally indulged in very loud 
lamentations, as they sat in groups, within and without their tents. 
Unfortunately, the spreading of a severe dysentery amongst them, 
at this time, gave occasion for the renewal of their grief. The 
medicinal charms of drumming and singing were plentifully applied, 
and. once they had recourse to conjuring over a sick person. I was 
informed, however, that the Northern Indians do not try this ex- 
pedient for the cure of a patient so often as the Crees; but when 
they do, the conjuror is most assiduous, and suffers great personal 
fatigue. Particular persons only, are trained in the mysteries of 
the art of conjuring, to procure the recovery of the sick, or to 
disclose future events. 

On extraordinary occasions the man remains in his narrow con- 
juring tent, for days without eating, before he can determine the 
matter to his satisfaction. When he is consulted about the sick, the 
patient is shut up with him; but on other occasions he is alone, and 
the poor creature often works his mind up to a pitch of illusion that 
can scarcely be imagined by one who has not witnessed it. His 
deluded companions seat themselves round his tent, and await his 
communication with earnest anxiety, yet during the progress of his 
manceuvres, they often venture to question him, as to the dis- 
position of the Great Spirit. 

 * Mr. Wentzel. 


OF THE POLAR SEA, | 159 


_ These artful fellows usually gain complete ascendency over the 
minds of their companions. ‘They are supported by voluntary con- 
tributions of provision, that their minds may not be diverted by 
the labour of hunting, from the peculiar duties of their profession. 

The chiefs among the Chipewyans are now totally without power. 
The presents of a flag, and a gaudy dress, still bestowed upon 
them by the traders, do not procure for them any respect or obe- 
dience, except from the youths of their own families. This is to 
be attributed mainly to their living at peace with their neighbours, 
and to the facility which the young men find in getting their wants 
supplied independent of the recommendation of the chiefs, which 
was formerly required. In war excursions, boldness and intrepidity 
would still command respect and procure authority; but the influence 
thus acquired would, probably, cease with the occasion that called 
it forth. The traders, however, endeavour to support their autho- 
rity by continuing towards them the accustomed marks of respect, 
hoisting the flag, and firing a salute of musketry on their entering 
the fort. : 

The chief halts at a distance from the house, and despatches one 
of his young men to announce his approach, and to bring his flag, 
which is carried before him when he arrives. The messenger also 
carries to him some vermilion to ornament the faces of his party, to- 
gether with a looking-glass and comb, some tobacco, and a few rounds 
of ammunition, that they may return the salute. These men paint 
round the eyes, the forehead, and the cheek bones. 

The Northern Indians evince no little vanity, by assuming to 
themselves the comprehensive title of “The People,” whilst they 
designate all other nations by the name of their particular country. 
If men were seen at a distance, and a Chipewyan was asked who 
those persons were, he would answer, The People, if he recognised 
them to belong to his tribe, and never Chipewyans; but he would 


160 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


give them their respective names, if they were Europeans, Canadians, 
or Cree Indians. 

As they suppose their ancestors to come originally from the east; 
those who happen to be born in the eastern part of their territory, 
are considered to be of the best origin. I have been informed, that 
all the Indians who trade at the different posts in the north-west 
parts of America, imagine that their forefathers came from the east, 
except the Dog-ribs, who reside between the Copper Indian Lands 
and the Mackenzie’s River, and who deduce their origin from the 
west, which is the more remarkable, as they speak a dialect: of the 
Chipewyan language. J could gather no information respecting 
their religious opinions, except that they have a tradition of a 
deluge. 

The Chipewyans are considered to be less expert hunters than 
the Crees, which probably arises from their residing much on the 
barren lands, where the rein-deer are so numerous that little skill is 
requisite. A good hunter, however, is highly esteemed among them. 
The facility of procuring goods, since the commercial opposition 
commenced, has given great encouragement to their native indolence 
of disposition, as is manifested by the difference in the amount of 
their collections of furs and provision between the late and former 
years. From six to eight hundred packs of furs used formerly to 
be sent from this department, now the return seldom exceeds half 
that amount. The decrease in the provision has been already 
mentioned. 

The Northern Indians suppose that they originally sprang from a 
dog; and, about five years ago, a superstitious fanatic so strongly 
pressed upon their minds the impropriety of employing these ani- 
mals, to which they were related, for purposes of labour, that they 
universally resolved against using them any more, and, strange as it’ 
may seem, destroyed them. They now have to drag every thing 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 161 


themselves on sledges. This laborious task fails most heavily on the 
women ; nothing can more shock the feelings of a person, accus- 
tomed to civilized life, than to witness the state of their degrada- 
tion. When a party is on a march the women have to drag the 
tent, the meat, and whatever the hunter possesses, whilst he only 
carries his gun and medicine case. In the evening they form the 
encampment, cut wood, fetch water, and prepare the supper; and 
then, perhaps, are not permitted to partake of the fare until the 
men have finished. A successful hunter sometimes has two or three 
wives ; whoever happens to be the favourite, assumes authority over 
the others, and has the’ management of the tent. These men 
usually treat their wives unkindly, and even with harshness; except, 
indeed, at the time when they are about to increase the family, and 
then they shew them much indulgence. 

Hearne charges the Chipewyans with the dreadful practice of 
abandoning, when in extremity, their aged and sick people. The 
only instance that came under our personal notice was attended with 
some ‘palliating circumstances:—An old woman arrived at Fort 
Chipewyan, during our residence, with her son, a little boy about 
ten years old, both of whom had been deserted by their relations, 
and left in an encampment, when much reduced by sickness : two or 
three days after their departure the woman gained a little strength, 
and, with the assistance of the boy, was enabled to paddle a canoe 
to the ‘fishing station of this post, where they were supported for 
some days, until they were enabled to proceed in search of some 
other relations, who, they expected, would treat: them with more 
kindness. J learned, indeed, that the woman bore an. extremely 
bad character, and had even been guilty of infanticide, and that her 
companions considered her offences merited the desertion. 

This tribe, since its present intimate connexion with the traders, 
has discontinued its war excursions against the Ksquimaux, but they 
still speak of that nation in terms of the most inveterate hatred. 

Y 


162 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


We have only conversed with four men who have been engaged in 
any of those expeditions ; all these confirm the statements of Black- 
meat respecting the sea-coast. Our observations concerning the 
half-breed population in this vicinity, coincided so exactly with those 
which have been given of similar persons'in Dr. Richardson’s ac- 
count of the Crees, that any statement respecting them at this 
place is rendered unnecessary. Both the Companies have wisely 
prohibited their servants from intermarrying with pure Indian wo- 
men, which was formerly the cause of many quarrels with the 
tribes. 

The weather was eure) variable, during the month of June ; 
we scarcely had two clear days in succession, and the showers of 
rain were frequent; the winds were often strong, and generally 
blowing from the north-east quarter. On the evening of the 16th 
the Aurora Borealis was visible, but after that date the nights were 
too light for our discerning it. : 

The musquitoes swarmed in great numbers about the house, and 
tormented us so incessantly by their irritating stings, that we were 
compelled to keep our rooms constantly filled with smoke, which is 
the only means of driving them away: the weather indeed was now 
warm. Having received one of Dollond’s eighteen-inch spirit ther- 
mometers from Mr. Stuart, which he had the kindness to send us 
from his post at Pierre au Calumet, after he had’ learned that ours 
had been rendered. useless, I observed the temperature, at noon, on 

the 25th of J une, to be 63°. 

On the following morning we made an excursion, accompanied by 
Mr. Smith, round the fishing stations on the south side of the lake, 
for the purpose of visiting our men: we passed several groups of 
women and children belonging to both the forts, posted wherever 
they could) find: a sufficiently dry spot for an encampment. At 
length we came to our'men, pitched upon a narrow strip of land, 
situated between two rivers. Though the portion’ of dry ground 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 163 


did not exceed fifty yards, yet they appeared to be living very com- 
fortably, having formed huts with the canoes’ sail and covering, and 
were amply supported by the fish their nets daily furnished. They 
sometimes had a change in their fare, by procuring a few ducks and 
other water fowl, which resort in great abundance to the marshes, 
by which they were surrounded. 

July 2.—The canoe, which was ordered to be built for our use, 
was finished. As it was constructed after the manner, which has 
been accurately described by Hearne, and several of the American 
travellers, a detail of the process will be unnecessary. Its extreme 
length was thirty-two feet six inches, including the bow and stern 
‘pieces, its greatest breadth was four feet ten inches, but it was only 
two feet nine inches forward. where the bowman sat, and two feet four 
inches behind where the steersman was placed ; and its depth was one 
foot eleven and a quarter inches.. There were seventy-three hoops 
of thin cedar, and a layer of slender laths of the same wood within 
the frame. These feeble vessels of bark will carry twenty-five pieces 
of goods; each weighing ninety pounds, exclusive of the necessary 
provision and baggage for the crew of five or six men, amounting in 
the whole to about three thousand three hundred pounds’ weight. 
This great lading they annually carry between the depéts and the 
posts, in the interior ; and it rarely happens that any accidents occur, 
if they are managed by experienced bowmen and steersmen, on 
whose skill the safety of the canoe entirely depends in the rapids and 
difficult places. When a total portage is made, these two men carry 
the canoe, and they often run with it, though its weight is estimated 
at about three hundred pounds, exclusive of the poles and oars, which 
are occasionally left in where the distance is short. 

On the 5th, we made an excursion for the purpose of trying our 
canoe. A heavy gale came on in the evening, which caused a great 
swell in the lake, and in crossing these waves we had the satisfaction 
to find that our birchen vessel proved an excellent sea boat. 


Y¥ 2 


164 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


July '7.—This morning some men, and their families, who had 
been sent off to search for Indians, with whom they intended to pass 
the summer, returned to the fort in consequence of a serious accident 
having befallen their canoe in the Red Deer River: when they were 
in the act of hauling up a strong rapid, the line broke, the canoe 
was overturned, and two of the party narrowly escaped drowning; 
fortunately the women and children happened to be on shore, or, in 
all probability, they would have perished in the confusion of the 


scene. Nearly all their stores, their guns, and fishing-nets, were lost, 
and they could not procure any other food for the last four days than 


some unripe berries. - 

Some gentlemen arrived in the evening with a party of Chipewyan 
Indians, from Hay River, a post between the Peace River, and the 
Great Slave Lake. These men gave distressing accounts of sickness 
among their relatives, and the Indians in general along the Peace 
River, and they say many of them have died. The disease is said 
to be dysentery. On the 10th and 11th we had very sultry weather, 
and were dreadfully tormented by musquitoes. ‘The highest tempe- 
rature was 73°. 

July 13.—This morning Mr. Back and I had the sincere gratifi- 
cation of welcoming our long-separated friends, Dr. Richardson and 
Mr. Hood, who arrived in perfect health with two canoes, having 
made a very expeditious journey from Cumberland, notwithstanding 
they were detained near three days in consequence of the melancholy 
loss of one of their bowmen, by the upsetting of a canoe in a strong 
rapid; but, as the occurrences of this journey, together with the 
mention of some other circumstances that happened previous to 
their departure from Cumberland, which have been extracted from 
Mr. Hood’s narrative, will appear in the following chapter, it will be 
unnecessary to enter farther into these points now. 

The zeal and talent displayed by Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood, 
in the discharge of their several duties, since my separation from 


ad 


_ OF THE POLAR. SEA. 165 


them, drew forth my highest approbation. These gentlemen had 
brought all the stores they could procure from the establishments at 
Cumberland and Isle a la Crosse; and at the latter place they had. re- 
ceived ten bags of pemmican from the North-West Company, which 
proved to be mouldy, and so totally unfit for use that it was left at 
the Methye portage. They got none from the Hudson’s Bay post. 
The voyagers belonging to that Company, being destitute of pro- 
vision, had eaten what was intended for us. In consequence of 
these untoward circumstances, the canoes arrived with only one 
day’s supply of this most essential article. The prospect of having 
to commence our journey from hence, almost destitute of provision, 
and scantily supplied with stores, was distressing to us, and very 
discouraging to the men. It was evident, however, that any unne- 
cessary delay here would have been very imprudent, as Fort Chi-, 
pewyan did not, at the present time, furnish the means of subsistence 
for so large a party, much less was there a prospect of our receiving 
any supply to carry with us. We, therefore, hastened to make the 
necessary arrangements for our speedy departure. All the stores. 
were demanded that could possibly be spared from both the esta- 
blishments ; and we rejoiced to find, that when this collection was 
added to the articles that had been brought up by the canoes, that 
we had a sufficient quantity of clothing for the equipment of the 
men who had been engaged here, as well as,.o furnish a present to 
the Indians, besides some few goods for the winter’s consumption ; 
. but we could not procure any ammunition, which was the most es- 
sential article, or spirits, and but little tobacco. 

We then made a final arrangement respecting the voyagers, who 
were to accompany the party ; and, fortunately, there was no diffi- 
culty in doing this, as Dr. Richardson and Mr. Hood had taken the 
very judicious precaution of bringing up ten men from Cumberland, 
who were engaged to proceed forward if their services were required. 
The Canadians, whom they brought, were most desirous of being 


166 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


continued, and we felt sincere pleasure in being able to keep men 
who were so zealous in the cause, and who had given proofs of their 
activity on their recent passage to this place, by discharging those 
men who were less willing to undertake the journey; of these three 
were Englishmen, one American, and three Canadians. When the 
numbers were completed, which we had been recommended by the 
traders to take as a protection against the Esquimaux, we had 
sixteen Canadian-voyagers, and our worthy and only English at- 
tendant John Hepburn, besides the two interpreters whom we were — 
to receive at the Great Slave Lake; we were also accompanied by 
a. Chipewyan woman. An equipment of goods was given to each 
of the men who had been engaged at this place, similar to what 
had been furnished to the others at’ Cumberland; and when this 
distribution had been made, the remainder were made up into 
bales, preparatory to our departure, on the following day. We were 
cheerfully assisted in these and all our occupations by Mr. Smith, 
who evinced an anxious desire to supply our wants as far as his 
means permitted. 

Mr. Hood having brought up the dipping needle from Cum- 
berland House, we ascertained the dip to be 85° 23’ 42”, and the 
difference produced by reversing the face of the instrument was 
6 2 10°. The intensity of the magnetic force was also observed. 
Several observations had been procured on both sides of the moon 
during our residence at Fort Chipewyan, the result of which gave 
for its longitude 111° 18’ 20" W., its latitude was observed to be 
18° 42' 38" N., and the variation of the compass 22° 49° 32” E. 
Fresh rates were procured for the chronometers and their errors 
determined for Greenwich time, by which the survey to the north- 
ward was carried on. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 167 


CHAPTER V. 


Mr. Hood’s Journey to the Basquiau Hill—Sojourns with an Indian Party—His J ourney to 
Chipewyan. 

1820. B ; sks : 

March. HDEHING desirous of obtaining a drawing of a moose deer, 
and also of making some observations on the height of the Aurora, 
I set out on the 23rd, to pass a few days at the Basquiau Hill. 
Two men accompanied me, with dogs and sledges, who were going 
to the hill for meat. We found the Saskatchawan open, and were 
obliged to follow it several miles to the eastward. We did not, 
then, cross it without wading in water, which had overflowed the 
ice; and our snow shoes were encumbered:with a heavy weight for 
the remainder of the day. On the south bank of the Saskatchawan 
were some poplars ten or twelve feet in circumference at the root. 
Beyond the river, we traversed an extensive swamp, bounded by 
woods. In the evening we crossed the Swan Lake, about six miles 
in breadth, and eight in length, and halted on its south side for 
the night, twenty-four miles $.S.W. of Cumberland House. 

At four in the morning of the 24th we continued the journey, and 
crossed some creeks in the woods, and another large swamp. These 
swamps are covered with water in summer, to the depth of several 
feet, which arises from the melted snow from the higher grounds. 
The tracks of foxes, wolves, wolverenes, and martens, were very 
numerous. The people, employed in carrying meat, set traps on 
their way out, and take possession of their captures at their return, 


168 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


for which they receive a sum from the Company, proportioned to 
the value of the fur. 

In the evening we crossed the Goose Lake, which is a little longer 
than Swan Lake, and afterwards the River Sepanach, a branch of 
the Saskatchawan, forming an island extending thirty miles above, — 
and forty below Cumberland. House. We turned to the westward 
on the Root River, which enters the Sepanach, and halted on its 
banks, having made in direct distance not more oe twenty miles 
since the 23rd. : 

We passed the Shoal Lake on the 25th, and then marched preite 
miles through woods and swamps to a hunting tent of the Indians. 
It was situated in a grove of large poplars, and would have been no 
unpleasant residence if we could have avoided the smoke. A heavy 
gale from the westward, with snow, confined us for several days to 
this tent. On the 30th two Indians arrived, one of whom named 
the Warrior, was well known at the house. We endeavoured to 
prevail upon them to set out in quest of moose, which they agreed 
to do, on receiving some rum. Promises were of no avail; the 
_ smallest present gratification is preferred to the certainty of ample 
reward at another period; an unfailing indication of strong animal 
passions, and a weak understanding. On complying with their 
demand they departed. : 

The next day, I went to the Warrior’s tent, distant about eleven 
miles. The country was materially changed: the pine had disap- 
peared, and gentle slopes, with clumps of large poplars, formed some 
pleasing groups; willows were scattered over the swamps. When 
I entered the tent, the Indians spread a buffalo robe before the fire, 
and desired me to sit down. Some were eating, others sleeping: 
many of them without any covering except the breach cloth and a 
blanket over the shoulders; a state in which they love to indulge 
themselves till hunger drives them forth to the chase. Besides the 
Warrior’s family, there was that of another hunter named Long-legs, 


praved ty E dw Fir 


- 


En 


WN. 


R 


Drawn by Lieut. Hood. i 


4 


7 


N 


G 
ish 


TI 


) TAIN 


IND 


Or 


= 
iis 


L@ 


W TE IR 


T 


rm 


ff 


W 


ec 


a 


Fablist 


Wa, sx 


an 
ron: 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 169 


whose bad success in hunting, had reduced him to the necessity of 
feeding on moose leather for three weeks, when he was compas- 
sionately relieved by the Warrior. I was an unwilling witness of 
the preparation of my dinner by the Indian women. They cut into 
pieces a portion of fat meat, using for that purpose a knife and 
their teeth. It was boiled in a kettle, and served in a platter made 
of birch bark, from which, being dirty, they had peeled the surface. 
However, the flavour of good moose meat will survive any process 
that it undergoes in their hands, except smoking. 

_ Having provided myself with some drawing materials, I amused 
the Indians with a sketch of the interior of the tent and its inha- 
bitants. An old woman, who was relating with great volubility an 
account of some quarrel with the traders at Cumberland House, 
broke off from her narration when she perceived my design ; sup- 
posing, perhaps, that I was employing some charm against her ; for the 
Indians have been taught a supernatural dread of particular pic- 
tures. - One of the young men drew, with a piece of charcoal, a 
figure resembling a frog, on the side of the tent, and by significantly 
pointing at me, excited peals of merriment from his companions. 
The caricature was comic; but I soon fixed their attention, by 
producing my pocket compass, and affecting it with a knife. They 
have great curiosity, which might easily be directed to the attain- 
ment of useful knowledge. As the dirt accumulated about these 
people was visibly of a communicative nature, I removed at night 
into the open air, where the thermometer fell to 15° belong ZeLO, 
although it was the next day 60° above it. 

In the morning the Warrior and his companion seme I found 
that, instead of hunting, they had passed the whole time in a 
drunken fit, at a short distance from the tent. In reply to our 
angry questions, the Warrior held out an empty vessel, as if to de- 
mand the payment of a debt, before he entered into any new nego-' 
tiation. Not being inclined to starve his family, we set out for 

Z 


170 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


another Indian tent, ten miles to the southward, but we found only 
the frame, or tent poles, standing, when we reached the spot. The 
men, by digging where the fire-place had. been, ascertained that the 
Indians had quitted it the day before; and as their marches are 
short, when encumbered with the women and baggage, we sought 
out their track, and followed it. At an abrupt angle of it, which 
was obscured by trees, the men suddenly disappeared; and, hasten- 
ing forward. to discover the cause, I perceived them both still rolling 
at the foot of a steep cliff, over which they had been dragged, while 
endeavouring to stop the descent of their sledges. The dogs were 
gazing silently, with the wreck of their harness about them, and the 
sledges deeply buried in the snow. The effects of this accident 
did not detain us long, and we proceeded afterwards with greater 
caution. 

The air was warm at noon, and the solitary but sweet notes of 
the jay, the earliest spring bird, were in every wood. Late in the 
evening we descried the ravens wheeling in circles round a small 
grove of poplars, and, according to our expectations, found the 
Indians encamped there. The men were absent hunting, and re- 
turned unsuccessful. They had been several days without provisions, 
and thinking that I could depend upon the continuance of their 
exertions, I gave them a little rum; the next day they set out, and 
at midnight they swept by us with their dogs in close pursuit. 

_ In the morning we found that a moose had eaten the bark of a 
tree near our fire. ‘The hunters, however, again failed; and they 
attributed the extreme difficulty of approaching the chase, to the 
calmness of the weather, which enabled it to hear them at a great 
distance. | 

They concluded, as usual, when labouring under any affliction, 
that they were tormented by the evil spirit; and assembled to 
beat a large tambourine, and sing an address to the manito, or deity, 
praying for relief, according to the explanation which I received : 


OF THE POLAR SEA. val 


but their prayer consisted of only three words, constantly repeated. 
One of the hunters yet remained abroad; and as the wind rose at 
noon, we had hopes that he was successful. In the evening he made 
his appearance, and announcing that he had killed a large moose, 
immediately secured the reward which had been promised. 

The tidings were received with apparent indifference, by people 
whose lives are alternate changes from the extremity of want to 
abundance. But as their countenances seldom betray their emotions, 
it cannot be determined whether their apathy is real or affected. How- 
ever, the women prepared their sledges and dogs, with the design 
of dismembering, and bringing home, the carcass ; a proceeding to 
which, in their necessitous condition, I could have had neither rea- 
sonable nor available objections, without giving them a substitute. By 
much solicitation I obtained an audience, and offered them our own 
provisions, on condition of their suspending the work of destruction 
till the next day. They agreed to the proposition, and we set out 
with some Indians for the place where the animal was lying. The 
night advancing, we were separated by a snow-storm, and not being 
skilful enough to follow tracks which were so speedily filled up, I was 
bewildered for several hours in the woods, when I met with an Indian, 
who led me back at such a pace that I was always in the rear, to 
his infinite diversion. The Indians are vain of their local know- 
ledge, which is certainly very wonderful. Our companions had 
taken out the entrails and young of the moose, which they buried 
in the snow. 

The Indians then returned to the tents, and one of my men ac- 
companied them; he was the person charged with the management 
of the trade at the hunting tent; and he observed, that the oppor- 
tunity of making a bargain with the Indians, while they were — 
ing, was too advantageous to be lost. 

It remained for us to prevent the wolves from mangling the 
moose ; for which purpose we wrapped ourselves in blankets between 


ZL 2 


172 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


its feet, and placed the hatchets within our reach. The night was - 
stormy, and apprehension kept me long awake; but finding my 
companion in so deep.a sleep, that nothing could have roused. him, 
except the. actual gripe of a wolf, I thought it advisable to imitate 
his example, as much as was in my power, rather than bear the 
burthen of anxiety alone. At day-light we shook off the snow, 
which was heaped upon us, and endeavoured to kindle a fire; but 
the violence of the storm defeated all our attempts. At length two 
Indians arrived, with whose assistance we succeeded, and they took 
possession of it, to show their sense of our obligations to them. 
We were ashamed of the scene before us; the entrails of the moose 
and its young, which had been buried at our feet, bore testimony 
to the nocturnal revel of the wolves, during the time we had slept. 
This was a fresh subject of derision for the Indians, whose appetites, 
however, would not suffer them to waste long upon us a time so 
precious. . They soon finished what the wolves had begun, and with 
as little aid from the art of cookery, eating both the young aie; 
and the contents of the paunch, raw. 

I had. scarcely secured myself by a lodge of branches from the 
snow, and placed the moose in a position for my sketch, when we 
were stormed by a troop of women and children, with their sledges 
and dogs. We obtained another short respite from the Indians, but 
our blows could not drive, nor their caresses entice, the ia 
dogs from the tempting feast before them. 

I had not finished my sketch, before the impatient oe tore 
the moose to pieces, and loaded their sledges with meat. On our 
way ,to the tent, a black wolf rushed out upon an Indian, who 
happened to pass near its den. It was shot; and the Indians car- 
ried away three black whelps, to improve the breed of their dogs. 
I purchased one of them, intending to send it to England, but it 
perished for want of proper nourishment. 

The latitude of these tents, was 53° 12’ 46” N., and Renaitwie 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 173 


by chronometers 103° 13:10” W. On the 5th of April we set out for 
the hunting: tent by our former track, and arrived there -in. the 
evening. | | 

As the increasing warmth of the weather had hicme ne) to in- 
terrupt communication by removing the ice, orders had. been sent 
from Cumberland House to the people at the tent, to quit it without 
- delay; which we did on the 7th. Some altitudes of the Aurora were 
obtained, the results of which will be noticed elsewhere. 

We had ‘a fine view, at sun-rise, of the Basquiau Hill, skirting 
half the horizon with its white sides, chequered by forests of pine. 
It is seen from Pine Island Lake, at the distance of fifty miles; and 
cannot, therefore, be less than three-fourths of a mile in perpen- 
dicular height ; probably the greatest. elevation hetween the Atlantic 
Ocean, and the Rocky Mountains. 

‘A small stream runs near the hunting tent, strongly impregnated 
with salt. There are several salt spans about it, which are not 
frozen during the winter. _ 

‘The ‘surface of the snow, thawing in the sun, and freezing at 
night, had become a strong crust, which sometimes gave way in a 
circle round our feet, immerging us in the soft snow beneath. The 
people were afflicted with snow blindness; a kind of ophthalmia oc- 
casioned by the reflection of the sun’s rays in the spring. 

The miseries endured during the first journey of this nature, are 
so great, that nothing could induce the sufferer to undertake a 
second, while under the influence of present pain. He feels his 
frame crushed by unaccountable pressure, he drags a galling and 
stubborn weight at his feet, and his track is marked with blood. 
The dazzling scene around him affords no rest to his eye, no object 
to divert his attention from his own agonizing sensations. When 
he»rises from sleep, half his body seems dead, till quickened into 
feeling by the iritation of his sores. But, fortunately for him, no 
evil. makes an impression so evanescent as pain. It cannot be wholly 


174 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


banished, nor recalled with the force of reality, by any act of the 
mind, either to affect our determinations, or ‘to sympathize with 
another. The traveller soon forgets his sufferings, and at every future 
journey, their recurrence is attended with diminished acuteness. 

It was not before the 10th or 12th of April, that the return of 
the swans, geese, and ducks, gave certain indications of the advance 
of spring. The juice of the maple tree began to flow, and the 
women repaired to the woods for the purpose of collecting it. This 
tree which abounds to the southward, is not, I believe found to the 
northward of the Saskatchawan. The Indians obtain the sap by 
making incisions into the tree. They boil it down, and evaporate 
the water, skimming off the impurities. They are so fond of sweets, 
that after this simple ‘process, they set an extravagant price upon it. 

On the 15th fell the first shower of rain we had seen for six 
months, and on the 17th the thermometer rose to'77° in the shade. 
The whole face of the country was deluged by the melted snow. 
All the nameless heaps of dirt, accumulated in the winter, now 
floated over the very thresholds, and the long-imprisoned scents 
dilated into vapours so penetrating, that no retreat was any security 
from them. The flood deseended into the cellar below our house, 
and destroyed a quantity of powder and tea; a loss irreparable in 
our situation. : 

The noise made by the frogs which this inundation produced, is 
almost incredible. There is strong reason to believe that they 
outlive the severity of winter. 'They have often been found frozen 
and revived by warmth, nor is it possible that the multitude which 
incessantly filled our ears with its discordant notes could have been 
matured in two or three days. 

The fishermen at Beaver Lake, and the other detached parties 
were ordered to return to the post. The expedients to which the 
poor people were reduced, to cross a country so beset with waters, 
presented many uncouth spectacles. The inexperienced were glad 


OF THE POLAR. SEA. 175 


to compromise, with the loss of property, for the safety of their 
persons, and astride upon ill-balanced rafts with which they struggled 
to be uppermost, exhibited a ludicrous picture of distress. Happy 
were those who could patch up an old canoe, though obliged to bear 
it half the way on their shoulders, through miry bogs and _ inter- 
woven willows. But the veteran trader, wedged in a box of skin, 
with his wife, children, dogs, and furs, wheeled triumphantly through 
the current, and deposited his heterogeneous. cargo safely on the 
shore. The woods re-echoed with the return of their exiled tenants. 
An hundred tribes as gaily dressed as any burnished natives of the 
south, greeted our eyes in our accustomed walks, and their voices, 
though unmusical, were the sweetest. that. ever saluted our ears. 

From the 19th to the 26th the snow once more blighted the resus- 
citating verdure, but a single day was. sufficient to remove it. On 
the 28th the Saskatchawan swept away the ice which had adhered 
to its banks, and the next day a boat came down from Carlton 
House with provisions. We received such accounts of the state of 
vegetation at. that place, that Dr. Richardson determined to visit it, 
in order to: collect botanical specimens, as the period at which the 
ice was expected to admit of the continuation of our journey was 
still distant. Accordingly he embarked on the 1st of May. 

In the course of the month the ice gradually wore away from the 
south side of the lake, but the great mass of it still hung to the 
north. side with some snow visible on its surface. By the 21st the 
elevated grounds were perfectly dry, and teeming with the fragrant 
offspring of the season. When the snow melted, the earth was 
covered. with the fallen leaves of the last year, and already it was 
green with the strawberry plant, and the bursting buds of the 
gooseberry, raspberry, and rose bushes, soon variegated by the rose 
and the blossoms of the choke cherry. The gifts of nature aye dis- 
regarded and undervalued till they are withdrawn, and in the 
hideous regions of the Arctic Zone, she would make a convert of 


176 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


him for whom the gardens of Europe had no charms, or the mild 
beauties of a southern clime had bloomed in vain. | 

Mr. Williams found a delightful occupation in his aniiohelat 
pursuits. The horses were brought to the plough, and fields of 
wheat, barley, and Indian corn, promised to reward his labours. 
His dairy furnished us with all the luxuries:of an English farm. 

On the 25th the ice departed from Pine Island Lake... We were; 
however, informed that Beaver Lake, which was likewise in our 
route, would not afford a passage before the 4th of June. Accord- 
ing to directions left by Mr. Franklin, applications were made to 
the Chiefs of the Hudson’s Bay and North-West Companies’ posts, 
for two canoes, with their crews, and a supply of stores, for the use 
of the Expedition. _They were not in a condition to comply with 
this request till the arrival of their respective returns from Isle A la 
Crosse and the Saskatchawan departments. Of the six men whom 
we brought from England, the most serviceable, John Hepburn, 
had accompanied Mr. Franklin, and only one other desired to prose- 
cute the journey with us. Mr. Franklin had made arrangements 
with Mr. Williams for the employment of the remaining five men 
in bringing to Cumberland House the ammunition, tobacco, ¢c., left 
at York Fort, which stores were, if possible, to be sent.after us in 
the summer. On the 30th Dr. Richardson returned from Carlton 
House, and on the 31st the boats arrived belonging to the Hudson’s 
Bay Company’s Saskatchawan department. We obtained a canoe 
and two more volunteers. On the 1st of June the Saskatchawan, 


swelled by the melting of the snow near the rocky mountains, rose 


twelve feet, and the current of the little rivers bounding Pine Island 
ran back into the lake, which it filled with mud. | 

On the 5th the North-West Company’s people arrived, mt Mr. 
Conolly furnished us with a canoe and five Canadians. . They were. 
engaged to attend us till Mr. Franklin should think fit to discharge: 
them, and bound under the usual penalties in case of disobedience, or 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 77 


other improper conduct. These poor people entertained such dread. of 
a ship of war, that they stipulated not to be embarked in Lieutenant 
Parry’s vessels, if we should find them on the coast; a condition 
with which they would gladly have dispensed, had that desirable 
event taken place. As we required a Canadian foreman and steers- 
man for the other canoe, we were compelled to wait for the appear- 
ance of the Isle a la Crosse canoes under Mr. Clark. 

On the 8th Mr. Williams embarked for York Fort. He gave us a 
circular letter addressed to the Chiefs of the Hudson’s Bay Com- 
pany’s posts, directing them to afford us all possible assistance on our 
route, and he promised to exert every endeavour to forward the 
Esquimaux interpreter, upon whom the success of our journey so 
much depended. He was accompanied by eight boats. With him 
we sent our collections of plants, minerals, charts, and drawings, to 
be transmitted to England by the Hudson’s Bay ships. After this 
period, our detention, though short, cost us more vexation than the 
whole time we had passed at Cumberland House, because every hour 
of the short summer was invaluable to us. On the 11th Mr. Clark 
arrived, and completed our crews. He brought letters from Mr. 
Franklin, dated March 28th, at Fort Chipewyan, where he was 
engaged procuring hunters and interpreters. A heavy storm of wind 
and rain from the north-east again delayed us till the morning of the 
13th. The account we had received at York Factory of the nume- 
rous stores at Cumberland House proved to be very erroneous. The 
most material stores we received did not amount, in addition to our 
own, to more than two barrels of powder, a keg of spirits, and two 
pieces of tobacco, with pemmican for sixteen days. 

The crew of Dr. Richardson’s canoe consisted of three English- 
men and three Canadians, and the other carried five Canadians; 
both were deeply laden, and the waves ran high on the lake. No 
person. in our party being well acquainted with the rivers to the 
northward, Mr. Conolly gave us a pilot, on condition that, we should 

2A 


178 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


exchange him when we met with the Athabasca brigade of canoes. 
At four A.M. we embarked. 

We soon found that birchen-bark canoes were not calculated to 
brave rough weather on a large lake, for we were compelled to land 
on the opposite border, to free them from the water which had 
already saturated their cargoes. The wind became more moderate, 
and we were enabled, after traversing a chain of smaller lakes, to 
enter the mouth of the Sturgeon River, at sunset, where we en- 
camped. ; | 

The lading of the canoes is always, if possible, carried on shore 
at night, and the canoes taken out of the water. The following 
evening we reached Beaver Lake, and landed to repair some damages 
sustained by the canoes. A round stone will displace the lading of 
a canoe, without doing any injury, but a slight blow against a sharp 
corner penetrates the bark. For the purpose of repairing it, a small 
quantity of gum or pitch, bark and pine roots, are embarked, and 
the business is so expeditiously performed, that the speed of the canoe 
amply compensates for every delay. ‘he Sturgeon River is justly 
called by the Canadians La Riviére Maligne, from its numerous and 
dangerous rapids. Against the strength of a rapid it is impossible 
to effect any progress by paddling, and the canoes are tracked, or if 
the bank will not admit of it, propelled with poles, in the manage- 
ment of which the Canadians shew great dexterity. Their simulta- 
neous motions were strongly contrasted with the awkward confusion 
of the inexperienced Englishmen, deafened by the torrent, who 
sustained the blame of every accident which occurred. 

At sunset we encamped on an island in Beaver Lake, and at four 
A.M., the next morning, passed the first portage in the Ridge 
River. Beaver Lake is twelve miles in length, and six in breadth. 
The flat limestone country rises into bold rocks on its banks, and 
at the mouth of the Ridge River, the limestone discontinues. The 
lake is very deep, and has already been noticed for the number and 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 179 


excellence of its fish. The Ridge River is rapid and shallow. We 
had emerged from the muddy channels through an alluvial soil, and 
the primitive rocks interrupted our way with frequent portages, 
through the whole route to Isle 4 la Crosse Lake. At two P.M. 
we passed the mouth of the Hay River, running from the westward; 
and the ridge above its confluence takes the name of the Great 
River, which rises at the height of land called the Frog Portage. . 

The thermometer was this day 100° in the sun, and the heat was 
extremely oppressive, from our constant exposure to it. We crossed 
three portages in the Great River, and encamped at the last ; here 
we met the director of the North-West Company’s affairs in the 
north, Mr. Stuart, on his way to Fort William, in alight canoe. He 
had left the Athabasca Lake only thirteen days, and brought letters 
from Mr. Franklin, who desired that we would endeavour to collect 
stores of every kind at Isle a la Cosse, and added a favourable account 
of the country, to the northward of the Slave Lake. 

On the 16th, at three A.M., we continued our course, the river 
increasing to the breadth of half a mile, with many rapids between 
the rocky islands. The banks were luxuriantly clothed with pines, 
poplars, and birch trees, of the largest size; but the different shades 
of green were undistinguishable at a distance, and the glow of 
autumnal colours was wanting to render the variety beautiful. 

Having crossed two portages at the different extremities of the 
Island Lake, we ran through two extensive sheets of water under 
sail, called the Heron and Pelican Lakes; the former of. which is 
fifteen miles in length, and the latter five; but its extent to the ~ 
southward has not been explored. An intricate channel, with four 
small portages, conducted us to the Woody Lake. Its borders were, 
indeed, walls of pines, hiding the face of steep and high rocks; 
and we wandered in search of a landing-place till ten P.M., when we 
were forced to take shelter from an impending storm, on a small 
island, where we wedged ourselves between the trees. But though 

2A2 


180 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


we secured the canoes, we incurred a personal evil of much greater 
magnitude, in the torments inflicted by the musquitoes, a plague 
which had grown upon us since our departure from Cumberland 
House, and which infested us during the whole summer; we found, 
no relief from their attacks by exposing ourselves to the utmost 
violence of the wind and rain. Our last resource was to plunge 
ourselves in the water, and from this uncomfortable situation we 
gladly escaped at day-light, and hoisted our sails. 

The Woody Lake is thirteen miles in length, and a small grassy 
channel at its north-western extremity, leads to the Frog Portage, 
the source of the waters descending by Beaver Lake to the Sas- 
katchawan. ‘The distance to the Missinnippi, or Churchill River, is 
only three hundred and eighty yards ; and as its course crosses the 
height nearly at right angles to the direction of the Great River, it 
would be superfluous to compute the elevation at this place. The 
portage is in latitude 55° 26’ 0" N., and longitude 103° 34/ 50" W. 
Its name, according to Sir Alexander Mackenzie, is derived from 
the Crees having left suspended a stretched frog’s skin, in derision 
of the Northern Indian mode of dressing the beaver. 

The part of the Missinnippi, in which we embarked, we should 
have mistaken for a lake, had it not been for the rapidity of the 
current against which we made our way. At four P.M. we passed 
a long portage, occasioned by a ledge of rocks, three hundred yards 
in length, over which the river falls seven or eight feet. After 
crossing another portage we encamped. 

On the 18th we had rain, wind, and thunder, the whole day; but 
this weather was much preferable to the heat we had borne hitherto. 
We passed three portages, and, at six P.M., encamped on the north 
bank. Below the third portage is the mouth of the Rapid River, 
flowing from a large lake to the southward, on which a post was 
formerly maintained by the North-West Company. Next morning 
we found ourselves involved in a confused mass of islands, through 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 18] 


the openings of which we could not discern the shore. The guide’s 
knowledge of the river did not extend beyond the last portage, and 
our perplexity continued, till we observed some foam floating on the 
water, and took the direction from which it came. The noise of a 
heavy fall, at the Mountain Portage, reached our ears, at the dis- 
tance of four miles, and we arrived there at eight A.M. The 
portage was a difficult ascent over a rocky island, between which and 
the main shore were two cataracts, and a third in sight above them, 
making another portage. We surprised a large brown bear, which 
immediately retreated into the woods. To the northward of the 
second portages we again found the channels intricate, but the 
shores being sometimes visible we ventured to proceed. The cha- 
racter of the country was new, and more interesting than before. 
The mountainous and strong elevations receded from the banks, 
and the woods crept through their breaches to the valleys behind; 
the adventurous pine alone ascending their bases, and braving storms 
unfelt below. 

At noon, we landed at the Otter Portage, where the river ran 
with great velocity for half a mile, among large stones. Having 
carried across the principal part of the cargo, the people attempted 
to track the canoes along the edge of the rapid. With the first they 
succeeded, but the other, in which were the foreman and steersman, 
was overset and swept away by the current. An account of this 
misfortune was speedily conveyed to the upper end of the portage, 
and the men launched the remaining canoe into the rapid, though 
wholly unacquainted with the dangers of it. The descent was 
quickly accomplished, and they perceived the bottom of the lost 
canoe above water in a little bay, whither it had been whirled by 
the eddy. One man had reached the bank, but no traces could be 
found of the foreman, Louis Saint Jean. We saved the canoe, out 
of which two guns and a case of preserved meats had been thrown 


182 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


into the rapid*. So early a disaster deeply affected the spirits of the 
Canadians, and their natural vivacity gave way to melancholy fore- 
bodings, while they erected a wooden cross in the rocks near the 
spot where their companion perished. 

The loss of this man’s services, and the necessity of procuring a 
guide, determined us to wait for the arrival of the North-West 
Company’s people from Fort Chipewyan, and we encamped accord- 
ingly. ‘The canoe was much shattered, but as the gun wales were 
not broken, we easily repaired it. In the evening a N. W. canoe 
arrived, with two of the partners. They gave us an account of 
Mr. Franklin’s proceedings, and referred us to the brigade following 
them for a guide. 

During the 20th it rained heavily, and we passed the day in 
anxious suspense confined to our tents. A black bear came to the 
bank on the opposite side of the river, and on seeing us, glided 
behind the trees. 

Late on the 21st Mr. Robertson, of the Hudson Bay Company 
arrived, and furnished us with a guide, but desired that he might 
be exchanged when we met the northern canoes. We took ad- 
vantage of the remainder of the day, to cross the next portage, 
which was three-fourths of a mile in length. 

On the 22nd we crossed three small portages, and encamped at 
the fourth. At one of them we passed some of the Hudson’s Bay 
Company's canoes, and our application to them was unsuccessful. 
We began to suspect that Isle 4 la Crosse was the nearest place 
at which we might hope for assistance. However, on the morning of 
the 23rd as we were about to embark, we encountered the last 
brigades of canoes belonging to both the Companies, and obtained a 
guide and foreman from them. Thus completely equipped, we 


* Mr. Hood himself was the first to leap into the canoe and incite the men to follow 
him, and shoot the rapid to save the lives of their companions.—Dr. Ricuarpson’s Journal, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 183 


entered the Black Bear Island Lake, the navigation of which. re- 
quires a very experienced pilot. Its length is twenty-two miles, 
and its breadth varies from three to five, yet it is so choaked with 
islands, that no channel is to be found through it, exceeding a mile 
in breadth. At sunset we landed; and encamped on an island, and 
at six A. M. on the 24th, left the lake, and crossed three portages 
into another, which has, probably, several communications with the 
last, as that by which we passed is too narrow to convey the whole 
body of the Missinnippi. At one of these portages called the Pin 
Portage is a rapid, about ten yards in length, with a descent of ten 
or twelve feet, and beset with rocks. Light canoes sometimes 
venture down this fatal gulf; to avoid the portage, unappalled by 
the warning crosses which overhang the brink, the mournful records 
of former failures. 

The Hudson’s Bay Company’s people whom we passed on the 
23rd, going to the rock house with their furs, were badly provided 
with food, of which we saw distressing proofs at every portage 
behind them. They had stripped the birch trees of their rind to 
procure the soft pulpy vessels in contact with the wood, which are 
sweet, but very insufficient to satisfy a craving appetite. 

The lake to the westward of the Pin Portage, is called Sandfly 
Lake; it is seven miles long, and a wide channel connects it with 
the Serpent Lake, the extent of which to the southward we could 
not discern. There is nothing remarkable in this chain of lakes, except 
their shapes being rocky basins filled by the waters of the Missinnippi, 
insulating the massy eminences, and meandering with almost imper- 
ceptible current between them. From the Serpent to the Sandy 
Lake, it is again confined in a narrow space by the approach of its 
winding banks, and on the 26th we were some hours employed in 
traversing a series of shallow rapids, where it was necessary to 
lighten the canoes. Having missed the path through the woods, we 
walked two miles in the water upon sharp stones, from which some 


184, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


person was incessantly slipping into deep holes, and floundering in 
vain for footing at the bottom; a scene highly diverting, notwith- 
standing our fatigue. We were detamed in Sandy Lake, till one 
P.M., by a strong gale, when the wind becoming moderate we 
crossed five miles to the mouth of the river, and at four P. M. left 
the main branch of it, and entered a little rivulet called the Grassy 
River, running through an extensive reedy swamp. It is the nest of 
innumerable ducks, which rear their young, among the long rushes, 
in security from beasts of prey. At sunset we encamped on the 
banks of the main branch. 

At three A. M. June 28th, we embarked in a thick fog occasioned 
by a fall of the temperature of the air ten degrees below that of the 
water. Having crossed Knee Lake, which is nine miles in length, 
and a portage at its western extremity, we entered Primeau Lake, 
with a strong and favourable wind, by the aid of which we ran 
nineteen miles through it, and encamped at the river’s mouth. It is 
shaped like the barb of an arrow, with the point towards the north, 
and its greatest breadth is about four miles. 

During the night, a torrent of rai washed us from our beds, 
accompanied with the loudest thunder I ever heard. This weather 
continued during the 29th, and often compelled us to land, and turn 
the canoes up, to prevent them from filling. We passed one portage, 
and the confluence of a river, said to afford, by other rivers beyond a 
height of land, a shorter but more difficult route to the Athabasca 
Lake than that which is generally pursued. 

On the 28th we crossed the last portage, and at ten A. M. en- 
tered the Isle 4 la Crosse Lake. Its long succession of woody 
points, both banks stretching towards the south, till their forms 
were lost in the haze of the horizon, was a grateful prospect to us, 
after our bewildered and interrupted voyage in the Missinnippi. 
The gale wafted us with unusual speed, and as the lake increased in 
breadth, the waves swelled to a dangerous height. A canoe running 


ee 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 185 


before the wind is very liable to burst asunder, when on the top of 
a wave, so that part of the bottom is out.of the water; for there is 
nothing to support the weight of its heavy cargo pas the bark, and 
the slight gunwales attached to it. 

On making known our exigencies to the gentlemen in charge of the 
Hudson’s Bay and North West Companies’ forts, they made up an 
assortment of stores, amounting to five bales; for four of which we 
were indebted to Mr. Mac Leod of the North West Company, who 
shared with us the ammunition absolutely required for the support 
of his post; receiving in exchange an order for the same quantity 
upon the cargo which we expected to follow us from York Factory. 
We had heard from Mr. Stuart that Fort Chipewyan was too much 
impoverished to supply the wants of the expedition, and we found 
Isle a la Crosse in the same condition; which indeed we might have 
foreseen, from the exhausted state of Cumberland House, but could 
not have provided against. We never had heard before our de- 
parture from York, that the posts in the interior only received an- 
nually the stores necessary for the consumption of a single year. 
It was fortunate for us that Mr. Franklin had desired ten bags of 
pemmican to be sent from the Saskatchawan across the plains, to 
Isle 4 la Crosse for our use. This resource was untouched, but: we 
could not embark more than five pieces in our own canoes. How- 
ever Mr. Mac Leod agreed to send a canoe after us to the Methye 
Portage, with the pemmican, and we calculated that the diminution 
of our provision would there enable us to receive it. 

The Beaver River énters it on the §.E. side, and another river 
which has not been named, on the S.W. Both these rivers are 
branches of the Missinnippi, as it is the only outlet from the lake. The 
banks appeared to be rocky, and the beach in many places sandy, 
but its waters are yellow and muddy. It produces a variety of fish, 
among which its white fish are esteemed the best in the country, 
The only birds visible at this, season, are common to every part. of 

2B 


186 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the Missinnippi; gulls, ducks, pigeons, goatsuckers, and the raven ; 
the geese and swans pay a momentary visit in passing to the north 
and returning. 

There was little in the forts differing from the establishments that 
we had before seen. The ground on which they are erected is sandy, 
and favourable to cultivation. Curiosity, however, was satisfied by 
the first experiment, and utility alone has been unable to extend it. 
Isle a la Crosse is frequented by the Crees and the Chipewyans. It 
is not the dread of the Indians, but of one another, that has brought 
the rival Companies so close together at every trading post; each 
party seeking to prevent the other from engaging the affections of 
the natives, and monopolizing the trade. Whenever a settlement is 
made by the one, the other immediately follows, without considering 
the eligibility of the place; for it may injure its opponent, though 
it cannot benefit itself, which is the first object of all other com- 
mercial bodies, but the second of the fur traders. 

On the evening of the 30th we embarked, and entered a wide 
channel to the northward of the forts, and extending towards the 
north-west. It gradually decreased in breadth till it became a river, 
which is the third fork of the Missinnippi, and its current being 
almost insensible, we entered the clear lake at ten A.M. on the ist 
of July. Of this lake, which is very large, no part is known except 
the south border, but its extent would lead us to conclude, that its 
evaporation must be supplied by another river to the northward, 
especially as the small channel that communicates with Buffalo Lake 
is motionless. The existence of such a river is asserted by the In- 
dians, and a shorter passage might be found by it across the height 
of land to the Clear Water River, than the portage from the Me- 
thye Lake. 

In Buffalo Lake the wind was too strong for us to proceed, and we 
therefore encamped upon a gravel beach thrown up by the waves. 


We embarked at three A.M. July 2d, and at four P.M., entered the 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 187 


mouth of the Methye River. The lake is thirty-four miles in length, 
and fourteen in breadth. It is probably very deep, for we saw no 
islands in this wide expanse, except at the borders. On the south- 
west side were two forts, belonging to the Companies, and near them 
a solitary hill seven or eight hundred feet high. At eight P.M. we 
encamped in the Methye River, at the confluence of the river Pem- 
bina. A route has. been explored by it to the Red Willow River, 
across the height of land, but the difficulties of it were so great, 
that the ordinary route is preferred. 

On the 3d we passed through the Methye River, and encamped 
on the borders of the Methye Lake. The soil from Isle a la Crosse 
to this place is sandy, with some portion of clay, and the trees nu- 
merous; but the Methye River is stoney, and so shallow, that, to 
lighten the canoes, we made two portages of five and two miles. The 
paths were overflowed with cold spring water, and barricadoed by 
fallen trees; we should have been contented to immerse ourselves 
wholly had the puddle been sufficiently deep, for the musquitoes de- 
voured every part that: was exposed to them. 

On the 4th we crossed the Methye Lake, and landed at the portage 
on the north-west side, in one of the sources of the Missinnippi. 
The lake is seventeen miles in length, with a large island in the 
middle. We proceeded to the north side of the portage with two 
men, carrying a tent and some instruments, leaving the canoes and 
cargoes to be transported by daily journeys of two or three miles. 
The distance is fourteen statute miles, and there are two small lakes 
about five miles from the north side. Several species of fish were 
found in them, though they have no known communication with 
any other body of water, being situated on the elevation of the. 
height. The road was a gentle ascent, miry from the late rainy 
weather, and shaded by pines, poplars, birches, and cypresses, which 
terminated our view. On the north side we discovered through an 
opening in the trees, that we were on a hill eight. or nine hundred 

2B 2 


188 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


feet high, and at the edge of a steep descent. We were prepared 
_ to expect an extensive prospect, but the magnificent scene before 
us was so superior to what the nature of the country had promised, 
that it banished even our sense of suffering from the musquitoes, 
which hovered in clouds about our heads. Two parallel chains of 
hills extended towards the setting sun, their various projecting out- 
lines exhibiting the several gradations of distance, and the opposite 
bases closing at the horizon. On the nearest eminence, the objects 
were clearly defined by their dark shadows; the yellow rays blended 
their softening hues with brilliant green on the next, and beyond it 
all distinction melted into gray and purple. In the long valley 
between, the smooth and colourless Clear Water River wound its 
spiral course, broken and shattered by encroaching woods. An ex- 
uberance of rich herbage covered the soil, and lofty trees climbed 
the precipice at our feet, hiding its brink with their summits. Im- 
patient as we were, and blinded with pain, we paid a tribute of ad- 
miration, which this beautiful landscape is capable of exciting, un- 
aided by the borrowed charms of a calm atmosphere, glowing with 
the vivid tints of evening. | 

We descended to the banks of the Clear Water River, and having 
encamped, the two men returned to assist their companions. We 
had sometimes before procured a little rest, by closing the tent, and 
burning wood, or flashing gunpowder within, the smoke driving the 
musquitoes into the crannies of the ground. But this remedy was 
now ineffectual, though we employed it so perseveringly as to hazard 
suffocation: they swarmed under our blankets, goring us with their 
envenomed trunks, and steeping our clothes in blood. We rose at 
day-light in a fever, and our misery was unmitigated during our 
whole stay. | 

The musquitoes of America resemble, in shape, those of Africa 
and Europe, but differ essentially in size and other particulars. 
There are two distinct species, the largest of which is brown, and 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 189 


the: smallest black. Where they are bred cannot easily be deter- 
mined, for they are numerous in every soil. They make their first 
appearance in May, and the cold destroys them in September ; in 
July they are most voracious; and fortunately for the traders, the 
journeys from the trading posts to the factories are generally con- 
cluded at that period. The food of the musquito is blood, which it. 
can extract by penetrating the hide of a buffalo; and if it is not 
disturbed, it gorges itself so as to swell its body into a transparent 
globe. The wound does not swell, like that of the African mus- 
quito, but it is infinitely more painful; and when multiplied an 
hundred fold, and continued for so many successive days, it becomes 
an evil of such magnitude, that cold, famine, and every other 
concomitant of an inhospitable climate, must yield the pre-eminence 
to it. It chases the buffalo to the plains, irritating him to madness; 

and the rein-deer to the sea-shore, from which they do not return till 
the scourge has ceased. 

On the 6th the thermometer was 106° in the sun, and on the 7th 
110°. The musquitoes sought the shade in the heat of the day, 
which we felt no inclination to contend with them. It was some 
satisfaction to us to see the havoc made among them by a large 
and beautiful species of dragon fly, called the musquito hawk, which 
wheeled through their retreats, swallowing its prey without a mo- 
mentary diminution of its speed. But the temporary relief that we 
had hoped for was only an exchange of tormentors: our new as- 
sailant, the horse-fly, or bull-dog, ranged in the hottest glare of 
the sun, and carried off a portion of flesh at each attack. Another 
noxious insect, the smallest, but not the least formidable, was: the 
sand-fly, known in Canada’ by the name of the brulot. To such 
annoyance all travellers must submit, and it would be unworthy to 
complain of that grievance in the pursuit of knowledge, which is 
endured for the sake of profit. ‘This detail of it has only been made 
as an excuse for the scantiness of our observations on the most. in- 
teresting part of the country through which we passed. 


190 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


The north side of the Methye portage is in latitude 56° 41’ 40’ N. 
and longitude 109° 52 0" W. - It is, by our course, one hundred and 
twenty-four miles from Isle a la Crosse, and considered as a branch 
of the Missinnippi, five hundred and ninety-two miles from the F rog 
portage. ‘The clear water-river passing through the valley, described 
above, evidently rises not far to the eastward. The height, com- 
puted by the same mode as that of the Echiamamis, by allowing a 
foot for each mile of distance, and. six feet on an average, for each 
fall and rapid, is two thousand four hundred and sixty-seven feet 
above the level of the sea, admitting it to be nine hundred feet 


above the Clear Water-River. The country, in a line between it and 


the mouth of Mackenzie’s river, is a continual descent, although to 
the eastward of that line, there may be several heights between it 
and the Arctic sea. To the eastward, the lands descend to Hud- 
son’s bay; and to the westward also, till the Athabasca river cuts 
through it, from whence it ascends to the rocky mountains. Daring 
was the spirit of enterprise that first led Commerce, with her cum- 
brous train, from the waters of Hudson’s Bay to those of the Arctic 
sea, across an obstacle to navigation so stupendous as this; and 
persevering has been the industry which drew riches from a source 
so remote. 

On the 8th two men arrived, and informed us, that they had 
brought us our ten bags of pemmican, from Isle 4 la Crosse, but that 
they were found to be rotten. Thus were we unexpectedly deprived 
of the most essential of our stores, for we knew Fort Chepewyan to 
be destitute of provisions, and that Mr. Franklin depended upon us 
for a supply, whereas, enough did not remain for our own use. On 
the 9th, the canoes and cargoes reached the north side of the portage. 
Our people had selected two bags of pemmican less mouldy than the 
rest, which they left on the beach. Its decay was caused by some 
defect in the mode of mixing it. 

On the 10th, we embarked in the Clear Water River; and proceeded 
down the current. The hills, the banks, and bed of the river, were 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 191 


composed of fine yellow sand, with some limestone rocks. The 
surface soil was alluvial. At eight A.M. we passed a portage on 
which the limestone rocks were singularly scattered through the 
woods, bearing the appearance of houses and turrets overgrown with 
moss. ‘The earth emitted a hollow sound, and the river was divided 
by rocks, into narrow crooked channels, every object indicating that 
some convulsion had disturbed the general order of nature at this 
place. We had passed a portage above it, and after two long por- 
tages below it we encamped. Near the last was a small stream so 
strongly impregnated with sulphur, as to taint the air to a great 
distance around it. We saw two brown bears on the hills in the 
course of the day. 

At day-light, on the 11th, we embarked. The hills continued on 
both sides to the mouth of the river, varying from eight hundred to 
one thousand feet in height. They declined to the banks in long 
green slopes, diversified by woody mounds and copses. The pines 
were not here in thick impenetrable masses, but perched aloft in 
single groups on the heights, or shrouded by the livelier hues of the 
poplar and willow. 

We passed the mouth of the Red Willow River on the south 
bank, flowing through a deep ravine. It is the continuation of the 
route by the Pembina, before mentioned. At noon we entered the 
majestic Athabasca or Elk River. Its junction with the Clear Water 
River is called the Forks. Its banks were inaccessible cliffs, appa- 
rently of clay and stones, about two hundred feet high, and its 
windings in the south were encircled by high mountains. Its breadth 
exceeded half a mile, and was swelled to a mile in many places by 
long muddy islands in the middle covered with trees. No more 
portages interrupted our course, but a swift current hurried us 
towards the quarter in which our anticipated discoveries were to 
commence. ‘The passing cliffs returned a loud confusion of echoes 
to the sprightly canoe-song, and the dashing paddles; and the eagles, 


192 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


watching with half-closed eyes on the pine tops, started from their 
airy rest, and prepared. their. drowsy pinions for the flight. 

About twenty miles from the Forks are some salt-pits and plains, 
said to be very extensive. The height of the banks was reduced to 
twenty or thirty feet, and the hills ranged themselves at an increased 
distance from the banks in the same variety as those of the Clear 
Water River. At sunset we encamped on a small sandy island, but 
the next morning made a speedy retreat to the canoes, the water 
having nearly overflown our encampment. We passed two deserted 
settlements of the fur traders on opposite banks, at a place called 
Pierre au Calumet. Beyond it the hills disappeared, and the banks 
were no longer visible above the trees. The river carries away yearly 
large portions of soil, which increases its breadth, and diminishes its 
depth, rendering the water so muddy that it was scarcely drinkable. 
Whole forests of timber are drifted down the stream, and choke up 
the channels between the islands at its mouth. We observed the 
traces of herds of buffaloes, where they had crossed the river, the 
trees being trodden down and strewed, as if by a whirlwind. 

At four P.M. we left the main branch of the Athabasca, entering 
a small river, called the Embarras. It is narrow and muddy, with 
pines of an: enormous size on its banks. Some of them are two 
hundred feet high, and three or four feet in diameter. At nine P.M. 
we landed and encamped; but finding ourselves in a nest of mus- 
quitoes, we continued our journey before day-break; and at eight 
A.M., emerged into the Athabasca lake. A strong wind agitated 
this sea of fresh water, which, however, we crossed without any 
accident, and landed on the north side of it, at Fort Chipewyan ; 
where we had the satisfaction of finding our companions in good 
health, and of experiencing that sympathy in our anxiety on the 
state of our affairs, the reality of which was only to be expected 
from those who were to share our future fortunes. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 193 


CHAPTER VI. 


Departure from Chipewyan—Difficulties of the various Navigations of the Rivers, and Lakes, 
and of the Portages—Slave Lake and Fort Providence—Scarcity of Provisions, and 
discontent of the Canadian Voyagers—Difficulties with regard to the Indian Guides— 
Refusal to proceed—Visit of Observation to the Upper part of Copper-Mine River— 
Return to the Winter-Quarters of Fort Enterprise. 


| 1820. : - ..- ° : 
July 18. E/ARLy this morning the stores were distributed to the 


three canoes. Our stock of provision unfortunately did not amount 
to more than sufficient for one day’s consumption, exclusive of two 
barrels of flour, three cases of preserved meats, some chocolate, 
arrow-root, and portable soup, which we had brought from England, 
and intended to reserve for our journey to the coast next season. 
Seventy pounds of moose meat and a little barley were all that Mr. 
Smith was enabled to give us. It was gratifying, however, to per- 
ceive that this scarcity of food did not depress the spirits of our 
Canadian companions, who cheerfully loaded their canoes, and em- 
barked in high glee after they had received the customary dram. 
At noon we bade farewell to our kind friend Mr. Smith. The crews 
commenced a lively paddling song on quitting the shore, which was 
continued until we had lost sight of the houses. ‘We soon reached 
the western boundary of the lake, and at two entered the Stoney 
River, one of the discharges of the Athabasca Lake into the Slave 
River, and having a favouring current passed swiftly along. This 
narrow stream is confined between low swampy banks, which sup- 
2¢ 


Bid - 
a) ee 


194: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


port willows, dwarf birch, and alder. At five we passed its conflux _ 
with the Peace River. The Slave River, formed by the union of 
these streams, is about three quarters of a mile wide. We de- 
scended this magnificent river, with much rapidity, and after passing 
through several narrow channels, formed by an assemblage of islands, 
crossed a spot where the waters had a violent whirling motion, which, 
when the river is low, is said to subside into a dangerous rapid ; 
on the present occasion no other inconvenience was felt than the 
inability of steering the canoes, which were whirled about in every 
direction by the eddies, until the current carried them beyond their 
influence. We encamped at seven, on the swampy bank of the 
river, but had scarcely pitched the tents before we were visited by 
a terrible thunder-storm; the rain fell in torrents, and the violence 
of the wind caused the river to overflow its banks, so that we were 
completely flooded. Swarms of musquitoes succeeded the storm, 
and their tormenting stings, superadded to other inconveniences, 
induced us to embark, and, after taking a hasty supper, to pursue 
our voyage down the stream during the night. 

At six on the following morning we passed the Reindeer Islands, 
and at ten reached: the entrance of the Dog River, where we halted 
to set the fishing nets. These were examined in the evening, but. to 
eur mortification we obtained only four small trout, and were com- 
pelled to issue part of our preserved meats for supper. The pan 
of the mouth of Dog River, was observed 59° 52’ 16" N. 

The nets were taken up at day-light, but they furnished only a 
solitary pike. We lost no time in embarking, and crossed the 
crooked channel of the Dog Rapid, when two of the canoes came 
in such violent contact. with each other, that the sternmost had 
its bow broken off. We were fortunately near to the shore or the 
disabled canoe would have sunk: \ The injury being. repaired in 
two hours, we again embarked, and. having descended. another rapid, 
arrived at the Cassette Portage of four hundred and sixty. paces, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 195 


over which the cargoes and canoes were carried in about twenty- 
six minutes. We next passed through a narrow channel full of 
rapids, crossed the Portage d’Embarras of seventy yards; and 
the portage of the Little Rock, of three hundred yards, at which 
another accident happened to one of the canoes, by the bowman 
slipping and letting it fall upon a rock, and breaking it in two. 
Two hours were occupied in sewing the detached pieces together, 
and covering the seam with pitch; but this being done it was 
as effective as before. After leaving this place we soon came to 
the next portage, of two hundred and seventy-three paces; and 
shortly afterwards to the Mountain Portage, of one hundred. and 
twenty: which is appropriately named, as the path leads over the 
summit of a high hill, This elevated situation commands a very 
grand and picturesque view, for some miles along the river, which 
at this part is about a mile wide. 

We next crossed a portage of one hundred and twenty yards ; 
and then the Pelican Portage, of eight hundred paces. Mr. Back 
took an accurate sketch of the interesting scenery which the river 
presents at this place. After descending six miles further we came 
to the last portage on the route to Slave Lake which we crossed, 
and encamped in its lower end. It is called “ The Portage of the 
Drowned,” and it received that name from a melancholy accident 
which took place many years ago. Two canoes arrived at the upper 
end of the portage, in one of which there was an experienced guide. 
This man judging from the height of the river, deemed it prac- 
ticable to shoot the rapid, and determined upon trying it. He accord- 
ingly placed himself in the bow of his canoe, having previously 
agreed, that if the passage was found easy, he should, on reaching 
the bottom of the rapid, fire a musket, as a signal for the other 
canoe to follow. ‘The rapid proved dangerous, and called forth all 
the skill of the guide, and the utmost exertion of his crew, and they 
narrowly escaped destruction. Just as they were landing, an unfor- 

2c 2 


196 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


tunate fellow seizing the loaded fowling-piece, fired at a duck which 
rose at the instant. The guide anticipating the consequences, ran 
with the utmost haste to the other end of the portage, but he was 
too late: the other canoe had pushed off, and he arrived only to 
witness the fate of his comrades. They got alarmed in the middle 
of the rapid, the canoe was upset, and every man perished. 

The various rapids we have passed to-day, are produced by an 
assemblage of islands and rocky ledges, which obstruct the river, and 
divide it into many narrow channels. Two of these channels are 
rendered still more difficult by accumulations of drift timber; a cir- 
cumstance which has given a name to one of the portages. The 
rocks which form the bed of the river, and the numerous islands, 
belong to the granite nae The distance made to-day was 
thirteen miles. 

July 21.—We embarked at foie A.M. and pursued our course 
down the river. The rocks cease at the last portage; and below it 
the banks are composed of alluvial soil, which is held together by 
the roots of the trees and shrubs that crown their summits. The 
river is about a mile wide, and the current is greatly diminished. 
At eight we landed at the mouth of the Salt River, and pitched 
our tents, intending to remain here this and the next day for the 
purpose of fishing. After breakfast, which made another inroad on 
our preserved meats, we proceeded up the river in a light canoe, to 
visit the salt springs, leaving a party behind to attend the nets. 
This river is about one hundred yards wide at its mouth. Its waters 
did not become brackish until we had ascended it seven or eight 
miles; but when we had passed several rivulets of fresh water 
which flowed in, the main stream became very salt, at the same 
time contracting to the width of fifteen or twenty yards. Ata 
distance of twenty-two miles, including the windings of the river 
the plains commence. Having pitched the tent at this spot, we set 
out to visit the principal springs, and walked about three miles 


| 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 197 


when the musquitoes compelled us to give up our project. We did 
not see the termination of the plains toward the east, but on the 
north and west they are bounded by an even ridge, about six 
or seven hundred feet in height. Several salt springs issue from 
the foot of this ridge, and spread their waters over the plain, which 
consists of tenacious clay. During the summer much evaporation 
takes place, and large heaps of salt are left behind crystallized in 
the form of cubes. Some beds of greyish compact gypsum were 
exposed on the sides of the hills. 

The next morning after filling some casks with salt for our use 
during winter, we embarked to return, and had descended. the river 
a few miles, when turning round a point, we perceived a buffalo 
plunge into the river before us. Eager to secure so valuable a prize, 
we instantly opened a fire upon him from four muskets, and in a 
few minutes he fell, but not before he had received fourteen balls. 
The carcass was towed to the bank, and the canoe speedily laden 
with meat. After this piece of good fortune, we descended the 
stream merrily, our voyagers chanting their liveliest songs. On 
arrival at the mouth of the river, we found that our nets had not 
produced more than enough to supply a scanty meal to the men 
- whom we had left behind, but this was now of little importance as 
the acquisition of meat we had made, would enable us to proceed 
without more delay to Slave Lake. The Poisson Inconnu mentioned 
by Mackenzie, is found here. It is a species of the Genus Salmo, 
and is said by the Indians to ascend from the Arctic Sea, but. being 
unable to pass the cascades of the Slave River, is not. found higher 
than this place. In the evening a violent. thunder-storm came on 
with heavy rain; thermometer 70°. 

At a very early hour on the following morning, we embarked, and 
continued to paddle against. a very strong wind and high waves, 
under the shelter of the bank of the rivers, until two P.M., when 
having arrived at a more exposed part of the stream, the canoes 


198 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


took in so much water that we were obliged to disembark on a small 
island. The river here is from one mile and a quarter to one mile 
and three quarters wide. Its banks are of moderate height, sandy, 
and. well wooded. 

July 24.—We made more progress notwithstanding the continu- 
ance of the wind. The course of the river is very winding, making in 
one place a circuit of seven or eight miles round a peninsula, which 
is joined to the west bank by a narrow isthmus. Near the foot of this 
elbow, a long island occupies the centre of the river, which it divides 
into two channels. The longitude was obtained near to it 113° 25' 36’, 
and variation 27°25 14” N., and the latitude 60° 54’ 52” N., about 
four miles farther down. We passed the mouth of a broad channel 
leading to the north-east, termed La Grande Rivitre de Jean, one of 
the two large branches by which the river pours its waters into the 
Great Slave Lake; the flooded delta, at the mouth of the river is in- 
tersected by several smaller channels, through one of which, called 
the Channel of the Scaffold, we pursued our voyage on the following 
morning, and by eight A.M. reached the establishment of the North- 
West Company on Moose Deer Island. We found letters from 
Mr. Wentzel, dated Fort Providence, on the north side of the lake 
which communicated to us, that there was an Indian guide waiting 
for us at that post; but, that the chief and the hunters, who were 
to accompany us, had gone to a short distance to hunt. They were 
becoming impatient at our delay. 

Soon after landing, I visited the Hudson’s Bay post on the same 
island, and engaged Pierre St. German, an interpreter for the Copper 
Indians. We regretted to find the posts of both the Companies ex- 
tremely bare of provision; but as the gentlemen in charge had des- 
patched men on the preceding evening, to a band of Indians, in 
search of meat, and they promised to furnish us with whatever 
should be brought, it was deemed advisable to wait for their return, 
as the smallest supply was now of importance to us. Advantage 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 199 


was taken of the delay to repair effectually the canoe, which had 
been broken in the Dog. Rapid, On the next evening, the men 
arrived with the meat, and enabled Mr. M‘Cleod, of the North- 
West Company, to furnish us with four hundred pounds of dried 
provisions. Mr. M‘Vicar, of the Hudson’s Bay Company, also sup- 
plied one hundred and fifty pounds. This quantity we considered 
would be sufficient, until we could join the hunters. We also ob- 
tained three fishing-nets, a gun, and a pair of pistols, which were all 
the stores these posts could furnish, although the gentlemen in 
charge were much disposed to assist us. 

Moose-Deer Island is about a mile in diameter, and rises towards 
the centre about three hundred feet above the lake. Its soil is in 
general sandy, in some parts swampy. The varieties of the northern 
berries grow abundantly on it. The North-West Company’s fort is 
in latitude 61° 11° 8" N.; longitude 113° 51° 37"-W., being two 
hundred and sixty statute miles distant from Fort Chipewyan, by 
the river course. The variation of the compass is 25° 40° 47" E. 
The houses of the two Companies are small, and have a bleak 
northern aspect. There are vast accumulations of drift wood, on 
the shore of the lake, brought down by the river, which afford 
plenty of fuel. The mhabitants live principally on the fish, which the 
lake at certain seasons furnishes in great abundance; ofthese, the 
white fish, trout, and poisson inconnu are considered the best. They 
also procure moose, buffalo, and rein-deer meat occasionally from 
their hunters; but these animals are generally found at the distance 
of several days’ walk from the forts. ‘The Indians who trade here 
are Chipewyans. Beavers, martens, foxes, and musk-rats, are caught 
in numbers, in the vicinity of this great body of water. The mus- 
quitoes are still a serious annoyance to us, but they are less nu- 
merous than before. They are in some degree replaced. by a small 
sandfly, whose bite is succeeded by a copious flow of: blood, and 


200 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


considerable swelling, but is attended with incomparably less irri- 
tation, than the puncture of the musquito. 

On the 27th of July we embarked at four A.M., and proceeded 
along the south shore of the lake, through a narrow channel, formed 
by some islands, beyond the confluence of the principal branch of 
the Slave River ; and as far as Stoney Island, where we breakfasted. 
This island is merely a rock of gneiss, that rises forty or fifty feet 
above the lake, and is precipitous on the north side. As the day 
was fine, and the lake smooth, we ventured upon paddling across to 
the Rein-deer Islands, which were distant about thirteen miles in a 
northern direction, instead of pursuing the usual track by keeping 
further along the south shore, which inclines to the eastward from 

this point. These islands are numerous, and consist of granite, 
rising from one hundred to two hundred feet above the water. 
They are for the most part naked; but towards the centres of the 
larger ones, there is a little soil, and a few groves of pines. At seven 
in the evening we landed upon one of them, and encamped. On 
the following morning we ran before a strong breeze, and a heavy 
swell, for some hours, but at length were obliged to seek shelter on 
a large island adjoining to Isle a la Cache of Mackenzie, where the 
following observations were obtained: latitude 61° 50 18’ N., lta 
gitude 115° 21' 40° W.., and variation 31° 2’ 06" E. 

The wind and swell having subsided in the afternoon, _ we re- 
embarked, and steered towards the western point of the Big Island of 
Mackenzie, and when four miles distant from it, had forty-two 
fathoms soundings. Passing between this island and a promontory 
of the main shore, termed Big Cape, we entered into a deep bay, 
which receives the waters from several rivers that come from the 
northward ; and we immediately perceived a decrease in the temper- 
ature of the water, from 59° to 48°. We coasted along the eastern 
side of the bay, its western shore being always visible, but the 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 201 


canoes were exposed to the hazard of being broken by the numerous 
sunken rocks, which were scattered in our track. We encamped 
for the night on a rocky island, and by eight A.M. on the following 
morning, arrived at Fort Providence, which is situated twenty-one 
miles from the entrance of the bay. The post is exclusively occupied 
by the North-West Company, the Hudson’s Bay Company having 
no settlement to the northward of Great Slave Lake. We found 
Mr. Wentzel and our interpreter Jean Baptiste Adam here, with 
one of the Indian guides: but the chief of the tribe and his hunters 
were encamped with their families, some miles from the fort, in a 
good situation for fishing. Our arrival was announced to him by a 
fire on the top of a hill, and before night a messenger came to com- 
municate his intention of seeing us next morning. ‘The customary 
present, of tobacco and some other articles, was immediately sent 
to him. 

Mr. Wentzel prepared me for the first conference with the Indians 
by mentioning all the information they had already given to him. 
The duties allotted to this gentleman were, the management of the 
Indians, the superintendence of the Canadian voyagers, the ob- 
taining, and the general distribution, of the provision, and the issue 
of the other stores. These services he was well qualified to perform, 
having been accustomed to execute similar duties, during a residence 
of upwards of twenty years in this country. We also deemed Mr. 
Wentzel to be a great acquisition to our party, as a check on the 
interpreters, he being one of the few traders who speak the Chi- 
pewyan language. 

As we were informed that external appearances made lasting 
impressions on the Indians, we prepared for the interview by deco- 
rating ourselves in uniform, and suspending a medal round each of 
our necks. Our tents had been previously pitched, and over one of 
them a silken union flag was hoisted. Soon after noon, on July 30th, 
several Indian canoes were seen advancing in a regular line, and on 

2D 


202 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


their approach, the chief was discovered in the headmost, which was 
paddled by two men. On landing at the fort, the chief assumed a 
very grave aspect, and walked up to Mr. Wentzel with a measured 
and dignified step, looking neither to the right nor to the left, at 
the persons who had assembled on the beach to witness his debarka- 
tion, but preserving the same immoveability of countenance until he 
reached the hall, and was introduced to the officers. When he had 
smoked his pipe, drank a small portion of spirits and water himself, 
and issued a glass to each of his companions, who had seated them- 
selves on the floor, he commenced his harangue, by mentioning the 
circumstances that led to his agreeing to accompany the expedition, 
an engagement which he was quite prepared to fulfil. He was 
rejoiced, he said to see such great chiefs on his lands, his tribe were 


poor, but they loved white men who had been their benefactors; and 


he hoped that our visit would be productive of much good to them. 
The report which preceded our arrival, he said, had caused much 
grief to him. It was at first rumoured that a great medicine chief 
accompanied us, who was able to restore the dead to life; at this he 
rejoiced, the prospect of again seeing his departed relatives had 
enlivened his spirits, but his first communication with Mr. Wentzel 
had removed these vain hopes, and he felt as if his friends had a 
second time been torn from him. He now wished to be informed 
exactly.of the nature of our expedition. 

In reply to this speech, which 1 understood had been prepared 
for many days, I endeavoured to explain the objects of our mission 
in a manner ‘best calculated to ensure his exertions in our service. 
With this view, I told him that we were sent out by the greatest chief 
in the world, who was the sovereign also of the trading companies 
in the country ; that he was the friend of peace, and had the interest 
of every nation at heart. Having learned that his children in the 
north, were much in want of articles of merchandise, in consequence 
of the extreme length and difficulty of the present route; he had 


Within 


Draw by Liat Hood, RN. 


2 


PORTRAIT OF AKAITCHO AND HIS SON. 


| : : Lublished March 1828, by Sohn Murray, Londow. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. ~ 203 


sent us to search for a passage by the sea, which if found, would 
enable large vessels to transport great quantities of goods more 
easily to their lands. That we had not come for the purpose of 
traffic, but solely to make discoveries for their benefit, as well as that 
of every other people. That we had been directed to inquire into the 
nature of all the productions of the countries we might pass through, 
and particularly respecting their inhabitants. That we desired the 
assistance of the Indians in guiding us, and providing us with food; 
finally, that we were most positively enjoined by the great chief to 
recommend. that hostilities should cease throughout this country ; and 
especially between the Indians and the Esquimaux, whom he consi- 
dered his children, in common with other natives; and by way of 
enforcing the latter point more strongly, I adaie him that a for- 
feiture of all the advantages which might be anticipated from the 
expedition would be a certain consequence, if any quarrel arose 
between his party and the Esquimaux. I also communicated to him 
that owing to the distance we had travelled, we had now few more 
stores than were necessary for the use of our own party, a part of 
these, however, should be forthwith presented to him ; on his return 
he and his party should be remunerated with cloth, ammunition, 
tobacco, and some useful iron materials, besides having their debts 
to the North-West Company discharged. 

The chief, whose name is Akaitcho or Big-foot, replied by a 
renewal of his assurances, that he and his party would attend us to 
the end of our journey, and that they would do their utmost to 
provide us with the means of subsistence. He admitted that his 
tribe had made war upon the Esquimaux, but said they were now 
desirous of peace, and unanimous in their opinion as to the neces- 
sity of all who accompanied us abstaining from every act of enmity 
against that nation. He added, however, that the isquimaux were 
very treacherous, and. therefore recommended that we should ad- 
vance towards them with caution. 

2D 2 


204: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


The communications which the chief and the guides then gave 
respecting the route to the Copper-Mine River, and its course to the 
sea, coincided in every material point with the statements which 
were made by Boileau and Black-meat at Chipewyan, but they 
differed in their descriptions of the coast. The information, how- 
ever, collected from both sources was very vague and unsatisfactory. 
None of his tribe had been more than three days’ march along the 
sea-coast to the eastward of the river’s mouth. 

As the water was unusually high this season, the Indian guides 
recommended our going by a shorter route to the Copper-Mine 
River than that they had first proposed to Mr. Wentzel, and they 
assigned as a reason for the change, that the rein-deer would be 
sooner found upon this track. They then drew a chart of the pro- 
posed route on the floor with charcoal, exhibiting a chain of twenty- 
five small lakes extending towards the north, about one half of them 
connected by a river which flows into Slave Lake, near Fort Provi- 
dence. One of the guides, named Keskarrah, drew the Copper- 
Mine River, running through the Upper Lake ina westerly direction 
towards the Great Bear Lake, and then northerly to the sea. The 
other guide drew the river in a straight line to the sea from the above- 
mentioned place, but, after some dispute, admitted the correctness of 
the first delineation. The latter was elder brother to Akaitcho, and 
he said that he had accompanied Mr. Hearne on his journey, and 
though very young at the time, still remembered many of the circum- 
stances, and particularly the massacre committed by the Indians on 
the Esquimaux. 

They pointed out another lake to the southward of the river, about 
three days’ journey distant from it,on which the chief proposed the next 
winter’s establishment should be formed, as the rein-deer would pass 
there in the autumn and spring. Its waters contained fish, and there 
was a sufficiency of wood for building as well as for the winter’s con- 
sumption. These were important considerations, and determined 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 205 


me in pursuing the route they now proposed. They could not inform 
us what time we should take in reaching the lake, until they saw our 
manner of travelling in the large canoes, but they supposed we might 
be about twenty days, in which case I entertained the hope that if 
we could then procure provision we should have time to descend. the 
Copper-Mine River for a considerable distance if not to the sea 
itself, and return to the lake before the winter set in. 

It may here be proper to mention that it had been my original 
plan to descend the: Mackenzie’s River, and to cross the Great Bear 
Lake from the eastern side of which, Boileau informed me, there is:a 
communication with the Copper-Mine River by four small lakes and 
portages; but, under our present circumstances, this course could 
not be followed, because it would remove us too far from the esta- 
blishments, at the Great Slave Lake to receive the supplies of am- 
munition and some other stores in the winter which were absolutely 
necessary for the prosecution of our journey, or to get the Esqui- 
maux interpreter, whom we expected. If I had not deemed these 
circumstances paramount I should have preferred the route by Bear 
Lake. | 

Akaitcho and the guides having communicated all the information 
they possessed on the different points to which our questions had 
been directed, I placed my medal round the neck of the chief, and 
the officers presented theirs to an elder brother of his and the two 
guides, communicating to them that these marks of distinction were 
given as tokens of our friendship and as pledges of the sincerity of 
our professions. Being conferred in the presence of all the hunters 
their acquisition was highly gratifying to them, but they studiously 
avoided any great expression of joy, because such an exposure would 
have been unbecoming the dignity which the senior Indians assume 
during a conference. They assured us, however, of their being duly 
sensible of these tokens of our regard, and that they should be pre- 
served during their lives with the utmost care. The chief evinced 


206 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


much penetration and intelligence during the whole of this conver- 
sation, which gave us a favourable opinion of his intellectual powers. 
He made many inquiries respecting the Discovery ships, under the 
command of Captain Parry, which had been mentioned to him, and 
asked why a passage had not been discovered long ago, if one existed. 
It may be stated that we gave a faithful explanation to all his in- 
quiries, which policy would have prompted us to do if alove of truth 
had not; for whenever these northern nations detect a falsehood in 
the dealings of the traders, they make it an unceasing subject of 
reproach, and their confidence is irrecoverably lost. 

We presented to the chief, the two guides, and the seven hun- 


ters, who had engaged to accompany us, some cloth, blankets, to- 


bacco, knives, daggers, besides other useful iron materials, and a 
gun to each; also a keg of very weak spirits and water, which they 
kept until the evening, as they had to try their guns before dark, 
and make the necessary preparations for commencing the journey 
on the following day. ‘The Indians, however, did not leave us 
on the next day, as the chief was desirous of being present, with 
his party, at the dance, which was given in the evening to our Ca- 
nadian voyagers. They were highly entertained by the vivacity and 
agility displayed by our companions in their singing and dancing: 
and especially by their imitating the gestures of a Canadian, who 
placed himself in the most ludicrous postures; and, whenever this 
was done, the gravity of the chief gave way to violent bursts of 


laughter. In return for the gratification Akaitcho had enjoyed, he 


desired his young men to exhibit the Dog-Rib Indian dance; and 
immediately they ranged themselves in a circle, and, keeping their 
legs widely separated, began to jump simultaneously sideways; their 
bodies were bent, their hands placed on their hips, and they uttered 
forcibly the interjection tsa at each jump. Devoid as were their 
attitudes of grace, and their music of harmony, we were much 
amused by the novelty of the exhibition. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 207 


In the midst of this scene an untoward accident occurred, which 
for a time interrupted our amusements. The tent in which Dr. 
Richardson and I lodged having caught fire from some embers that 
had been placed in it to expel the musquitoes, was entirely burnt. 
Hepburn, who was sleeping within it, close to some powder, most 
providentially was awoke in time to throw it clear of the flame, and 
rescue the baggage, before any material injury had been received. 
We dreaded the consequences of this disaster upon the fickle minds 
of the Indians, and wished it not to be communicated to them. 
The chief, however, was soon informed of it by one of his people, 
and expressed his desire that no future misfortune should be con- 
cealed from him. We found he was most concerned to hear that 
the flag had been burnt, but we removed his anxiety on that point, 
by the assurance that it could easily be repaired. We were advised 
by Mr. Wentzel to recommence the dancing after this event, lest 
the Indians should imagine, by our putting a stop to it, that we 
considered the circumstance as an unfavourable commencement of 
our undertaking. We were, however, deeply impressed with a 
grateful sense of the Divine Providence, in averting the threatened 
destruction of our stores, which would have been fatal to every 
prospect of proceeding forward this season. 

August 1.—This morning the Indians set out, intending to wait 
for us at the mouth of the Yellow Knife River. We remained 
behind to pack our stores, in bales of eighty pounds each, an ope- 
ration which could not be done in the presence of these Indians, as 
they are in the habit of begging for every thing they see. Our 
stores consisted of two barrels of gunpowder, one hundred and 
forty pounds of ball and small shot, four fowling-pieces, a few old 
trading guns, eight pistols, twenty-four Indian daggers, some 
packages of knives, chisels, axes, nails, and fastenings for a boat : 
a few yards of cloth, some blankets, needles, looking-glasses, and 
beads ; together with nine fishing-nets, having meshes of different. 


208 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


sizes. Our provision was two casks of flour, two hundred dried rein- 
deer tongues, some dried moose meat, portable soup, and arrow- 
root, sufficient in the whole for ten days’ consumption, besides two 
cases of chocolate, and two canisters of tea. We engaged another 
Canadian voyager at this place, and the expedition then consisted: of 
twenty-eight persons, including the officers, and the wives of three 
of our voyagers, who were brought for the purpose of making shoes 
and clothes for the men at the winter establishment ; there were 
also three children, belonging to two of these women *. 

Our observations place Fort Providence in latitude 62° 17 19’ N.., 
longitude 114° 9' 28" W.; the variation of the compass is 33° 35’ 55° 
E., and dip of the needle 86° 38’ 02". It is distant from Moose-Deer 
Island sixty-six geographic miles. This is the last establishment 
of the traders in this direction, but the North-West Company 
have two to the northward of it, on the Mackenzie River. It has 
been erected for the convenience of the Copper and Dog-rib Indians, 


* The following is the list of the officers and men who composed the expedition on its 
departure from Fort Providence : 


John Franklin, Lieutenant of the Royal Navy and Commander. 
John Richardson, M.D., Surgeon of the Royal N avy. 

Mr. George Back, of the Royal Navy, Admiralty Midshipman. 
Mr. Robert Hood, of the Royal Navy, Admiralty Midshipman. 
Mr. Frederick Wentzel, Clerk to the North-West Company. 
John Hepburn, English seaman. 


CANADIAN VOYAGERS. 


Joseph Peltier, Joseph Forcier, Jean Baptiste Parent, 
Mathew Pelonquin, dit Credit, Ignace Perrault, Jean Baptiste Belanger, 
Solomon Belanger, Francais Samandre, Jean Baptiste Belleau, 
Joseph Bennoit, Gabriel Beauparlant Emanuel Cournoyée, 
Joseph Gagné, Vincenza Fontano, Michel 'Teroahauté an 
Pierre Dumas, Registe Vaillant, Troquois. 
INTERPRETERS. 


Pierre St. Germain, Jean Baptiste Adam, Chipewyan Bois Brulés, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 209 


who generally bring such a quantity of rein-deer meat that the resi- 
dents are enabled, out of their superabundance, to send annually 
some provision to the fort at Moose-Deer Island. They also occa- 
sionally procure moose and buffalo meat, but these animals are not 
numerous on this side of the lake. Few furs are collected. Les 
potssons tnconnus, trout, pike, carp, and white fish are very plentiful, 
and on these the residents principally subsist. ‘Their great supply of 
fish is procured in the latter part of September and the beginning of 
October, but there are a few taken daily in the nets during the 
winter. ‘The surrounding country consists almost entirely of coarse 
grained granite, frequently enclosing large masses of reddish felspar. 
These rocks form hills which attain an elevation of three hundred or 
four hundred feet, about a mile behind the house; their surface 1s 
generally naked, but in the valleys between them a few spruces, 
aspens, and birches grow, together with a variety of shrubs and berry- 
bearing plants. 

On the afternoon of the 2d of August we commenced our jour- 


ney, having, in addition to our three canoes, a smaller one to 


convey the women; we were all in high spirits, being heartily glad 
that the time had at length arrived when our course was to be di- 
rected towards the Copper-Mine River, and through a line of 
country which had not been previously visited by any Eurcpean. 
We proceeded to the northward, along the eastern side of a deep 
bay of the lake, passing through various channels, formed by an as- 
semblage of rocky islands; and, at sun-set, encamped on a projecting 
point of the north main shore, eight miles from Fort Providence. 
To the westward of this arm, or bay, of the lake, there is another 
deep bay, that receives the waters of a river, which communicates 
with Great Marten Lake, where the North-West Company had 
once a post established. The eastern shores of the Great Slave Lake 
are very imperfectly known: none of the traders have visited them, 
and the Indians give such loose and unsatisfactory accounts, that 
25 


210: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


no estimation can be formed: of its extent in that direction. These — 


men say there is'a communication from its eastern extremity by a 
chain of lakes, with a shallow river, which discharges its waters into 
the'sea. This stream they call the Thlouee-tessy, and report it to be 
navigable for Indian canoes only. The forms of the south and 
western shores are better known from the survey of Sir Alexander 
Mackenzie, and in consequence of the canoes having to pass and 
Tepass along these borders annually, between Moose-Deer Island 
and Mackenzie’s River: _ Our observations made the breadth of the 
lake, between Stoney Island; and the north main shore, sixty miles 
less than it is laid down in Arrowsmith’s map; and there is also a 
considerable difference inthe longitude of the eastern side of the 
bay, which we entered. 

This lake, owing to its great depth, is seldom completely frozen 
ever before the last week in November, and the ice, which is gene- 
rally seven feet thick, breaks up about the middle of June, three 
_ weeks later than that of the Slave River. The only known outlet 
to thisvast body sof water, which receives so many streams on its 
north-and south shores, isthe Mackenzie’s River. 

. August 3.~-We embarked at three A.M., and proceeded to the 
entranee of the Yellow-Knife River of the traders, which is called 
by the natives ‘Beg-ho-lo-dessy; or, River of the Toothless 
Fish: »We found Akaitcho, and. the hunters with their families, 
encamped here, - There were also several other Indians of his tribe, 
who intended to accompany us some distance into the interior. 


This party was quickly in miction after our arrival, and we were 


soon surrounded by a fleet of seventeen Indian canoes. In com- 
pany with them we: paddled up the river, which is one hundred 
and fifty yards wide, and, in an hour, came to a cascade of five feet, 
where we were compelled to make a portage of one hundred and 
fifty-eight yards:: We next crossed a dilatation of the river, about 


six niles in length, upon which ‘the name of Lake Prosperous was- 


Hi) HAA Hl 


AMMA 


i i | 
| TABI] WA 
eA 


ch 


i i) i 


a 


AWM ay 


a, Hood EIN 


Prawa. by La 


; 


(e_4 
=| 
is 


OF THE POLAR SEA, © yal 


bestowed. Its shores, though scantily supplied with wood, are 
very picturesque, as will appear from the annexed interesting 
sketch, by Mr. Hood, which exhibits an accurate representation of 
our brigade, at the time of passing through it. 

Akaitcho caused himself to be paddled by his slave, a young man, 
of the Dog-rib nation, whom he had taken by force from his 
friends; when he thought himself, however, out of reach of our 
observation, he laid aside a good deal of his state, and assisted in 
the labour; and, after a few days’ further acquaintance with us, he 
did not hesitate to paddle in our presence, or even carry his canoe 
on the portages. Several of the canoes were managed by women, 
who proved to be noisy companions, for they quarrelled frequently, 
and the weakest was generally profuse in her lamentations, which 
were not at all diminished, when the husband attempted to settle 
the difference by a few blows with his paddle. 

An observation, near the centre of the lake, gave 114° 13’ 39” W., 
and 33° 8 06” E. variation. 

Leaving the lake, we ascended a very strong rapid, and arrived 
at a range of three steep cascades, situated in the bend of the river. 
Here we made a portage of one thousand three hundred yards over a 
rocky hill, which received the name of the Bowstring Portage, from 
its shape. We found that the Indians had greatly the advantage of 
us in this operation; the men carried their small canoes, the women 
and children the clothes and provisions, and at the end of the 
portage they were ready to embark; whilst it was necessary for our 
people to return four times, before they could transport the weighty 
cargo with which we were burthened. After passing through 
another expansion of the river, and over the steep portage of one 
hundred and fifteen yards, we encamped on a small rocky isle, just 
large enough to hold our party, and the Indians took possession of 
an adjoining rock. We were now distant thirty miles from Fort 
Providence. | 

2E 2 


212 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


As soon as the tents were pitched, the officers and men were 
divided into watches for the night; a precaution intended to be 
taken throughout the journey, not merely to prevent our being 
surprised by strangers, but also to show our companions that we 
were constantly on our guard. The chief, who suffered nothing to 
escape his observation, remarked, “ that he should sleep without 
anxiety among the Esquimaux, for he perceived no enemy could 
surprise us.” 

After supper we retired to rest, but our sleep was soon inter- 
rupted by the Indians joining in loud lamentations over a sick child, 
whom they supposed to be dying. Dr. Richardson, however, im- 
mediately went to the boy, and administered some medicine which 
relieved his pain, and put a stop to their mourning. The temperatures, 
this day, were at four A.M. 54°, three P.M. 72°, at seven P.M. 65°. 

On the 4th we crossed a small lake, and passed over in succession 
the Blue Berry Cascade, and Double Fall portages, where the river 
falls over ridges of rocks that completely obstruct the passage for 
canoes. We came to three strong rapids beyond these barriers, 
which were surmounted by the aid of the poles and lines, and then 
to a bend of the river in which the cascades were so frequent, that 
to avoid them we carried the canoes into a chain of small lakes. 
We entered them by a portage of nine hundred and fifty paces, and 
during the afternoon traversed three other grassy lakes, and en- 
camped on the banks of the river, at the end of the Yellow-Knife 
Portage, of three hundred and fifty paces. ‘This day’s work was 
very laborious to our men. Akaitcho, however, had directed his 
party to assist them in carrying their burdens on the portages, which 
they did cheerfully. This morning Mr. Back caught. several fish 
with a fly, a method of fishing entirely new to the Indians; and 
they were not more delighted than astonished at his skill and 
success. The extremes of temperature to-day were 54° and 63°. 

On August 5th we continued the ascent of the river which varied 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 913 


much in breadth as did the current in rapidity. It flows between 
high rocky banks on which there is sufficient soil to support pines, 
birch, and poplars. Five portages were crossed, then the Rocky 
Lake, and we finished our labours at the end of the sixth portage. 
The issue of dried meat for breakfast this morning had exhausted 
all our stock; and no other provision remained but the portable 
soups, and a few pounds of preserved meat. At the recommendation 
of Akaitcho, the hunters were furnished with ammunition, and 
desired to go forward as speedily as possible, to the part where the 
rein-deer were expected to be found; and to return to us with any 
provision they could procure. He also assured us that in our ad- 
vance towards them we should come to lakes abounding in fish. 
Many of the Indians, being also in distress for food, decided on se- 
parating from us, and going on at a quicker pace than we could 
travel. 

Akaitcho himself was always furnished with a portion at our meals, 
as a token of regard which the traders have taught the chiefs to 
expect, and which we willingly paid. 

The next. morning we crossed a small lake and a portage, before 
we entered the river; shortly afterwards, the canoes and. cargoes 
_ were carried a mile along its banks, to avoid three very strong 
rapids, and over another portage into a narrow lake; we encamped 
on an island in the middle of it, to set the nets; but they only 
yielded a few fish, and we had a very scanty supper; as it was 
necessary to deal out our provision sparingly. The longitude 114° 
27' 03" W., and variation 33° 04” E., were observed. 

_We had the mortification of finding the nets entirely empty next 
morning, an untoward circumstance that discouraged our voyagers 
very much; and they complained of being unable to support the 
fatigue to which they were daily exposed, on their present scanty fare. 
We had seen with regret that the portages were more frequent as we 
advanced to the northward, and feared that their strength would 


QA A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


fail, if provision were not soon obtained. We embarked at six, pro- 
ceeded to the head of the lake, and crossed a portage of two thou- 
sand five hundred paces, leading over ridges of sand-hills, which 
nourished pines of a larger size than we had lately seen. ‘This 
conducted us to Mossy Lake, from whence we regained the river, 
after traversing another portage. The Birch and Poplar portages 
next followed, and beyond these we came to a part where the river 
takes a great circuit, and its course 1s interrupted by several heavy 
falls. The guide, therefore, advised us to quit it, and proceed 
through a chain of nine lakes extending to the north-east, which we 
did, and encamped on Icy Portage, where the nets were set. The 
bottom of the valley, through which the track across this portage 
led, was covered with ice four or five feet thick, the remains of a 
large iceberg, which is annually formed there, by the snow drifting 
into the valley, and becoming consolidated into ice by the overflowing 
of some springs that are warm enough to resist the winter’s cold. 
The latitude is 63° 29’ 15” N., longitude 114° 15' 30" W. 

We were alarmed in the night by our fire communicating to the 
dry moss, which spreading by the force of a strong wind, encircled 
the encampment and threatened destruction to our canoes and 


baggage. The watch immediately aroused all the men, who quickly 
removed whatever could be injured to a distant part, and afterwards 


succeeded in extinguishing the flame. 
August 8.—During this day we crossed five portages, passing over 


a very bad road. The men were quite exhausted with fatigue by 


five P.M., when we were obliged to encamp on the borders of the 
fifth lake, in which the fishing-nets were set. We began this even- 


ing to issue’ some portable soup and arrow-root, which our compa- 


nions relished very much; but this food is too unsubstantial to sup= 


port their vigour under their daily exhausting labour, and we could 


not furnish them with a sufficient quantity even of this to satisfy 


their desires. "We commenced our labours on the next day im a very: 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 215 


wet uncomfortable state, as it had rained through the night until 
four A.M. The fifth grassy lake was crossed, and four others, with 
their intervening portages, and we returned to the river by a portage 
of one thousand four hundred and fifteen paces. The width of the 
stream here is about one hundred yards, its banks are moderately 
high, and scantily covered with wood. We afterwards twice car- 
ried the cargoes along its banks to avoid a very stoney rapid, and then 
crossed the first Carp portage in longitude 114° 2' 01" W., variation 
of the compass 32° 30° 40” E., and encamped on the borders of 
Lower Carp Lake. 

The chief having told us that this was a good lake for fishing, 
we determined on halting for a day or two to recruit our men, of 
whom three were lame, and several others had swelled legs. The 
chief himself went forward to look after the hunters, and he pre- 
mised to make a fire as a signal if they had killed any rein-deer. 
All the Indians had left us in the course of yesterday and to-day to 
seek these animals, except the guide Keskarrah. | 

August 10.—The nets furnishing only four carp, we embarked for 
the purpose of searching for a better spot, and encamped again on the 
shores of the same lake. The spirits of the men were much revived 
by seeing some recent traces of rein-deer at this place, which cir- 
cumstance caused them to cherish the hope of soon getting a supply 
of meat from the hunters. They were also gratified by finding 
abundance of blue berries near to the encampment, which made an 
agreeable and substantial addition to their otherwise scanty fare. We 
were teazed by sand-flies this evening, although the thermometer 
did not rise above 45°. The country through which we have tra- 
velled for some days consists principally of granite, intermixed in some 
spots with mica slate, often passing into clay-slate. But the borders 
of Lower Carp Lake, where the gneiss formation prevails, are com- 
posed of hills, having less altitude, fewer precipices, and more’ 
rounded summits. The valleys are less fertile, containing a gra- 


216 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


velly soil and fewer trees; so that the country has throughout a more 
barren aspect. 

August 11.—Having caught sufficient trout, white fish, and carp, 
yesterday and this morning, to afford the party two hearty meals, 
and the men being recovered of their fatigue, we proceeded on our 
journey, crossed the Upper Carp Portage, and embarked on the 
lake of that name, where we had the gratification of paddling for ten 
niles. We put up at its termination to fish, by the advice of our guide, 
and the following observations were then taken: longitude 113° 46° 
35' W., variation of the compass 36° 45‘ 30" E., dip 87° 11° 48". At 
this place we first perceived the north end of our dipping-needle to 
pass the perpendicular line when the instrument was faced to the west. 

We had scarcely quitted the encampment next day before an Indian 
met us, with the agreeable communication, that the hunters had 
made several fires, which were certain indications of their having 
killed rein-deer. ‘This intelligence inspired our companions with 
fresh energy, and they quickly traversed the next portage, and pad- 
dled through the Rein-deer Lake; at the north side of it we found 
the canoes of our hunters, and learned from our guide, that the 
Indians usually leave their canoes here, as the water-communication 
on their hunting-grounds is bad. ‘The Yellow-Knife River has now 
dwindled into an insignificant rivulet, and we could not trace it be- 
yond the next lake, except as a mere brook. The latitude of its 
source 64° 130’ N., longitude 113° 36’ W., and its length is one. 
hundred and fifty-six statute miles. Though this river is of sufficient 
breadth and depth for navigating in canoes, yet I conceive its course 
is too much interrupted by cascades and rapids for its ever being used 
as a channel for the conveyance of merchandise. Whilst the crews: 
were employed in making a portage over the foot of Prospect, Hill, 
we ascended to the top of it, and as it is the highest ground in the 
neighbourhood, its summit, which is about five hundred feet above 
the water, commands an extensive view. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 217 


Akaitcho, who was here with his family, pointed out to us the 
smoke of the distant fires which the hunters had made. The pros- 
pect from the hill is agreeably diversified by an intermixture of 
hill and valley, and. the appearance of twelve lakes in different di- 
rections. On the borders of these lakes a few thin pine groves occur, 
but the country in general is destitute of almost every vegetable, 
except a few. berry-bearing shrubs and lichens, and has a very barren 
aspect. The hills are composed of gneiss, but their acclivities are 
covered with a coarse gravelly soil. There are many large loose 
stones both on their summits and acclivities, composed: of the same 
materials as the solid rock. | 

We crossed another lake in the evening, encamped, and set the 
nets. The chief made a large fire to announce our situation to the 
hunters. ei 

August 13.—We caught twenty fish this morning, but they were 
small, and furnished but a scanty breakfast for the party. Whilst 
this meal was preparing, our Canadian voyagers, who had been for 
some days past murmuring at their meagre diet, and striving to get 
the whole of our little provision to consume at once, broke out 
into open discontent, and. several of them threatened they would 
not proceed forward unless more food was given to them. This 
conduct was the more unpardonable, as they saw we were rapidly 
approaching the fires of the hunters, and that provision might soon 
be expected. I, therefore, felt the duty incumbent on me to: ad- 
dress them in the strongest manner on the danger of insubordination, 
and to assure them of my determination to inflict the heaviest pu- 
nishment on any that should persist in their refusal to go on, or in 
any other way attempt to retard the Expedition. I considered this 
decisive step necessary, having learned from: the gentlemen,’ most 
intimately acquainted with the character of the Canadian voyagers, 
that they invariably try how far they can impose upon every new 
master with whom they may serve, and that they will continue to be 

2F 


218 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


disobedient and: intractable if they once gain any ascendency over 
him. I must admit, however, that the present hardships. of our 
companions were of a kind which few could support without mur- 
muring, and no one could witness without feeling a sincere pity for 
their sufferings. 

After this discussion we went foxtovail until suiitet In the course 
of the day we crossed: seven lakes and as many portages. Just as we 
_had encamped. we were delighted to see four of the hunters arrive, 
with the flesh of two rein-deer. This seasonable supply, though only 
sufficient for this evening’s and. the next day’s consumption, instantly 
revived the spirits of our companions, and they immediately forgot. all 
their cares. As we did not, after this period, experience any defici- 
ency of food during this journey, they worked extremely well,. and 
never again reflected upon us as they had done before, for rashly 
bringing them into, an inhospitable country, where the means of 
subsistence could not be procured. 

Several blue fish, resembling the grayling, were caught in a stream 
which flows out of Hunter’s Lake. It is remarkable for the largeness 
of the dorsal fin and the beauty of its colours. 

August 14. —Having crossed the Hunter’s Portage we entered the 
lake of the same name in latitude 64° 6' 47" N. longitude, 113° 25’ 00" 
W., but soon quitted it by desire of the Indian guide, and diverged 
more to the eastward that we might get into the line upon which 
our hunters had gone.. This was the only consideration that could 
have induced us to remove to a chain of small lakes connected 
by long portages. We crossed three of these, and then were obliged 
to encamp to rest the men. ‘The country is bare of wood except a 
few dwarf birch bushes, which grow near the borders of the lakes, 
and here and there a few stunted pines; and our fuel principally 
consisted of the roots of decayed. pines, which we had some difficulty 
to collect: in sufficient: quantity for cooking: When this material is 
wanting, the rein-deer lichen and. other mosses that grow in profusion 


OF THE POLAR. SEA. 219 


on the gravelly acclivities of the hills are used as substitutes. Three 
more of the hunters arrived with meat this evening, which supply 
eame very opportunely as our nets were unproductive. At eight 
P.M. a faint Aurora Borealis appeared to the southward, the night 
was cold, the wind strong from N:W. 

We were detained some time in the following morning before the 
fishing-nets, which had sunk in the night, could be recovered. 

After starting we first crossed the Orkney Lake, then a portage 
which brought us to Sandy Lake, and here we missed one of our 
barrels of powder, which the steersman of the canoe then recollected 
had been left yesterday. He and two other men were sent back to 
search for it, m the small canoe. The rest of the party proceeded 
to the portage on the north side of the Grizzle-Bear Lake, where 
the hunters had made a deposit of meat, and there encamped to 
await their return, which happened at nine P.M. with the powder. 
We perceived, from the direction of this lake, that considerable 
labour would have been spared if we had continued our course yes- 
terday instead of striking off at the guide’s suggestion, as the bottom 
of this lake‘cannot be far separated from either Hunter’s Lake or 
the one to the westward of it. The chief and all the Indians went 
off to hunt, accompanied by Pierre St. Germain, the interpreter. 
They returned at night bringing some meat, and reported that they 
had put the carcasses of several rein-deer en cache. These were sent 
for early next morning, and as the weather was unusually warm, the 
thermometer, at noon, being 77°, we remained stationary all day, 
that the women might prepare the meat for keeping, by stripping 
the flesh from the bones and drying it in the sun over a slow fire. 
The hunters'were again successful, and by the evening we had col- 
lected the carcasses of seventeen deer. As this was a sufficient store 
_ to serve us until we arrived at Winter Lake, the chief proposed that 
he and his hunters should proceed to that place and collect some 
provision against our arrival. He also requested that we would 

2F 2 


920 A JOURNEY ‘TO THE SHORES 


allow him to be absent ten days to provide his family with clothing, 
as the skin of the rein-deer is unfit for that purpose after the month 
of September. We could not refuse to grant such a reasonable 
request, but caused St. Germain to accompany him, that his absence 
might not exceed the appointed time. Previous to his departure 
the chief warned us to be constantly on our guard against the grizzly 
bears, which he described as being numerous in this vicinity, and 
very ferocious; one had been seen to-day by an Indian, to which 
circumstance the lake owes its appellation. We afterwards learned 
that the only bear in this part of the country is the brown bear, 
and. that they by no means possess the ferocity which the Indians 
ascribe to them with their usual love of exaggeration. The fierce 
grizzly bear, which frequents the sources of the Missouri, is not 
found on the barren grounds. 

The shores of this lake and the neighbouring hills are principally 
composed of sand and gravel; they are much varied in their outline 
and present some picturesque scenery. 

The following observations were taken here: latitude 64° 15’ 17° 
N.; longitude 113° 2’ 39" W.; variation of the compass 36° 50’ 47’ 
E.; and dip of the needle 87° 20' 35". 

On August the 17th, having finished drying the meat, which had 
been retarded by the heavy showers of rain that fell in the morning, 
we embarked at one P.M. and crossed two lakes and two por- 
tages. The last of these was two thousand and sixty-six paces 
long, and very rugged, so that the men were much fatigued. 
On the next day we received the flesh of four rein-deer by the 
small canoe which had been sent for it yesterday, and heard that 
the hunters had killed several more deer on our route. We saw | 
many of these animals as we passed along to-day; and our compa- 
nions, delighted with the prospect of having food in abundance, now 
began to accompany their paddling with singing, which they had 
discontinued ever since our provisions became scarce. We passed 


_ OF THE POLAR SEA. 221 


from one small lake to another ‘over. four portages, then crossed a 
lake about six miles in diameter, and encamped on its border, where, 
finding pines, we enjoyed the luxury of a good fire, which we had 
not done for some days. At ten P.M. the aurora borealis appeared 
very brilliant in an arch across the zenith, from north-west to south- 
east, which afterwards gave place to a beautiful corona borealis. 

August 19.—After crossing a portage of five hundred and ninety- 
five paces, a small lake and another portage of two thousand. paces, 
which occupied the crews seven hours, we embarked on a small 
stream, running towards the north-west, which carried us to the lake, 
where Akaitcho proposed that we should pass the winter. The 
officers ascended several of the loftiest hills in the course of the day, 
prompted by a natural anxiety to examine the spot which was to be 
their residence for many months. The prospect, however, was not 
then the most agreeable, as the borders of the lake seemed to be 
scantily furnished with wood, and that of a kind too small for the 
purposes of building. 

We perceived the smoke of a distant fire which the Indians 
suppose had been made by some of the Dog-ribbed tribe, who occa- 
- sionally visit this part of the country. 

Embarking at seven next morning, we paddled to the western 
extremity of the lake, and there found a small river, which flows 
out of it to the S.W. To avoid a strong rapid at its commencement, 
we made a portage, and then crossed to the north bank of the 
river, where the Indians recommended that the winter establish- 
ment should be erected, and we soon found that the situation they 
had chosen possessed all the advantages we could have desired. The 
trees were numerous, and of a far greater size than we had sup- 
posed them to be yesterday. Some of the pines being thirty or 
forty feet high, and two feet in diameter at the root. We deter- 
mined on placing the house on the summit of the bank, which 
commands a beautiful prospect of the surrounding country. The 


299 A JOURNEY TO.THE SHORES 


view in the front is bounded at the distance of three miles, by 
round-backed. hills; to the eastward and westward lie the Winter 
and Round-rock Lakes, which are connected by the Winter River, 
whose banks are well clothed with pines, and ornamented with a pro- 
fusion of mosses, lichens, and shrubs. | 

In the afternoon we read divine service, and offered our thanks- 
giving to the Almighty for his goodness in having brought us thus 
far on our journey; a duty which we never neglected, when sta. 
tionary on the sabbath. ? 

The united length of the portages we have crossed, since leaving 
Fort Providence, is twenty-one statute miles and a half; and as 
our men had to traverse each portage four times, with a load of one 
hundred and eighty pounds, and return three times light, they 
walked in the whole upwards of one hundred and fifty miles. ‘The 


total length of our voyage from Chipewyan is five hundred and fifty- 


three miles *. 

A fire was made on the south side of the river to inform the 
chief of our arrival, which spreading before a strong wind, caught 
the whole wood, and we were completely enveloped in a cloud of 
smoke for the three following days. 

On the next morning our voyagers were divided into two parties, 
the one to cut the wood for the building of a store-house, and the 
other to fetch the meat as fast as the hunters procured it. An in- 
terpreter was sent with Keskarrah, the guide, to search for the 
Indians who had made the fire seen on Saturday, from whom we 


Statute Miles. 


* Stoney and Slave Rivers. : : ae 260 
Slave Lake : . . } os { 107 
Yellow-Knife River L ( ; , i 156.5 
Barren country between the source of the Yellow-Knife River 

and Fort Enterprise , F , 29.5 


——$$—$———— 


553 


OF THE POLAR SEA. - 223 


might obtain some supplies of provision. An Indian was also de- 
spatched to’ Akaitcho, with directions for him to come hither directly, 
and. bring whatever provision he had, as we were desirous of pro- 
ceeding, without delay, to the Copper-Mine River. In the evening 
our men brought in the carcasses of seven rein-deer, which two 
hunters had shot yesterday, and the women commenced. drying the 
meat for our journey. We also obtained a good supply of fish from 
our nets to-day. 

A heavy rain, on the 23d, prevented the men from working, 
either at the building, or going for meat; but on the next day the 
weather was fine, and they renewed their labours. The thermo- 
meter, that day, did not rise higher than 42°, andit fell to 31° be- 
fore midnight. On the morning of the 25th, we were surprised by 
some early symptoms of the approach of winter; the small pools 
were frozen over, and. a flock of geese passed to the southward. In 
the afternoon, however, a fog came on, which afterwards changed 
into rain, and the ice quickly disappeared. We suffered great 
anxiety all the next’ day respecting John Hepburn, who had gone 
to hunt before sunrise on the 25th, and been absent ever since. 
About four hours after his departure the wind changed, and a dense 
fog obscured every mark by which his course to the tents could be 
directed, and we thought it probable he had been. wandering in an 
opposite direction to our situation, as the two hunters, who had 
been sent to look for him, returned at sunset without having seen 
him. Akaitcho arrived with his party, and we were greatly disap- 
pointed. at finding they had stored up only fifteen rein-deer for us, 
St. Germain informed us, that having heard of the death of the chief's 
brother-in-law, they had spent several days in bewailing his loss, in- 
stead of hunting. We learned also, that the decease of this man had 
caused. another party of the tribe, who had been sent by Mr. Wentzel 
to prepare provision for us on the banks of the Copper-Mine River, 
to remove to the shores of the Great Bear Lake, distant from our 


D4, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


proposed route. Mortifying as these circumstances were, they pro- 
duced less painful sensations than we experienced in the evening, by 
the refusal of Akaitcho to accompany us in the proposed descent of 
the Copper-Mine River. When Mr. Wentzel, by my direction, com- 
municated to him my intention of proceeding at once on that ser- 
vice, he desired a conference with me upon the subject, which being 
immediately granted, he began by stating, that the very attempt 
would be rash and dangerous, as the weather was cold, the leaves 
were falling, some geese had passed to the southward, and the winter 
would shortly set in; and that, as he considered the lives of all 
who went on such a journey would be forfeited, he neither would 
go himself, nor permit his hunters to accompany us. He said there 
was no wood within eleven days’ march, during which time we 
could not have any fire, as the moss, which the Indians use in their 
summer excursions, would be too wet for burning, in consequence 
of the recent rains; that we should be forty days in descending the 
Copper-Mine River, six of which would be expended in getting to its 
banks, and that we might be blocked up by the ice in the next 
moon; and during the whole journey the party must experience 
great suffering for want of food, as the rein-deer had already left the 
river. 

He was now reminded that these statements were very different 
from the account he had given, both at Fort Providence and on 
the route hither; and that, up to this moment, we had been en- 
couraged by his conversation to expect that the party might de- 
scend the Copper-Mine River, accompanied by the Indians. He 
replied, that at the former place he had been unacquainted with 
our slow mode of travelling, and that the alteration, in his opinion, 
arose from the advance of winter. 

We now informed him, that we were provided with instruments 
by which we could ascertain the state of the air and water, and that 
we did not imagine the winter to be so near as he supposed ; how- 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 225 


ever, we promised to return on discovering the first change in the 
season. He was also told that all the baggage being left behind, our 
canoes, would now, of course, travel infinitely more expeditiously 
than any thing he had hitherto witnessed. Akaitcho appeared. to 
feel hurt, that we should continue to press the matter further, and 
answered with some warmth: “ Well, I have said every thing I can 
urge, to dissuade you from going on this service, on which, it seems, 
your wish to sacrifice your own lives, as well as the Indians who 
might attend you: however, if after all I have said, you are deter- 
mined to go, some of my young men shall join the party, because it 
shall not be said, that we permitted you to die alone after having 
brought you hither; but from the moment they embark in the 
canoes, | and my relatives shall lament them as dead.” 

We could only reply to this forcible appeal, by assuring him and 
the Indians who were seated around him, that we felt the most 
anxious solicitude for the safety of every individual, and that it was 
far from our intention to proceed without considering every argu- 
ment for and against the proposed journey. 

We next informed him, that it would be very desirable to see the 
river at any rate, that we might give some positive information 
about its situation and size, in our next letters to the great Chief ; 
and that we were very anxious to get on its banks, for the purpose 
of observing an eclipse of the sun, which we described to him, and 
said would happen in a few days. He received this communication 
with more temper than the preceding, though he immediately as- 
signed as a reason for his declining to go, that “ the Indians must now 
procure a sufficient quantity of deer-skins for winter clothing for 
themselves, and dresses for the Canadians, who would need them if 
they had to travel in the winter.” Finding him so averse to proceed, 
and feeling at the same time, how essential his continuance with us 
was, not only to our future success, but even to our existence during 
the winter; I closed the conversation here, intending to propose to 


2G 


226 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


_him ‘next morning, some modification of the plan, which might meet 
his approbation. Soon after we were gone, however, he informed 
Mr. Wentzel, with whom he was in the habit of speaking. confi- 
dentially, that as his advice was neglected, his presence was useless, 
and he should, therefore, return to Fort Providence with his 
hunters, after he had collected some winter provision for us. Mr. 
Wentzel having reported this to me, the night was past in great 
anxiety, and after weighing all the arguments that presented them- 
selves to my mind, I came reluctantly to the determination of re- 
linquishing the intention of going any distance down the river 
this season. I had considered, that could we ascertain what were the 
impediments to the navigation of the Copper-Mine River, what 
wood grew on its banks, if fit for boat-building, and whether drift 
timber existed where the country was naked, our operations: next 
season would -be much facilitated; but we had aiso cherished the 
hope. of reaching the sea this year, for the Indians in their conver- 
sations with us, had only spoken of two great rapids as likely to 
obstruct us. This was a hope extremely painful to give up, for 
in the event of success we should have ascertained whether the 
sea was clear of ice, and navigable for canoes; have learned the 
disposition of the Esquimaux; and might have ‘obtained other 
information that would none had erent influence on our future 
saa oe | | 

-I must confess, however, that my opinion of the e ‘probability of 
our being able to attain so great a desideratum this season had been 
somewhat ‘altered by the recent changes in the weather, ‘although, 
had the chief been willing to accompany us with his party, I should 
have made the attempt; with the intention, however, of returning 
immediately upon the first decided appearance of winter. 

On the morning of August 27th, having communicated my sen- 
timents to the officers, on the subject of the conference last evening, 
they all agreed that the descent to the sea this season could not be 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 927 


attempted, without hazarding a complete rupture with the Indians ; 
but they thought that a party should be sent to ascertain the 
distance and size of the Copper-Mine River. These opinions being 
in conformity with my own, I determined on despatching Messrs. 
Back. and Hood on that service, Ina pet canoe, as soon as 
possible. 

We witnessed this morning an instance of the semallity of our 
Indian companions, which gave us much uneasiness, as it regarded 
the safety of our faithful attendant Hepburn. When they heard, 
on their arrival last night, of his having been so long absent, they 
expressed the greatest solicitude about him, and the whole party 
immediately volunteered to go in search of him as soon as daylight 
permitted. Their resolutions, however, seemed to have been changed, 
in consequence of the subsequent conversation we had with the 
chief, and we found all of them indisposed to proceed on that errand 
this morning, and it was only by much entreaty, that three of the 
hunters and a boy were prevailed upon to go. They fortunately suc- 
ceeded in their search, and we were infinitely rejoiced to see Hep- 
burn return with them in the afternoon, though much jaded by the 
fatigue he had undergone. He had got bewildered, as we had 
conjectured, in the foggy weather on the 95th, and had been 
wandering about ever since, except during half an hour that he slept 
yesterday. He had eaten only a partridge and some berries, for 
his anxiety of mind had deprived him of appetite; and of a deer 
which he had shot, he took only the tongue, and the skin to protect 
himself from the wind.and rain. This anxiety we learned from him 
was occasioned by the fear that the party which was about to de- 
scend the Copper-Mine River, might be detained until he was found, 
or that it might have departed without him. He did not entertain 
any dread of the white bears, of whose numbers and ferocious at- 
tacks the Indians had been constantly speaking, since we had 


entered the barren grounds. Our fears for his safety, however, were 
2G 2 


998 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


in a considerable degree excited by the accounts we had received 
of these animals. Having made a hearty supper he retired to rest, 
slept soundly, and arose next morning in perfect health. 

On the 28th of August Akaitcho was informed of our intention to 
send the party to the river, and of the reasons for doing so, of which 
he approved, when he found that I had relinquished the idea of 
going myself, in compliance with the desire which he and the In- 
dians had expressed; and he immediately said two of the hunters 
should go to provide them with food on the journey, and to serve as 
guides. During this conversation we gathered from him, for the 
first time, that there might still be some of his tribe near to the 
river, from whom the party could get provision. Our next object 
was to despatch the Indians to their hunting-ground to collect pro- 
vision for us, and to procure the fat of the deer for our use during 
the. winter, and for making the pemmican we should require in the 
spring. They were therefore furnished with some ammunition, 
clothing, and other necessary articles, and directed to take their de- 
parture as soon as possible. 

Akaitcho came into our tent this evening at supper, and made 
several pertinent inquiries respecting the eclipse, of which we had 
spoken last night. He desired to know the effect that would be 
produced, and the cause of it, which we endeavoured to explain ; 
and, having gained this information, he sent for several of his com- 
panions, that they might also have it repeated to them. They were 
most astonished at our knowing the time at which this event should 
happen, and remarked, that this knowledge was a striking proof of 
the superiority of the whites over the Indians. We took advantage 
of this occasion to speak to them respecting the Supreme Being, who 
ordered all the operations of nature, and to impress on their minds 
the necessity of paying strict attention to their moral duties, in obe- 
dience to his will. They readily assented to all these ‘points, and 
Akaitcho assured us that both himself and his young men would 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 229 


exert themselves in obtaining provision for us in return for the in- 
teresting communications we had just made to them. 

Having received a supply of dried meat from the Indian lodges, 
we were enabled to equip the party for the Copper-Mine River, and 
at mine A.M., on the 29th, Mr. Back and Mr. Hood embarked 
on that service in a light canoe, with St. Germain, eight Canadians, 
and one Indian. We could not furnish them with more than eight 
days’ provision, which, with their blankets, two tents, and a few in- 
struments, composed their lading. Mr. Back, who had charge of the 
party, was directed to proceed to the river, and if, when he arrived 
at its banks, the weather should continue to be mild, and the tem- 
perature of the water was not lower than 40°, he might embark, and. 
descend the stream for a few days, to gain some knowledge of its 
course, but he was not to go so far as to risk his returning to this 
place in a fortnight with the canoe. But, if the weather should be 
severe, and the temperature of the water below 40°, he was not to 
embark, but return immediately, and endeavour to ascertain the 
best track for our goods to be conveyed thither next spring. 

We had seen that the water decreases rapidly in temperature at 
this season, and I feared that, if he embarked to descend the river 
when it was below 40°, the canoe might be frozen in, and the crew 
have to walk back in very severe weather. 

As soon as the canoes had started, Akaitcho and the Indians took 
their departure also, except two of the hunters, who staid behind to 
kill deer in our neighbourhood, and old Keskarrah and his family; 
who remained as our guests. 

The fishing-nets were this day transferred from the river in which 
they had been set since our arrival, to Winter Lake, whither the fish 
had removed, and the fishermen built a log-hut on its borders to 
reside in, that they might attend more closely to their occupation. 

_ The month of September commenced with very disagreeable wea- 
ther. The temperature of the atmosphere ranged between 39° and 


230 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


31° during the first three days, and that of the water in the river de- 
creased from 49° to 44°. Several rein-deer and a large flight of white 
geese passed to the southward. These circumstances led us to fear 
for the comfort, if not for the safety, of our absent friends. _ On the 
4th of September we commenced building. our dwelling-house, og 
ing cut sufficient wood for the frame of it. 

In the afternoon of September the 6th, we removed our tent to 
the summit. of a hill, about three miles distant, for the better ob- 
serving the eclipse, which was calculated to occur on the next morn- 
ing. We were prevented, however, from witnessing it by a heavy 
snow-storm, and the only observation we could then make was to 
examine whether the temperature of the atmosphere altered during 
the eclipse, but we found that both the mercurial and spirit ther- 
mometers remained steadily at 30° for a quarter of an hour previous 
to its commencement, during its continuance, and for half an hour 
subsequent to its termination ; we remarked the wind increased very 
much, and the snow fell in heavier flakes just after the estimated 
time of its commencement. This boisterous weather continued until 
three P.M., when the wind abated, and the snow changed to rain. 

_As there was now no immediate occasion for my remaining on the 
spot, the eclipse being over, and the Indians having removed to 
their hunting-grounds, Dr. Richardson and I determined on taking a 
pedestrian excursion to the Copper-Mine River, leaving Mr. Wentzel 
in charge of the men, and to superintend the buildings. On the 
_ morning of September the 9th we commenced our journey, under 
the guidance of old Keskarrah, and accompanied by John Hepburn 
and Samandrie, who carried our blankets, cooking utensils, hatchets, 
and a small supply of dried meat. Our guide led us from the top of 
one hill to the top of another, making as straight a course to the 
northward as the numerous lakes, with which the country is inter- 
sected, would permit.. At noon we reached a remarkable hill, with 
precipitous sides, named by the Copper Indians the Dog-rib Rock, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 231 


and its latitude, 64° 34’ 52”S., was obtained.’ The canoe-track passes 
to the eastward‘of this rock, but we kept to the westward, as 
being the more direct course. From the time we quitted the banks 
of Winter River we saw only a few detached clumps of trees; but 
after we passed Dog-rib Rock even these disappeared, and we tra- 
velled through a naked country. In the course of the afternoon 
Keskarrah killed a rein-deer, and loaded himself with its head. and 
skin, and our men also carried off a few pounds of its flesh for sup- 
per; but their loads were altogether too great to permit them to 
take much additional weight. Keskarrah offered to us. as a great 
treat the raw marrow from the hind legs of the animal, of which 
all the party ate except myself, and thought it very good. Iwas 
also of the same opinion, when I subsequently conquered my. then 
too fastidious taste. We halted for the night on the borders of a 
small lake, which washed the base of a ridge of sand-hills, about three 
hundred feet high, having walked in direct distance sixteen miles. 
»» There were four ancient pine-trees here which did not exceed six 
or seven feet in height, but whose branches spread themselves out 
for several yards, and we gladly cropped a few twigs to make a bed 
and to protect us from the frozen ground, still white from a fall of 
snow which took place in the afternoon. We were about to cut down 
one of these trees for firewood, but our guide solicited us to spare 
them, and made us understand by signs that they had. been, long 
serviceable to his nation, and that we ought to content ourselves 
with a few of the smaller branches. As soon as we comprehended 
his request we complied with it, and our attendants having, with 
some trouble, grubbed up a sufficient quantity of the roots of the 
dwarf birch to make a fire, we were enabled to prepare a comfortable 
‘supper of rein-deer’s meat, which we despatched with the appetites 
travelling in this country never fails to. ensure. We then stretched 
ourselves out on the pine brush, and covered by a single blanket, 
enjoyed a night of sound repose. The small quantity of bed-clothes 


232 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


we carried induced us to sleep without undressing. Old Keskarrah 
followed a different plan ; he stripped himself to the skin, and having 
toasted his body for a short time over the embers of the fire, he 
crept under his deer-skin and rags, previously spread out as smoothly 
as possible, and coiling himself up in a circular form, fell asleep in- 
stantly. This custom of undressing to the skin even when lying in 
the open air is common to all the Indian tribes. The thermometer 
at sun-set stood at 29°. 

Resuming our journey next morning we pursued a northerly 
course, but had to make a considerable circuit round the western 
ends of two lakes whose eastern extremities were hidden from out 
view. ‘lhe march was very uncomfortable as the wind was cold, and 
there was a constant fall of snow until noon ; our guide too persisted 
in taking us over the summit of every hill that lay in the route, so 
that we had the full henefit of the breeze. 

_ We forded two streams in the afternoon flowing between small 
lakes, and being wet, did not much relish having to halt, whilst 
Keskarrah pursued a herd of rein-deer ; but there was no alternative; 
as he set off and followed them without consulting our wishes. The 
old man loaded himself with the skin, and some meat of the animal 
he killed in addition to his former burden; but after walking two 
miles, finding his charge too heavy for his strength, he spread. the 
skin on the rock, and deposited the meat under some stones, intend- 
ing to pick them up on our return. | 

We put up at sunset on the borders of a large lake, having come 
twelve miles. A few dwarf birches afforded us but a scanty fire, yet 
being sheltered from the wind by a sandy bank, we passed the night 
comfortably, though the temperature was 30°. A number of geese 
passed over us to the southward. We set off early next morning, 
and marched at a tolerably quick pace. The atmosphere was quite 
fogey, and our view was limited to a short distance. At noon, 
the sun shone forth for a few minutes, and the latitude 64° 57’ 7” 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 233 


was observed. The small streams that we have hitherto crossed run 
uniformly to the southward. 

At the end of sixteen miles and a half we encamped amongst a 
few dwarf pines, and were much rejoiced at having a good fire, as 
the night was very stormy and cold. The thermometer fluctuated 
this day between 31° and 35°. Though the following morning was 
foggy and rainy, we were not sorry to quit the cold and uncomfort- 
able beds of rock upon which we had slept, and commence our 
journey at an early hour. After walking about three miles, we 
passed over a steep sandy ridge, and found the course of the rivulets 
running towards the north and north-west. Our progress was slow 
in the early part of the morning, and we were detained for two 
hours on the summit of a hill exposed to a very cold wind, whilst 
our guide went in an unsuccessful pursuit of some rein-deer. After 
walking a few miles farther, the fog cleared away, and Keskarrah 
pointed out the Copper-Mine River at a distance, and we pushed 
towards it with all the speed we could put forth. At noon we 
arrived at an arm of Point Lake, an extensive expansion of the 
river, and observed the latitude 65° 9’ 06° N. We continued our 
walk along the south end of this arm for about a mile further, 
and then halted to breakfast amidst a cluster of pines. Here the 
longitude, 112° 57 25", was observed. After breakfast we set out 
and walked along the east-side of the arm towards the main body 
of the lake, leaving Samandrie to prepare an encampment amongst 
the pines against our return. We found the main channel deep, 
its banks high and rocky, and the valleys on its borders inter- 
spersed with clusters of spruce trees. The latter circumstance wag 
a source of much gratification to us. The temperature of its surface 
water was 41°, that of the air being 43°, Having gained all the informa- 
tion we could collect from our guide‘and from personal observation, we 
retraced our steps to the encampment; and on the way back Hep- 

2H 


994, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


burn and Keskarraly shot: several waveys (anas hyperborea,) which 
afforded us a seasonable supply, our stock of provision being nearly 


exhausted. ‘These birds’ were feeding in large flocks on the crow- 
_ berries, which grew plentifully on the sides of the hills. We reached 
the: ‘encampment after dark, found a comfortable hut prepared for 
“our reception, made an excellent supper, and retired to bed, and 
‘ oe soundly though it snowed hard the whole night. 


The hills in this neighbourhood are higher than those about Fort 
Br ararices they stand, however, in the same detached manner, 
without forming connected ranges; and the bottom of every valley is 


occupied, either by a small lake or a stoney marsh. On the borders 
‘of such of these lakes as communicate with the Copper-Mine River, 
‘there are a few groves of spruce trees, generally growing on accu- 


‘mulations of sand, on the acclivities of the hills. 
» We did not quit the encampment on the morning of September 
is until nine o’clock, in consequence of a constant fall of snow; 


*but:at that hour we set out on our return to Fort Enterprise, and 


taking a'route somewhat different from the one by which we came, 


“kept to the eastward ofa chain of lakes. Soon after noon the weather 
-becameextr emely disagreeable; a cold northerly gale came on, attended 


by snow and sleet; and the temperature fell very soon from 43° 


to 34°) The waveys, alarmed at the sudden change, flew over our 
heads in great numbers to a milder climate. We walked as quickly 
‘as. possible to get to a place that would furnish some fuel and 
shelter ; ‘but: the fog occasioned us to make frequent halts, from the 


inability: of our guide to trace his way.. At length we came to a 


‘spot: which’ afforded us plenty of dwarf birches, but they were so 
‘much frozen, and the snow fell so thick, that upwards of two hours 


were wasted in endeavouring to make a fire; during which time our 
clothes were freezing upon us. At length our efforts were crowned 
with. success, and after a soil supper, we laid, or rather sat down to 


; 


we 


Pop paAg pa 


ETS U 


ABO VT 


Far 
5 


mya A 


IN Hy POUR 4 ery Aq. TWLe tC 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 239 


sleep ; for the nature of the ground obliged us to pass the night in 
a demi-erect position, with our backs against a bank of earth. The 
thermometer was 16° at six P.M. | 

After enjoying a more comfortable night’s rest than wehad expected, 
we set off at day-break: the thermometer then standing at 18°. 
The ground was covered with snow, the small lakes were frozen, 
and the whole scene had a wintry appearance. We got on but slowly 
at first, owing to an old sprained ancle, which had been very trou- 
blesome to me for the last three days, and was this morning exces- 
sively painful. In fording a rivulet, however, the application of cold 
water gave me immediate relief, and I walked with ease the re- 
mainder of the day. In the afternoon we rejoined our track outwards 
and came to the place where Keskarrah had made his deposit of 
provision, which proved a very acceptable supply, as our stock was 
exhausted. We then crossed to some sand hills, and encamped 
amidst a few small pines, having walked thirteen miles. 

The comfort of a good fire made us soon insensible to the 
fatigue we had experienced through the day, in marching over the 
rugged stones, whose surface was rendered slippery by the frost. 
The thermometer at seven P.M. stood at 27°. 

We set off at sunrise next morning, and our provision being ex- 
pended pushed on as fast as we could to Fort Enterprise, where we 
arrived at eight P.M., almost exhausted by a harassing day’s march 
of twenty-two miles. A substantial supper of rein-deer steaks 
soon restored our vigour. We had the happiness of meeting our. 
friends Mr. Back and Mr. Hood, who had returned from their ex- 
cursion on the day succeeding that on which we set out; and I 
received from them the following account of their journey. 

They proceeded up the Winter River to the north end of the 
Martin Lake, and then the guide, being unacquainted with the 
route by water to the Copper-Mine River, proposed that the canoe 
should be left. Upon this they ascended the loftiest hill in the 


2H 2 


236 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


= : neighbourhood, to examine whether they could discover any large 
_ lakes, or water communication in the direction which the guide pointed 
the river to be. They only saw.a small rivulet, which was too 
shallow for the carioe, and also wide of the course; and ‘as they 
‘perceived the crew would have to carry it over a rugged hilly track, 
they judiciously decided: on leaving it, and proceeding forwards on 
foot. Having deposited.the canoe among a few dwarf birch bushes; 
they commenced their march, carrying the tents, blankets, cooking 
utensils, and a‘part of ‘the dried meat. St. Germain, however, had 
_ previously delineated with charcoal, a'man and a house on a piece 
of bark, which he placed over the canoe and the few things that 
were by to pene out to the nis that they belonged to white 
ie ae 
she nae renched he shores of Point Lake, through which éfig 
Capac River runs, on the Ist of September. The next: day 
was too stormy for them to march, but on the 3d, they proceeded 
along its shore. to. the westward, round a mountainous promontory, 
and -perceiving the course of the lake extending to the W.N.W., 
they encamped near some pines, and then first enjoyed the luxury 
_ of a good fire, since their departure from us. The temperature of 
_ the water in’ the lake was 35°, and of the air 32°, but the latter fell 
~ to 20° in. the course of, that night. As their principal object was 
_ to-ascertain whether any arm of the lake branched nearer to Fort 
| Enterprise than the part they had fallen upon, to which the transport 
_-of our goods could be more easily made next spring, they returned 
on its borders to the eastward, being satisfied, by the appearance of 
the: mountains between south and west, that no further examination 
was necessary in’ that direction; and they continued their march 
until the 6th at noon, without finding any part: of the lake inclining 
“nearer: ‘to the fort. They therefore encamped to observe the eclipse, 


_ which-was to’ take place on the following morning; but a violent 


‘snow storm’ rendering the observation impossible, they commenced 


m tf @ 


UIP AOL TY Wyap Ap-E2e) YALE PIYSY NY 


beg 


CZF TL VaI¢ 


opuTg wp AY pacerary “WP pooypsnsry Aq tMeace 


Z ee ; 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 937 


their return, and after a comfortless and laborious march regained 
their canoe on the 10th, and embarking in it, arrived the same even- 
ing at the house. 

Point Lake varied, as far as they traced, from one to three miles 
in width. Its main course was nearly east and west, but several 
arms branched off in different directions. The annexed sketch, 
by Mr. Hood, of the party when they first got sight of Point 
Lake, conveys the most accurate representation of their mode of 
travelling, and of the character of the country. I was much pleased 
with the able manner in which these officers executed the service 
they had been despatched upon, and was gratified to learn from 
them, that their companions had conducted themselves extremely 
well, and borne the fatigues of their journey most cheerfully. They 
scarcely ever had more than sufficient fuel to boil the kettle; and 
were generally obliged to lie down in their wet clothes, and conse- 
quently, suffered much from cold. : 

The distance which the parties have travelled, in their journey to 
and from Point Lake, may be estimated at one hundred and ten 
statute miles, which being added to the distances given in the 
preceding pages, will amount to one thousand five hundred. and 
twenty miles that the expedition has travelled in 1820, up to the 
time of its residence at Fort Enterprise. 


238 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


CHAPTER VIL. 


Transactions at Fort Enterprise—Mr. Back’s Narrative of his J ourney to Chipewyan and 
Return. | | 


1820. 


September. Durine our little expedition to the Copper-Mine 
River, Mr. Wentzel had made great progress in the erection of 
our winter-house, having nearly roofed it in. But before proceed- 
ing to give an account of a ten months’ residence at this place, 
henceforth designated Fort Enterprise, I may premise, that I shall 
omit many of the ordinary occurrences of a North-American winter, 
as they have been already detailed in so able and interesting a manner 
by Ellis*, and confine myself principally to the circumstances which 
had an influence on our progress on the ensuing summer. The ob- 
servations on the magnetic needle, the temperature of the atmosphere, 
the Aurora Borealis, and other meteorological phenomena, together 
with the mineralogical and botanical notices, being less interesting to 
the general reader, are reserved for the Appendix. 

The men continued to work diligently at the house, and by the 
30th of September had nearly completed it for our reception, when 
a heavy fall of rain washed the greater part of the mud off the roof. 
This rain was remarked by the Indians as unusual, after what they 
had deemed so decided a commencement of winter in the early part 
of the month. . The mean temperature for the month was 333°, but 


* Voyage to Hudson’s Bay in the Dobbs and California. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 239 


the thermometer had sunk as low as 16°, and on one occasion risen 
to 53°. > 

Besides the party constantly employed at the house, two men. were 
appointed to fish, and others were occasionally sent for meat, as the 
hunters procured it. This latter employment, although extremely 
laborious, was. always relished by the Canadians, as they never failed 
to use a prescriptive right of helping themselves to the fattest and 
most delicate parts of the deer. Towards the end of the month, 
the rein-deer began to quit the barren grounds, and came into the 
vicinity of the house, on their way to the woods; and the success of 
the hunters being consequently great, the necessity of sending for 
the meat considerably retarded the building of the house. In the 
mean time we resided in. our canvass tents, which proved very cold 
habitations, although we maintained a fire in front of them, and 
also endeavoured to protect ourselves from the piercing winds by a 
barricade of pine branches. 

On the 6th of October, the house being completed, we struck 
our tents, and removed into it. It was.merely a log-building, fifty 
feet long, and twenty-four wide, divided into a hall, three _bed- 
rooms, anda kitchen. The walls and. roof were plastered. with clay, 
the floors laid with planks rudely squared with the hatchet, and the 
windows closed with parchment of deer-skin. The clay, which, 
from the coldness of the weather, required to be tempered before the 
fire with hot. water, froze as it was daubed on, and afterwards 
cracked in such a:‘manner as to admit the wind from every quarter ; 
yet, compared with the tents, our new habitation appeared com- 
fortable; and having filled our, capacious clay-built chimney with 
fagots, we spent a cheerful evening before the invigorating blaze. 
The change was peculiarly beneficial to Dr. Richardson, who having, 
in one of his excursions, incautiously, laid down on the frozen side 
of a hill when heated with walking, had caught a severe inflamma- 
tory sore throat, which became daily worse whilst we remained in 


QAO A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the tents, but began to amend soon after he was enabled to confine 
himself to the more equable warmth of the house. We took up 
our abode at first on the floor, but our working party, who had 
shewn such skill as house-carpenters, soon proved themselves to be, 
with the same tools, the hatchet and crooked knife, excellent cabinet- 
makers, and daily added a table, chair, or bedstcad, to the comforts 
of our establishment. The crooked knife, generally made of an 
old file, bent and tempered by heat, serves an Indian or Canadian 
voyager for plane, chisel, and auger. With it the snow-shoe and 
canoe-timbers are fashioned, the deals of their sledges reduced to 
the requisite thinness and polish, and their wooden bowls and spoons 
hollowed out. Indeed, though not quite so requisite for existence 
as the hatchet, yet without its aid there would be little comfort in 
these wilds. 

On the 7th we were gratified by a sight of the sun, after it had 
been obscured for twelve days. On this and the several following 
days the meridian sun melted the light covering of snow or hoar 
frost on the lichens, which clothe the barren grounds, and rendered 
them so tender as to attract great herds of rein-deer to our neigh- 
bourhood. On the morning of the 10th I estimated the numbers I 
saw during a short walk, at upwards of two thousand. They form 
into herds of different sizes, from ten to a hundred, according as 
.their fears or accident induce them to unite or separate. 

The females being at this time more lean and active, usually lead 
the van. The haunches of the males are now covered to the depth 
of two inches or more with fat which is beginning to get red and 
high flavoured, and is considered a sure indication of the commence- 
ment of the rutting season. Their horns, which in the middle of 
August were yet tender, have now attained their proper size, and 
are beginning to lose their hairy covering which hangs from them in 
ragged filaments. ‘The horns of the rein-deer vary, not only with 
its sex and age, but are otherwise so uncertain in their growth, that 


OF THE POLAR SEA. — DA] 


they are never alike in: any two individuals. The old males shed 
theirs: about: the end of December; the females retain them until. 
the disappearance of the snow enables them to frequent the barren 
grounds, which may be stated to be about the middle or end of May, 
soon after which period they proceed towards the sea-coast and drop 
their- young. The young males lose their horns about the same 
time with the females or a little earlier, some of them as early as 
April. . The hair of the rein-deer falls in July, and is succeeded by 
a short thick, coat of mingled clove, deep reddish, and yellowish, 
browns; the belly and under parts of the neck, &c., remaining white.: 
As’ the) winter approaches the hair becomes longer, and lighter in 
its colours, and. it begins to loosen in May, being then much worn. 
on the sides, from the animal rubbing itself against trees and stones. 
it becomes grayish and almost white, before it is completely shed. 
The Indians form their robes of the skins procured in autumn, when 
the ‘hair is short. Towards the spring the larvee of the cestrus at- 
taining a large size, produce so many perforations in the skins, that 
they are good for nothing. The cicatrices only of these holes are to 
be seen in August, but a fresh set of ova have in the mean time 
been deposited *. 

The ‘rein-deer retire from the sea-coast in July and August, but 
in October.on the verge of the barren grounds, and shelter them- 
selves in the: woods during the winter. They are often induced by 
a few fine days in winter, to pay a transitory visit to their favourite 
pastures in the barren country, but their principal movement to the 
northward commences generally in the end of April, when the snow 


* «-Ttis worthy of remark, that in the month of May a very great number of large 
larvee exist under the mucous membrane at the root of the tongue, and posterior part of the 
nares-and pharynx. The Indians consider them to belong to the same species with. the 
cestrus, that deposits its ova under the skin; to us the larvae of the former appeared more 
flattened than those of the latter. Specimens of both kinds, preserved in spirits, were de- 
stroyed by the frequent falls they’ re¢eived’on the portages.”—Dr. Ricarpson’s Journal. 


2] 


242 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


first begins to melt on the sides of the hills, and early in May, when 
large patches of the ground are visible, they are on the banks of the 
Copper-Mine River. The females take the lead in this spring 
migration, and bring forth their young on the sea-coast about the 
end of May or beginning of June. There are certain spots or passes 
well known to the Indians, through which the deer invariably pass 
in their migrations to and from the coast, and it has been observed 
that they always travel against the wind. ‘The principal food of 
the rein-deer in the barren grounds, consists of the cetraria nivalis 
and cucullata, cenomyce rangiferina, cornicularia ochrileuca, and other 
lichens, and they also eat the hay or dry grass which is found in the 
swamps in autumn. In the woods they feed on the different lichens 
which hang from the trees. They are accustomed to gnaw their 
fallen antlers, and are said also to devour mice. 

The weight of a full grown barren-ground deer, exclusive of the 
offal, varies from ninety to one hundred and thirty pounds. There 
is, however, a much larger kind found in the woody parts of the 
country, whose carcass weighs from two hundred to two hundred 
and forty pounds. This kind never leaves the woods, but its skin 
is as much perforated by the gad-fly as that of the others; a pre- 
sumptive proof that the smaller species are not driven tothe sea- 
coast by the attacks of that insect. There area few rein-deer 
occasionally killed in the spring, whose skins are entire, and these 
are always fat, whereas the others are lean at’ that season. The 
gad-fly does not confine its attacks to the skin of the back, but 
deposits its ova in the mucous membrane also, which lines the 
nostrils and fauces. This insect likewise infests the red-deer 
(wawaskeesh,) but its ova are not found in the skin of the moose, 
or buffalo, nor, as we have been informed, of the sheep and goat that 
inhabit the rocky mountains, although the rein-deer found in those 
parts, (which by the way, are of an unusually large kind,) are as 
much tormented by them as the barren-ground variety. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 243 


The herds of rein-deer are attended in their migrations by bands 
of wolves, which destroy a great many of them. The Copper 
Indians kill the rein-deer in the summer, with the gun, or taking 
advantage of a favourable disposition of the ground, they enclose 
a herd. upon: a neck of land, and drive them into a lake, where they 
fall an easy prey; but in the rutting season and. in the spring, when 
they are numerous on the skirts of the woods, they catch them in 
snares. The snares are simple nooses, formed in a rope made of 
twisted sinew, which are placed in the aperture of a slight hedge, 
constructed of the branches of trees. This hedge is disposed so as 
to form several winding compartments, and although it 1s by no 
means strong, yet the deer seldom attempt \to break through it. 
The herd is led into the labyrinth by two converging rows of poles, 
and one is generally caught at each of the openings by the noose 
placed there. The hunter, too, lying in ambush, stabs some of them 
with -his bayonet as they pass by, and the whole herd frequently 
becomes his prey. Where wood is scarce, a piece of turf turned. up 
answers the purpose of a pole to:conduct them towards the snares. 

The’ rein-deer has a quick eye, but the hunter by keeping to 
leeward. and using a little caution, may approach very near ; their 
apprehensions being much more easily roused by the smell than the 
sight of any unusual object. Indeed their curiosity often causes them 
to come close up to and wheel around the hunter ; thus affording 
him a good opportunity of singling out the fattest of the herd, and 
upon these occasions they often become so confused. by the. shouts 
and. gestures of their enemy, that they run backwards and. forwards 
with great rapidity, but without the power of making their escape. 

The Copper Indians find by experience that a white dress attracts 
them: most. readily, and they often succeed in bringing them within 
shot, by kneeling and vibrating the gun from side to side, in. imi- 
tation of the motion of a deer’s horns when he is in the act of 
rubbing his head against a) stone. 


244, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


The Dog-rib Indians have a mode of killing these animals, ‘which 
though simple, is very successful. It was thus described by Mr. Went- 
zel, who resided long amongst that people. The hunters go in pairs, 
the foremost man carrying in one hand the horns and part of the skin 
of the head of a deer, and in the other a small bundle of twigs, against 
which he, from time to time, rubs the horns, imitating the gestures 
peculiar to the animal. His comrade follows treading exactly in his 
footsteps, and holding the guns of both in a horizontal position, ‘so 
that the muzzles project under the arms‘ of him who carries the 
head. Both hunters have a fillet of white skin round their fore- 
heads, and. the foremost’ has a strip of the same kind round. his 
wrists. ‘They approach the herd by degrees, raising their legs very 
slowly, but setting them down somewhat suddenly, after the manner 
of a deer, and always. taking care to lift their right or left feet 
simultaneously. If any of the herd leave off feeding to gaze upon 
‘this extraordinary phenomenon, it instantly stops, and the head 
‘begins to play its part by licking its shoulders, and performing other 
necessary movements. In this way the hunters attain the very 
‘centre of the herd without -exciting suspicion, and have leisure to 
‘single out the fattest. The hindmost man then. pushes forward. his 
‘comrade’s gun, the head is dropt, and they both fire nearly at the 
‘same instant. The herd scampers off, the hunters trot after them ; 
in a short time the poor animals halt to ascertain the cause of their 
‘terror, their foes. stop at the same instant, and. having loaded as 
‘they ran, greet the gazers with a second fatal discharge. The con- 
‘sternation of the deer increases, they run to and fro in the utmost 
confusion, and sometimes a great part of the herd is destroyed within 
‘the space of a few hundred yards. 

A “party: who’ had’ been® sent’ to Aultaidali returned, bringing 
‘three hundred. and seventy pounds of dried: meat; and two hundred 
and twenty pounds of suet, together with the unpleasant informa- 
tion, that a still larger quantity of the latter article had been found 


OF THE POLAR SEA. DAie5 


and ‘carried off,:as he supposed, by some Dog-ribs, who had passed 
that way. | 

The weather becoming daily colder, all. the lakes in the neigh- 
‘bourhood. of the house were completely, and the river partially, 
‘frozen over by: the middle of the month. The rein-deer now began 
to quit us for more southerly and better-sheltered pastures. Indeed, 
‘their longer residence in. our neighbourhood would have been of 
little service to us, for our ammunition was almost completely ex- 
‘pended, although we had dealt it of late with a very sparing hand to 
-the Indians. We had,. however, already secured in the store-house 
the carcasses of one hundred deer, together with one thousand 
‘pounds of suet, and some dried meat; and had, moreover, eighty 
deer stowed. up at. various distances from the house. The necessity 
of employing the men to build a house for themselves, before the 
weather became too severe, obliged us to put the latter en cache, as 
the voyagers term it, instead of adopting the more safe plan of 
‘bringing them to’ the house. Putting a deer en cache, means merely 
protecting it against. the wolves, and still more destructive) wolve- 
‘renes, by heavy loads of wood or stones; the latter animal, how- 
‘ever, sometimes digs underneath the pile, and renders the precau- 
tion abortive. 

On the 18th, Mr. Back and Mr. Wentzel set out for Fort Pro- 
‘vidence, accompanied by Beauparlant, Belanger, and two Indians, 
-Akaiyazza and ‘Vhoolezzeh, with their wives, the Little Forehead, 
-and the Smiling Marten. Mr. Back had volunteered to go and 
make the necessary arrangements for transporting the stores. we 
expected from Cumberland House, and to endeavour to obtain some 
-additional supplies from the establishments at Slave Lake. If any 
‘accident should have prevented the arrival of our stores, and the 
-establishments at Moose-deer Island should be unable to supply the 
deficiency, he was, if he found himself equal to the task, to proceed 
‘to'Chipewyan. Ammunition was essential to our existence, and a 


246 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


considerable supply of tobacco. was also requisite, not. only for the 
comfort of the Canadians, who use it largely, and had stipulated for 
it in their engagements, but: also as a means of preserving the 
friendship of the Indians. Blankets, cloth, and iron-work, were 
scarcely less indispensable to:equip our men for the advance next 
season.. | | Tag 

Mr. Wentzel accompanied Mri Back, to assist him in obtaining 
from the traders, on the score’ of old friendship, that which: they 
might be inclined to deny to our necessities. I forwarded by them 
letters to the Colonial Office and Admiralty, detailing the proceed- 
ings of the Expedition wp to this period. 

On the 22d we. were surpiised by a visit from a dog; the poor 
animal was in low condition, and much fatigued. Our Indians dis- 
covered,’ by marks on his ears, that he belonged to the Dog-ribs. 
This tribe, unlike the’ Chipewyans and. Copper Indians, had_ pre- 
served that useful associate of man, although from their frequent 
intercourse with the latter people, they were not ignorant of the 
prediction alluded ‘to in a former page. One of our interpreters 
was immediately despatched, with an Indian, to endeavour to trace 
out the Dog-ribs, whom he supposed might be concealed in the 
neighbourhood from their dread of the Copper Indians; although 
we had: no doubt of their coming to us, were they aware of our 
being here. The. interpreter, however, returned without having 
discovered any traces of strange Indians; a circumstance which led 
us to conclude, that the dog had strayed from his masters a consi- 
derable time since. 

Towards the‘end of the month the men completed their house, 
and took’ up their abode in it. It was thirty-four feet long and 
eighteen feet wide; was divided into. two apartments, and. was 
placed at right angles to the officers’ dwelling, and facing the store- 
house: the three buildings forming three sides of a quadrangle. 

» On the 26th Akaitcho‘and ‘his party arrived, the hunting in this 


opuoy Aninyy Uyop <q "peg? qsrepy peTsTany 


4 Hp]? ttt Ali Ae 


“AZIM aN LMO LO ATIA WRINIM 


dpa eapy Aq paaersuye 


NM MOEQAMary Aq wary 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 24:7 


neighbourhood being terminated for tlie season, by the deer having 
retired to the southward to shelter themselves in the woods. 

The arrival of this large party was a serious inconvenience to us, 
from our being compelled to issue them daily rations of’ provision 
from the store. The want of ammunition prevented us from equip- 
ping and sending them to the woods to hunt ; and although they are 
accustomed to subsist themselves for a considerable part of the year 
by fishing, or snaring the deer, without having recourse to fire-arms, 
yet, on the present occasion, they felt little inclined to do so, and 
gave scope to their natural love of ease, as long as our store-house 
seemed to be well stocked. Nevertheless, as they were conscious 
of impairing our future resources, they did not. fail, occasionally, 
to remind us that it was not their fault, to express an ardent 
desire to go a hunting, and to request a supply of ammunition, 
although they knew that it was not in our power to give it. 

The summer birds by this time had entirely deserted us, leaving, 
for our winter companions, the raven, cinereous crow, ptarmigan, 
and snow-bird. The last of the water-fowl that quitted us was a 
species of diver, of the same size with the colymbus arcticus}: but 
differing from it in the arrangement of the white spots on its plumage, 
and in having a yellowish white bill. ‘This bird was occasionally 
caught in our fishing nets. 7 

The thermometer during the month of October, at Fort Enter- 
prise, never rose above 37°, or fell below 5°; the mean temperature 
for the month was 23°. 

In the beginning of October a party had been sent to the west- 
ward to search for birch to make snow-shoe frames, and the Indian 
‘women were afterwards employed in ‘netting the shoes and pre- 
paring leather for winter-clothing to the men. Robes of rein-deer 
skins were also obtained from the Indians, and issued to the men 
who were to travel, as they are not only a great deal lighter than 
blankets, but also much warmer, and altogether better adapted for 
a winter in this climate. They are, however, unfit for summer use, 


24,8 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


as the least moisture causes the skin to spoil, and lose its hair. It | 


requires the skins of seven deer to make one robe. The finest are 
made of the skins of young fawns. 

The fishing, having failed as the weather anune more severe, was 
given up on the 5th. It had procured us about one thousand two 
hundred white fish, from two to three pounds each. ‘There are two 
other species of salmo in Winter Lake; Back’s grayling and the round 
fish, and afew trout, pike, methye, and red carp, were also occasionally 
obtained from the nets.” It may be worthy of notice here, that the 
fish froze as they were taken out of the nets, in a short time became 
a solid mass of ice, and by a blow or two of the hatchet were easily: 
split open; when the intestines might be removed in one lump. If in 
this completely frozen state they were thawed before the fire, they re- 
covered: their animation. This was particularly the case with the carp, 
and we hadoccasion to observe it repeatedly, as Dr. Richardson occu- 
pied himself in examining the structure of the different species of fish, 
and was always, in the winter, under the necessity of thawing them be- 
fore he could cut them. We have seen a carp recover so far as to leap 
about. with much vigour, after it had been frozen for thirty-six hours. 

From the 12th to the 16th we had fine, and for the season warm, 


weather, and the deer, which had not been seen since the 26th of | 


October, re-appeared in the neighbourhood of the house, to the 
surprise of the Indians, who attributed their return to the barren 
grounds, ‘to the unusual mildness of the season. On this occasion, 
by melting some of our pewter cups, we managed to furnish five 
balls to each of the hunters, but they were all expended unsuccess- 
fully, except by Akaitcho, who killed two deer. | 

By the middle of the month Winter River was firmly frozen over, 
except the small rapid at its commencement, which remained. open all 
the winter. The ice on. the lake was now nearly two feet thick. 
After the 16th -we had:a succession of cold, snowy, and windy wea- 
ther. We had’ become anxious to hear of the arrival of Mr. Back 
and: his party at Fort: Providence. The Indians, who had calculated 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 249 


the period at which a messenger ought to have returned from thence 
to be already passed, became impatient when it had elapsed, and 
with their usual love of evil augury tormented us by their melan- 
choly forebodings. At one time they conjectured that the whole 
party had fallen through the ice; at another, that they had been 
way-laid and cut off by the Dog-ribs. In vain did we urge the im- 


probability of the former accident, or the peaceable character. of the 


Dog-ribs, so little in conformity with the latter. “The ice at this 
season was deceitful,” they said, “ and the Dog-ribs, though unwar- 
like, were treacherous.” These assertions, so often repeated, had 
some effect upon the spirits of our Canadian voyagers, who seldom 
weigh any opinion they adopt; but we persisted in treating their 
fears as chimerical, for had we seemed to listen to them for a mo- 
ment, it is more than probable that the whole of our Indians would 
have gone to Fort Providence in search of supplies, from whence we 
should have found it extremely difficult to have recovered them. 

The matter was put to rest by the appearance of Belanger on the 
morning of the 23d, and the Indians, now running into the opposite 
extreme, were disposed to give us more credit for our judgment than 
we deserved. They had had a tedious and fatiguing journey to 
Fort Providence, and for some days were destitute of provisions. 

Belanger arrived alone; he had walked constantly for the last six- 
and-thirty hours, leaving his Indian companions encamped at the 
last woods, they being unwilling to accompany him across the barren 
grounds during the storm that had prevailed for several days, and 
blew with unusual violence on the morning of his arrival. His locks 
were matted with snow, and he was incrusted with ice from head to 
foot, so that we scarcely recognised him when he burst in upon us. 
We welcomed him with the usual shake of the hand, but were un- 
able to give him the glass of rum which every voyager receives on. 
his arrival at a trading post. 

As soon as his packet was thawed, we eagerly opened it to 
2K 


250 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


obtain our English letters. The latest were dated on the preceding 
April. ‘They came by way of Canada, and were brought up in Sep- 
tember to Slave Lake by the North-West Company’s canoes. 

We were not so fortunate with regard to our stores; of ten pieces 
which had been sent from York Factory by Governor Williams, ‘five 
of the most essential had been left at the Grand Rapid on the 
Saskatchawan, owing, as far as we could judge from the accounts 
that reached us, to the misconduct of the officer to whom they were 
intrusted, and who was ordered to convey them to Cumberland- 
House. Being overtaken by some of the North-West Company’s 
canoes, he had insisted on their taking half of his charge as it was 
intended for the service of Government. The North-West gentle- 
men objected, that their canoes had already got a cargo in, and that 
they had been requested only to convey our stores from Cumberland- 
House where they had a canoe waiting for the purpose. The Hud- 
son’s-Bay officer upon this deposited our ammunition and tobacco 
upon the beach, and departed without any regard to the serious 
consequences that might result to us from the want of them. The 
Indians, who assembled at the opening of the packet, and sat in 
silence watching our countenances, were necessarily made acquainted 
with the non-arrival of our stores, and bore the intelligence with un- 
expected tranquillity. We took care, however, in our communica- 
tions with them to dwell upon the more agreeable parts of our 
intelligence, and they seemed to receive particular pleasure on being 
informed of the arrival of two Esquimaux interpreters at Slave Lake 
on their way to join the party. The circumstance not only quieted 
their fears of opposition from the Esquimaux on our descent to the 
sea next season, but also afforded a substantial proof of our influence 
in being able to bring two people of that nation from such a 
distance. 

Akaitcho, who is a man of great penetration and shrewdness, duly 
appreciated these circumstances; indeed he has often surprised us 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 251 


by his correct judgment of the character of individuals amongst the 
traders or of our own party, although his knowledge of their opinions 
was, in most instances, obtained through the imperfect medium of 
interpretation. He was an attentive observer, however, of every 
action, and steadily compared their conduct with their pretensions. 

By the newspapers we learnt the demise of our revered and 
lamented sovereign George III., and the proclamation of George IV. 
We concealed this intelligence from the Indians, lest the death of 
their great Father might lead them to suppose that we should be 
unable to fulfil our promises to them. 

The Indians who had left Fort Providence with Belanger arrived 
the day after him, and, amongst other intelligence, informed A kait- 
cho of some reports they had heard to our disadvantage. They 
stated that Mr. Weeks, the gentleman in charge of Fort Provi- 
dence, had told them, that so far from our being what we repre- 
sented ourselves to be, the officers of a great King, we were merely 
a set of dependant wretches, whose only aim was to obtain subsist- 
ence for a season in the plentiful country of the Copper Indians; 
that, out of charity, we had been supplied with a portion of goods 
by the trading Companies, but that there was not the smallest pro- 
bability of our being able to reward the Indians when their term of 
service was completed. Akaitcho, with great good sense, instantly 
came to have the matter explained, stating at the same time, that 
he could not credit it. I then pointed out to him that Mr. Wentzel, 
with whom they had long been accustomed to trade, had pledged 
the credit of his Company for the stipulated rewards to the party 
that accompanied us, and that the trading debts due by Akaitcho 
and his party had already been remitted, which was of itself a suffi- 
cient proof of our influence with the North-West Company. I also 
reminded Akaitcho, that our having caused the Esquimaux to be 
brought up at a great expense, was evidence of our future inten- 
tions, and informed him that I should write to Mr. Smith, the 

2K 2 


952 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


senior trader in the department, on the subject, when I had no 
doubt that a satisfactory explanation would be given. The Indians 
retired from the conference apparently satisfied, but this business 
was in the end productive of much inconvenience to us, and proved 
very detrimental to the progress of the Expedition. In conjunction 
also with other intelligence conveyed in Mr. Back’s letters re- 
specting the disposition of the traders towards us, particularly a 
statement of Mr. Weeks, that he had been desired not to assist us 
with supplies from his post, it was productive of much present un- 
easiness to me. 

On the 28th St. Germain, the interpreter, set out with eight Ca- 
nadian voyagers and four Indian hunters to bring up our stores from 
Fort Providence. I wrote by him to Mr. Smith, at Moose-Deer 
Island, and Mr. Keith, at Chipewyan, both of the North-West Com- 
pany, urging them in the strongest manner to comply with the re- 
quisition for stores, which Mr. Back would present. I also informed 
Mr. Simpson, principal agent in the Athabasca for the Hudson’s Bay 
Company, who had proffered every assistance in his power, that we 
should gladly avail ourselves of the kind intentions expressed in a 
letter which I had received from him. . 

We also sent a number of broken axes to Slave Lake to be re- 
paired. The dog that came to us on the 22d of October, and had 
become very familiar, followed the party. We were in hopes that it 
might prove of some use in dragging their loads, but we afterwards 
learnt, that on the evening after their departure from the house, 
they had the cruelty to kill and eat it, although they had no reason 
to apprehend a scarcity of provision. A dog is considered to be 
delicate eating by the voyagers. 

The mean temperature of the air for November was — 0.7°. The 
greatest heat observed was 25° above, and the least 31° below, zero. 

On the 1st of December the sky was clear, a slight appearance of 
stratus only being visible near the horizon; but a kind of snow fell 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 208 


at intervals in the forenoon, its particles so minute as to be observed 
only in the sunshine. ‘Towards noon the snow became more appa- 
rent, and the two limbs of a prismatic arch were visible, one on 
each side of the sun near its place in the heavens, the centre being. 
deficient. We have frequently observed this descent of minute icy 
spiculz when the sky appears perfectly clear, and could even per- 
ceive that its silent, but continued, action added to the snowy cover- 
ing of the ground. | 

Having received one hundred balls from Fort Providence by Be- 
langer, we distributed them amongst the Indians, informing the 
leader at the same time, that the residence of so large a party as his 
at the house, amounting, with women and children, to forty souls, 
was producing a serious reduction in our stock of provision. He 
acknowledged the justice of the statement, and promised to remove 
as soon as his party had prepared snow-shoes and. sledges for them- 
selves. Under one pretext or other, however, their departure was - 
delayed until the 10th of the month, when they left us, having pre- 
viously received one of our fishing-nets, and all the ammunition we 
possessed. The leader left his aged mother and two female attend- 
ants to our care, requesting, that if she died during his absence, she 
might be buried at a distance from the fort, that he might not be 
reminded of his loss when he visited us. 

Keskarrah, the guide, also remained behind, with his wife and 
daughter. The old man has become too feeble to hunt, and his 
time is almost entirely occupied in attendance upon his wife, who 
has been long affected with an ulcer on the face, which has nearly 
destroyed. her nose. 

Lately he made an offering to the water spirits, whose wrath he 
apprehended to be the cause of her malady. It consisted of a knife, 
a piece of tobacco, and some other trifling articles, which were tied 
up in a small bundle, and committed to the rapid with a long 
prayer. He does not trust entirely, however, to the relenting of 


DA, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the spirits for his wife’s cure, but comes daily to Dr. Richardson for 
medicine. . 

Upon one occasion he received the medicine from the Doctor 
with such formality, and wrapped it up in his rein-deer robe with 
such extraordinary carefulness, that it excited the involuntary laugh- 
ter of Mr. Hood and myself. The old man smiled in his turn, and 
as he always seemed proud of the familiar way in which we were 
accustomed to joke with him, we thought no more upon the subject. 
But he unfortunately mentioned the circumstance to his wife, who 
imagined in consequence, that the drug was not productive of its 
usual good effects, and they immediately came to the conclusion 
that some bad medicine had been intentionally given to them. The 
distress produced by this idea, was in proportion to their former 
faith in the potency of the remedy, and the night was spent in 
singing and groaning. Next morning the whole family were crying 
in concert, and it was not until the evening of the second day that 
we succeeded in pacifying them. The old woman began to feel 
better, and her faith in the medicine was renewed. 

While speaking of this family, I may remark that the daughter, 
whom we designated Green-stockings from her dress, is considered 
by her tribe to be a great beauty. Mr. Hood drew an accurate 
portrait of her, although her mother was averse to her sitting for it. 
She was afraid, she said, that her daughter’s likeness would induce 
the great Chief who resided in England to send for the original. 
The young lady, however, was undeterred by any such fear. She 
has already been an object of contest between her countrymen, and 
although under sixteen years of age, has belonged successively to 
two husbands, and would probably have been the wife of many 
more, if her mother had not required her services as a nurse. 

The weather during this month, was the coldest we experienced 
during our residence in America. The thermometer sunk on one 

“occasion to 57° below zero, and never rose beyond 6° above it; the 


“MIPUIT ADLINGL UYOL AQ SZOE Y2MOUE VIUSTIQNL 


“DOYS MOIS B SUIpPTiy TT 


"SONIMOOLS NIETO UMIEOMVYE SIR CNY TAINS NVIGNI WHadood v 


‘WOM peayymary Aq umpig 


: y 


ey 


i 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 955 


mean for the month was — 29.7°. During these intense colds, how- 
ever, the atmosphere was generally calm, and the wood-cutters and 
others went about their ordinary occupations without using any 
extraordinary precautions, yet without feeling any bad effects. 
They had their rein-deer shirts on, leathern mittens lined with 
blankets, and furred caps; but none of them used any defence for the 
face, nor did they need todoso. Indeed we have already mentioned 
that the heat is abstracted most rapidly from the body during strong 
breezes, and most of those who have perished from cold in this 
country, have fallen a sacrifice to their being overtaken on a lake 
or other unsheltered place, by a storm of wind. The intense colds 
were, however, detrimental to us in another way. ‘The trees froze 
to their very centres, and became as hard as stones, and more dif- 
ficult to cut. Some of the axes were broken daily, and by the end 
of the month we had only one left that was fit for felling trees. 
By intrusting it only to one of the party who had been bred a car- 
penter, and who could use it with dexterity, it was fortunately 
preserved until the arrival of our men with others from Fort 
Providence. 

A thermometer, hung in our bed-room at the distance of sixteen 
feet from the fire, but exposed to its direct radiation, stood even 
in the day-time occasionally at 15° below zero, and was observed 
more than once previous to the kindling of the fire in the morning, 
to be as low as 40° below zero. On two of these occasions the 
chronometers 2149 and 2151 which during the night lay under Mr. 
Hood’s and Dr. Richardson’s pillows, stopped while they were 
dressing themselves. 

The rapid at the commencement of the river remained open in 
the severest weather, although-it was somewhat contracted in width: 
Its temperature was 32°, as was the surface of the river opposite the 
house, about a quarter of a mile lower down, tried at a hole in the 
ice, through which water was drawn for domestic purposes. The 


256 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


river here was two fathoms and a half deep, and the temperature at 
its bottom was at least 42° above zero. This fact was ascertained by 
a spirit thermometer ; in which, probably, from some irregularity in 
the tube, a small portion of the coloured liquor usually remained at 
42° when the column was made to descend rapidly. In the present 
istance the thermometer standing at 47° below zero, with no por- 
tion of the fluid in the upper part of the tube was let down slowly 
into the water, but drawn cautiously and rapidly up again, when a 
red drop at + 42° indicated that the fluid had risen to that point 
or above it. At this period the daily visits of the sun were very 
short, and owing to the obliquity of his rays, afforded us little 
warmth or light. It is half past eleven before he peeps over a small 
ridge of hills opposite to the house, and he sinks in the horizon at 
half past two. On the 28th Mr. Hood, in order to attain an ap- 
proximation to the quantity of terrestrial refraction, observed the 
sun’s meridional altitude when the thermometer stood at 46° below 
zero, at the imminent hazard of having his fingers frozen. 

He found the sextant had changed its error considerably, and 
that the glasses had lost their parallelism from the contraction of the 
brass. In measuring the error he perceived that the diameter of 
the sun’s image was considerably short of twice the semi-diameter : 
a proof of the uncertainty of celestial observations made during 
these intense frosts. The results of this and another similar obser- 
vation are given at the bottom of the page*. 


* « 'The observed meridian altitude of © upper limb was 2° 52’ 51”. Temperature 
of the air — 45° 5’. By comparing this altitude, corrected by the mean refraction and 
parallax, with that deduced from the latitude which was observed in autumn, the increase 
of refraction is found to be 6’ 50", the whole refraction, therefore, for the altitude 2° 52! 51” 
is 21’ 49”. Admitting that the refraction increases in the same ratio as that of the atmo- 
sphere at a mean state of temperature, the horizontal refraction will be 417’ 22’. But the 
diameter of the sun measured immediately after the observation, was only 27 ‘7’, which 
shews an increase of refraction at the lower limb of 3’ 29’. The horizontal refraction cal- 


culated with this difference, and the above-mentioned ratio, is 56’ 3’, at the temperature 


eee 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 957 


The aurora appeared with more or less brilliancy on twenty-eight 
nights in this month, and we were also gratified by the resplendent 
beauty of the moon, which for many days together performed its 
circle round the heavens, shining with undiminished lustre, and 
scarcely disappearing below the horizon during the twenty-four hours. 

During many nights there was a halo round the moon, although 
the stars shone brightly, and the atmosphere appeared otherwise 
clear. The same phenomenon was observed round the candles, 
even in our bed-rooms; the diameter of the halo creasing as the 
observer receded from the light. These halos, both round the 
moon and candles, occasionally exhibited faintly some of the pris- 


matic colours. 
As it may be interesting to the reader to know how we passed 


— 45° 5’. So that in the parallel 68° 42’, where, if there was no refraction, the sun would 
be invisible for thirty-four days, his upper limb, with the refraction 56° 3", is, in fact, above 
the horizon at every noon. | 

The wind was from the westward a moderate breeze, and the air perfectly clear. Ja- 
nuary Ist, 1821. Observed meridian altitude of © lower limb 2° 35’ 20". © apparent 
diameter 29° 20’. For apparent altitude 2° 35’ 20", the mean refraction is 16’ 5” (Mackay’s 
Tables), and the true, found as detailed above, is 20’ 8": which increasing in the same 
ratio as that of the atmosphere, at a mean state of temperature, is 41’ 19” at the horizon. 
But the difference of refraction at the upper and lower limbs, increasing also in that ratio, 
gives 55' 16" for the horizontal refraction. Temperature of the air — 41°. Wind north, 
a light breeze, a large halo visible about the sun. January 15th, 1821—Observed an 
apparent meridian altitude © lower limb 4° 24’ 57”. © apparent diameter 31’ 5”. For 
apparent altitude 4° 24° 57", the mean refraction is 10’ 58” (Mackay’s Tables), and the 
true, found as detailed above, is 14’ 39’, which increasing in the same ratio as that of the 
atmosphere at a mean state of temperature, is 43’ 57” at the horizon. But the difference 
of refraction between the upper and lower limbs, increasing also in that ratio, gives 48’ 30" 
for the horizontal refraction, 

Temperature of the air — 35°, a light air from the westward, very clear. 

The extreme coldness of the weather rendered these operations difficult and dangerous ; 
yet I think the observations may be depended upon within 30", as will appear by their 
approximate results in calculating the horizontal refraction ; for it must be considered that 
an.error of 30", in the refraction in altitude, would make a difference of several minutes 


in the horizontal refraction.”"—-Mz. Hoop’s Journal. 
21 


258 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


our time at this season of the year, I shall mention briefly, that a 
considerable portion of it was occupied in writing up our journals. 


‘Some newspapers and magazines, that we had. received: from Eng- 


land with our letters, were read) again and again, and commented 
upon, at our meals; and we often exercised ourselves with conjec- 
turing the changes that might take place in the world: before we 
could hear from it again. The probability of our receiving letters, 
and the period of their arrival, were calculated toa nicety.. We 
occasionally paid the woodmen a visit, or took a walk for a mile or 
two on the river. 

In the evenings we joined the men in the hall, and took a part in 
their games, which generally continued to a late hour; in. short, 
we never found the time to hang heavy wpon our hands; and the 
peculiar occupations of each of the officers afforded them more 
employment than might at first be supposed. I re-calculated the 
observations made on our route; Mr. Hood protracted the charts, 
and made those drawings of birds, plants, and. fishes, which cannot 
appear in this work, but which have ‘been the admiration of every 
one who has seen them. Each of the party sedulously and sepa- 
rately recorded their observations on the aurora, and Dr. Richard- 
son contrived to obtain from under the snow specimens of most of 
the lichens in the neighbourhood, and to make himself acquainted 
with the mineralogy of the surrounding country. 

The Sabbath was always a day of rest with us; the woodmen 
were required to provide for the exigencies of that day on Saturday, 
and the party were dressed in their best attire. Divine service was 
regularly performed, and the Canadians attended, and behaved with 
great decorum, although they were all Roman Catholics, and but 
little acquainted. with the language in which the prayers were 
read, I regretted much that we had not a French Prayer-Book, but 
the Lord’s Prayer and ree were “always read to them in their own 
language. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 259 


Our diet consisted almost entirely of rein-deer meat, varied twice 
a week by fish, and occasionally by a little flour, but’ we*had no 
vegetables of any description. On the Sunday mornings we drank 
a cup of chocolate, but our greatest luxury was tea (without sugar), 
of which we regularly partook twice a-day. With rein-deers’ fat, 
and strips of cotton shirts, we formed candles; and Hepburn ac- 
quired considerable skill in the manufacture of soap, from the wood- 
ashes, fat, and salt. The: formation of soap was considered as 
rather a mysterious operation by our Canadians, and, in their hands, 
was always supposed to fail if a woman approached the kettle in 
which the ley was boiling. Such are our simple domestic details. 

On the 30th, two hunters came from the leader, to convey am- 
munition to him, as soon as our men should bring it from Fort Pro- 
vidence. 

The men, at this time, coated the walls of the house on the out- 
side, with a thin mixture of clay and water, which formed a crust 
of ice, that, for some days, proved impervious to the air; the dry- 
ness of the atmosphere, however, was such, that the ice in a short 
time evaporated, and gave admission to the wind as before. It is 
a general custom at the forts to give this sort of coating to the 
walls at Christmas time. When it was gone we attempted to 
remedy its defect, by heaping up snow against the walls. 

1821, This morning our men collected, and greeted us with the 
January }- customary salutation on the commencement of | the new 
year. That they might enjoy a holiday, they had yesterday col- 
lected. double the usual quantity of fire-wood, and we anxiously ex- 
pected. the arrival of the men from: Fort Providence, with some ad_ 
ditions to their comforts: We were led the more readily to hope 
for, their arrival before the evening, as we knew that every voyager 
uses his utmost endeavour'to reach a post. upon, or previous to, 
the jour de Pan, that he may partake of the wonted festivities, ~ It 
forms the theme of their conversation for months before and after 

212 


2960 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the period of its arrival. On the present occasion we could only 
treat them with a little flour and fat; these were both considered as 
great luxuries, but still the feast was defective from the want of 
rum, although we promised them a little when it should arrive. 

The early part of January proved mild, the thermometer rose to 
20° above zero, and we were surprised by the appearance of a kind 
of damp fog approaching very nearly to rain. The Indians expressed 
their astonishment at this circumstance, and declared the present to 
be one of the warmest winters they had ever experienced. Some of 
them reported that 1t had actually rained in the woody parts of the 
country. In the latter part of the month, however, the thermometer 
again descended to — 49°, and the mean temperature for the 
month proved to be — 15.6°. Owing to the fogs that obscured the 
sky the aurora was visible only upon eighteen nights in the 
month. | 

On the 15th seven of our men arrived from Fort Providence with: 
two kegs of rum, one barrel of powder, sixty pounds of ball, two rolls 
of tobacco, and some clothing. They had been twenty-one days on 
their march from Slave Lake, and the labour they underwent was 
sufficiently evinced by their sledge-collars having worn out the 
shoulders of their coats. Their loads weighed from sixty to ninety 
pounds each, exclusive of their bedding. and provisions, which 
at starting must have been at least as much more. We were much 
rejoiced at their arrival, and proceeded forthwith to pierce the spirit. 
cask, and issue to each of the household the portion of rum which 
had been promised to them on the first day of the year. The spirits, 
which were proof, were frozen, but after standing at the fire for some 
time they flowed out of the consistency of honey. The temperature 
of the liquid, even in this state, was so low as instantly to convert 
into ice the moisture which condensed on the surface of the dram- 
glass. The fingers also adhered to the glass, and would, doubtless, 
have been speedily frozen had they been kept in contact with it, yet 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 261 


each of the voyagers swallowed his dram without experiencing the 
slightest inconvenience, or complaining even of the tooth-ach. 

After the men had retired, an Indian, who had accompanied them 
from Fort Providence, informed me that they had broached the cask 
on their way up and spent two days in drinking. ‘This instance of 
breach of trust was excessively distressing to me; I felt for their 
privations and fatigues, and was disposed. to seize upon every oppor- 
tunity of alleviating them, but this, combined with many instances 
of petty dishonesty with regard to meat, shewed how little confidence 
could be put in a Canadian voyager when food or spirits were in 
question. We had been indeed made acquainted with their cha- 
racter on these points by the traders, but we thought that when 
they saw their officers living under equal if not greater privations 
than themselves, they would have been prompted by some degree of 
generous feeling to abstain from those depredations which, under 
ordinary circumstances, they would scarcely have blushed to be 
detected in. 

As they were pretty well aware that such a circumstance could 
not long be concealed from us, one of them came the next morning 
with an artful apology for their conduct. He stated, that as they 
knew it was my intention to treat them with a dram on the com- 
mencement of the new year, they had helped themselves to a small 
quantity on that day, trusting to my goodness for forgiveness; and 
being unwilling to act harshly at this period, I did forgive them, 
after admonishing them to be very circumspect in their future 


conduct. 
The ammunition, and a small present of rum, were sent to 


Akaitcho. | 
On the 18th Vaillant, the woodman, had the misfortune to break 
his axe. This would have been a serious evil had it occurred a few 
weeks sooner, but we had just received some others from Slave Lake. 
On the 27th Mr. Wentzel and St. Germain arrived with the 


262 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


two Esquimaux, Tattannceuck and Hoeootcerock, (the belly and 
the ear.) The English names, which were bestowed upon them 
at Fort Churchill, are Augustus and. Junius. The former speaks 
English. 

We now learnt that Mr. Back procceie ah DP acteclant to Fort 
Chipewyan, on the 24th of December, to procure stores, having 
previously discharged J. Belleau from our service at his own request, 
and with my consent. I was the more induced to comply with this 
man’s desire of leaving us, as he proved to be too weak to perform the 
duty of bowman- which he had undertaken. 

Four dogs were brought up by this party, and proved a great relief 
to our wood-haulers during the remainder of the season. 

By the arrival of Mr. Wentzel, who is an excellent. musician, and 
assisted us (con amore) in our attempts to amuse the men, we were 
enabled to gratify the whole establishment with an occasional. dance. 
This is an amusement of which the voyagers are very fond, and not 
the less so, as it was now and then accompanied by a dram as long 
as our rum lasted. 

On the 5th of February, two Canadians came from Akaitcho for 
further supplies of ammunition. .We. were mortified to learn that 
he had received some further unpleasant reports concerning us from 
Fort Providence, and' that his faith in our good intentions was 
somewhat shaken. He expressed himself dissatisfied. with the quan- 
tity of ammunition we had sent him, accused us of an intention of 
endeavouring to degrade him in the eyes of, his tribe, and. informed 
us that Mr. Weeks had refused to pay some notes for trifling quan- 
tities of goods and ammunition that had been given to, ihe hunters 
who accompanied our men to Slave Lake. 

Some powder and shot, anda keg of diluted spirits were sent to 
him with the strongest assurances of our’ regard. © rr 

On the 12th, another party of six men was sent to Fort Provi- 
dence,;'to bring up: the remaining stores. St. Germain went to 


SOLS OD OV 


— 


UlpUoy NOLM UYyop Ad CZpT WPLOW VIYEYQNT 


‘SUCLAUMUALNI XAVININSEL OML IO SLIVULMO 


* § SULNCOLE 


NULL NAT bg uMoigr 


\ 


ee ee ee 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 263 


Akaitcho for the purpose of sending two of his hunters to join this 
party on its route. 

On comparing the language of our two Esquimaux with a copy of 
St. John’s Gospel, printed for the use of the Moravian Missionary 
Settlements on the Labrador coast, it appeared that the Esquimaux 
who resort to Churchill speak a language essentially the same with 
those who frequent the Labrador coast. The Red Knives, too, re- 
cognise the expression Teyma, used by the Esquimaux when they 
accost strangers in a friendly manner, as similarly pronounced by 
Augustus, and those of his race who is ew the mouth of the 
Copper-Mine River. 

The tribe to which Augustus belongs sessed generally a little to 
the northward of Churchill. In the spring, before the ice quits the 
shores, they kill seal, but during winter they frequent the borders of 
the large lakes near the coast, where they obtain fish, rein-deer, and 
musk-oxen. 

There are eighty-four grown men in the tribe, only seven of whom 
areaged. Six Chiefs have in general two wives; the rest of the men 
have only one, so that thé number of married people may amount 
to one hundred and séventy.; He could give me no certain data 
whereby I might estimate the number of children. 

Two great Chiefs, or Ackhaiyoot, have complete authority in di- 
recting the movements .of the party, and in distributing provisions. 
The <Aittooganeuck, or lesser Chiefs, are respected principally as 
senior men. They seldom suffer from want of food, if the Chief 
moves to the different stations at the proper season. The Esqui- 
maux seem to follow the eastern custom respecting marriage. As 
soon asa girl is born, the young lad who wishes to have her for a 
wife goes to her father’s tent, and: proffers himself. If accepted, a 
promise is given which is considered binding, and the girl is deli- 
vered to her betrothed husband at the proper age. 

They consider their progenitors to have come from the moon. 


264, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Augustus has no other idea of a Deity than some confused notions 
which he has obtained at Churchill. 

When any of the tribe is dangerously ill, a conjurer is sent for, 
and the bearer of the message carries a suitable present to induce — 
his attendance. Upon his arrival he encloses himself in the tent 
with the sick man, and sings over him for days together without 
tasting food; but Augustus, as well as the rest of the uninitiated, 
are ignorant of the purport of his songs, and of the nature of the 
Being to whom they are addressed. The conjurers practise a good 
deal of jugglery in ‘swallowing knives, firmg bullets through their 
bodies, ¢c., but they are generally secluded from view, and the by- 
standers believe their assertions, without requiring to be eye-wit- 
nesses of the fact. Sixteen men and three women amongst. Au- 
gustus’ tribe are acquainted with the mysteries of the art. The 
skill of the latter is exerted only on their own sex. | 

Upon the map being spread before Augustus, he soon. compre- 
hended. it, and recognised Chesterfield Inlet to be “ the opening 
into which salt water enters at spring tides, and which receives a 
river at its upper end.” He termed it Kannwuck Kieenwuck. He 
has never been farther north himself than Marble Island, which he 
distinguishes as being the spot where the large ships were wrecked, 
alluding to the disastrous termination of Barlow and Knight’s 
Voyage of Discovery*. He says, however, that Esquimaux of three 
different tribes have traded with his’ countrymen, and that they de- 
‘seribed themselves as having come across land from a northern sea. 
One tribe, who named themselves Ahwhacknanhelett, he supposes 
may come from Repulse Bay; another, designated Ootkooseek-ka- 
lingmeoot, or Stone-Kettle Esquimaux, reside more to the west- 
ward; and the third, the Kang-orr-meoot, or White Goose Esqui- 
maux, describe themselves as coming from a great distance, and 
mentioned that a party of Indians had killed several of their tribe 


* See Introduction to HEarNz’s Journey, page xxiv. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 265 


on the summer preceding their visit. Upon comparing the dates of 
this murder with that of the last massacre which ‘the Copper Indians 
have perpetrated on these harmless and defenceless people, they 
appear to differ two years; but the lapse of time is so inaccurately 
recorded, that this difference in their accounts is not sufficient to 
destroy their identity; besides, the Chipewyans, the only other 
Indians who could possibly have committed the deed, have long 
since ceased to go to war. If this massacre should be the one men- 
tioned by the Copper Indians, the Kang-orr-mceoot must reside near 
the mouth of the Anatessy, or River of Strangers. 

The winter habitations of the Esquimaux, who visit Churchill, 
are built. of snow, and judging from one constructed by Augustus 
to-day, they are very comfortable dwellings. Having selected a 
spot on the river, where the snow was about two feet deep, and suf- 
ficiently compact, he commenced by tracing out a circle twelve 
feet in diameter. ‘The snow in the interior of the circle was next 
divided with a broad knife, having a long handle, into slabs three 
feet long, six inches thick, and two feet deep, being the thiekness 
of the layer of snow. These slabs were tenacious enough to admit 
of being moved about without breaking, or even losing the sharp- 
ness of their angles, and they had a slight degree of curvature, cor- 
responding with that of the circle from which they were cut. They 
were piled upon each other exactly like courses of hewn stone around 
the circle which was traced out, and care was taken to smooth the 
beds of the different courses with the knife, and to cut them so as — 
to give the wall a slight inclination inwards, by which contrivance the 
building acquired the properties of a dome. The dome was closed 
somewhat suddenly and flatly by cutting the upper slabs in a wedge- 
form, instead of the more rectangular shape of those below. The 
roof was about eight feet high, and the last aperture was shut up by 
a small conical piece. The whole was built from within, and each 
slab was cut so that it retained its position without requiring sup- 

2M 


266 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


port until another was placed beside it, the lightness of the slabs 
greatly facilitating the operation. When the building was covered 
in, a little loose snow was thrown over it, to close up every chink, 
and alow door was cut through the walls with the knife. A bed- 
place was next formed, and neatly faced up with slabs of snow, which 
was then covered with a thin layer of pine branches, to prevent them 
from melting by the heat of the body. At each end of the bed a 
pular of snow was erected to place a lamp upon, and lastly, a porch 
was built before the door, and a piece of clear ice was placed in an | 
aperture cut in the wall for a window. 

The purity of the material. of which the house was framed, the 
elegance of its construction, and the translucency of its walls, which 
transmitted a very pleasant light, gave it an appearance far superior 
to a marble building, and one might survey it with feelings some- 
what akin to those produced by the contemplation of a Grecian 
temple, reared by Phidias ; both are triumphs of art, inimitable in 
their kinds. | 

Annexed there is a plan of a complete Esquimaux snow-house, 
with kitchen and other apartments, copied from a sketch made’ by 
Augustus, with the names of the different places affixed. The only 
fire-place is in the kitchen, the heat of the lamps sufficing to keep 
the other apartments warm. 

Several deer were killed near the house, and we received some 
supplies from Akaitcho. Parties were also employed in bringing 
in the meat that was placed en cache in the early part’ of the win- 
ter. More than one half of these caches, however, had been 
destroyed by the. wolves and wolverines; a circumstance which, in 
conjunction with the empty state of our store-house, led’ us to fear 
that we should be much straitened for provisions before the arrival. 
of any considerable number of rein-deer in this neighbourhood: | 


A. Ablokeyt, steps. 
B, Pahleuk, porch. 
C. Wadl-leek, passage. 


D. Haddneweek, for the reception of 


the sweepings of the house. 


E. G. Tokheuook, ante-chamber, or 


passage. 


F. Annarreartoweek. 
H. Eegah, cooking-house. 


I, 


Eegah-natkah, passage. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 


A 


Hn 
tau 


TOdev., 


2 
; R 
2 
$ 2 
: 
‘ 


K. Keidgewack, for piling wood 
upon. 

M. Keek loot,fire-place built of stone. 

L. Keek kloweyt, cooking side. 

N. Eegloo, house. 

O. Kattack, door. 

P. Natieuck, clear space in the 
apartment. | 

a. d. Eekput, a kind of shelf; where 

the candle stands; and 


267 


b.c.a pit,where they throw their 
bones, and other offal of their 
provision. 

Q. Kegl-luck,. bed-place. 

S. bed-place as on the other side. 

R. Eegleeteci, bed-side, or sitting- 
place. 

T. Keitgn-nok, small pantry. ' 

U. Hergloack, store-house for pro- 
visions. 


2M 2 


268 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


A good many ptarmigan were seen at this time, and the women 
caught some in snares, but not in sufficient quantity to make any 
further alteration in the rations of deers’ meat that were daily 
issued. They had already been reduced from eight, to the short 
allowance of five pounds. | 

Many wolves prowled nightly about the house, and even ven- 
tured upon the roof of the kitchen, which is a low building, in 
search of food. Keskarrah shot a very large white one, of which 
a beautiful and correct drawing was made by Mr. Hood. ’ 

The temperature in February was considerably lower than in 
the preceding month, although not so low as in December, the 
mean being — 25.3°. The greatest temperature was 1° above zero, 
and the lowest 51° below. 

On the 5th of March the people returned from Slave Lake, 
bringing the remainder of our stores, consisting of a cask of flour, 
thirty-six pounds of sugar, a roll of tobacco, and forty pounds of 
tobacco. I received a letter from Mr. Weeks, wherein he denied 
that he had ever circulated any reports to our disadvantage ; and 
stated, that he had done every thing in his power to assist us, and 
even discouraged Akaitcho. from leaving us, when he had sent him 
a message, saying, that he wished to do so, if he was sure of being 
well received at Fort Providence. 

We mentioned the contents of the letter to the Indians, who 
were at the house at the time, when one of the hunters, who had 
attended the men on their journey, stated, that he had heard many 
of the reports against us from Mr. Weeks himself, and expressing 
his surprise that he should venture to deny them. St. Germain 
soon afterwards arrived from Akaitcho, and informed us, that he left 
him in good humour, and, apparently, not harbouring the slightest 
idea of quitting us. 

On the 12th, we sent. four men to.Fort Providence; and, on the 
7th, Mr. Back arrived from Fort Chipewyan, having performed, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 269 


since he left us, a journey of more than one thousand miles on foot. 
DP had every reason to be much pleased with his conduct on this 
arduous undertaking ; but his exertions may be best estimated by the 
perusal‘ of the following narrative of his proceedings :— 


On quitting Fort Enterprise, with Mr. Wentzel and two Cana- 
dians, accompanied by two hunters and their wives, our route lay 
across the barren hills. We saw, during the day, a number of deer, 
and, occasionally, a solitary white wolf; and in the evening halted 
near a small knot of pines. Owing to the slow progress made by 
the wives of the hunters, we only travelled the first day a distance 
of seven miles and a half. During the night we had a glimpse of 
the fantastic beauties of the Aurora Borealis, and were somewhat 
annoyed: by the wolves, whose nightly howling interrupted our re- 
pose. Early the next morning we continued our march, sometimes 
crossing small lakes (which were just frozen enough to bear us), and 
at' other: times going large circuits, in order to avoid those which 
were open. The walking was extremely bad throughout the day ; 
for, independent of the general unevenness of the ground, and the 
numberless large stones which lay seattered in every direction, the 
unusual warmth of the weather had dissolved the snow, which not 
only kept us constantly wet, but deprived us of a firm: footing, so 
that the men, with their heavy burdens, were in momentary appre- 
hension of fallmg. In the afternoon a fine herd of deer was~ des- 
eried, and the Indians, who are always anxious for the chase, and 
can hardly be restrained from pursuing every animal which they 
see, set out immediately. It was late when they returned, having 
had good success, and bringing with them five tongues, and the 
shoulder of a deer. We made about twelve miles this day. The 
night was fine, and the Aurora Borealis so vivid, that we imagined, 


270 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


more than once, that we heard a rustling noise like that of autum- 
nal leaves stirred by the wind; but after two hours of attentive 
listening, we were not entirely convinced of the fact. The corus- 
cations were not so bright, nor the transition from one shape and 
colour to another so rapid, as they sometimes are ; otherwise, I have 
no doubt, from the midnight silence which prevailed, that we should 
have ascertained this yet undecided point. 

The morning of the 20th was so extremely hazy that we enul 
not see ten yards before us; it was, therefore, late when we started, 
- and during our journey the hunters complained of the weather, 
and feared they should lose the track of our route. Towards the 
evening it became so thick that we could not proceed, consequently 
we halted in a small wood, situated in a valley, after howAg onl 
completed a distance of six miles. 

The scenery-consisted of high hills, which were almost. destitute 
of trees, and lakes appeared in the valleys. The cracking of the 
ice was. so loud during the night as to resemble thunder, and the 
wolves howled round us. .We were now at the commencement of 
the woods, and at an early hour, on the 21st, continued our jour- 
ney over high hills for three miles, when the appearance of some 
deer caused us to halt, and nearly the remainder of the day was passed 
in hunting them. In the evening we stopped within sight of Pros- 
pect Hall, after having killed and concealed six deer. A consider- 
able quantity of snow fell during the night. | 

The surrounding country was extremely rugged ; the hills divided 
by deep ravines, and the valleys covered with broken masses of rocks 
and stones; yet the deer fly (as it were,) over these impediments 
with apparent ease, seldom making a false step, and springing from, 
crag to crag with all the safety of the mountain goat. After passing 
Rein-deer Lake, (where the ice was so thin as to bend at every. step 
for nine miles,) we halted, perfectly satisfied with our escape from. 
sinking into the water. While some of the party were forming the. 


OF THE POLAR SHA. 271 


encampment one of the hunters killed a deer, a part of which was 
concealed to be ready for use on our return. This evening we 
halted in a wood near the canoe track, after having travelled a_ 
distance of nine miles. The wind was S.E. and the night cloudy, 
with wind and rain. 

On the 24th and 25th we underwent some fatigue from being 
obliged to go round the lakes, which lay across our route, and 
were not sufficiently frozen to bear us. Several rivulets appeared 
to empty themselves into the lakes, no animals were killed, and 
few tracks seen. The scenery consisted of barren rocks and high 
hills, covered with lofty pine, birch, and larch trees. 

October 26—We continued our journey, sometimes on frozen 
lakes, and at other times on high craggy rocks. . When we were on 
the lakes we were much impeded in our journey by different parts 
which were unfrozen. There was a visible increase of wood, con- 
sisting of birch and larch, as we inclined to the southward. About 
ten A.M. we passed Icy Portage, where we saw various tracks of 
the moose, bear, and otter; and after a most harassing march through 
thick woods and over fallen trees, we halted a mile to the westward 
of Fishing Lake; our provisions were now almost expended; the 
weather was cloudy with snow. 

On the 27th we crossed two lakes, and performed a circuitous 
route, frequently crossing high hills to avoid those lakes which were 
not frozen ; during the day one of the women made a hole through the 
ice, and caught a fine pike, which she gave to us; the Indians would. 
not partake of it, from the idea (as we afterwards learnt,) that we 
should not have sufficient for ourselves: “ We are accustomed to 
starvation,” said they, “but. you are not.” In the evening we halted _ 
near Rocky Lake. I accompanied one of the Indians to the summit 
of a hill, where he shewed me a dark horizontal cloud, extending to 
a considerable distance along the mountains in the perspective, 
which he said was occasioned by the Great Slave Lake, and was 


272 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


considered as a good guide to all the hunters in the vicinity. On 
our return we saw two untenanted bears’ dens. 

The night was cloudy with heavy snow; yet the following morning 
we continued our tedious march, many of the lakes remained still 
open, the rocks high and covered with snow, which continued to fall 
all day, consequently we effected but a trifling distance, and that 
too with much difficulty. In the evening we halted; having only 
performed about seven miles. One of the Indians gave us a fish 
which he had caught, though he had nothing for himself; and it 
was with much trouble that he could be prevailed upon to partake 
of it. The night was cloudy with snow. On the 29th we set out 
through deep snow and thick woods; and after crossing two small 
lakes stopped to breakfast, sending the women on before, as they 
had already complained of lameness, and could not keep pace with 
the party. It was not long before we overtook them on the banks 
of a small lake, which though infinitely less in magnitude than many 
we had passed, yet had not a particle of ice on its surface. It was 
shoal, had no visible current, and was surrounded by hills. We had 
nothing to eat, and were not very near an establishment where food 
could be procured ; however, as we proceeded, the lakes were frozen, 
and we quickened our pace, stopping but twice for the hunters to 
smoke. Nevertheless the distance we completed was but trifling, 
and at night we halted near a lake, the men being tired, and much 
bruised from constantly falling amongst thick broken woods and 
loose stones concealed under the snow. The night was blowing and 
hazy with snow. | 

On the 30th we set out with the expectation of gaining the Slave 
Lake in the evening; but our progress was again impeded by the 
same causes as before, so that the whole day was spent in forcing 
our way through thick woods and over swamps covered with snow. 
We had to walk over pointed and loose rocks, which sliding from 
under our feet, made our path dangerous, and often threw us down 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 37S 


several feet on sharp-edged stones lying beneath the snow. | Once 
we had to climb a towering, and almost. perpendicular, rock, which 
not only detained us, but was the cause of great anxiety for the 
safety of the women, who being heavily laden with furs, and one of 
them with a child on her back, could not exert themselves with the 
activity which such a task required. Fortunately nothing serious 
occurred, though one of them once fell with considerable violence. 
During the day one of the hunters broke through the ice, but was 
soon extricated; when it became dark we halted near the Bow 
String Portage, greatly disappointed at not having reached the lake. 
The weather was cloudy, accompanied with thick mist and’ snow. 
The Indians expected to have found here a bear in its den, and to 
have made a hearty meal of its flesh ; indeed it had been the subject 
of conversation all day, and they had even gone so far as to divide 
it, frequently asking me what part I preferred ; but when we came 
to the spot—oh! lamentable! it had already fallen a prey to the 
devouring appetites of some more fortunate hunters, who had only 
left sufficient evidence that such a thing had once existed. One of 
our men, however, caught a fish, which with the assistance of some 
weed scraped from the rocks, (tripe de roche,) which forms a glu- 
tinous substance, made us a tolerable supper ; it was not of the most 
choice kind, but yet good enough for hungry men. While we were 
eating it 1 perceived one of the women busily employed scraping 
an old skin, the contents of which her husband presented us with. 
They consisted of pounded meat, fat, and a greater proportion of 
Indians’ and deers’ hair than either ; and though such a mixture may 
not appear very alluring to an English stomach, it was thought 
a great luxury after three days’ privation in these cheerless regions 
of America. Indeed had it not been for the precaution and gene- 
rosity of the Indians, we must have gone without sustenance until 
we had reached the fort. | 
2N 


DTA, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


On the Ist of November our men began to make a raft to enable 
us to cross a river which was not even frozen at the edges. It was 
soon finished, and three of us embarked, being seated up to the 
ancles in water. We each took a pine branch for a paddle, and 
made an effort to gain the opposite shore, in which, after some time, 
(and not without strong apprehensions of drifting into the Slave 
Lake,) we succeeded. In two hours’ time the whole party was over, 
with a comfortable addition to it in the shape of some fine fish, 
which the Indians had caught; of course we did not forget to take 
these friends with us, and after passing several lakes, to one of which 
we saw no termination, we halted within eight miles of the fort. 
The Great Slave Lake was not frozen. 

In crossing a narrow branch of the lake I fell through the ice, but 
received no injury ; and at noon we arrived at Fort Providence, and 
were received by Mr. Weeks, a clerk of the North-West Company, 
and in charge of the establishment. I found several packets of 
letters for the officers, which I was desirous of sending to them 
immediately; but as the Indians and their wives complained of 
illness and inability to return before they had rested, a flagon of 
mixed spirits was given them, and their sorrows were soon forgotten, 
and in a quarter of an hour they pronounced themselves excellent 
hunters, and capable of going any where; however, their boasting 
ceased with the last drop of the bottle, when a crying scene took 
place, which would have continued half the night, had not the 
magic of an additional quantity of spirits dried their tears, and 
mee more turned their mourning into joy. It was a satisfac- 
aon to me to behold these poor creatures enjoying themselves, 
‘or they had behaved in the most exemplary and active manner 
cowards the party, and with a generosity and sympathy seldom 
found even in the more civilized parts of the world; and the 
attention and affection which they manifested towards their wives, . 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 275 


evinced a benevolence of disposition and goodness of nature which 
could not fail to secure the approbation of the most indifferent 
observer. | 

The accounts I here received of our goods were of so unsatis- 
factory a nature, that I determined to proceed, as soon as the lake 
was frozen, to Moose-Deer Island, or if necessary to the Athabasca 
Lake; both to inform myself of the grounds of the unceremonious 
and negligent manner in which the Expedition had been treated, 
and to obtain a sufficient supply of ammunition and other stores, to 
enable it to leave its present situation, and proceed for the attain- 
ment of its ultimate object. 
' November 9.—I despatched to Fort Enterprise one of the men, 
with the letters and a hundred musquet-balls, which Mr. Weeks 
lent me on the condition that they should be returned the first 
opportunity. An Indian and his wife accompanied the messenger. 
Lieutenant Franklin was made acquainted with the exact state of 
things; and I awaited with much impatience the freezing of the 
lake. | 

November 16.—A band of Slave Indians came to the fort with a 
few furs and some bears’ grease. Though we had not seen any of 
them, it appeared that they had received information of our being 
in the country ; and knew the precise situation of our house, which 
they would have visited long ago, but from the fear they had of 
being pillaged by the Copper Indians. I questioned the chief about 
the Great Bear and Martin Lakes, their distance from Fort En- 
terprise, &c.; but his answers were so vague and unsatisfactory that 
they were not worth attention; his description of Bouleau’s Route, 
(which he said was the shortest and best, and abundant in animals, ) 
was very defective, though the relative points were sufficiently cha- 
racteristic, had we not possessed a better route. He had never 
been at the sea; and knew nothing about the mouth of the Cop- 
per-Mine River. In the evening he made his young men dance, and 


2N2 


276 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


sometimes accompanied them himself. They had four feathers in 
each hand. When one commenced moving in a circular form, lifting 
both feet at the same time, similar to jumping sideways. After a 
short time a)second and a third joined, and afterwards the whole 
band, was dancing, ‘some in a state of nudity, others half dressed, 
singing an unmusical wild air with (I suppose,) appropriate words ; 
the particular sounds of which were, ha! ha! ha! uttered voci- 
ferously, and with great distortion of countenance, and peculiar 
attitude of body,.the feathers being always kept in a tremulous 
motion. ‘The ensuing day I made the chief acquainted with the 
object of our mission, and recommended him to keep at peace with 
his neighbouring tribes, and to conduct himself with attention and. 
friendship towards the whites. I then gave him a medal, telling 
him it was the picture of the King, whom they emphatically term 
“their Great Father.” 

November 18.—We observed two mock moons at equal distances - 
from the central one; and the whole were encircled by a halo: the 
colour of the mner edge of the large circle was a light red, in- 
clining to a faint purple. | 

November. 20—Two parhelia were observable with a halo; the 
colours of the inner edge of the circle were a bright carmine and 
ved lake, intermingled with a rich yellow, forming a ST is orange; 
the outer edge was pale gamboge. 

December 5.—A man was sent some distance on the lake, to see if 
it was sufficiently frozen for us to cross. I need scarcely mention 
my satisfaction, ay he returned with the pleasing information that 
it was. a Meas 

December ‘7. ne Pynitted Fort Providence, being accompanied by 
Mr. Wentzel, Beauparlant, and two other Canadians, provided with 
dogs and sledges.. We proceeded along the borders of the lake, 
occasionally crossing deep bays; and at dusk encamped at the Gros 
Cap, having proceeded a distance of twenty-five miles, 


“MODUIT AVL UYOL AQ EXIT URLOPE PUSH ANG 


US LYE) NO ONITISAV SNL SSL 


“SOU FORE MerT Aq weeny, 


“TSpULy MMPI AQ paseLsug, 


| 
i 


il! 


i 


i 


. = 

We: S= = ———S—SSSS=== == 

| = = —_ —SSSSS== 
| = = ————— 

E == ——————— 

= = SSS 

E — = <= = 

= ——— = a 


rd 


ai 
fi, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. Nae 


December 8.—We set out on the lake with an excessively cold 
north-west wind, and were frequently interrupted by large pieces of 
ice which had been thrown up by the violence of the waves during 
the progress of congelation, and at dusk we encamped on the Rein- 
deer Islands. 

The night was fine, with a faint Aurora Borealis. Next day the 
wind was so keen, that the men proposed conveying me in a sledge 
that I might be the less exposed, to which, after some hesitation, I 
consented. Accordingly a rein-deer skin and a blanket were laid 
along the sledge, and in these I was wrapped tight up to the chin, 
and lashed to the vehicle, with just leaving sufficient play for my 
head to perceive when I was about to be upset. on some rough pro- 
jecting piece of ice. Thus equipped, we set off before the wind (a 
favourable circumstance on a lake), and went on very well until 
noon; when the ice being driven up in ridges, in such a manner as 
to obstruct us very much, I was released; and I confess not unwill- 
ingly, though I had to walk the remainder of the day. 

_ There are large openings in many parts where the ice had sepa- 
rated ; and in attempting to cross one of them, the dogs fell into the 
water, and were saved with difficulty. The poor animals suffered 
dreadfully from the cold, and narrowly escaped being frozen to 
death. We had quickened our pace towards the close of the day, 
but could not get sight of the land; and it was not till the sun had 
set that we perceived it about four miles to our left, which obliged 
us to turn back, and head the wind. It was then so cold, that two 
of the party were frozen almost immediately about the face and 
ears. I escaped, from having the good fortune to possess a pair of | 
gloves made of rabbits-skin, with which I kept constantly chafing 
the places which began to be affected. At six P.M. we arrived at 
the fishing-huts near Stoney Island, and remained there the night. 
The Canadians were not a little surprised at seeing us, whom they 
had already given up for lost—nor less so at the manner by which 


278 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


we had come—for they all affirmed, that the lake near them was 
quite free from ice the day before. 

December 10.—At an early hour we quitted the huts, lashed on 
sledges as before, with some little addition to our party; and at 
three hours thirty minutes P.M. arrived at the North-West Fort on 
Moose-Deer Island, where I was received by Mr. Smith, with 
whom I had been acquainted at the Athabasca. He said he partly 
expected me. The same evening I visited Messrs. M‘Vicar and 
M‘Aulay at Hudson’s Bay Fort, when I found the reports concern- 
‘ing our goods were but too true, there being in reality but five 
packages for us. I also was informed that two Esquimaux, Augus- 
tus the chief, and Junius his servant, who had been sent from Fort 
Churchill by Governor Williams, to serve in the capacity of inter- 
preters to.the Expedition, were at the Fort. The men were short 
of stature but muscular, apparently good-natured, and perfectly ac- 
quainted with the purpose for which they were intended. They had 
built themselves a snow-house on an adjacent island, where they used 
frequently to sleep. The following day I examined the pieces, and 
to my great disappointment found them to consist of three kegs of 
spirits, already adulterated by the voyagers who had brought them ; 
a keg of flour, and thirty-five pounds of sugar, instead of sixty. 
The ammunition and tobacco, the two most essential requisites, were 
left behind. , 

I lost no time in making a demand from both parties; and though 
their united list did not furnish the half of what was required, yet it 
is possible that every thing was given by them which could be spared 
consistent with their separate interests, particularly by Mr. M‘Vicar, 
who, in many articles, gave me the whole he had in his possession. 
These things were sent away immediately for Fort Enterprise, when 
an interpreter arrived with letters from Lieutenant Franklin, which 
referred toa series of injurious reports said to have been propagated 
against us by some one at Fort Providence. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 979 


Finding a sufficiency of goods could not be provided at Moose- 
Deer Island, I determined to proceed to the Athabasca Lake, and 
ascertain the inclinations of the gentlemen there. With this view I 
communicated my intentions to both parties; but could only get dogs 
enough from the North-West Company to carry the necessary provi- 
sions for the journey. Indeed Mr. Smith informed me plainly he 
was of opinion that nothing could be spared at Fort Chipewyan ; 
that goods had never been transported so long a journey in the winter 
season, and that the same dogs could not possibly go and return ; be- 
sides, it was very doubtful if I could be provided with dogs there ; and 


finally, that the distance was great, and would take sixteen days to per- 


form it. He added, that the provisions would be mouldy and bad, and 
that, from having to walk constantly on snow-shoes, I should suffer a 
great deal of misery and fatigue. Notwithstanding these assertions, 
on the 23d of December I left the Fort, with Beauparlant and a 
Bois-brulé, each having a sledge drawn by dogs, laden with pem- 
mican. We crossed an arm of the lake, and entered the Little 
Buffalo River, which is connected with the Salt River, and is about 
fifty yards wide at its junction with the lake—the water is brackish. 
This route is usually taken in the winter, as it cuts off a large angle 
in going to the Great Slave River. In the afternoon we passed two 
empty fishing-huts, and in the evening encamped amongst some high 
pines on the banks of the river, having had several snow showers 
during the day, which considerably impeded the dogs, so that we 
had not proceeded more than fifteen miles. 

December 24 and 25.—We continued along the river, frequently 
making small portages to avoid going round the points, and passed 
some small canoes, which the Indians had left for the winter. The 
snow was so deep that the dogs were obliged to stop every ten mi- 
nutes to rest themselves; and the cold so excessive, that both the 
men were badly frozen on both sides of the face and chin. At 
length, having come to a long meadow, which the dogs could not 


280 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


cross that night, we halted in an adjoining wood, and were presently 
joined by a Canadian, who was on his return to the Fort, and who 
treated us with some fresh meat in exchange for some pemmican. 
During the latter part of the day we had seen numerous tracks of 
the moose buffalo and marten. | 

December 26.—The weather was so cold that we were compelled 
to run to prevent ourselves from freezing; our route lay across some 
large meadows which appeared to abound in animals, though the 
Indians around Slave Lake are in a state of great want. About noon 
we passed a sulphur-stream, which ran into the river; it appeared to 
come from a plain about fifty yards distant. There were no rocks 
near it, and the soil through which it took its course was composed 
of a reddish clay. I wasmuch galled by the strings of the snow- 
shoes during the day, and once got a severe fall, occasioned by the 
dogs running over one of my feet, and dragging me some distance, 
my snow-shoe having become entangled with the sledge. In the 
evening we lost our way, from the great similarity of appearance in 
the country, and it was dark before we found it again, when we 
halted in a thick wood, after having come about sixteen miles from 
the last encampment. Much snow fell during the night. 

At an early hour on the 27th of December, we continued our jour- 
ney along the surface of a long but narrow lake, and then through 
a wood, which brought us to the grand detour on the Slave River. 
The weather was extremely cloudy, with occasional falls of snow, 
which tended greatly to impede our progress, from its gathering in 
lumps between the dogs’ toes; and though they did not go very fast, 
yet my left knee pained me so much, that I found it difficult to keep 
up with them. At three P.M. we halted within nine miles of the 
Salt River, and made a hearty meal of mouldy pemmican. 

December 28 and 29.—We had much difficulty in proceeding, 
owing to the poor dogs being quite worn out, and their feet per- 
fectly raw. We endeavoured to tie shoes on them, to afford them 


- 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 281 


some little relief, but they continually came off when amongst deep 
snow, so that it occupied one person entirely to look after them. In 
this state they were hardly of any use amongst the steep ascents of 
the portages, when we were obliged to drag the sledges ourselves. 
We found a few of the rapids entirely frozen. Those that were not 
had holes and large spaces about them, from whence issued a thick 
vapour, and in passing this we found it particularly cold; but what 
appeared most curious was the number of small fountains which rose 
through the ice, and often rendered it doubtful which way we should 
take. I was much disappointed at finding several falls (which I had 


intended to sketch) frozen almost even with the upper and lower 


parts of the stream ; the ice was connected by a thin arch, and the 
rushing of the water underneath might be heard at a considerable 
distance from the place. On the banks of these rapids there was a 
constant overflowing of the water, but in such small quantities as to 
freeze before it had reached the surface of the central ice, so that we 
passed between two ridges of icicles, the transparency of which ‘was 
beautifully contrasted by the flakes of snow and the dark green 
branches of the over-hanging pine. 

Beauparlant complained bitterly of the cold whilst among the 
rapids, but no sooner had he reached the upper part of the river 
than he found the change of the temperature so great, that he 
vented his indignation against the heat.—“ Mais cest terrible,” said 
he, to be frozen and sun-burnt in the same day, The poor fellow, 
who had been a long time in the country, regarded it as the most 
severe punishment that could have been inflicted on him, and would 
willingly have given a part of his wages rather than this disgrace 
had happened ; for there is a pride amongst “Old Voyagers,” which 
makes them consider the state of being frost-bitten as effeminate, 
and only excusable in a “ Pork-eater,” or one newly come into the 
country. I was greatly fatigued, and suffered acute pains in .the 

| 20 


282 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


knees and legs, both of which were much swollen when we halted a 
little above the Dog River. 

December 30 and 31.—Our journey these days was by far the most 
annoying we had yet experienced; but, independent of the vast 
masses of ice that were piled on one another, as well as the nume- 
rous open places about the rapids (and they did not a little impede 
us), there was a strong gale from the north-west, and so dreadfully 
keen, that our time was occupied in rubbing the frozen parts of 
the face, and in attempting to warm the hands, in order to be 
prepared for the next operation. Scarcely was one place cured by 
constant friction than another was frozen; and though there was 
nothing pleasant about it, yet it was laughable enough to observe the 
dexterity which was used in changing the position of the hand from 
the face to the mitten, and vice versd. One of the men was severely 
affected, the whole side of his face being almost raw. Towards sun- 
set I suffered so much in my knee and ancle, from a recent sprain, 
that it was with difficulty I could proceed with snow-shoes to the 
encampment on the Stoney Islands. But in this point I was not 
singular; for Beauparlant was almost as bad, and without the same 
cause. 

me We set out with a quick step, the wind still blowing fresh 
January 1. from the north-west, which seemed in some measure to invigo- 
rate the dogs; for towards sunset they left me a considerable distance 
behind. Indeed my legs and ancles were now so swelled, that it was 
excessive pain to drag the snow-shoes after me. At night we halted 
on the banks of Stoney River, when I gave the men a glass of grog 
to commemorate the new year; and the next day, January 2, we 
arrived at Fort Chipeywan, after a journey oi ten days and four hours 
—the shortest time in which the distance had been done at the same 
season of the year. I found Messrs. G. Keith and S$. M‘Gilliway in 
charge of the fort, who were not a little surprised to see me. <At 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 283 


the commencement of the new year is the rejoicing season of the 
Canadians, when they are generally intoxicated a few days. I post- 
poned making any demand till this time of festivity should cease ; 
but on the same day I went over to the Hudson’s Bay Fort, and de- 
livered Lieutenant Franklin’s letters to Mr. Simpson. If they were 
astonished at one side to see me, the amazement was still greater on 
the other; for reports were so far in advance, that we were said to 
have already fallen by the spears of the Esquimaux. 

January 3—I made a demand from both parties for supplies; 
such as ammunition, gun-flints, axes, files, clothing, tobacco, and 
spirits. I stated to them our extreme necessity, and that without 
their assistance the Expedition must be arrested in its progress. 
The answer from the North-West gentlemen was satisfactory 
enough; but on the Hudson Bay side I was told, “ that any farther 
assistance this season entirely depends on the arrival of supplies, 
expected in a few weeks hence from a distant establishment.” I 
remained at Fort Chipewyan five weeks, during which time some 
laden sledges did arrive, but I could not obtain any addition to the 
few articles I had procured at first. A packet of letters for us, 
from England, having arrived, I made preparations for my return, 
but not before I had requested both Companies to send, next year, 
from the depots a quantity of goods for our use, specified in lists 
furnished to them. 

The weather, during my abode at Chipewyan, was generally 
mild, with occasional heavy storms, the greater part of which was 
generally anticipated by the activity of the Aurora Borealis; and 
this I observed had been the case between Fort Providence and the 
Athabasca in December and January, though not invariably so in 
other parts of the country. One of the partners of the North- 
West Company related to me the following singular story :—“ He 
was travelling in a canoe in the English River, and had landed near 
the Kettle Fall, when the coruscations of the Aurora Borealis were 

202 


284, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES © 


so vivid and low, that the Canadians fell on their faces, and began 
praying and crying, fearing they should be killed; he himself threw 
away his gun and knife, that they might not attract the flashes, 
for they were within two feet from the earth, flitting along with 
incredible swiftness, and moving parallel to its surface. They con- 
tinued for upwards of five minutes, as near as he could judge, and 
made a loud rustling noise, like the waving of a flag in a strong 
breeze. After they had ceased, the sky became clear, with little 
wind.” 

February 9.—Having got every thing arranged, and having had a 
hearty breakfast (with a coup de leau de vie, a custom amongst the 
traders), I took my departure, or rather attempted to do so, for 
on going to the gate there was a long range of women, who came 
to bid me farewell. They were all dressed (after the manner of 
the country) in blue or green cloth, with their hair fresh greased, 
separated before, and falling down behind, not in careless tresses, 
but in a good sound tail, fastened with black tape or riband. This 
was considered a great compliment, and the ceremony consisted in 
embracing the whole party. _ | 

I had with me four sledges, laden with goods for the Expedition, 
and a fifth one belonging to the Hudson’s Bay Company. We re- 
turned exactly by the same route, suffering no other inconvenience 
but that arising from the chafing of the snow-shoe, and bad weather. 
Some Indians, whom we met on the banks of the Little Buffalo 
River, were rather surprised at seeing us, for they had heard that 
we were on an island, which was surrounded by Esquimaux. The 
dogs were almost worn out, and their feet raw, when, on February 
the 20th, we arrived at Moose-deer Island with our goods all in 
good order. Towards the end of the month two of our men ar- 
rived with letters from Lieutenant Franklin, containing some fresh 
demands, the major part of which I was fortunate enough to pro- 
cure without the least trouble. Having arranged the accounts and 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 285 


receipts between the Companies and the Expedition, and sent every 
thing before me to Fort Providence, I prepared for my departure ; 
and itis but justice to the gentlemen of both parties at Moose- 
Deer Island to remark, that they afforded the means of forwarding 
our stores in the most cheerful and pleasant manner. 

March 5.—I took leave of the gentlemen at the forts, and, in the 
afternoon, got to the fisheries near Stoney Island, where I found 
Mr. M‘Vicar, who was kind enough to have a house ready for my 
reception; and I was not a little gratified at perceiving a pleasant 
looking girl employed in roasting a fine joint, and afterwards 
arranging the table with all the dexterity of an accomplished 
servant. 

March 6.—We set out at day-light, and breakfasted at the Rein- 
deer Islands. As the day advanced the heat became so oppressive, 
that each pulled off his coat and ran till sunset, when we halted 
with two men, who were on their return to Moose-Deer Island. 
There was a beautiful Aurora Borealis in the night; it rose about 
N.b.W., and divided into three bars, diverging at equal distances as 
far as the zenith, and then converging until they met in the opposite 
horizon ; there were some flashes at right angles to the bars. 

March 7.—We arrived at Fort Providence, and found our stores 
safe and in good order. ‘There being no certainty when the Indian, 
who was to accompany me to our house, would arrive, and my im- 
patience to join my companions increasing as I approached it, 
after making the necessary arrangements with Mr. Weeks respecting 
our stores, on March the 10th I quitted the fort, with two of our 
men, who had each a couple of dogs and a sledge laden with pro- 
vision. On the 13th we met the Indian, near Icy Portage, who 
was sent to guide me back. On the 14th we killed a deer, and gave 
the dogs a good feed; and, on the 17th, at an early hour, we ar- 
rived at Fort Enterprise, having travelled about eighteen miles 
a-day. I had the pleasure of meeting my friends all in good 


a 


286 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


health, after an absence of nearly five months, during which time I 
had travelled one thousand one hundred and four miles, on snow 
shoes, and had no other covering at night, in the woods, than a 
blanket and deer-skin, with the thermometer frequently at — 40°, 


and once at — 57°; and sometimes passing two or three days with- 
out tasting food. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 287 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Continuation of Proceedings at Fort Enterprise—Some Account of Copper Indians—Preparations 
for the Journey to the Northward. 


March ny I SHALL now give a brief account of the Copper Indians, 
termed by the Chipewyans, Tantsawhot-dinneh, or Birch-rind Indians. 
They were originally a tribe of the former people, and, according to 
their own account, inhabited the south side of Great Slave Lake, at no 
very distant period. Their language, traditions, and customs, are essen- 
tially the same with those of the Chipewyans, but in personal character 
they have greatly the advantage of that people; a circumstance which 
is to be attributed, probably, to local causes, perhaps to their procuring 
their food more easily and in greater abundance. They hold wo- 
men in the same low estimation as the Chipewyans do, looking upon 
them as a kind of property, which the stronger may take from the 
weaker, whenever there is just reason for quarrelling, if the parties 
are of their own nation, or whenever they meet, if the weaker 
party are Dog-ribs or other strangers. They suffer, however, the 
kinder affections to shew themselves occasionally ; they, in general, 
live happily with their wives, the women are contented with their 
lot, and we witnessed several instances of strong attachment. Of 
their kindness to strangers we are fully qualified to speak; their love 
of property, attention to their interests, and fears for the future, made 
them occasionally clamorous and unsteady ; but their delicate and 
humane attention to us, in a season of great distress, at a future 


288 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


period, are indelibly engraven on our memories. Of their notions 
of a Deity, or future state, we never could obtain any satisfactory 
account ; they were unwilling, perhaps, to expose their opinions to 
the chance of ridicule. Akaitcho generally evaded our questions on 
these points, but expressed a desire to learn from us, and regularly 
attended Divine Service during his residence at the fort, behaving 
with the utmost decorum. 

This leader, indeed, and many others of his tribe, possessed a 
laudable curiosity, which might easily be directed to the most im- 
portant ends; and I believe, that a well-conducted Christian mis- 
sion to this quarter could not fail of producing the happiest effect. 
Old Keskarrah alone used boldly to express his disbelief of a Supreme 
Deity, and state that he could not credit the existence of a Being, 
whose power was said to extend every where, but whom he had 
not yet seen, although he was now an old man. The old sceptic 
is not a little conceited, as the following exordium to one of his 
speeches evinces: “ It is very strange that I never meet with any 
one who is equal in sense to myself?” ‘The same old man, in one of 
his communicative moods, related to us the following tradition: 
The earth had been formed, but continued enveloped in total dark- 
ness, when a bear and a squirrel met on the shores of a lake; a 
dispute arose as to their respective powers, which they agreed to 
settle by running in opposite directions round the lake, and which 
ever arrived first, was to evince his superiority by some signal act 
of power. The squirrel beat, ran up a tree, and loudly demanded 
light, which instantly beaming forth, discovered a bird dispelling 
the gloom with its wings ; the bird was afterwards recognised to be 
acrow. ‘lhe squirrel next broke a piece of bark from the tree, 
endowed it with the power of floating, and said, Behold the ma- 
terial which shall afford the future inhabitants of the earth the means 
of traversing the waters. 

The Indians are not the first people who have ascribed the origin 


OF THE POLAR SEA. . 289 


of nautics to the ingenuity of the squirrel. The Copper Indians 
consider the bear, otter, and other animals of prey, or rather some 
kind of spirits which assume the forms of these creatures, as’ their 
constant enemies, and the cause of every misfortune which attends 
them; and in seasons of difficulty or sickness they alternately de- 
precate and abuse them. 

Few of this ‘nation have more than one wife at a time, and none 
‘but the leaders have more than two. Akaitcho has three, and the 
mother of his only son is the favourite. They frequently marry two 
sisters, and there is no prohibition to the intermarriage of: cou- 
sins, but a man is restricted from marrying his niece. 

The last war excursion they made against the Esquimaux was 
about ten years ago, when they destroyed about thirty persons, at 
the mouth of what they term Stoney-Point River, not far from the 
mouth of the Copper-Mine River. They now seem desirous ‘of 
being on friendly terms with that persecuted nation, and hope, 
through our means, to establish a lucrative commerce with them. 
Indeed, the Copper Indians are sensible of the advantages’ that 
would accrue to them, were they made the carriers of goods between 
the traders and Esquimaux. 

At the time of Hearne’s visit, the Copper Indians being un- 
supplied with fire-arms, were oppressed by. the Chipewyans; but 
even that traveller had occasion to praise their kindness of heart. 
Since they have received arms from the traders, the Chipewyans are 
fearful. of venturing upon their lands; andall of that nation, who 
frequent the shores of Great Slave Lake, hold the name of 
Akaitcho in great respect. ‘The Chipewyans pavend no leader of equal 
authority amongst themselves. 

~The number of the Copper Indians may lip one hundred and 
ninety souls, viz. eighty men and boys, and one hundred and ten 
women and young children. There are forty-five hunters in the 

2P 


290 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


tribe. The adherents of Akaitcho amount to about forty men and 
boys; the rest follow a number of minor chiefs. 

For the following notices of the nations on Mackenzie’s River, 
we are principally indebted to Mr. Wentzel, who resided for many 
years in that quarter. 

The Thlingcha-dinneh, or Dog-ribs, or, as they are sometimes 
termed. after the Crees, who formerly warred against them, Slaves, 
inhabit. the country to the westward of the Copper Indians, as far 
as Mackenzie’s River. They are of a mild, hospitable, but rather 
indolent, disposition. They spend much of their time in amuse- 
ments, and are fond of singing and dancing. In this respect, and 
in another, they differ very widely from most of the other Abori- 
gines of North America. I allude to their kind treatment of the 
women. ‘The men do the laborious work, whilst their wives employ 
themselves in ornamenting their dresses with quill work, and in 
other occupations suited to their sex. Mr. Wentzel has often known 
the young married men to bring specimens of their wives’ needle- 
work to the forts, and exhibit them with much pride. Kind treat- 
ment of the fair sex being usually considered as an indication of 
considerable progressive civilization, it might be worth while to 
inquire how it happens, that these people have stept so far beyond 
their neighbours. They have had, undoubtedly, the same common 
origin with the Chipewyans, for their languages differ only in accent, 
and. their mode of life is essentially the same. We have not suffi- 
cient data to prosecute the inquiry with any hope of success, but 
we may recall to the reader’s memory what was formerly mentioned, 
that the Dog-ribs say they came from the westward, whilst the 
Chipewyans say that they migrated from the eastward. 

When bands of Dog-ribs meet each other after a long absence: 
they perform a kind of dance. A piece of ground is cleared for the 
purpose, if it is winter of the snow, or if summer of the bushes; and 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 291 


the dance frequently lasts for two or three days, the parties relieving 
each other as they get tired. The two bands commence the dance 
with their backs turned to each other, the individuals following one 
another in Indian file, and holding the bow in the left hand and an 
arrow in the right. They approach obliquely, after many turns, and 
when the two bands are closely back to back, they feign to see each 
other for the first time, and the bow is instantly transferred to the 
right hand, and the arrow to the left, signifying that it is not their 
intention to use them against their friends. At a fort they use 
feathers instead of bows. The dance is accompanied with a song. 
These people are the dancing-masters of the country. The Copper 
Indians have neither dance nor music but what they borrow from 
them. On our first interview with Akaitcho, at Fort Providence, he 
treated us, as has already been mentioned, with a representation of 
the Dog-rib dance; and Mr. Back, during his winter journey, had an 
opportunity of observing it performed by the Dog-ribs themselves. 

The chief tribe of the Dog-rib nation, termed Horn Mountain 
Indians, inhabit the country betwixt Great Bear Lake, and the west 
end of Great Slave Lake. They muster about two hundred men 
and boys capable of pursuing the chase. Small detachments of the 
nation frequent Marten Lake, and during the summer hunt in the 
neighbourhood of Fort Enterprise. Indeed this part of the country 
was formerly exclusively theirs, and most of the lakes and remarkable 
hills. bear the names which they imposed upon them. | As the 
Copper Indians generally pillage them of their women and furs when 
they meet, they endeavour to avoid them, and visit their ancient 
quarters on the barren grounds only by stealth. 

Immediately to the northward of the Dog-ribs, on the north side 
of Bear Lake River, are the Kawcho-dinneh, or Hare Indians, who 
also speak a dialect of the Chipewyan language, and have much. of 
the same manners with the Dog-ribs, but are considered. both by 
them and. by the Copper Indians, to be great conjurers. These 

2P 2 


292 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


people report that in their hunting excursions to the northward of 
Great Bear Lake they meet small parties of Esquimaux. 

Immediately to the northward of the Hare Indians, on both banks 
of Mackenzie’s River, are the Tykothee-dinneh, Loucheux, Squint- 
Eyes, or Quarrellers. They speak a language distinct from the 
Chipewyan. They war often with the Esquimaux at the mouth of 
Mackenzie’s River, but have occasionally some peaceable intercourse 
with them, and it would appear that they find no difficulty in under- 
standing each other, there being considerable similarity in their 
languages. Their dress also resembles the Esquimaux, and differs 
from that of the other inhabitants of Mackenzie’s River. The 
Tykothee-dinneh trade. with Fort Good-Hope, situated a consider- 
able distance below the confluence of Bear Lake River with Mae- 
kenzie’s River, and as the traders suppose, within three days’ march 
of the Arctic Sea. It is the most northern establishment of the 
North-West Company, and some small pieces of Russian copper 
coin once made their way thither across the continent from the west- 
ward. Blue or white beads are almost the only articles of European 
manufacture coveted by the Loucheux. They perforate the septum 
of the nose, and insert in the opening three small shells which they 
procure at a high price from the Esquimaux. 

On the west bank of Mackenzie’s River there are several tribes 
who speak dialects of the Chipewyan language, that have not hitherto 
been mentioned. The first we came to, on tracing the river to the 
southward from Fort Good-Hope, are the Ambawtawhoot-dinneh, or 
Sheep Indians. ‘They inhabit the rocky mountains near the sources 
of the Dawhoot-dinneh River which flows into Mackenzie’s, and are 
but little known to the traders. Some of them have visited Fort 
Good-Hope. A report of their being cannibals may have originated 
in an imperfect knowledge of them. 

Some distance to the southward of this people are the Rocky 
Mountain Indians, a small tribe which musters about forty men and: | 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 293 


boys capable of pursuing the chase. They differ but little from the 
next we are about to mention, the Edchawtawhoot-dinneh, Strong- 
bow, Beaver, or Thick-wood Indians, who frequent the Riviere aux 
Ivards, or south branch of Mackenzie’s River. The Strong-bows 
resemble the Dog-ribs somewhat in their disposition ; but when they 
meet they assume a considerable degree of superiority over the latter, 
who meekly submit to the haughtiness of their neighbours. Until 
the year 1813, when a small party of them from some unfortunate 
provocation, destroyed Fort. Nelson on the Riviere aux Liards, and 
murdered its inmates, the Strong -bows were considered to be a 
friendly and quiet tribe, and esteemed as excellent hunters. These 
people take their names, in the first instance, from their dogs. A 
young man is the father of a certain dog, but when he is married, 
and has a son, he styles himself the father of the boy. The women 
have a habit of reproving the dogs very tenderly when they observe 
them fighting,—“ Are you not ashamed,” say they, “are you not 
ashamed to quarrel with your little brother?” The dogs appear to 
understand the reproof and sneak off. 

The Strong-bows, and. Hacky Morsitain Indians, have a tradition! 
in common with the Dog-ribs, that they came originally from the 
westward, from a level country, where there was no winter, which 
produced trees, and large fruits, now unknown to them. It was 
inhabited also by many strange animals, amongst which there was 
a small one whose visage bore a striking resemblance to the human 
countenance. During their residence in this land, their ancestors 
were visited by a man who healed the sick, raised the dead, and 
performed many other miracles, enjoining them at the same time to 
lead good lives, and not to eat of the entrails of animals, nor to use 
the brains for dressing skins until after the third day ; and never to 
leave the skull of deer upon the ground within the reach of dogs 
and wolves, but to hang them carefully upon trees. No one knew 
from whence this good man came, or whither he went. They were 


204, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


driven from that land by the rising of the waters, and following the 
tracks of animals on the sea-shore, they directed their course to the 
northward. At length they came to a strait, which they crossed 
upon a raft, but the sea has since frozen, and they have never been 
able to return. These traditions are unknown to the Chipewyans. 

The number of men and boys of the Strong-bow nation, who are 
capable of hunting, may amount to seventy. 

There are some other tribes who also speak dialects of the 
Chipewyan, upon the upper branches of the Riviere aux Liards, 
such as the Nohhannies and the Tsillawhawdoot-dinneh, or Brush- 
wood Indians. They are but little known, but the latter are sup- 
posed occasionally to visit some of the establishments on Peace 
River. 

Having now communicated as briefly as I could the principal 
facts that came to our knowledge regarding the Indians in this quar- 
ter, I shall resume the narrative of events at Fort Enterprise.— 
The month of March proved fine. The thermometer rose once to 
24° degrees above zero, and fell upon another day 49° below zero, 
but the mean was 11’ 57’. 

On the 23d the last of our winter’s stock of deers’ meat was ex- 
pended, and we were compelled to issue a little pounded meat 
which we had reserved for making pemmican for summer use. Our 
nets, which were set under the ice on the 15th, produced only two 
or three small fish daily. Amongst these was the round fish, a spe- 
cies of salmo, which we had not seen previously. | 

On the following day two Indians came with a message from the 
Hook, the chief next to Akaitcho in authority amongst the Copper . 
Indians. His band was between West Marten and Great Bear 
Lakes, and he offered to provide a quantity of dried meat for us on 
the banks of the Copper-Mine River in the beginning of summer, 
provided we sent him some goods and ammunition. It was in his 
power to do this without inconvenience, as he generally spends the 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 295 


summer months on the banks of the river near the Copper Moun- 
tain; but we had no goods to spare, and I could not venture to send 
any part of our small stock of ammunition until I saw what the 
necessities of our own party required. I told them, however, that 
I would gladly receive either provisions or leather when we met, and 
would pay for them by notes on the North-West Company's post ; 
but, to prevent any misunderstanding with Mr. Weeks, I requested 
them to take their winter's collection of furs to Fort Providence 
before they went to the Copper-Mine River. They assured me that 
the Hook would watch anxiously for our passing, as he was unwell, 
and wished to consult the doctor. 

Several circumstances having come lately to my knowledge that 
led me to suspect the fidelity of our interpreters, they were exa- 
mined upon this subject. It appeared that in their intercourse with 
the Indians they have contracted very fearful ideas of the danger of 
our enterprise, which augment as the time of our departure draws 
near, and have not hesitated to express their dislike to the journey 
in strong terms amongst the Canadians, who are accustomed to pay 
much deference to the opinions of an interpreter. But this is not 
all; I had more than sufficient reason for suspecting that they had 
endeavoured to damp the exertions of the Indians, with the hope 
that the want of provision in the spring would put an end to our 
progress at once. St. Germain, in particular, had behaved in a very 
equivocal way, since his journey to Slave Lake. He denied the 
principal parts of the charge in a very dogged: manner, but acknow- 
ledged that he had told the leader that we had not paid him the 
attention that a chief like him ought to have received; and that we 
had put'a great affront on him in sending him only a small quantity 
ofrum. An artful man like St. Germain, possessing as he did such 
a flow of language, and capable of saying even what he confessed to, 
had the means of poisoning the minds of the Indians without com- 
mitting himself by any direct assertion that they could communicate; 


296 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


and it is to be remarked, that unless. Mr. Wentzel had possessed a 
competent knowledge of the Copper Indian language, we should not 
have learned what we did. 

Although perfectly satisfied of his baseness, I could not dispense 
with his services; and I had no other resource but to give him a 
serious admonition, and desire him to return to his duty, after endea- 
vouring to work upon his fears by an assurance, that I would cer- 
tainly convey him to England for trial if the Expedition should be 
stopped through his fault. He replied, “ It is immaterial to me 
where I lose my life, whether in England, or accompanying you to 
the sea, for the whole party will perish.” After. this discussion, 
however, he was more circumspect in his conduct. . 

On the 28th we received: a small supply of meat from the 
Indian lodges. They have now moved into a lake, about. twelve 
miles distant from us, in expectation of the deer coming soon to the 
northward. : 

On the 29th Akaitcho arrived at. the house, having been sent fo 
to make some arrangements respecting the procuring of provision, 
and that we might learn from him what his sentiments were with 
regard to accompanying us on our future journey. Next morning 
we had a conference, which I commenced. by shewing him the charts 
and drawings that were prepared to be sent to England, and: ex- 
plaining fully our future intentions. He appeared much pleased 
at this mark of attention, and, when his curiosity was satisfied, 
began his speech by saying, that “although a vast. number of idle 
rumours had been floating about the barren grounds during the 
winter,” yet: he was convinced that the representations that had 
been made to him at Fort Providence regarding the purport of 
the Expedition were perfectly correct. I next pointed out to him 
the necessity of our proceeding with as little delay as possible 
during the short period ‘of the year that was fit for our opera- 
tions, and that to do so it was requisite we should have a large supply 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 997 


of provisions at starting. He instantly admitted the force of these 
observations, and promised that he and his young men should do 
their utmost to comply with our desires; and afterwards, in answer 
to my questions, informed us that he would accompany the Expedi- 
tion to the mouth of the Copper-Mine River, or, if we did not meet 
with Esquimaux there for some distance along the coast, he was 
anxious, he said, to have an amicable interview with that people ; 
and he further requested, that, in the event of our meeting with 
Dog-ribs on the Copper-Mine River, we should use our influence to 
persuade them to live on friendly terms with his tribe. We were 
highly pleased to find his sentiments so favourable to our views, and, 
after making some minor arrangements, we parted, mutually content 
with each other. 

Akaitcho left us on the morning of the 31st, accompanied by 
Augustus, who, at his request, went to reside for a few days at his 
lodge. 

On the 4th of April our men arrived with the last supply of goods 
from Fort Providence, the fruits of Mr. Back’s arduous journey to 
the Athabasca Lake ; and on the 17th Belanger le gros and Belanger 
le rouge, for so our men discriminated them, set out for Slave Lake, 
with a box containing the journals of the officers, charts, drawings, 
observations, and letters addressed to the Secretary of State for Colo- 
nial Affairs. ‘They also conveyed a letter for Governor Williams, in 
which I requested that he would, if possible, send a schooner to 
Wager Bay with provisions and clothing, to meet the exigencies of 
the party, should they succeed in reaching that part of the coast. 

Connoyer, who was much tormented. with biliary calculi, and had 
done little or no duty all the winter, was discharged at the same 
time, and sent down in company with an Indian named the Belly. 

The commencement of April was fine, and for several days a 
considerable thaw took place in the heat of the sun, which laying 
bare some of the lichens on the sides of the hills, produced a con- 


2Q 


298 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


sequent movement of the rein-deer to the northward, and induced 
the Indians to believe that the spring was already commencing; 
Many of them, therefore, quitted the woods, and set their snares on 
the barren grounds near Fort Enterprise. Two or three days of 
cold weather, however, towards the middle of the month, damped 
their hopes, and they began to say that another moon must elapse 
before the arrival of the wished-for season. In the mean time their 
premature departure from the woods, caused them to suffer from the 
want of food, and we were in some degree involved in their distress. 
We received no supplies from the hunters, our nets produced but 
very few fish, and the pounded meat which we had imtended to 
keep for summer use was nearly expended. Our meals at this 
period were always scanty, and we were occasionally restricted to 
one in the day. 

The Indian families about the house, consisting principally of 
women and children, suffered most. I had often requested them 
to move to Akaitcho’s lodge, where they were more certain of re- 
ceiving supplies; but as most of them were sick or infirm, they did 
not like to quit the house, where they daily received medicines from 
Dr. Richardson, to encounter the fatigue of following the movements 
of a hunting camp. They cleared away the snow on the site of the 
autumn encampments to look for bones, deers’ feet, bits of hide, and 
other offal. When we beheld them knawing the pieces of hide, and 
pounding the bones, for the purpose of extracting some nourishment 
from them by boiling, we regretted our inability to relieve them, but 
little thought that we should ourselves be afterwards driven to the 
necessity of eagerly collecting these same bones a second time from 
the dunghill. : 

At this time, to divert the attention of the men from their wants, 
we encouraged the practice of sliding down the steep bank of the 
river upon sledges. ‘These vehicles descended the snowy bank with 
much velocity, and ran a great distance upon the ice. The officers 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 999 


joined in the sport, and the numerous overturns we experienced 
seemed to form no small share of the amusement of the party, but 
on one occasion, when I had been thrown from my seat and almost 
buried in the snow, a fat Indian woman drove her sledge over me, 
and sprained my knee severely. 

On the 18th at eight in the evening a beautiful halo appeared. 
round the ‘sun when it was about 8° high. The colours were pris- 
matic, and very bright, the red next the sun. 

On the 21st the ice in the river was measured, and found to be 
five feet thick, and on the same day in setting the nets in Round 
Rock Lake, the ice there was ascertained to be six feet and a half 
thick, the water being six fathoms deep. The stomachs of some 
fish were at this time opened by Dr. Richardson, and found filled 
with insects which appear to exist in abundance under the ice 
during the winter. 

On the 22nd a moose-deer ‘was killed at the distance of forty-five 
miles, and Saint Germain went for it with a dog sledge, and returned 
with unusual expedition on the morning of the third day. This 
supply was soon exhausted, and we passed the 27th without eating, 
and had a prospect of fasting a day or two longer, when old Kes- 
karrah entered with the unexpected intelligence of his having killed 
a deer. It was divided ‘betwixt our own family and the Indians, 
and during the night a seasonable supply arrived from Akaitcho. 
Augustus returned with the men who brought it, much pleased 
with the attention he had received from the Indians during his visit 
to Akaitcho. 

Next day Mr. Wentzel set out with every man that we could 
spare irom the fort, for the purpose of bringing meat from the In- 
dians as fast as it could be procured. Dr. Richardson followed them 
two days afterwards to collect specimens of the rocks in that part. of 
the country. On the same day the two Belangers arrived from 
Fort Providence, having been only five days on the march from thence. 

2Q2 


300° A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


The highest temperature in April was + 40°, the lowest — 32°, 
the mean + 4.6°. The temperature of the rapid, examined on 
the 30th by Messrs. Back and Hood, was 32° at the surface, 33° at 
the bottom. 

On the 7th of May Dr. Richardson returned from his excursion. 
He informed me that the rein-deer were again advancing to the 
northward, but that the leader had been joined by several families 
of old people, and that the daily consumption of provision at the 
Indian tents was consequently great. This information excited 
some painful apprehensions of being very scantily provided when 
the period for our departure should arrive. 

The weather in the beginning of May was fine and warm. On 
the 2nd some patches of sandy ground near the house were cleared 
of snow. On the 7th the sides of the hills began to appear bare, 
and on the 8th a large house-fly was seen. ‘This interesting event 
spread cheerfulness through our residence and formed a topic of 
conversation for the rest of the day. 

On the 9th the approach of spring was still more agreeably con- 
firmed by the appearance of a merganser and two gulls, and some 
loons, or arctic divers, at the rapid. This day to reduce the labour 
of dragging meat to the house, the women and children and all the 
men except four, were sent to live at the Indian tents. 

The blue-berries, crow-berries, eye-berries, and cran-berries, which 
had been covered, and protected by the snow during the winter, 
might at this time be gathered in abundance, and proved indeed a 
valuable resource. The ground continued frozen, but the heat of 
the sun had a visible effect on the vegetation ; the sap thawed in 
the pine-trees, and Dr. Richardson informed me that the mosses 
were beginning to shoot, and that the calyptre of some of the 
jungermanniz were already visible. 

On the 11th Mr. Wentzel returned from the Indian lodges, 
having made the necessary arrangements with Akaitcho for the 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 301 


drying of meat for summer use, the bringing of fresh meat to the 
fort, and the procuring a sufficient quantity of the resin of the 
spruce-fir, or as it is termed by the voyagers gwm, for repairing the 
canoes previous to starting, and during the voyage. By my desire, 
he had promised payment to the Indian women who should bring 
in any of the latter article, and had sent several of our own men to 
the woods to search for it. At this time I communicated to Mr. 
Wentzel the mode in which I meant to conduct the journey of the 
approaching summer. Upon our arrival at the sea, 1 proposed to 
reduce the party to what would be sufficient to man two canoes, in 
order to lessen the consumption of provisions during our voyage, or 
journey along the coast; and as Mr. Wentzel had expressed a desire 
of proceeding no further than the mouth of the Copper-Mine River, 
which was seconded by the Indians, who wished him to return with 
them, I readily relieved his anxiety on this subject; the more so as 
I thought he might render greater service to us by making deposits 
of provision at certain points, than by accompanying us, through 
a country which was unknown to him, and amongst a people with 
whom he was totally unacquainted. My intentions were explained 
to him in detail, but they were of course to be modified by the 
circumstances that might occur. 

On the 14th a robin appeared; this bird is considered by the 
natives as the infallible precursor of warm weather. Ducks and 
geese were also seen in numbers, and the rein-deer advanced to 
the northward. The merganser, which preys upon small fish, was 
the first of the duck tribe that appeared; next came the teal, (anas 
erecca,,) which lives upon small insects that abound in the waters 
at this season; and lastly the goose, which feeds upon berries and 
herbage. Geese appear at Cumberland House, in latitude 54°, usually 
about the 12th of April; at Fort Chipewyan, in latitude 59°, on the 
25th of April; at Slave Lake, in latitude 61°, on the Ist of May; and. 


302 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


at Fort Enterprise, in latitude 64° 28, on the 12th or 14th of the 
same month. 

On the 16th a mmor chief amongst the Copper Indians, attended 
by his son, arrived from Fort Providence to consult Dr. Richardson. 
He was affected with snow-blindness, which soon yielded to the 
dropping of a little laudanum into his eyes twice a day. Most of 
our own men have been affected with the same complaint of late, 
but it has always yielded in twenty or thirty hours to the same 
remedy. 

On the 21st all our men returned from ‘the Indians, and Akaitcho 
was on his way to the fort. In the afternoon two of his young men 
arrived to announce his visit, and to request that he might be re- 
ceived with a salute and other marks of respect that he had been 
accustomed to on visiting Fort Providence m the spring. I complied 
with his desire although I regretted the expenditure of ammunition, 
and sent the young men away with the customary present of powder 
to enable him to return the salute, some tobacco, vermilion to paint 
their faces, a comb, and a looking-glass. 

At eleven Akaitcho arrived ; upon the first notice of ‘his appear- 
ance the flag was hoisted at the fort, and upon his nearer approach, 
a number of musquets were fired by a party of our people, and . 
returned by his young men. Akaitcho, preceded by his ‘standard- 
bearer, led the party, and advanced with a slow and solemn step to the 
door where Mr. Wentzel and I received him. The faces of the party 
were daubed with vermilion, the old men having a spot on the right 
cheek, the young ones on the left. Akaitcho himself was not painted. 
On entering he sat down ona chest, the rest placed themselves 
in a circle on the floor. The pipe was passed once or twice round, 
and in ‘the mean time a bowl of spirits and water, anda present 
considerable for our-circumstances of cloth, blankets, capots, shirts, 
&e., was placed on the floor for the chief’s acceptance, and distri- 


- 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 303 


bution amongst his people. Akaitcho then commenced his speech, 
but I regret to say, that it was very discouraging, and indicated that 
he had parted with his good humour, at least since his March visit. 
He first inquired, whether in the event of a passage by sea being 
discovered, we should come to his lands in any ship that might be 
sent? And beimg answered, that it was probable but not quite 
certain, that some one amongst us might come;, he expressed a hope 
that some suitable present should be forwarded to himself and 
nation; “ for,” said he, “ the great Chief who commands where all 
the goods come from, must see from the drawings and descriptions 
of us and our country that we are a miserable people.” I told him 
that he should assuredly be remembered, provided he faithfully ful- 
filled his engagement with us. 

He next complained of the non-payment of my notes by Mr. 
Weeks, from whence he apprehended that his own reward would 
be withheld. «“ If’ said he, “ your notes to such a trifling amount 
are not. accepted, whilst you are within such a short distance, and 
ean hold communication with the fort, it is not probable that the 
large reward which has been promised to myself and party, will be 
paid when you are far distant, on your way to your own country. It 
really appears to me,” he continued, “ as if both of the Companies 
consider your party as a third company, hostile to their interests, 
and that neither of them will pay the notes you give to the 
Indians.” : 

Afterwards, in the course of a long conference, he enumerated 
many other grounds of dissatisfaction; the principal of which were 
our want of attention to him as chief, the weakness of the rum 


- formerly sent to him, the smallness of the present now offered to 


him, and the want of the chief’s clothing, which he had been 
accustomed to receive at Fort Providence every spring. He 
concluded, by refusing to receive the goods now offered to him. 

In reply to these complaints it was stated, that Mr. Weeks’s 


304 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


conduct could not be properly discussed at the distance we were 
from his fort; that no dependance ought to be placed on the vague 
reports that floated through the Indian territory; that, for our 
part, although we had heard many stories to his (Akaitcho’s) dis- 
advantage, we discredited them all; that the rum we had sent him, 
being what the great men in England were accustomed to drink, 
was of a milder kind, but, in fact, stronger than what he had been 
accustomed to receive; and that the distance we had come, and the 
speed with which we travelled, precluded us from bringing large 
quantities of goods like the traders; that this had been fully ex- 
plained to him when he agreed to accompany us; and that, in con- 
sideration of his not receiving his usual spring outfit, his debts to 
the Company had been cancelled, and a present, much greater than 
any he had ever received before, ordered to be got ready for his 
return. He was further informed, that we were much disappointed 
in not receiving any dried meat from him, an article indispensable 
for our summer voyage, and which, he had led us to believe there 
was no difficulty in procuring; and that, in fact, his complaints 
were so groundless, in comparison with the real injury we sustained 
from the want of supplies, that we were led to believe they were 
preferred solely for the purpose of cloaking his own want of atten- 
tion to the terms of his engagement. He then shifted his ground, 
and stated, that if we attempted to make a voyage along the sea- 
coast we would inevitably perish ; and he advised us strongly against 
persisting in the attempt. ‘This part of his harangue being an 
exact transcript of the sentiments formerly expressed. by our inter- 
preters, induced us to conclude that they had prompted his present 
line of conduct, by telling him, that we had goods or rum con- 
cealed. He afterwards received a portion of our dinner, in the 
manner he had been accustomed to do, and seemed inclined. to 
make up matters with us in the course of the evening, provided. 
we added to the present offered to him. Being told, however, © 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 305 


that this was impossible, since we had already offered him all the 
rum we had, and every article of goods we could spare from our own 
equipment, his obstinacy was a little shaken, and. he made some con- 
cessions, but deferred giving .a final answer, until the arrival of 
Humpy, his elder brother. The young men, however, did not 
choose to wait so long, and at night came for the rum, which we 
judged to be a considerable step towards a reconciliation. 

St. Germain, the most intelligent of our two interpreters, and 
the one who had most influence with the Indians, being informed 
that their defection was, in a great measure, attributed to the un- 
guarded conversations he had held with them, and which he had in 
part acknowledged, exerted himself much, on the following day, 
in bringing about a change in their sentiments, and with some suc- 
cess. The young men, though they declined hunting, conducted 
themselves with the same good humour and freedom as formerly. 
Akaitcho being, as he said, ashamed to shew himself, kept close in 
his tent all day. 

On the 24th, one of the women, ais ice brapaiited us from Atha- 
basa, was sent down to Fort Providence, under charge of the old 
chief, who came some days ago for medicine for his eyes. Ange- 
lique and Roulante, the other two women, having families, preferred 
accompanying the Indians, during their summer hunt. On the 
25th, clothing, and other necessary articles, were issued to the 
Canadians as their equipment. for the ensuing voyage. Two or 
three blankets, seme cloth, iron work, and trinkets, were reserved 
for distribution amongst the Esquimaux on the sea-coast. Laced 
dresses were given to Augustus and Junius. It is impossible to de- 
scribe the joy that took possession of the latter on the receipt. of 
this present. The happy little fellow burst into ecstatic laughter, as 

he surveyed the different articles of his gay habiliments, 
_ In the afternoon Humpy, the leader’s elder brother; Anncethai- 
yazzeh, another of -his brothers; and one of our guides, arrived 
2k 


306 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


with the remainder of Akaitcho’s band; as also Long-legs, brother 
to the Hook, with three of his band. There were now in the en- 
campment, thirty hunters, thirty-one women, and sixty children, 
in all one hundred and twenty-one Indians of the Copper-Indian 
or Red-Knife tribe. The rest of the nation were with the a 
on the lower part of the Copper-Mine River. 

Annoethai-yazzeh is remarkable amongst the Indians for the nbaibelt 
of his descendants ; he has eighteen children living, by two wives, of 
whom sixteen were at the fort at this time. ba 

In the evening we had another formidable conference. The 
former complaints were reiterated, and we parted about. midnight, 
without any satisfactory answer being given to my questions, as to 
when Akaitcho would proceed towards the River, and where he 
meant to make provision for our march. I was somewhat pleased, 
however, to find, that Humpy and Anncethai-yazzeh censured their 
brother’s conduct, and accused him of avarice. | 

On the 26th the canoes were removed from the places where they 
had been deposited, as we judged that the heat of the atmosphere 
was now so great, as to admit of their being repaired without risk 
of cracking the bark. We were rejoiced to find that two of them 
had suffered little injury from the frost during the winter. The bark 
of the third one was penienialh rent, but it was still capable of 
being repaired. 

The Indians sat in conference in their tents all the morning ; 
and, in the afternoon, came into the house, charged with os 
matter for discussion. ws 

Soon after they had seated themselves, and the room was filled 
with the customary volume of smoke from their calumets, the 
goods which had been laid aside, were again presented to the 
leader; but he at once refused to distribute so small a quantity 
amongst his men, and complained that there were neither blankets, 
kettles, nor daggers, amongst them; and, in the warmth of his 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 307 


anger, he charged Mr. Wentzel with having advised the distribu- 
tion of all our goods to the Canadians, and thus defrauding the In- 
dians of what was intended for them. Mr. Wentzel, of course, 
immediately repelled this injurious accusation, and reminded 
Akaitcho again, that he had been told, on engaging to accompany 
us, that he was not to expect any goods until his return. This he 
denied with an effrontery that surprised us all, when Humpy, who 
was present at our first interview at Fort Providence, declared that 
he heard us say, that no goods could be taken for the supply of the 
Indians on the voyage; and the first guide added, “ I do not ex- 
pect any thing here, I have promised to accompany the white people 
to the sea, and I will, therefore, go, confidently relying upon re- 
ceiving the stipulated reward on my return.” Akaitcho did not 
seem prepared to hear such declarations from his brothers, and in- 
stantly changed the subject, and began to descant upon the treat- 
ment he had received from the traders in his concerns with them, 
with an asperity of language that bore more the appearance of 
menace than complaint. I immediately refused to discuss this topic, 
as foreign to our present business, and desired Akaitcho to recall 
to his memory, that he had told me on our first meeting, that he 
considered me the father of every person attached to the expedi- 
tion, in which character it was surely my duty to provide for the: 
comfort and safety of the Canadians, as well as of the Indians. The 
voyagers, he knew, had a long journey to perform, and would, in 
all probability, be exposed to much suffering from cold, on a coast 
destitute of wood; and, therefore, required a greater provision of 
clothing than was necessary for the Indians, who, by returning im- 
mediately from the mouth of the river, would reach Fort Provi- 
dence in August, and obtain their promised rewards. Most of the 
Indians appeared to assent to this argument, but Akaitcho said, « I 
perceive the traders have deceived you, you should have brought 
more goods, but I do not blame you.” I then told him, that I 
2R 2 


308 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


had brought from England only ammunition, tobacco, and spirits ; 
and that, being ignorant what other articles the Indians required, | 
we were dependent on the traders for supplies; but he must be 
aware, that every endeavour had been used on our parts to procure 
them, as was evinced by Mr. Back’s journey to Fort Chipewyan. 
With respect to the ammunition and tobacco, we had been as much 
disappointed as themselves in not receiving them, but this was to 
be attributed to the neglect of those to whom they had been in- 
trusted. This explanation seemed to satisfy him. After some 
minutes of refiection, his countenance became more cheerful, and 
he made inquiry, whether his party might go to either of the trading 
posts they chose on their return, and whether the Hudson’s Bay 
Company were rich, for they had been represented to him as a poor 
people? I answered him, that. we really knew nothing about the 
wealth of either Company, having never concerned ourselves with 
trade, but that all the traders appeared to us to be respectable. 
Our thoughts, I added, are fixed solely on the accomplishment 
of the objects for which we came to the country. Our success de- 
pends much on your furnishing us with provision speedily, that we 
may have all the summer to work in; and if we succeed, a ship will 
soon bring goods in abundance to the mouth of the Copper-Mine 
River. The Indians talked together for a short time after this con- 
versation, and then the leader made an application for two or three 
kettles and some blankets to be added to the present to his young 
men; we were unable to spare him any kettles, but the officers 
promised to give a blanket each from their own beds. 

Dinner was now brought in, and relieved us for a time from their 
importunity. The leading men, as usual, received each a portion 
from the table. When the conversation was resumed, the leader 
renewed his solicitations for goods, but it was now too palpable to 
be mistaken, that he aimed at getting every thing he possibly could, 
and leaving us without the means of making any presents to the 


—— ne 


OF. THE POLAR SEA. 309 


Esquimaux, or other Indians we might meet. I resolved, therefore, 
on steadily refusing every request that he should make at this time, 
and when he perceived that he could extort nothing more, he rose 
im an angry manner, and addressing his young men, said: “ There 
are too few goods for me to distribute; those that mean. to follow the 
white people to the sea may take them.” 

This was an incautious speech, as it rendered it necessary for his 
party to display their sentiments. The guides, and most of the 
hunters, declared their readiness to go, and came forward to receive 
a portion of the present, which was no inconsiderable assortment. 
This relieved a weight of anxiety from my mind, and I did not 
much regard the leader, retiring in a very dissatisfied mood. 

The hunters then applied to Mr. Wentzel. for ammunition, that 
they might go a hunting in the morning, and it was cheerfully given 
to them. 

The officers and men amused themselves at prison-bars, and other 
Canadian games till two o’clock in the morning, and we were pleased 
to observe the Indians sitting in groups enjoying the sport. -We 
were desirous of filling up the leisure moments of the Canadians 
with amusements, not only for the purpose of enlivening their 
spirits, but also to prevent them from conversing upon our dif- 
ferences with the Indians, which they must have observed. The 
exercise. was also in a peculiar manner serviceable to. Mr. Hood. 
Ever ardent in his pursuits, he had, through close attention to his 
drawings and other avocations, confined himself too much to the 
house in winter, and his health was impaired by his sedentary 
habits. I could only take the part of a spectator in these amuse- 
ments, being stilfdame from the hurt formerly alluded to. 

The sun now sinks for so short a time below the horizon, that 
there is more light at midnight, than we enjoyed on some days at 
noon in the winter-time. 

On the 27th the hunters brought in two rein-deer. Many of the 


310 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Indians attended divine service this day, and were attentive spec- 
tators of our addresses to the throne of the Almighty. 

On the 28th I had a conversation with Long-legs, whose arrival 
two days ago has been mentioned. I acquainted him with the 
objects of our expedition, and our desire of promoting peace between 
his nation and the Esquimaux, and learned from him, that his brother 
the Hook was by this time on the Copper-Mine River with his party ; 
and that, although he had little ammunition, yet it was possible he 
might have some provision collected before our arrival at his tents. 
I then decorated him with a medal similar to those given to the 
other chiefs. He was highly pleased with this mark of our regard, 
and promised to do every thing for us in his power. Akaitcho 
came in during the latter part of our conversation, with a very 
cheerful countenance. Jealousy of the Hook, and a knowledge of 
the sentiments of the young men being different from his own, with 
respect to the recent discussions, had combined to produce ~ this 
change in his conduct, and next morning he took an opportunity of 
telling me that I must not think the worse of him for his impor- 
tunities. It was their custom, he said, to do so, however strange 
it might appear to us, and that he, as the leader of his party, had to 
beg for them all; but as he saw that we had not deceived him by 
concealing any of our goods, and that we really had nothing left, he 
should ask for no more. He then told me that he would set out 
for the river as soon as the state of the country admitted of their 
travelling. The snow, he remarked, was still too deep for sledges to 
the northward, and the moss too wet to make fires. He was 
seconded in this opinion by Long-legs, whom I was the more in- 
clined to believe, from knowing that he was anxious to rejoin his 
family as soon as possible. , 

Akaitcho now accepted the dress he had formerly refused, and 
next day clothed himself in another new suit, which he had received 
from us in the autumn. Ever since his arrival at the fort, he had 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 31] 


dressed meanly, and pleaded poverty; but, perceiving that nothing 
more could be gained by such conduct, he thought proper to shew 
some of his riches. tothe strangers who were daily arriving at the 
fort. In the afternoon, however, he made another, though a covert, 
attack upon us. He informed me that two old men had just arrived 
at the encampment with a little pounded meat, which they wished to 
barter. It was evident that his intention was merely to discover 
whether we had any goods remaining or not. I told him that we 
had nothing at present to give for meat, however much we stood in 
need of it, but that we would pay for it by notes on the North-West 
Company, in any kind of goods they pleased. After much artful 
circumlocution, and repeated assurances of the necessities of the 
men who owned the meat, he introduced them, and they readily 
agreed to give us the provision on our own terms. 

I have deemed it my duty to give the preceding details of the 
tedious conversations we had with Akaitcho, to point out to future 
travellers, the art with which these Indians pursue their objects, 
their avaricious nature, and the little reliance that can be placed 
upon them when their interests jar with their promises. In these 
respects they agree with other tribes of northern Indians; but, as has 
been already mentioned, their dispositions are not cruel, and their 
hearts are readily moved by the ery of distress. 

The average temperature for May was neo 32°, the sreatent 
heat was 68°, the lowest 8°. 

We had constant daylight at the end of the month, aiid geese and 
ducks were abundant, indeed rather too much so, for our hunters 
were apt to waste upon them the ammunition that was given to 
them for killing deer. Uncertain as to the length of time that our 
ammunition might be required to last, we did not deem a goose of 
equal value with the charge it cost to procure it. 

Dr. Richardson and Mr. Back having visited the contre to the 
northward of the Slave Rock, and reported that they thought we 


312 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES © 


might: travel over it, I signified my, intention of sending the first 
party off-on Monday the 4th of June. I was anxious to get the 
Indians to move on before, but they lingered about the house, 
evidently with the intention of picking up such articles as we might 
deem unnecessary to take. When Akaitcho was made acquainted 
with my purpose of sending away a party of men, ‘he came to inform 
me that he would appoint two hunters to accompany them, and at 
the same-time requested that. Dr. Richardson, or as he -ealled him, 
the Medicine. Chief, might be sent with his own band. These 
Indians seta great value upon medicine, and made many. demands 
upon Dr. Richardson on the prospect of his departure... He had to 
make up little packets, of the different articles in his chest, not only 
for the leader, but for each of the minor chiefs, who carefully placed 
them in their medicine bags, noting in their memories the di- 
rections he gave for their use. The readiness with which their 
requests for medical assistance were complied with, was considered by 
them as a strong mark of our good intentions towards them; and the 
leader often remarked, that they owed much to our kindness in that 
respect ; that formerly numbers had died every year, but that-not 
a life had. been lost since our arrival amongst them. In the present 
instance, however, the leader’s request could not be complied with. 
Dr. Richardson had volunteered to conduct the first party to the 
Copper-Mine., River, whilst the rest of the officers remained with me 
to the last moment, to complete our astronomical observations at 
the house. He, therefore, informed the leader that he would remain 
stationary at Point Lake until the arrival of the whole party, where 
he might be easily consulted if any of his people fell sick, as it was 
in the neighbourhood of their hunting grounds. 

On the 2nd the stores were packed up in proper sized bales for 
the journey. I had intended to send the canoes by the first party, 
but they were not yet repaired, the weather not being sufficiently 
warm to permit the men to work constantly at them, without the 


(wapyiilaTrTa u. LOWY uYyar AG EZ gr YR POYSY RT 


‘Tloptie Mpa Aq PaAPsTsuyy “SOW Poop, ynayy Aq som Su, NY IP EY Mer Ay sdeosprreT sty, 


= = + 


——— 


: 


vy 


re 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 313 


hazard of breaking the bark. This day one of the new trading guns 
which we had recently received from Fort Chipewyan, burst in the 
hands of a young Indian; fortunately, however, without doing him 
any material injury. This is the sixth accident of the kind which 
has occurred to us since our departure from Slave Lake. Surely 
this deficiency in the quality of the guns, which hazards the lives 
of so many poor Indians, requires the serious consideration of the 
principals of the trading Companies. 

On. the 4th, at three in the morning, the party under the charge 
of Dr. Richardson started. It consisted of fifteen voyagers, three of 
them conducting dog sledges, Baldhead and Basil, two Indian 
hunters with their wives, Akaiyazzeh a sick Indian and his wife, 
together with Angelique and Roulante; so that the party consisted 
of twenty-three exclusive of children. 

The burdens of the men were about eighty pounds each, 
exclusive of their personal baggage which amounted to nearly as 
much more. Most of them dragged their loads upon sledges, but a 
few preferred carrying them on their backs. They set off in high 
spirits. | 

After breakfast the Indians struck their tents, and the women, the 
boys, and the old men who had to drag sledges, took their departure. 
It was three P.M., however, before Akaitcho and the hunters left 
cus. We issued thirty balls to the leader, and twenty to each of the 
hunters and guides, with a proportionate quantity of powder, and 
gave them directions to make all the provision they could on their 
way to Point Lake. I then desired Mr. Wentzel to inform Akaitcho 
in’ the presence of the other Indians, that I wished a deposit of 
provision to be made at this place previous to next September, as 
a resource should we return this way. He and the guides not 
‘only promised to see this done, but suggested that it would be more 
secure if placed in the cellar, or in Mr. Wentzel’s room. The Dog- 
ribs, they said, would respect any thing that was in the house as 
knowing it to belong to the white people. At the close of this con- 

28 


314 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


versation Akaitcho exclaimed with a smile, “1 see now that you 
have really no goods left, (the rooms and stores being completely 
stripped,) and therefore I shall not trouble you any more, but use my 
best endeavours to prepare provision for you, and-I think if the 
animals are tolerably Rumenous we may get plenty before oa can 
embark on the river.’ 

Whilst the Indians were packing up this morning, one of the 
women absconded. She belongs to the Dog-rib tribe, and had been 
taken by force from her relations by her present husband, who has 
treated her very harshly. The fellow was in my room when his 
mother announced the departure of his wife, and received the in- 
telligence with great composure as well as the seasonable reproof of 
Akaitcho. “ You are rightly served,” said the chief to him, “and 
will now have to carry all your things yourself, instead of having a 
wife to drag them.” One hunter remained after the departure of 
the other Indians. | : 
_ On the 5th the Dog-rib woman presented herself on -a hill at 
some distance from the house, but was afraid to approach us, until 
the interpreter went and told her that neither we nor the Indian 
who remained with us, would prevent her from going where she 
pleased. Upon this she came to solicit a fire-steel and kettle. She 
was at first low-spirited, from the non-arrival of a’ countrywoman, 
who had promised to elope with her, but had probably been too 
narrowly watched. The Indian hunter, however, having given her 
some directions as to the most proper mode of joining her own tribe, 
she became more composed, and ultimately agreed to adopt his 
advice of proceeding at once to Fort. Providence, instead of wan- 
dering about the country all summer in search of them, atthe 
imminent hazard of being starved. : 

On the 7th the wind changing to the southward, dispersed the 
clouds which had obscured the sky for several days, and produced 
a change of temperature under which the snow rapidly disappeared. 
The thermometer rose to 73°, many flies came: forth, musquitoes 


OF THE POLAR SEA... . | B15 


shewed themselves for the first time, and one swallow made 
its appearance. We were the more gratified with these indica- 
tions of summer, that St. Germain was enabled to commence 
upon the repair of the canoes, and before night had completed the 
two which had received the least injury. Augustus killed two 
deer to-day. 

On the 10th the dip: of the magnetic needle being observed, 
shewed a decrease of 22° 44", since last autumn. The repairs of the 
third canoe were finished this evening. 

The snow was now confined to the bases of the hills, and our 
Indian hunter told us the season was early. The operations of 
nature, however, seemed to us, very tardy. We were eager to 
be gone, and dreaded the lapse of summer, before the Indians would 
allow it had. begun. 

On the llth the geese and alethis had left the vicinity of Fort 
Enterprise, and proceeded to the northward. Some young ravens 
and whiskey-johns made their appearance at this time. 

On the 12th, Winter River was nearly cleared of ice, and on 
the 13th the men returned, having left Dr. Richardson on the 
borders of Point Lake. Dr. Richardson informed me by letter 
that the snow was deeper in many parts near his encampment than 
it had been at any time last winter near Fort Enterprise, and that 
the ice on Point Lake had scarcely begun to decay. Although the 
voyagers were much fatigued on their arrival, and had eaten nothing 
for the last twenty-four hours, they were very cheerful, and ex- 
pressed a desire to start with the remainder of the stores next 
morning. The Dog-rib woman, who had lingered about the house 
since the 6th of June, took alarm at the approach of men, thinking, 
perhaps, that they were accompanied by Indians, and ran off. She 
was now provided with a hatchet, kettle, and fire steel, and would 
probably go at once to Fort Providence, in the expectation of 
meeting with some of her countrymen, before the end of summer. 

28 2 


316 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


CHAPTER IX*, 


Departure from Fort Enterprise—Navigation of the Copper-Mine River—Visit to the Copper 
Mountain— Interview with the Esquimaux—Departure of the Indian Hunters—Arrange- 
ments made with them for our return. 


june 14, HE trains for the canoes having been finished during the 

night, the party attached to them commenced their journey at ten 
this morning. Each canoe was dragged by four men assisted by two 
dogs. They took the route of Winter Lake, with the intention of 
following, although more circuitous, the water-course as far as practi- 
cable, it being safer for the canoes than travelling over land. After 
their departure, the remaining stores, the instruments, and our small 
stock of dried meat, amounting only to eighty pounds, were dis- 
tributed equally among Hepburn, three Canadians, and the two 
Esquimaux; with this party and two Indian hunters, we quitted 
Fort Enterprise, most sincerely rejoicing that the long-wished for 
day had arrived, when we were to proceed towards the final object 
of the Expedition. 

We left in one of the rooms a box, containing a journal of the 
occurrences up to this date, the charts, and some drawings, which 
was to be conveyed to Fort Chipewyan by Mr. Wentzel, on his 
return from the sea, and from thence to be sent to England. The 


* It will be seen hereafter that I had the misfortune to lose my portfolio containing my 
journals from Fort Enterprise to the 14th of September. But the loss has been amply 
redeemed by my brother officers’ journals, from which the narrative ni to that oe has 
been chiefly compiled. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 317 


room was blocked up, and, by the advice of Mr. Wentzel, a 
drawing representing a man holding a dagger in a threatening 
attitude, was affixed to the door, to deter any Indians from breaking 
it open. We directed our course towards the Dog-rib Rock, but 
as our companions were loaded with the weight of near one hundred 
and eighty pounds weight each, we of necessity proceeded at a slow 
pace. ‘The day was extremely warm, and the musquitoes, whose 
attacks had hitherto been feeble, issued forth in swarms from the 
marshes, and were very tormenting. Having walked five miles we 
encamped near a small cluster of pines about two miles from the 
Dog-rib Rock. The canoe party had not been seen since they set 
out. Our hunters went forward to Marten Lake intending to wait 
for us at a place where two deer were deposited. At nine P.M. the 
temperature of the air was 63°. 

We resumed our march at an early hour, and crossed. several lakes 
which lay in our course, as the ice enabled the men to drag their 
burdens on trains formed of sticks and deers’ horns, with more ease 
than they could carry them on their backs. We were kept con- 
stantly wet by this operation, .as the ice had broken near the shores 
of the lakes, but this inconvenience was not regarded, as the day 
was unusually warm: the temperature at two P.M. being 822°. At 
Marten Lake we joined the canoe party, and encamped with them. 
We had the mortification of learning from our hunters that the 
meat they had put en cache here, had been destroyed by the wol- 
verenes, and we had in consequence, to furnish the supper from our 
scanty stock of dried meat. The wind changed from S.E. to N.E. 
in the evening, and the weather became very cold, the thermometer 
being 43° at nine P.M. The few dwarf birches we could collect 
afforded fire insufficient to keep us warm, and we retired under the 
covering of our blankets as soon as the supper was despatched. 
The N.E. breeze rendered the night so extremely cold, that we 
procured but little sleep, having neither fire nor shelter, for though 


318 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


we carried our tents we had been forced to leave the tent poles 
which we could not now replace; we therefore gladly recommenced 
the journey at five in the morning, and travelled through the re- 
maining part of the lake on the ice. Its surface being quite smooth, 
the canoes were dragged along expeditiously by the dogs, and. the 
rest of the party had to walk very: quick to keep pace with them, 
which occasioned them to get many heavy falls. By the time we 
had reached the end of the lake, the wind had increased to a perfect 
gale, and the atmosphere was so cold that we could not proceed 
with the canoes further without the risk of breaking the bark and 
seriously injuring them, we therefore crossed Winter River in them, 
and put up on a ridge of sand hills in a well sheltered place. But as 
the stock of provision was scanty, we determined on proceeding 
as quick as possible, and leaving the canoe party under the charge 
of Mr. Wentzel. We parted from them in the afternoon and first 
directed our course towards a range of hills, where we expected to 
find Antonio Fontano, who had separated from us in the morning. 
In crossing towards these hills I fell through the ice into the lake, 
with my bundle on my shoulders, but was soon extricated without 
receiving any injury; and Mr. Back, who left us to go in search of the 
strageler, met with a similar accident in the evening. We put up on 
a ridge of sand hills, where we found some pines, and made a large 
fire to apprize Mr. Back and Fontano of our situation. St. German 
having killed a deer in the afternoon, we received an acceptable 
supply of meat. The night was stormy and very cold. 
At five next morning our men were sent in different directions 


after our absent companions, but as the weather was fogzy we de- 


spaired of finding them unless they should chance to hear the 
muskets our people were desired to fire. They returned, however, 
at ten, bringing intelligence of them. I went immediately with 
Hepburn to join Mr. Back, and directed Mr. Hood to proceed with 
the Canadians, and halt with them at a spot where the hunters had 


OF THE POLAR SEA. _. 319 


killed a deer. Though Mr. Back was much fatigued he set off with 
me immediately, and in the evening we rejoined our friends on the 
borders of the Big Lake. The Indians informed us that Fontano 
only remained a few hours with them, and then continued his 
journey. We had to oppose a violent gale and frequent snow storms 
through the day, which unseasonable weather caused the tempera- 
ture to descend below the freezing point this evening. The situa- 
tion of our encampment being bleak, and our fuel stunted green 
willows, we passed a very cold and uncomfortable night. 

June 18.—Though the breeze was moderate this morning, the 
atmosphere was piercingly keen. When on the point of starting, 
we perceived Mr. Wentzel’s party coming, and awaited his arrival to 
learn whether the canoes had received any injury during the severe 
weather of yesterday. Finding they had not, we proceeded to get 
upon the ice on the lake, which could not be effected without 
walking up to the waist in water, for some distance from its borders. 
We had not the command of our feet in this situation, and the men 
fell often; poor Junius broke through the ice with his heavy burden 
on his back, but fortunately was not hurt. 

This lake is extensive, and large arms branch from its. main 
course in different directions. At these parts we crossed the pro- 
jecting points of land, and on each occasion had to wade as before, 
which so wearied every one, that we rejoiced when we reached its 
north side and encamped, though our resting-place was a bare rock. 
We had the happiness of finding Fontano at this place. The poor 
fellow had passed the three preceding days without tasting food, and 
was exhausted by anxiety and hunger. His sufferings were con- 
sidered to have been a sufficient punishment for his imprudent 
conduct in separating from us, and we only admonished him to be 
more cautious in future. 

Having received information that the hunters had killed a deer, 
we sent three men to fetch the meat, which was distributed between 


320 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


our party, and the canoe men who had been encamped near to us. 
The thermometer at three P.M. was 46°, at nine 34°. 

We commenced the following day by crossing a lake about four 
miles in length, and then passed over a succession of rugged hills 
for nearly the same distance. The men being anxious to reach 
some pine-trees, which they had seen on their former journey 
walked a quick pace, though they were suffering from swelled legs 
and rheumatic pains; we could not, however, attain the desired 
point, and therefore encamped on the declivity of a hill, which 
sheltered us from the wind; and used the rein-deer moss for fuel, 
which afforded us more warmth than we expected. We perceived 
several patches of snow yet remaining on the surrounding hills. The 
thermometer varied to-day between 55° and 45°. 

On the 20th of June we began our march by crossing a small 
lake, not without much risk, as the surface of the ice was covered 
with water to the depth of two feet, and there were many holes into 
which we slipped, in spite of our efforts to avoid them. <A few of 
the men, being fearful of attempting the traverse with their heavy 
loads, walked round the eastern end of the lake. The parties 
met on the sandy ridge, which separates the streams that fall 
into Winter Lake from those that flow to the northward; and here 
we killed three deer. Near to the base of this ridge we crossed a 
small but rapid stream, in which there is a remarkable cascade of 
about fifty feet descent. Some Indians joined us here, and gave 
us information respecting the situation of Dr. Richardson’s tent, 
which our hunters considered was sufficient for our guidance, and 
therefore proceeded as quickly as they could. We marched a few 
miles farther in the evening, and encamped among some pines; 
but the comfort of a good fire did not compensate for the torment 
we suffered from the host of musquitoes we found at this spot. ‘The 
temperature was 52°. on 
_ We set off next morning at a very early hour. The men took the 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | $21 


course of Point Lake, that they might use their sledges, but the 
officers pursued the nearest route by land to Dr. Richardson’s tent, 
which we reached at eleven A.M. It was situated on the western 
side of an arm of the lake, and near to the part through which the 
Copper-Mine River runs. Our men arrived soon after us, and in 
the evening Mr. Wentzel and his party, with the canoes in ex- 
cellent condition. They were much jaded by their fatiguing 
journey, and several were lame from swellings of the lower extre- 
mities. The ice on the lake was still six or seven feet thick, 
and there was no appearance of its decay except near the edges; 
and as it was evident that, by remaining here until it should 
be removed, we might lose every prospect of success in our under- 
taking, I determined on dragging our stores along its surface, until 
we should come to a part of the river where we could embark; and 
directions were given this evening for each man to prepare a train 
for the conveyance of his portion of the stores. I may remark here, 
as a proof of the strong effect of radiation from the earth in melt- 
ing the ice, that the largest holes in the ice were always formed at 
the base of the high and steep cliffs, which abound on the borders 
of this lake. a | 

We found Akaitcho and the hunters encamped here, but their 
families, and the rest of the tribe, had gone off two days before to 
the Beth-see-to, a large lake to the northward, where they in- 
tended passing the summer. Long-legs and Keskarrah had de- 
parted, to desire the Hook to collect as much meat as he could 
against our arrival at his lodge. We were extremely distressed to 
learn from Dr. Richardson, that Akaitcho and his party had eXx- 
pended all the ammunition they had received at Fort Enterprise, 
without having contributed any supply of provision. The Doctor 
had, however, through the assistance of two hunters he kept with 
him, prepared two hundred pounds of dried meat, which was now 
our sole dependence for the. journey. On the following morning IT 

QT 


322 ~— A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


sepravented to Akaitcho that we had | been ' greatly disappointed: by 
his conduct, which was: so opposite to the promise of exertion he‘had 
made, on quitting Fort, Enterprise. He offered. many excuses; but 
finding they were not satisfactory, he admitted that the :greater part 
of the ammunition had been given: to) those: who-accompanied ‘the 
women to the Beth-see-to, and promised to behave better im future! 
I then told him, that I imtended m future to give them ammuni 
tion only in proportion to the meat which was brought in, and ‘that 
we should commence upon that plan, by supplying: . with fifteen 
balls, and the hunters with. ten each. fd ba 
The number-of our hunters was now reduced: to ve as two of 
the most. active declined going any further, their father, who 
thought. himself dying, having solicited» them ‘to: remain and close 
his: eyes.’ These five,were furnished) with ammunition, and sent 
forward. to hunt: on the south border of the lake, with directions to 
place any meat they might procure near to the edge of the lake, 
and set. up. marks to guide us tothe spots. Akaitcho, his brother; 
the guide, and three other men, remained to accompany us. We 
were much surprised to perceive an extraordinary difference in eli- 
mate in so short an advance to the northward as fifty miles: The 
snow here was lying in.large patches on the hills: The dwarf-birch 
and willows were only just beginning to open their buds; which 
had burst forth at Fort. Enterprise many days previous to our de- 
parture. Vegetation seemed to be three weeks or a: month later 
here than at. that place. We had heavy showers of rain through the 
night of the 22d, which melted the snow, and visibly. wasted the ice. 
On the. 23d, the’ men ‘were busily employed in making their 
trains, and in pounding. the, meat for pemmican, ~The’ situation: of 
the encampment was ascertained, latitude 65° 12' 40" N., longitude 
113° 8’ 25" W., and the variation 43° 4’ 20” EB... -‘The arrangements | 
being ea pietedlns purposed commencing’ our journey next morn- 
ing, but the weather was \teo stormy to admit of our venturing upon 


UIPUIT APLIAL UYOPAG Caf YPABY PIYUSY IAL 


[e8l Ge FUNf- 


NIOd HONMOMEL ONISSVWA NOLLIGCTAXKa 
“POL TL NO VIVT LNIOd HONOMEHD DNISSVd NOILIGE 


Nt 


i 


MOWAT HULU 


in i 


EW Movs ~nery Aq wea 
TmSputy wpe AQ pave.suyy ; : ; : i . _ 


peta: 
hs 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 323 


the lake with the canoes. In the afternoon a heavy fall of snow 
took place, which was succeeded by sleet and rain. The north-east 
gale continued, but the thermometer rose to 39°. 

June 25.—The wind having. abated m ‘the night, we prepared for 
starting at an early hour. ‘The three canoes were mounted on 
sledges, and nine men were appomted to conduct them, having the 
assistance of two dogs to each canoe. The stores and provisions were 
distributed equally among the rest of our men, except a few small 
articles which the Indians carried... The provision consisted of only 
two bags of pemmican, two of pounded meat, five of suet, and 
two small bundles of dried-provision, together with fresh meat suf- 
ficient for our supper at night. It was gratifying to witness the 
readiness with which the men prepared for and commenced the 
journey, which promised to be so very laborious, as each of them 
had to drag upwards of one hundred and eighty pounds on his 
sledge. Mr. Back having chosen the moment of our setting off for 
sketching the annexed accurate and interesting picture of our 
mode of travelling on the ice, further description of it is unne- 
cessary. | 

Our course led down the main channel of the lake, which varied 
in breadth from half a mile to three miles; but we proceeded at 
a slow pace, as the:snow which fell last night, and still lay on the 
lake, very much impeded the sledges. Many extensive arms branched 
off on the north side of this channel, and it was bounded on the 
south by a chain of lofty islands. The hills on both sides rose to 
the height of six hundred or seven hundred feet, and high steep 
cliffs were numerous. . Clusters of pines were occasionally seen in 
the valleys. We put up, at eight P.M., in a spot which afforded 
us but a few twigs for fuel. The party was much fatigued, and 
several of the men were affected by an inflammation on the inside 
of: the thigh, attended with hardness and swelling. The distance 
made to-day was six miles. | 

| 27 2 


324p A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


_ We ‘started at ten next morning. The day was extremely hot, 


and the men were soon jaded; their lameness increased very much, 
and some not previously affected began to complain. The dogs too 


shewed symptoms of great weakness, and one of them ‘stretched 
himself obstinately on the ice, and was obliged to be released from 
the harness. Under these circumstances we were compelled to 
encamp at an early hour, having come only four miles. The suf. 
fermgs of the people in this early stage of our journey were 
truly discouraging to them, and very distressing to us, whose 
situation was comparatively easy. I, therefore, determined on leaving 


the third canoe, which had. been principally carried to provide 
against any accident happening to the others. By this we gained 


three men, to lighten the loads of those who were most lame, and 


an additional dog for each of the other canoes. It was accordingly 


properly secured on a stage erected for the purpose near the en- 


campment. Dried meat was issued for supper, but in the course 


of the evening the Indians killed two deer, which were immediately 
sent for. i 


The channel of the lake through which we had passed to-day. 


was bounded on both sides by islands of considerable height, pre- 
senting bold and rugged scenery. We were informed by our guide, 


that a large body of the lake lies to the northward of a long island. 


which we passed. air 

Another deer was killed next morning, but as the men break- 
fasted off it before they started, the additional weight was not ma- 
terially felt. The burthens of the men being considerably light- 
ened by the arrangements of last evening, the party walked at the 
rate of one mile and three quarters an hour until the afternoon, 
when our pace was slackened, as the surface of the ice was more’ 
rough, and our lame companions felt their sores very galling. At 
noon we passed a deep bay on the south side, which is said to 


OF THE POLAR SEA. - 325, 


receive a river.’ Throughout the day’s march the hills on each side 
of the lake bore a strong resemblance, in height and form, to those 
about Fort Enterprise. We encamped on the north main shore, 
among some spruce trees, having walked eight miles and a half. 
Three or four fish were caught with lines through holes, which the 
water had worn in the ice. We perceived a slight westerly current 
at. these places. | | 

It rained heavily during the night, and this was succeeded by a 

dense fog on the morning of the 28th. Being short of provisions 
we commenced our journey, though the points of land were not 
discernible beyond a short distance. The surface of the ice, being 
honeycombed, by the recent. rains, presented innumerable sharp. 
points, which tore-.our shoes, and lacerated the feet at every step. 
The poor dogs, too, marked their path with their blood. 
In the evening the atmosphere became. clear, and, at. five P.M., 
we reached the rapid by which Point Lake communicates with 
Red-Rock Lake. This rapid is only one hundred yards wide, and 
we were much disappointed at finding the Copper-Mine River such 
an inconsiderable stream. The canoes descended the rapid, but the 
cargoes were carried across the peninsula, and placed again on. the 
sledges, as the next lake was still frozen. We passed an extensive 
arm, branching to the eastward, and encamped. just below it, on the 
western bank, among spruce pines, having walked six miles of direct 
distance. The rolled stones on the beach are principally red day 
slate, hence its Indian appellation, which we have retained. — 

We continued our journey at the usual hour next morning. At 
noon the variation was observed to be 47° east. Ourattention was 
afterwards directed to some pine branches, scattered on the ice, 
which proved to be marks placed by our hunters, to guide us to the 
spot where they had deposited the carcasses of two small deer: 
This supply was very seasonable, and the men cheerfully dragged 
the additional weight. Akaitcho, judging from the appearance of 


326 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the meat, thought it had been placed here three days ago, and that 
the hunters were considerably in advance. _We put up, at six P.M., 


near the end of the lake, having come twelve miles and_ three. 


quarters, and found the channel open by which it is connected with 
the Rock-nest Lake. A river was pointed out, bearing south from our 
encampment, which is said. to rise near Great Marten Lake. Red-rock 
Lake is in general narrow, its shelving banks are well clothed with 
wood, and even the hills, which attain an elevation of four hundred or 
five hundred feet, are ornamented, half way up, with stunted pines. 

On June 30, the men having gummed the canoes, embarked with 
their burdens to descend the river; but) we accompanied the In- 
dians about five miles across a neck of land, when we also em- 
barked. The river was about two hundred yards wide, and. its 
course being uninterrupted, we cherished a sanguine hope of now 
getting on more speedily, until: we perceived that the waters of 
Rock-nest Lake were still bound by ice, and that recourse must 
again. be had to the sledges. The ice was much decayed, and 
we were exposed to great risk of breaking through in making 
the traverse. In one part we had to cross an open channel in 
the canoes, and in another were compelled to quit the lake, and 
make a portage along the land... When the party had got upon the 
ice-again, our guide evinced much uncertainty as to the route. He 


first directed us towards: the west end of the lake; but when we 
had nearly gained that point, he discovered a remarkable rock to 


the north-east, named by the Indians the Rock-nest, and then. re- 
collected that the river ran‘at its base. Our course was immediately 
changed to that direction, but the traverse we had then to make 


was more dangerous than the former one.. The ice cracked under: 


us at every step, and the party were obliged to separate’ them- 


selves widely to prevent accidents... We landed at the first point 


we could approach, but having found an open channel close to the 
shore, we were obliged to ferry the goods across on pieces of ice. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 327 


The fresh meat beng expended we had to make another inroad. on 
our pounded meat. The evening was very warm, and the mus- 
quitoes numerous. A large fire was made to apprize the hunters 
of our advance. The scenery of Rock-nest Lake is picturesque, its 
shores are rather low, except at the Rock’s-nest; and two or three 
eminences on the eastern side. The only wood is the pine, which is 
twenty or thirty feet high, and about one foot im diameter. Our 
distance to-day was six miles. 

July \.—Our guide directed us to proceed towards a deep bay on 
the north side of the lake, where he supposed we should. find the 
river. In consequence of the bad state of the ice, we employed all 
the different modes of travelling we had previously. followed. in 
attaining this place; and, in crossing a point of land, had the mis- 
fortune to lose one of the dogs, which set off in pursuit of some 
rein-deer. Arriving at the bay, we only found a stream that fell 
into it from the north-east; and looked in vain for the Copper-Mine 
River. This circumstance confused the guide, and he confessed. that 
he was now doubtful of the proper route ; we, therefore, halted, and 
despatched him, with two men, to look for the river from the top 
of the high hills near the Nest-rock. During this delay a slight 
injury was repaired, which one of the canoes had received. We 
were here amused by the interesting spectacle of a wolf chasing 
two rein-deer on the ice. The pursuer being alarmed at the sight 
of our men, gave up the chase when near to the hindmost, much to 
our regret, for we were calculating upon the chance of sharing in 
his capture. ha chee 

At four P.M. our men returned; with the agreeable information 
that they had seen the river flowing at the base of the Rock-nest. 
The’ canoes and stores were immediately placed on the ice, and 
dragged thither; we then embarked, but soon had to cut through a 
barrier of drift ice that blocked up the way. We afterwards de- 
scended two strong rapids, and encamped near to the discharge of a 


328 | A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


small stream which flows from an adjoining lake. The Copper- 
Mine River, at. this point, is. about two hundred yards wide, and 
ten feet deep, and flows very rapidly over a rocky bottom. The 
scenery of its banks is picturesque, the hills shelve to the water- 
side, and are well covered with wood, and the surface of the rocks 
is richly ornamented with lichens.. The Indians say that. the 
same kind of country prevails.as far as Mackenzie’s River in this 
parallel; but that the land to the eastward is perfectly barren. 
Akaitcho and one of the Indians killed two deer, which were im- 
mediately sent for. Two of the hunters arrived in the night, and 
we learned that their companions, instead of. being in advance, as we 
supposed, were staying at the place where we first found the river 
open. ‘They had only seen our fires last evening, and had sent to 
examine who we were. The circumstance of having passed them 
was very vexatious, as they had three deer en cache at their en- 
campment. However, an Indian was sent to desire those who re- 
mained to join us, and bring the meat. 

We embarked at nine A.M. on July 2nd, and descended a suc- 
cession of strong rapids for three miles. We were carried along 
with extraordinary rapidity, shooting over large stones, upon which 
a single stroke would have been destructive to the canoes; and we 
were also in danger of breaking them, from the want of the long 
poles which lie along their bottoms and equalize their cargoes, as 


they plunged very much, and on one occasion the first, canoe was. 


almost filled with the waves. But there was no receding after we 
had once launched into the stream, and our safety depended on the 
skill and dexterity of the bowmen and steersmen. The banks of the 
river here are rocky, and the scenery beautiful; consisting of gentle 
elevations and dales wooded to the edge of the stream, and flanked 


on both sides at the distance of three or four miles by a range of - 
round-backed barren -hills, upwards of six hundred feet high. At 


the foot of the rapids the high lands receded to a greater distance; 


SE EEE EE 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 329 


‘and the river flowed with a more gentle current, in a wider channel, 
through a level and open country consisting of alluvial sand. In 
one place the passage was blocked up by drift ice, still covered. to 
some depth with snow. A channel for the canoes was made for 
some way with the hatchets and poles; but on reaching the more 
‘compact part we were under the necessity of transporting the 
canoes and cargoes across it; an operation of much hazard, as the 
snow concealed the numerous holes which the water had made in 
the ice. This expansion of the river being mistaken by the guide 
for a lake, which he spoke of as the last on our route to the sea, 
we supposed. that we should have no more ice to cross, and therefore 
encamped after passing through it, for the ‘purpose of fitting the 
canoes properly for the voyage, and to provide poles, which are not 
only necessary to strengthen them when placed in the bottom, but 
essentially requisite for the safe management of them in dangerous 
rapids. The guide began afterwards to doubt whether the lake he 
meant was not further on, and he was sent with two men to examine 
mto the fact, who returned in the evening with the information of 
its being below us, but that there was an open channel through it. 
This day was very sultry, several plants appeared in flower. 

~The men were employed in repairing their canoes to a late hour, 
and commenced very early next morning, as we were desirous of 
availing ourselves of every part. of this favourable weather for their 
operations. The hunters arrived in the course of the night. It— 
appeared that the dog which escaped. from us two days ago came 
mto the vicinity of their encampment, howling piteously ; seeing 
him without his harness, they came to the hasty conclusion that our 
whole party had perished in a rapid; and throwing away part of 
their baggage, and leaving the meat behind them, they set off with 
the utmost haste to join Long-legs. Our messenger met them in 
their. flight, but too far advanced to admit of their returning for the 
meat. Akaitcho scolded them heartily for their thoughtlessness in 


2U 


330 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


leaving the meat, which we so much wanted, They expressed their 
regret, and being ashamed of their panic, proposed to remedy the 
evil as much as possible by going forward, without stopping until 
they came toa favourable spot for hunting, which they expected to 
do about thirty or forty miles below our present encampment. 
Akaitcho accompanied them, but previous to setting off he renewed 
his charge that we should be on our guard against the bears, which 
was occasioned by the hunters having fired at one this morning as 
they were descending a rapid in their canoe. As their small canoes 
would only carry five persons, two of the hunters had to walk: in 
turns along the banks. we 

In our rambles round the encampment, we witnessed fail sacs 
sure the progress which the vegetation had made within the few 
last warm days; most of the trees had put forth their leaves, and 
several flowers ornamented the moss-covered ground; many of the 
smaller summer birds were observed in the woods, and a variety of 
ducks, gulls, and plovers, were seen on the banks of the river. The 
river is about three hundred yards wide at this part, is deep and 
flows over a bed of alluvial sand. We caught some trout of con- 
siderable size with our lines, and a few white fish in the nets, which 
maintamed us, with a little assistance from the pemmican. The 
repair of our canoes was completed this evening. Previous ‘to em: 
barking I issued an order that no rapid should in future be de- 
scended until the bowmen had examined it, and decided upon its 
being safe to run, Wherever the least danger was to be appre- 
hended, or the crew had to disembark for the purpose of lightening 
the canoe, the ammunition, guns and instruments, were always to 
be put out and carried along the bank; that we might be provided 
with the means of ‘subsisting ourselves, in case of any accident 
befalling the canoes. : 

‘The situation of our encampment was ascertained to be 65° 43 
28'N., longitude 114° 26’ 45" W., and the variation 42° 17 22’ E. 


OF THE POLAR SEA, > | 331 


_ At four in the morning of July 4th we embarked and descended 
a ‘succession of very agitated rapids, but took the precaution of 
landing the articles mentioned yesterday, wherever there appeared 
any hazard; notwithstanding all our precautions the leading canoe 
struck with great force against a stone, and the bark was split, but 
this injury was easily repaired, and we regretted only the loss of 
time. At, eleven we came to an expansion of the river where the 
current. ran with less force, and an accumulation of drift ice had, in 
consequence, barred the channel; which the canoes and. cargoes 
were carried over. The ice in many places adhered to the banks, 
and projected in wide ledges several feet thick over the stream, 
which had hollowed them out beneath. On one occasion as the 
people were embarking from one of these ledges, it suddenly gave 
way, and. three men were precipitated into the water, but were 
rescued without. further damage than a sound ducking, and the 
canoe fortunately, (and narrowly), escaped being crushed. Pereeiving 
one of the Indians sitting on the east bank of the river, we landed, 
and having learned from him that Akaitcho and the hunters had gone 
in pursuit of a herd of musk oxen, we encamped, iii come 
twenty-four miles and a half. 

In the afternoon they brought us the agreeable intelligence of 
their having killed eight cows, of which four were full grown. 
All the party were immediately despatched to bring in this sea- 
sonable supply. A young cow irritated by the firing of the 
hunters ran down to the river, and passed close to me when walking 
at.a short distance from the tents. I fired and wounded it, when’ 
the animal instantly turned, and ran at me, but I avoided its fury 
by jumping aside and getting upon an elevated piece of ground. 
In the mean time some people came from the tents, ang it. took to 
flight. 

‘The musk oxen, like the buffalo, herd fae cs in margin and 


2U 2 


332 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


generally frequent the barren grounds during the summer months, 


keeping near to the banks of the rivers, but retire to the woods in’ 
winter. ‘hey seem to be less watchful than most other wild animals,. 


and when grazing are not difficult to approach, provided the hunters 
go against the wind; when two or three men get so near a herd as 
to fire at them from different points, these animals instead of sepa- 
rating or running away, huddle closer together, and several are 
generally killed; but if the wound is not mortal they become en- 
raged and dart in the most furious manner at the hunters, who must 


be very dexterous to evade them: They can defend themselves by 


their powerful horns against the wolves and bears, which as the 
Indians say, they not unfrequently kill. 21ND 
The musk oxen feed on the same substances with the rein-deer; 
and the prints of the feet of these two animals are so much alike that 
it requires the eye of an experienced hunter to distinguish them. 


The largest of these animals killed by us did not exceed in weight 


three hundred pounds. The flesh has a musky disagreeable flavour, 
particularly when the animal is lean, which unfortunately for us was 
the case with all that were now killed by us. 

During this day’s march the river varied in breadth from one 
hundred to two hundred feet, and except in two open spaces, a very 
strong current marked a deep descent the whole way. It flows over 
a bed of gravel, of which also its immediate banks are composed. 
Near to our encampment it is bounded by cliffs of fine sand from 
one hundred to two hundred feet high. Sandy plains extend on a 
level with the summit of these cliffs, and at the distance of six or 
seven miles are terminated by ranges of hills eight hundred or one 
thousand feet high. The grass on these plains affords excellent 
pasturage for the musk oxen, and they generally abound here. The 
hunters added two more to our stock in the course of the night. 
As we had now more meat than the party could consume fresh, 


OF THE POLAR SEA.” - 339 


we delayed our voyage next day for the purpose of drying: it. 
The hunters were supplied with more ammunition, and sent 
forward; but Akaitcho, his brother, and another Indian remained 
with us. | 
It may here be proper to mention, that the officers had treated 
Akaitcho more distantly since our departure from Point Lake, for 
the purpose of shewing him their opinion of his misconduct. 'The 
diligence in hunting, however, which. he had evinced at this place, 
induced us to receive him more familiarly when he came to the tent 
this evening. During our conversation he endeavoured to excite 
suspicions in our minds against the Hook, by saying, “« I am 
aware that you consider me the worst man of my nation; but I 
know the Hook to be a great rogue, and, I think, he will disappoint 
you.” . 
On the morning of the 6th we embarked, and descended a series 
of rapids, having twice unloaded the canoes where the water was 
shallow. After passing the mouth of the Fairy * Lake River the 
rapids ceased. The main stream was then about three hundred 
yards wide, and generally deep, though, in one part, the channel 
was interrupted by several sandy banks, and low alluvial islands 
covered with willows. It flows between banks of sand thinly 
wooded, and as we advanced the barren hills approached the water’s 
edge. | . 
At ten we rejoimed our hunters, who had killed a deer, and 
halted to breakfast. We sent them forward: one of them, who 


* This is an Indian name. The Northern Indian fairies are six inches high, lead a 
life similar to the Indians, and are excellent hunters. Those who have had the good 
fortune to fall im with their tiny encampments have been kindly treated, and regaled on 
venison, We did not learn with certainty whether the existence of these delightful 
creatures is known from Indian ‘tradition, or whether the Indians owe their knowledge of 


them to their intercourse with the traders, but think the former probable. 


BEL A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


was walking along the shore afterwards, fired upon two brown 
bears, and wounded one of them, which instantly turned and 
pursued him. His companions in the canoes put ashore to his 
assistance, but did not succeed in killing the bears, which fled upon 
the reinforcement coming up. During the delay thus occasioned 
we overtook them, and they continued with us during the rest of 
the day. | 

We encamped. at die foot of a lofty range of mountains, which 
appear to be from one thousand two hundred to one thousand. five 
hundred feet high; they arein general round backed, but the outline 
is not even, being interrupted by craggy conical eminences. This 
is the first ridge of hills we have seen in this country, that deserves 
the appellation of a mountain range ; it is probably a continuation of 
the stony mountains crossed by Hearne. Many plants appeared 
in full flower near the tents, and Dr. Richardson gathered some 
high up on the hills. - The distance we made to-day was fifty miles. 

There was a hoar frost in the night, and the temperature, at four 
next morning, was 40°: embarking at that hour, we glided quickly 
down the stream and, by seven arrived at the Hook’s encamp- 
ment, which was placed on the summit of a lofty sand cliff, whose 
base was washed by the river. This chief had with him only three 
hunters, and a few old men and their families, the rest. of his 
band having remained at their snares in Bear Lake. His brother, 
Long-legs, and our guide, Keskarrah, who had joined him three 
days before, had communicated to him our want of provision, and 
we were happy to find that, departing from the general practice of 
Indian chiefs, he entered at once upon the business, without making 
a long speech. As an introductory mark of our regard, I decorated 
him with a medal, similar to those which had been given to the 
other leaders. ‘The Hook began by stating, “ that he was aware of 
_ our being destitute of provision; and of the great need we had of 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 335 


an ample stock, to enable us. to execute our undertaking; and_ his 
‘regret, that the unusual scarcity of animals this season, together with 
the circumstance of his having only just received .a supply of am- 
munition from Fort Providence, had prevented him. from collecting 
the quantity of meat he had wished to do for our use. The amount, 
indeed,” he said, “ is very small, but I will cheerfully give you 
what I have: we are too much indebted to the white people, to 
allow them to want food on our lands, whilst we have any to give 
them. Our families can live .on fish until we can ‘procure more 
meat, but the season. is too short to allow of your delaying, to gain 
subsistence in that manner.” He immediately desired, aloud, that 
the women should bring «all the meat they had to us; and we soon 
collected sufficient to make three bags and a ‘half of pemmican: 
besides some dried meat and tongues. Weowere truly delighted by 
this prompt and cheerful behaviour, and would gladly have rewarded 
the kindness of himself and his companions by some substantial 
present, but we were limited by the scantiness of our store toa 
small donation of fifteen charges of ammunition to each of the 
chiefs. In return for the provision they accepted notes on the 
North-West ‘Company, to be paid at Fort Providence; and to these 
was subjoined an order for a few articles of clothing, as an additional 
present. I then endeavoured to prevail upon the Hook to remain in 
this viemity with his hunters until the autumn, and to make de- 
posits of provision in different parts of the course to the sea, as a 
resource for our party, in the event of our being compelled to re- 
turn by this route. He required time, however, to consider this 
matter, and promised ‘to give me an answer next day. I was 
rejoiced to ‘find him then prepared to meet my wish, and the fol 
lowing plan was agreed upon :—As the animals abound, at all times; 
onthe borders of Bear Lake, they promised to remain on the east 
side of it until the month of November, at that spot which is nearest 


336 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


to the Copper-Mine River, from whence there is a communication 
by a chain of lakes and portages. There the principal deposit of 
provision was to be made; but during the summer the hunters 
were to be employed in putting up supplies of dried meat at con- 
venient distances, not only along the communication from this river, 
but also upon its banks, as far down as the Copper Mountain. 
_ They were also to place particular marks to guide our course to their 
lodges. We contracted to repay them liberally, whether we re- 
turned by this way or not; if we did, they were to accompany. us to 
Fort. Providence to receive the reward; and, at any rate, I pro- 
mised to send the necessary documents by Mr. Wentzel, from the 
sea-coast, to ensure their having an ample remuneration. | With this 
arrangement they were perfectly satisfied, and we could not be less 
so, knowing they had every motive for fulfilling their promises, as 
the place they had chosen to remain at is their usual hunting- 
ground. ‘The uncommon anxiety these chiefs expressed for our 
safety, appeared to us as likely to prompt them to every care and 
attention, and I record their expressions with gratitude. After re- 
presenting the numerous hardships we should have to encounter in 
the strongest manner, though in language similar to what we had 
often heard from our friend Akaitcho, they earnestly entreated we 
would be constantly on our guard against the treachery of the Esqui- 
maux; and no less forcibly desired we would not proceed far along 
the coast, as they dreaded the consequences of our being exposed 
to a tempestuous sea in canoes, and having to endure the cold of the 
autumn on a shore destitute of fuel. The Hook, having been an in- 
valid for several years, rejoiced at the opportunity of consulting 
Dr, Richardson, who immediately gave him advice, and. supplied him r 
with medicine. | 

The pounded meat and fat were converted into pemmican, ca 
paratory to our, voyage. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 337 


The result of our observations at the Hook’s encampment. was, 
latitude 66° 45° 11" N., longitude 115° 42° 23" W., variation of the 
compass 46° 7 30° E. 

- We embarked at eleven to proceed on our journey. ‘Akaitelio 
“inl his brother, the guide, being in the first canoe, and old 
Keskarrah in the other. We wished to dispense with the further 
attendance of two guides, and made a proposition that either 
of them might remain here, but neither would relinquish the 
honour of escorting the Expedition to the sea. One of our hunters, 
however, was less eager for this honour, and preferred remaining 
with Keskarrah’s fascinating daughter. The other four, with the 
Little Singer, accompanied us, two of them conducting their small 
canoes in turns, and the rest walking along the beach. 

. The river flows over a bed of sand, and winds in an uninter- 
rupted channel of from three quarters to a mile broad, between 
two ranges of hills, which are pretty even in their outline, and 
round backed, but having rather steep acclivities. The immediate 
borders of the stream consisted either of high banks of sand, or 
steep gravel cliffs; and, sometimes, where the hills receded to a 
little distance, the intervening space was occupied by high sandy 
ridges. | 7 

At three P.M., after passing along the foot of a high range of 
hills, we arrived at the portage leading to the Bear Lake, to which 
we have previously alluded. Its position is very remarkable, being 
situated at the most westerly part of the Copper-Mine River, and 
at the point where it resumes a northern course, and forces a passage 
through the lofty ridge of mountains, to which it had run parallel 
for the last thirty miles. As the Indians travel from hence, with 
their families, in three days, to the point where they propose stay- 
ing for us, the distance, I think, cannot exceed forty miles ; and, 
admitting the course to be due west, which is the direction the 

2x 


338 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


guide pointed, that distance would place the eastern eee of Bear 
Lake in 118%° W. longitude. 

Beyond this spot the river is diminished in pieedely and a suc- 
cession of rapids are formed ; but as the water was deep, we passed 
through them without discharging any part of the cargoes. It still 
runs between high ranges of mountains, though its actual bounda- 
ries are banks of mud mixed with clay, which are clothed with 
stunted pines.. We picked upia deer which the hunters had shot, 
and killed another from the canoe; and also received an addition to 
our stock of provision of seven young geese, which the hunters 
had beaten down with their sticks. About six P.M. we perceived a 
mark on the shore, which, on examination, was found to have been 
recently put up by some Indians ; and, on proceeding further, we 
discerned stronger proofs of their being near to that spot; we, 
therefore, encamped, and made a large fire as a signal, which they 
answered ina similar way. Mr. Wentzel’was immediately ‘sent, in 
expectation’ of getting provision from them. On his return, we 
learned that the party consisted of three old’ Copper Indians, with 
their families, who had supported themselves with the bow and 
arrow since last autumn, not having visited Fort Providence for 
more than a year; and so successful had they been, that they were 
enabled to supply us with upwards of seventy pounds of dried 
meat, and six moose skins fit for making shoes, which were the more 
valuable, as we were apprehensive of being barefooted before the 
journey could be completed. ©The evening’ was sultry, and the 
musquitoes appeared. in great numbers. The distance made to-day 
twenty-five miles.’ Pyston ¢ 

On the following morning we went down to these Indians, and 
delivered to them notes on the North-West. Company, for the meat 
and skins they had furnished ; and we had then the mortification of 
learning, that not having people to carry a considerable quantity 


OF THE POLAR SEA. . 339 


of pounded meat, which they had intended for us, they had left it 
upon the. Bear-Lake Portage... They promised, however, to get it 
conveyed to the banks of this river before we could return, and we 
rewarded them with a present of knives and files. : 

After re-embarking we continued to descend the river, abil was 
now contracted between lofty banks to about one hundred and 
twenty yards wide; the current. was very strong. At eleven we 
came to a rapid, which had been the theme of discourse with the 
Indians for many days, and which they had described. to us as im- 
passable in canoes. The river here descends. for three quarters ofa 
mile, in a deep, but narrow and crooked, channel, which it has cut 
through the foot of a hill of five hundred or six hundred feet high. 
It is confined between perpendicular cliffs resembling. stone walls, 
varying in height from eighty to one hundred and fifty feet, on 
which lies a mass of fine sand. The body of the river, pent within 
this narrow chasm, dashed furiously round the projecting rocky 
columns, and discharged itself at the northern. extremity in a sheet 
of foam. The canoes, after discharging part. of their cargoes, ran 
through this defile without.sustaining any injury. Accurate sketches 
of this interesting scene were taken. by Messrs. Back and Hood. 
Soon after passing this rapid, we perceived the hunters running up the 
east, side of the river, to prevent us from disturbing a herd of musk 
oxen, which they had observed grazing on the opposite bank ; we 
put them across, and they succeeded in killing six, upon which we 
encamped for the purpose of drying the meat.) The country below 
the rocky defile rapid consists. of sandy plains, broken by small 
conical eminences also of sand; and bounded to the westward: by 
a continuation of the mountain chain, which we -had crossed at 
the Bear-Lake Portage; and to the eastward. and northward, at 
the distance of twelve miles, by the Copper. Mountains. which 
Mr. Hearne visited. The plains are crowned by several clumps of 
moderately large spruces, about thirty feet high. 


2X 2 


340 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


This evening the Indians made a large fire, as a signal to the 
Hook’s party that we had passed the éerrific rapid in safety. 

The position of our encampment was ascertained to be, latitude 
67° 1 10° N., longitude 116° 27’ 28" W., variation of the compass 
44° 11 43" E., dip of the needle 87°31’ 18". 

Some thunder showers retarded the drying of the meat, and our 
embarkation was delayed next day. The hunters were sent for- 
ward to hunt at the Copper Mountains, under the superintendence 
of Adam, the interpreter, who received strict injunctions not to 
permit them to make any large fires, lest they should alarm straggling 
parties of the Esquimaux. : 

The musquitoes were now very numerous and annoying, but 
we consoled ourselves with the hope that their season would be 
short. 

On the 11th we started at three A.M., and as*the metas had re- 
presented the river below our encampment to be full of shoals, some 
of the men were directed to walk along the shore, but they were 
assailed so violently by the musquitoes, as to be compelled to em- 
bark very soon; and we afterwards ‘passed over the shallow parts 
by the aid of the- poles, without experiencing much interruption: 
The current ran very rapidly, having been augmented by the waters of 
the Mouse River and several small streams. We rejoined our hunters 
at the foot of the Copper Mountains, and found they had killed 
three musk oxen. ‘This circumstance determined us on encamping 
to dry the meat, as there was wood at the spot. We availed our 
selves of this delay to visit the Copper Mountains in search of spe- 
cimens of the ore, agreeably to my instructions; and a party of 
twenty-one persons, consisting of the officers, some of the voyagers, 
and.all the Indians, set off on that excursion. We travelled for nine 
hours over a considerable space of ground, but found only a few small 
pieces of native copper. The range we ascended was on the west 
side of the river, extending W.N.W. and E.S.E. The mountains 


OF THE POLAR SEA. -  d4] 


varied in height from one thousand two hundred to one thousand 
five hundred feet. For a description of the character of the rocks I 
must refer the reader to Dr. Richardson’s Mineralogical Observa- 
tions. The uniformity of the mountains is interrupted by narrow 
valleys traversed by small streams. The best specimens of metal 
we procured were found among the stones in these valleys, and it 
was in such situations that our guides desired us to search most 
carefully. It would appear, that when the Indians see any sparry 
substance projecting above the surface, they dig there; but they 
have no other rule to direct them, and have never found the metal 
in its original repository. Our guides reported that they had found 
copper in large pieces in every part of this range, for two days’ walk 
to the north-west, and that the Esquimaux come hither to search 
for it. The annual visits which the Copper Indians were accus- 
tomed to make to these mountains, when most of their weapons 
and utensils were made of copper, have been discontinued since 
they have been enabled to obtain a supply of ice chisels and other 
instruments of iron by the establishment of trading posts near to 
their hunting grounds. That none of those who accompanied us had 
visited them for many years was evident, from their ignorance of the 
spots most abundant in metal. | 

The impracticability of navigating the river upwards from the 
sea, and the want of wood for forming an establishment, would 
prove insuperable objections to rendering the collection of copper 
at this part worthy of mercantile speculation. | 

We had the opportunity of surveying the country from several 
elevated positions. Two or three small lakes only were visible, 
still partly frozen; and much snow remained on the mountains 
The trees were reduced to a scanty fringe on the borders of the 
river, and. every side was beset by naked mountains. 

The day was unusually warm, and, therefore, favourable for ities 


te 


342 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the meat. Our whole stock of provision, calculated for preservation, 
was sufficient for fourteen days, without any diminution of the ordi- 
nary allowance of three pounds to each man per day. The situation 
of our tents was 67° 10’ 30" N., longitude 116° 25’ 45” W. 

June 12.—The Indians, knowing the course of the river below 
this point to be only a succession of rapids, declined taking their 
canoes any further; but as I conceived one of them would be re- 
quired, should we be compelled to walk along the coast, two of 0 our 
men were appointed to conduct it: 

As we were now entering on the confines of the Esquimaux 
country, our guides recommended us to be cautious in lighting fires, 
lest. we should discover ourselves, adding that the same reason would 
lead them to travel as much as possible in the valleys, and to avoid 
crossing the tops of the hills. We embarked at six A.M., taking 
with us only old Keskarrah. The other Indians walked along the 
banks of the river. Throughout this day’s voyage the current was 
very strong, running four or five miles an hour; but the navigation 
was tolerable, and we had to lighten the canoes only once, in a 
contracted part of the river where the waves were very high. The 
river is in ‘many places confined between perpendicular walls of rock 
to one hundred and fifty yards in width, and there the rapids were 
most agitated. Large masses of ice twelve or fourteen feet thick, 
were still adhering to many parts of the bank, indicating the tardy 
departure of winter from this inhospitable land, but the earth 
around them was rich with vegetation. In the evening two musk- 
oxen being seen on the beach, were pursued and killed by our men. 
Whilst we were waiting to embark the meat, the Indians rejoined 
us, and reported they had been attacked by a bear, which sprang upon 
them whilst they were conversing together. His attack was so sudden 
that they had not time to level their guns properly, and they all 
missed except Akaitcho, who, less confused than the rest, took 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 343 


deliberate aim, and shot the animal dead. They do not eat the 
flesh of the bear, but knowing that we had no such prejudice, they 
brought us some of the choice pieces, which upon trial we found 
to. be’ excellent meat. ) 

The Indians having informed us that we were now within twelve 
miles of the rapid where the Esquimaux have invariably been found, 
we pitched our tents on the beach, under the shelter of a high hill 
whose precipitous side is washed by the river, intending to send 
forward some persons to determine the situation of their present 
abode. Some vestiges of an old Esquimaux encampment were ob- 
served near to the tents, and the stumps of the trees bore marks of 
the stone hatchets they use. A strict watch’ was appointed, con- 
sisting of an officer, four Canadians,’ and an Indian, and directions 
were given for the rest of the party to sleep with their arms by their 
side. That as little delay as possible might be experienced in 
opening a communication with the Esquimaux, we immediately 
commenced the arrangements for sending forward persons to. dis- 
cover whether there were any in our vicinity. Akaitcho and the 
guides proposed that two of the hunters should be despatched on this 
service, who had extremely quick sight, and were accustomed to act 
as scouts, an office which required equal caution and circumspection. 
A strong objection, however, lay against this plan in the probability 
of their being discovered by a straggling hunter, which. would be 
destructive to every hope ofaccommodation. It was therefore de- 
termined to send Augustus and J unius, who were very. desirous to 
undertake the service. These adventurous men proposed: to go 
armed only with pistols concealed in their dress, and furnished: with 
beads, looking-glasses and other articles, that'they might conciliate 
their countrymen by presents. We could not divest.our minds of 
the apprehension, that it might be a service of much hazard if the 
Esquimaux were as hostile to strangers as the Copper Indians have 
invariably represented them to be; and we felt great reluctance in 


344: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


exposing our two little interpreters, who had rendered themselves 
dear to the whole party, to the most distant chance of receiving 
injury; but this course of proceeding appeared in their opinion and 
our own to offer the only chance of gaining an interview. Though 
not insensible to the danger, they cheerfully prepared for their 
mission, and clothed themselves in Esquimaux dresses, which had 
been made for the purpose at Fort Enterprise. Augustus was 
desired to make his presents, and to tell the Esquimaux that. the 
white men had come to make peace between them and all their 
enemies, and also to discover a passage by which every article of 
which they stood in need might be brought in large ships. -He was 
not to mention that we were accompanied by the Indians, but to 
endeavour to prevail on some of the Esquimaux to return with him. 
He was directed to come back immediately if there were no lodges 
at the rapid. | Aa 

The Indians were not suffered to move out of our sight, but in 
the evening we permitted two of them to cross the river in pursuit 
of a. musk-ox, which they killed on the beach, and returned imme- 
diately. ‘The officers prompted by an anxious solicitude for Augustus 
and Junius, crawled wp frequently to the summit of the mountain, 
to watch their return. The view, however, was not extensive, being 
bounded at the distance of eight miles by a range of hills similar to 
the Copper Mountains, but not so lofty. The night came without 
bringing any intelligence of our messengers, and our fears for their 
safety increased with the length of their absence. 

As every) one had been interested in the welfare of ‘diese men 
through their vivacity and good-nature, and for the assistance they 
had cheerfully rendered in bearing their portion of whatever labour 
might be going on, their detention formed the subject of all our con- 
versation, and numerous conjectures were hazarded as to the cause. 

Dr. Richardson having the first watch, had gone to the summit of 
the hill, and remained seated contemplating the river that washed 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 345 


the precipice under his feet, long after dusk had hid distant objects 
from his view. His thoughts were, perhaps, far distant from the sur- 
rounding objects, when he was roused by an indistinct noise behind 
him, and on looking round, perceived that nine white wolves had 
ranged themselves in form of a crescent, and were advancing, ap- 
parently with the intention of driving him into the river. On his 
rising up they halted, and when he advanced they made way for his 
passage down to the tents. He had his gun in his hand but fore- 
bore to fire, lest there should be Esquimaux in the neighbourhood. 
During Mr. Wentzel’s middle watch the wolves appeared repeatedly 
on the summit of the hill, and at one time they succeeded in driving 
a deer over the precipice. The animal was stunned by the fall, but 
recovering itself, swam across the stream, and escaped up the river. 
I may remark here that at midnight it was tolerably dark in the 
valley of the river at this time, but that an object on the eminence 
above could be distinctly seen against the sky. 

_ The following: observations were taken at this encampment, lati- 
tude 67° 23' 14" N., longitude 116° 6 51” W., variation 49° 46' 24” E. 
Thermometer 75° at three P.M. Sultry weather. 

Augustus and Junius not having returned next morning, we were 
more alarmed respecting them, and determined on proceeding to 
find out the cause of their detention, but it was eleven A.M. before 
we could prevail upon the Indians to remain behind, which we 
wished them to do, fearing that the Esquimaux might suspect our 
intentions, if they were seen in our suite. We promised to send for 
them when we had paved the way for their reception, but Akaitcho 
ever ready to augur misfortune, expressed his belief that our mes- 
sengers had been killed, and that the Esquimaux, warned of our 
approach, were lying in wait for us, and “ although,” said he, “ your 
party may be sufficiently strong to repulse any hostile attack, my 
band is too weak when separated from you to offer an effectual 
resistance; and therefore we are determined to go on with you, or to 

2Y 


346 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


return to our lands.” After much argument, however, he yielded 
to our request, and agreed to stay behind provided Mr. Wentzel 
would remain with him. This gentleman was accordingly left with 
a Canadian attendant, and they promised not to pass a range 
of hills then in view to the northward, unless we sent notice to 
them. 

The river during the whole of this day’s voyage flowed between 
alternate cliffs of loose sand intermixed with gravel; and red sand 
stone rocks, and was everywhere shallow and rapid. As its course 
was very crooked, much time was spent in examining the different 
rapids previous to running them, but the canoes descended them, 
except at a single place, without any difficulty. Most of the officers 
and half the men marched. along the land to lighten the canoes, and 
reconnoitre the country, each person being armed with a gun and 
a dagger. Arriving at a range of mountains: which had terminated 
our view yesterday, we ascended it with much eagerness, expecting 
to see the rapid that Mr. Hearne visited near to its base, and to 
gain a view of the sea; but our disappomtment was proportionably 
great, when we beheld beyond a plain similar to that we had just 
left, terminated by another range of trap hills, between whose tops 
the summits of some distant blue mountains appeared. Our reliance 
on the information of the guides, which had been for some time 
shaken, was now quite at an end; and we feared that the sea was 
still far distant. The flat country here is covered with grass, and 
is devoid of the large stones, so frequent in the barren grounds, 
but the ranges of trap hills which seem to intersect it at regular 
distances are quite barren. A few decayed stunted pines were 
standing-on the borders of the river. In the evening we had the 
gratification of meeting Junius, who was hastening back to inform 
us that they had found four Esquimaux tents at the fall which we 
recognised to be the one described by Mr. Hearne. The inmates 
were asleep at the time of their arrival, but rose soon afterwards, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 347 


and then Augustus presented himself, and had some conversation 
across the river. He told them the white people had arrived, who 
would make them very useful presents. The information of our 
arrival, seemed to alarm them very much, but as the noise of the 
rapid prevented them from hearing distinctly, one of them came 
nearer to him in his canoe, and received the rest of the message. 
He would not, however, land on his side of the river, but returned 
to their tents without receiving the present. His language differed 
in some respects from Augustus’s, but they understood each other 
tolerably well. Augustus trusting for a supply of provision to the 
Esquimaux, had neglected to carry any with him, and this was the 
main cause of Junius’s return. We now encamped, having come 
fourteen miles. After a few hours’ rest Junius set off again to rejoin 
his companion, being accompanied by Hepburn, who was directed 
to remain about two miles above the fall, to arrest the canoes on 
their passage, lest we should too suddenly surprise the Esqui- 
maux. About ten P.M. we were mortified by the appearance 
of the Indians with Mr. Wentzel, who had in vain endeavoured to 
restrain them from following us. The only reason assigned by 
Akaitcho for this conduct was, that he wished a re-assurance of my 
promise to establish peace between his nation and the Esquimaux. 
I took this occasion of pointing out again the necessity of their 
remaining behind, until we had obtained the confidence and good- 
will of their enemies. After supper Dr. Richardson ascended a lofty 
hill about three miles from the encampment, and obtained the first 
view of the sea; it appeared to be covered with ice. A large promon- 
tory, which I named Cape Hearne, bore N.E., and its lofty mountains 
proved to be the blue land we had seen in the forenoon, and’ which 
had led us to believe the sea was still far distant. He saw the sun 
set a few minutes before midnight from the same elevated situation. 
It did not rise during the half hour he remained there, but before 
he reached the encampment its rays gilded the tops of the hills. 
2Y 2 


348 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


The night was warm and we were much annoyed by the mus- 
quitoes. ! 

June 15.—We this morning initio as much difficultsri as 
before in prevailing upon the Indians to remain behind, and they. 
did not consent to do so until I had assured them that they should 
lose the reward which had been promised, if they proceeded any 
farther, until we had prepared the Esquimaux to receive them. We 
left a Canadian with them, and proceeded on our journey, not with- 
out apprehension that they would follow us, and derange our whole 
plan by their obstinacy. Two of the officers and a party of the men 
walked on the shore, to lighten the canoes. The river, in this part, 
flows between high sand stone cliffs, reddish slate clay rocks, and 
shelving banks of white clay, and is full of shoals and dangerous 
rapids. One of these was termed Escape Rapid, from both the 
eanoes having narrowly escaped foundering in its high waves. We 
had entered the rapid before we were aware, and the steepness of 
the cliff’ preventing us from landing, we were indebted to the 
swiftness of our descent for our preservation. ‘Iwo waves made a 
complete breach over the canoes; a third would in all probability 
have filled and overset them, which must have proved fatal to every 
one in them. The powder fortunately escaped the water, which 
was soon discharged when we reached the bottom of the rapid. At 
noon we perceived Hepburn lying on the left bank of the river, and 
we landed immediately to receive his information. As he repre- 
sented the water to be shoal the whole way to the rapid, (below 
which the Esquimaux were.) the shore party were directed to con 
tinue their march to a sandy bay at the head of the fall, and there 
await the arrival of the canoes. The land in the neighbourhood of 
the rapid, is of the most singular form: large irregular sand hills 
bounding both banks, apparently so unconnected that they resem- 
ble icebergs; the country around them consisting of high round 
green hills. The river became wide in this part, and full of shoals, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 349 


but we had no difficulty in finding a channel through them. On 
regaining the shore party, we regretted to find that some of the 
men had incautiously appeared on the tops of the hills, just at the 
time Augustus was conversing with one of the Esquimaux, who had 
approached in his canoe, and was almost persuaded to land. The 
unfortunate appearance of so many people at this instant, revived 
his fears, and he crossed over to the eastern bank of the. river, and 
fled with the whole of his party. We learned from Augustus that 
this-party, consisting of four men and as many women, had mani- 
fested a friendly disposition. Two of the men were very tall. The 
man who first came to speak to him, inquired the number of canoes 
that we had with us, expressed himself to be not displeased at our 
arrival, and desired him to caution us not to attempt running the 
rapid, but to make the portage’ on the west side of the river. Not- 
withstanding this appearance of confidence and satisfaction, it seems 
they did not consider their situation to be free from danger, as they 
retreated the first night, to an island somewhat farther down the 
river, and in the morning they returned and threw down their 
lodges, as if to give notice to any of their nation that might arrive, 
that there was an enemy in the neighbourhood. From seeing all 
their property strewed about, and ten of their dogs left, we enter- 
tained the hope that these poor people would return after their first 
alarm had subsided ; and therefore I determined on remaining until 
the next day, in the expectation of seeing them, as I considered the 
opening of an early communication to be a matter of the greatest 
importance in our state of absolute ignorance respecting the sea 
coast. ‘The canoes and cargoes were carried. across the portage, and 
we encamped on the north side of it. We sent Augustus and 
Junius across the river to look for the runaways, but their search 
was fruitless. They put a few pieces of iron and trinkets in their 
canoes, which were lying on the beach. We also sent some men to 
put up the stages of fish, and secure them as much as possible from 


350. A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the attacks of the’ dogs: Under the covering of their tents were 
-observed some stone Kettles and:hatchets, a few fish spears made of 
~ copper, ‘two small bits’ of iron, a quantity of skins, and some dried 
-salinon, which: was’ ‘covered with maggots, and half putrid. The 
entrails of the fish were spread out to dry. A great many skins 
of ‘small. birds were! hung up to a stage, and even two mice’ were 
preserved: in the same way. Thus it would appear that the neces- 
sities of these poor people induce them to preserve every article that 
ean be possibly used:as food. ‘Several human skulls which bore the 
marks of violence, and: many bones were strewed about the ground 
near to the encampment, and as the spot exactly answers the de- 
scription given by’ Mr. Hearne, of the place where the Chipewyans 
who accompanied him perpetrated the dreadful massacre on the 
[squimaux, we had no doubt of this being the place, notwith- 
standing the difference in its position:as to latitude and longitude 
given by him, and ascertained by our observation. We have, there- 
fore, preserved the appellation of Bloody Fall, which he bestowed 
upon it. Its situation by our observations is, in latitude 67° 42’ 
35" N., longitude 115° 49° 33" W., variation 50° 20° 14” E.. This 
rapid is a ‘sort of shelving cascade, about three hundred yards in 
length, : having a descent of ‘from -ten to fifteen feet. It is bounded 
on each side by high walls of red sand stone, upon which rests a 
series of lofty green hills. On its north side, close to the east bank, 
is the low rocky island which the Esquimaux had deserted. ‘The 
surrounding scenery is accurately delineated in the annexed sketch 
taken by Mr. Hood’ but finished by Mr. Back. We caught forty 
excellent fish of the salmon’ and white fish species in a single 
net: below the rapid: We had not seen any trees during this day’s 
journey; our fuel consisted of small willows and pieces of dried 
wood ‘that were picked up near to the encampment. The ground is 
well clothed with grass, and nourishes most of the shrubs and berry- 
bearing plants that we have seen north of Fort Enterprise; and the 


i] 1H}! }I 
AAA 
WANA 
i} I Mi 
WI 
| if it il] i | 
| | 
Hi WAN 
| | i || 
| ! I | | Hy 
| Wilt | il 1} 
NIH Hill | 
WHAT WM 
| | Mi WNIT } 
| | | l | 
| | i i | | | ] | Hi 
Wt I WA 
PT) | Hh 
| A | AN 
\| iH} Ht 1 \| H\| | 
i] | I HI Ml MH Hh 
HAMA A 
i) MAN win 
PY ] i) i 
WTI ) | | Wit 
HT UATTHIATRHHATRVELOUAT TTP TT 
} i NWN i 
HN 
| | | Hi Ih | 
| | Ml | i 
| WWW Hi i 
NNT NN WN 
HII HN Hi 
| } I} iH HI INK My MH | 
1 ATARI Wilh 
Bi iit ih 
Al ANA SN 
| iil 


Hi Wh Hi || Meee | 
TT EE 
ik il 
WAAR 
I wi i WNT ITAA Re 
| Wh HH I! NIK HI ih 
i iH) | | Mi iit NU ANANTH ARI 
|| | Hi WAI | A NN 
Wii Kil il WA 
WK Hi Mil WI 
I} DANN | VIIA 
HIN | AAA I WN I Hl 
Wl a Mi Hi HAMA | 
| a HT NIN} i HII \| I HIM | | i 
Hi HAW AA ii AA AAR NNT 
| i il NIH i | | HK | | 
| IT i i HAAN | | | WW | HHH} 
AAMAS A 
| | NIH Mi Nil AIH HH} 
LANA AAA 
| | 
| \\| A 
| | | | 
| | A i 
HA | Hl] 
HN HII} | | | 
HII 
| Hil I | | | NII 
Wh A || WH | ] 
TAA | 
WIAA NN WII 
AAA 
Hl LAA 
AMAA ll Hl 
HMMA 
tM HH HATTA HAI 
mi HAAN 
WATT NI AAAI il AUT AU HT | 


y Lieu “Back RN. 


ib) 


Drawn 


Engraved by Edw? Finden.. 


AVI dh . 


1 


aye 


ay 


)) 


m 


)@ 


mal @ 


i) 


35) 


SUbY LAGE, 


LEWMACH. 


, 
} 


Sohn MUTAl 


by 


1023: 


Liblished March 


" 


My 


hy 


_ OF THE POLAR SEA. 351 


country altogether has a richer appearance than the barren lands 
of the Copper Indians. We had a distinct view of the sea from the 
summit of a hill behind the tents; it appeared choked with ice and 
full of islands. 

Qn the morning of the 16th three men were ‘epee the river: to 
search for dried wood to make floats for the nets. ». Adam, the inter- 
preter, was also despatched with a Canadian, to inform Akaitcho of 
the flight of the Esquimaux. We were preparing to go dowm te 
the sea in one of the canoes, leaving Mr. Back to await the return 
of the men who were absent; but just as the crew were putting 
the canoe in the water, Adam arrived in the utmost consternation, 
and informed us that a party of Esquimaux were pursuing the men 
whom we had sent to collect floats. The orders for embarking were 
instantly countermanded, and we went with a party of mén to 
their rescue. We soon met our people returning at a: slow pace, 
and learned that they had come unawares upon the Esquimaux 
party, which consisted of six men, with their women and. children, 
who were travelling towards the rapid. with a considerable number 
of dogs carrying their baggage. The women hid themselves’ on 
the first alarm, but the men advanced, and stopping at some dis- 
tance from our men, began to dance in a circle, tossing up their 
hands in the air, and accompanying their motions with much shout- 
ing, to signify, I conceive, their desire of peace. Our men: saluted 
them by pulling off their hats, and making bows, but neither party 
was willing to approach the other; and, at length, the Esquimaux 
_retired to the hill, from whence they had descended. when. first seen, 
We proceeded in the hope of gaining an interview with them, but 
lest our appearance in a body should alarm them, we advanced-in a 
long line, at the head of which was Augustus. We were led to 
their baggage, which they had deserted, by the howling of the 
dogs; and on the summit of the hill we found, lying behind. a — 
stone, an old man, who was too infirm to effect his escape with 


352 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the rest, He was much terrified when Augustus advanced, and 
probably expected immediate death; but that the fatal. blow might 
not be unrevenged, he seized his spear, and made a ‘thrust with 
it at his supposed enemy. -Augustus, however, easily repressed 
his feeble effort, and soon calmed his fears by presenting him with 
some pieces of iron, and assuring him of his friendly intentions. 
Dr. Richardson and I then joined them, and, after receiving our 
presents, the old man was quite composed, and became communi- 
cative. His dialect differed from that used by Augustus, but they 
understood each other tolerably well. 

It appeared that his party consisted of eight men and their fa- 
milies, who were returning from a hunting excursion with dried 
meat. After being told who we were, he said, that he had heard 
of white people from different parties of his nation which resided on 
the sea-coast to the eastward; and to our inquiries respecting the 
provision and fuel we might expect to get on our voyage, he: in- 
formed us that the rein-deer frequent the coast during summer, 
the fish are plentiful at the mouths of the rivers, the seals are 
abundant, but*there are no sea-horses: nor whales, although he re- 
membered one of the latter, which had been killed by some distant 
tribe, having been driven on shore on his part of the coast by a 
gale of wind. ‘That musk oxen were to be found a little distance 
up the rivers, and that we should find drift wood along the shore. 
He had no knowledge of the coast to the eastward beyond the next 
river, which he called Nappa-arktok-towock, or Tree River. The 
old man, contrary to the Indian practice, asked each of our names; 
and, in reply to a similar question on our part, said his was Terre- 
ganoeuck, or the White Fox; and that his tribe denominated 
themselves Nagge-ook-tor-mceoot, or Deer Horn Esquimaux. 
They usually frequent the Bloody Fall during this and the follow- 
ing moons, for the purpose of salting salmon, and then retire to a 
river which flows’ into the sea, a short way to the westward, (Since 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 353 


denominated Richardson’s River,) and. pass the winter in show- 
houses. 

After this conversation Terregannoeuck decane going down to 
his baggage, and we then perceived he was too infirm to walk with- 
out the assistance of sticks. Augustus, therefore, offered him his 
arm, which he readily accepted, and, on reaching his store, he dis- 
tributed pieces of dried meat to each person, which, though highly 
tainted, were immediately eaten; this being an universal token 
among the Indians of peaceable intention. 

We then informed him of our desire to procure as much meat 
as we possibly could, and he told us that he had a large quantity 
concealed in the neighbourhood, which he would cause to be carried 
to us when his people returned. 

I now communicated to him that we were soci mire by some 
Copper Indians, who were very desirous to make peace with his 
nation, and that they had requested me to prevail upon the Esqui- 
maux to receive them in a friendly manner; to which he replied, 
he should rejoice to see an end put to the hostility that 
existed between the nations, and, therefore, would most gladly 
welcome our companions. Having despatched Adam to inform 
Akaitcho of this circumstance, we left Terregannoeuck, in the hope 
that his party would rejoin him; but as we had doubts whether the 
young men would venture upon coming to our tents, on the old 
man’s bare representation, we sent Augustus and Junius back in 
the evening, to remain with him until they came, that they might 
fully detail to them our intentions. 

The countenance of Terregannceuck was oval, with a sniticiehths 
prominent nose, and had nothing very different from an European 
face, except in the smallness of his eyes, and, perhaps, in the narrow- 
ness of his forehead. His complexion was very fresh and red, and he 
had a longer beard than I have hitherto seen on any of the aboriginal 
inhabitants of America. It was between two and three inches long; 

22 


354 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


and perfectly white. His face was not tattoed. His dress consisted of 
a shirt, or jacket with a hood, wide breeches, reaching only to the 
knee, and tight leggins sewed to the shoes, all of deers’ skins. 
The soles of the shoes were made of seal-skin, and stuffed with 
feathers instead of socks. He was bent. with age, but appeared to 
be about five feet ten inches high. His hands and feet were small 
in proportion to his height. Whenever Terregannoeuck received a 
present, he placed each article first on his right shoulder, then on 
his left ; and when he wished to express still higher satisfaction, he 
rubbed it over his head. He held hatchets, and other iron instru- 
ments, in the highest esteem. On seeing his countenance in a glass 
for the first time, he exclaimed, “ I shall: never kill deer more,” 
and immediately put the mirror down. The tribe to which he be- 
longs repair to the sea in spring, and kill seals; as the season ad- 
vances they hunt. deer and musk oxen at some distance from the 
coast. ‘Their weapon is the bow and arrow, and they get sufficiently 
near to the deer, either by crawling, or by leading these animals 
by ranges of turf towards a spot where the archer can conceal him- 
self. Their bows are formed of three pieces of fir, the’centre piece 
alone bent, the other two lying in the same straight line with the 
bowstring ; the pieces are neatly tied together with sinew. Their 
canoes are similar to those we saw in Hudson’s Straits, but smaller. 
They get fish constantly in the rivers, and in the sea as soon as 
the ice breaks up. This tribe does not make use of nets, but 
they are tolerably successful with the hook and line. Their cook- 
ing utensils are made of pot-stone, and they form very neat dishes 
of fir, the sides being made of thin deal bent into an oval form, 
secured at the ends by sewing, and fitted so nicely to the bottom 
as to be perfectly water tight. They have’ also large spoons made 
of the horns of the musk oxen. 
_ Akaitcho and the Indians arrived at our tents in the evening, 
and. we learned that: they had seen the Esquimaux the day before, 


OF THE POLAR SEA, . 300 


and endeavoured, without success, to open a communication with 
them. They exhibited no hostile intention, but were afraid to come 
near. Akaitcho, keeping out of their sight, followed them at a_ 
distance, expecting that ultimately finding themselves enclosed. be- 
tween our party and his, they would be compelled to come to a 
parley with one of us: Akaitcho had seen Terregannceuck soon 
after our departure ; he was much terrified at their approach, and 
thrust his spear at Akaitcho as he had done at Augustus; but 
he was soon reconciled after the demonstrations of kindness the 
Indians made, in cutting off the buttons from their dress to present 
to him. 

July 17.—We waited all ne forenoon in momentary expectation 
of the return of Augustus and Junius, but as they did not appear 
at two P.M., I sent Mr. Hood, with a party of men, to inquire 
into the cause of their detention, and to bring the meat which Ter- 
regannoeuck had promised us. He returned at midnight with the 
information, that none of the Esquimaux had yet ventured to come 
near ‘lerregannoeuck except his aged wife, who had concealed her- 
self amongst the rocks at our first interview; and she told him the 
rest of the party had gone-to-a river, a short distance to the west- 
ward, where there was another party of Esquimaux fishing. 
Augustus and Junius had erected the tent, and done every thing 
in their power to make the old man comfortable in their absence. 
Terregannceuck being unable to walk to the place where the meat 
was concealed, readily : pointed the spot out to Mr. Hood, who 
went thither; but. after experiencing much difficulty in getting at 
the column of rock on: which it was deposited, he found the meat 
too putrid for our use...The features of Terregannceuck’s wife 
were remarkable for roundness and flatness; her face © was much 
tattoed, her dress differed little from the old man’s. “iy 

In the afternoon’a party of nine Esquimaux appeared | on thé east 
bank of the river, about a mile below our encampment, ‘carrying 

22 2 


356 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


their canoes and baggage on their backs; but they turned and fled 
as soon as they perceived our tents. The appearance of so many 
different bands of Esquimaux terrified the Indians to such a de- 
gree, that they determined on leaving us the next day, lest they 
should be surrounded and their retreat cut off. I endeavoured, by 
the offer of any remuneration they would choose, to prevail upon 
one or two of the hunters to proceed, but in vain; and I had much 
difficulty even in obtaining their promise to wait at the Copper 
Mountains for Mr. Wentzel and the four men, whom I intended to 
discharge at the sea. 

The fears which our interpreters, St. Germain and Adam, enter- 
tained respecting the voyage, were now greatly increased, and both 
of them came this evening to request their discharges, urging that 
their services could be no longer requisite, as the Indians were going 
from us. St. Germain even said that he had understood he was 
only engaged to accompany us as long as the Indians did, and per- 
sisted in this falsehood until his agreement to go with us throughout 
the voyage had been twice read to him. As these were the only 
two of the party on whose skill in hunting we could rely, I was 
unable to listen for a moment to their desire of quitting us, and lest 
they should leave us by stealth, their motions were strictly watched. 
This was not an unnecessary precaution, as I was informed that they 
had actually laid a plan for eloping ; but the rest of the men knowing 
that their own safety would have been compromised had they suc- 
ceeded, kept a watchful eye over them. We knew that the dread 
of the Esquimaux would prevent these men from leaving us as soon 
as the Indians were at a distance, and we trusted to their becoming 
reconciled to the journey when once the novelty of a sea voyage had 
worn. off. | | ; 

July 18.—As the Indians persevered in their determination of 
setting out this morning, I reminded them, through Mr. Wentzel 
and St. Germain, of the necessity of our having the deposit of pro- 


OF THE’ POLAR SEA. . 4 357 


vision made at Fort Enterprise, and received a renewed assurance 
of their attending to that. point. They were also desired to put as 
much meat as they could en cache on the banks of the Copper-Mine 
River on their return. We then furnished them with as much am- 
munition as we could spare, and they took their departure, promising 
to wait three days for Mr. Wentzel at the Copper Mountains. We 
afterwards learned that their fears did not permit them to do so, 
and that Mr. Wentzel did.not rejoin them until they were a day’s 
march to the southward of the mountains. | 3 

We embarked at five A.M. and proceeded towards the sea, which 
is about nine miles distant from the Bloody Fall. After passing a few 
rapids, the river became wider, and more navigable for canoes, 
flowing between banks of alluvial sand. We encamped at ten on 
the western bank at its junction with the sea. he river is here 
about a mile wide, but very. shallow, being barred nearly across by 
sand-banks, which run out from the main land on each side to a 
low alluvial island that lies in the centre, and forms two channels ; 
of these the westermost only is navigable even for canoes, the other 
being obstructed by.a stony bar. ‘The islands to seaward are high 
and numerous, and fill the horizon in many points of the compass ; 
the only open space, seen from an eminence near the encamp- 
ment, being from N.bE. to N.E.bN. Towards the east the land 
was like a chain of islands, the ice surrounded the islands apparently 
in a compact body, leaving a channel between its edge and the 
main of about three miles. The water in this channel was of a clear 
green colour, and decidedly salt. Mr. Hearne could have only tasted 
it at the mouth of the river, when he pronounced it to be merely 
brackish. A rise and fall of four inches in the water was observed. 
The shore is strewed with a, considerable quantity of drift timber, 
which is principally of the wood of the popwlus balsamefera, but none 
of it of great size. We also picked up some decayed wood far 
out. of the reach of the water. A few stunted willows were growing 


358 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


near the encampment. Some ducks, gulls, and partridges were seen 
to-day. As I had to make up despatches for England to be sent by 
Mr. Wentzel, the nets were set in the interim, and we were rejoiced 
to find that they produced a sufficiency of fish to supply the party. 
The fish caught were, the Copper-Mine River salmon, white fish, 
and two species of pleuronectes. We felt a considerable change of 
temperature on reaching the sea-coast, produced by the winds 
changing from the southward to the N.W. Our Canadian voyagers 
complained much of the cold, but they were amused with their first 
view of the sea, and particularly with the sight of the seals that 
were swimming about near the entrance of the river, but these sen- 
sations gave place to despondency before the evening had elapsed. 
They were terrified at the idea of a voyage through an icy sea in 
bark canoes. ‘They speculated on the length of the journey, the 
roughness of the sea, the uncertainty of provisions, the exposure to 
cold where we could expect no fuel, and the prospect of having to 
traverse the barren grounds to get to some establishment. The two 
interpreters expressed their apprehensions with the least disguise, 
and again urgently applied to be discharged; but only one of the 
Canadians made a similar request. Judging that the constant occu- 
pation of their time as'soon as we were enabled to commence the 
voyage would prevent them from conjuring up so many causes of 
fear, and that familiarity with the scenes on the coast, would ina 
short time enable them to give scope to their natural cheerfulness, 
the officers endeavoured to ridicule their fears, and happily sue- 
ceeded for the present: The manner in which our faithful Hepburn 
viewed the element that he had been so long accustomed to, con- 
tributed not’a little to make them ashamed of their fears. _ 

On the morning of the 19th Dr. Richardson, accompanied. by 
Augustus, paid another’ visit to Terregannoeuck, to see if he could 
obtain any additional'information respecting the country to the east- 


‘ward; but he was disappointed at finding that his affrighted family 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 359 


had. not yet rejoined him, and the old man could add nothing to his 
former communication. ‘The Doctor remarked that Terregannoeuck 
had a great dislike to mentioning the name of the Copper-Mine 
River, and that he evaded the question with much dexterity as 
often as it was put to him; but that he willingly told the name of 
a river to the eastward, and also of his tribe. He attempted to 
persuade Augustus to remain with him, and. offered him one of his 
daughters for a wife. These Esquimaux strike fire with two stones, 
catching the sparks in the down of the catkins of a willow. 

The despatches being finished were delivered this evening to 
Mr. Wentzel, who parted from us at eight P.M. with Parent, Gagnier, 
Dumas, and Forcier, Canadians, whom I had discharged for the 
purpose of reducing our expenditure of provision. as much as pos- 
sible. ‘The remainder of the party, including officers, amounted to 
twenty persons. I made Mr. Wentzel acquainted: with the probable 
course of our future proceedings, and mentioned to him that if we 
were far distant from this river, when the season or other circumstan- 
ces rendered it necessary to put a stop to our advance, we should, 
in all probability, be unable to return to it, and should have to travel 
across the barren grounds towards some established post: in which 
case I told him that we should certainly go first to Fort Enterprise, 
expecting that he would cause the Indians to place a supply of dried 
provision there, as soon. as possible after their arrival in its vicinity. 
My instructions to him were, that he should: proceed to Point Lake, 
transport the canoe that was left there to Fort Enterprise, where he 
was to embark the instruments and books, and carry them to Slave 
Lake, and to forward the box containing the journals, &c., with the 
present despatches by the next winter packet to England. But 
before he quitted Fort Enterprise, he was to be assured of the in- 
tention of the Indians to lay up the provision we required, and if 
they should be in want of ammunition for that purpose, to procure 


360: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


it if possible from Fort Providence, or the other forts in Slave Lake; 
and send it immediately to them by the hunters who accompanied 
him thither. I also requested him to ascertain from Akaitcho and the 
other leading Indians, where their different parties would be hunting 
in the months of September and October, and to leave this inform- 
ation in a letter at Fort Enterprise, for our guidance in finding 
them, as we should require their assistance. Mr. Wentzel was fur- 
nished with a list of the stores that had been promised to Akaitcho — 
and his party as a remuneration for their services, as well as with an 
official request to the North-West Company that these goods might 
be paid to them on their next visit to Fort Providence, which. they 
expected to make in the latter part of November. I desired him to 
mention this circumstance to the Indians as an encouragement to 
their exertion in our behalf, and to promise them an additional 
reward for the supply of provision they shopld collect at Fort 
Enterprise. 

If Mr. Wentzel met. the Hook, or any of his party, he was in- 
structed to assure them that he was provided with the necessary 
documents to get them payment for any meat they should put en 
cache for our use; and to acquaint them, that we fully relied on 
their fulfilling every part of the agreement they had made with us. 
Whenever the Indians, whom he was to join at the Copper Moun- 
tains, killed any animals on their way to Fort Enterprise, he was 
requested to put en cache whatever meat could be spared, placing 
conspicuous marks to guide us to them; and. I particularly begged — 
he would employ them in hunting in our service, immediately after 
his arrival at the house. | 

When Mr. Wentzel’s party had been supplied with ammunition, 
our remaining stock consisted of one thousand balls, and a little 
more than the requisite proportion of powder. <A bag of small shot 
was missing, and we afterwards discovered that the Canadians had 


UOPUIT ADL UYOP AG “LOT YDLOT I PIYSY ONT 


‘TEC be Aju 


Oo 


“HSIN GIA "SSALU SNA MddOD SEL LO ENLOOM aH WOW VES DMLOY 


= 


ro hee "is 


“WApPULT, MPT AQ paavasury 


a 
IFT SSG 


7. 
aye 


a 
Awd) ae 


nes ie 


Di eae 
- 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 361 


secreted and distributed it among themselves, in order that when 
provision should become scarce, they might privately procure ducks 
and geese, and avoid the necessity of sharing them with the officers. 

The situation of our encampment was ascertained to be, latitude 
67° 47 50° N., longitude 115° 36’ 49" W., the variation of the com- 
pass 46° 25’ 52" K., and dip of the needle 88° 5’ 07. 

It will be perceived, that the position of the mouth of the river, 
given by our observations, differs widely from that assigned to it by 
Mr. Hearne; but the accuracy of his description, conjoined with 
Indian information, assured us that we were at the very part he 
visited. I have, therefore, named the most conspicuous cape we 
then saw “Cape Hearne,” as a just tribute to the memory of that 
persevering traveller. I have distinguished another cape by the 
name of Mackenzie, in honour of Sir Alexander Mackenzie, the 
only other Kuropean* who had before reached the Northern Ocean. 
I have called the river which falls into the sea, to the westward of 
the Copper-Mine, Richardson, as a testimony of sincere regard for 
my friend and companion, Dr. Richardson; and have named the 
islands, which are in view from our encampment, “ Couper’s Isles,” 
in honour of a friend of his. The sun set this night at thirty mi- 
nutes after eleven, apparent time; and the annexed: view, taken from 
a drawing by Mr. Back, shews the appearance of the sky and. the 
prospect at midnight. | 

The travelling distance from Fort Enterprize to the north of the 
Copper-Mine River, is about three hundred and thirty-four miles. 
The canoes and baggage were dragged over snow and ice for one 
hundred and seventeen miles of this distance. 


* Captain Parry’s success was at this time unknown to us, 


362 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


CHAPTER X. 


Nayigation of the Polar Sea, in two Canoes, as far as Cape Turnagain, to the Eastward, a 
distance exceeding Five Hundred and Fifty Miles—Observations on the probability of a 
North-West Passage. 


Hargise: W & intended to have embarked early this morning, and 
to have launched upon an element,’ which was more congenial 
with our habits than the fresh-water navigations, and their nume- 
rous difficulties and impediments we had ‘hitherto encountered, but 
which was altogether new to ‘our ‘Canadian voyagers. We were 
detained, however, by a strong north-east gale, which continued the 
whole day, with constant thunder showers ; the more provoking as 
our nets procured but few fish, and we had to draw upon our 
store of dried meat; which, with ‘other provision for the journey, 
amounted only to fifteen days’ consumption: Indeed, we should 
have preferred going dinnerless to bed rather than encroach on our 
small stock, had we not been desirous of satisfying the appetites, 
and cheering the spirits, of our Canadian companions at the com- 
mencement of our voyage. “These thoughtless people would, at any 
time, incur the hazard of absolute starvation, at a future period, 
for the present gratification of their appetites; to imdulge > which » 
they do not hesitate, as we more than once experienced, helping 
themselves secretly; it being, in their opinion, no disgrace to be 
caught in the act of pilfering food. 

Our only luxury now was a little-salt, which had long been our 
_ substitute both for bread and vegetables. Since our departure from 


« 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 363 


Point Lake we ‘had. boiled the Indian tea plant, ledum. palustre, 
which produced a beverage in smell much resembling rhubarb; 
notwithstanding which we found. it refreshing, and were gratified to 
see this plant flourishing abundantly, though of dwarfish growth, on 
the sea-shore. 

July 21.—The wind, which had blown strong through the night, 
became moderate in the morning, but a dense fog prevented us from 
embarking until noon, when we commenced our voyage on the 
Hyperborean Sea.* Soon afterwards we landed on an island where 
the Esquimaux had erected a stage of drift timber, and stored up 
many of their fishing implements and winter sledges, together with 
a great many dressed seal, musk ox, and deer skins. Their spears 
headed with bone, and many small articles of the same material, 
were worked with extreme neatness, as well as their wooden dishes, 
and cooking utensils of stone; and several articles, very elegantly 
formed of bone, were evidently intended for some game, but 
Augustus was unacquainted with their use. We took from this 
deposit four seal-skins to repair our shoes, and left in exchange a 
ccopper-kettle, and some awls and. beads. 

We paddled all day along the coast to the eastward, on the inside 
of a crowded range of islands, and saw very little ice; the “ blink” 
of it, however, was visible to the northward, and one small iceberg 
was seen at a distance. A tide was distinguishable among the 
islands by the foam floating on the water, but we could not ascer- 
tain its direction. In the afternoon St. Germain killed, on an 
island, a fat deer, which was a great acquisition to us; it was the 
first we had seen for some months in good condition. 

Having encamped on the main shore, after a run of thirty-seven 
miles, we set up a pole to ascertain the rise and fall of the water, which 
was repeated at every halting-place, and Hepburn was ordered - 
to attend to the result. We found the coast well covered with 
vegetation, of moderate height, even in its outline, and easy of 

3A 2 


364 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


approach. The islands are rocky and barren, presenting high cliffs of 
a columnar structure. J have named the westernmost group of 
those we passed “ Berens’ Isles,” in honour of the Governor of. the 
Hudson’s Bay Company; and the easternmost, “ Sir Graham Moore’s 
Islands.” At the spot where we landed some muscle-shells and 
a single piece of sea-weed lay on the beach; this was the only spot 
on the coast where we saw shells. We were rejoiced to find the 
beach strewed with abundance of small drift-wood, none of it 
recent. : 

It may be remarked that the Copper-Mine River does not bring 
down any drift-wood; nor does any other known stream, except 
Mackenzie’s River; hence, from its appearance on this part of the 
coast, an easterly current may be inferred. This evening we were 
all in high glee at the progress we had made; the disappearance of 


the ice, and the continuance of the land in an eastern direction, and | 


our future prospects formed an enlivening subject of conversation. 
The thermometer varied during the day between 43° and 45°. The 
fishing nets were set, but produced nothing. 

On the 22d we embarked at four A.M., and having the benefit of 
a light breeze continued our voyage along the coast, under sail, until 
eleven, when we halted to breakfast, and to obtain the latitude. 
The coast up to this point presented the same general appearance 
as yesterday, namely, a gravelly or sandy beach, skirted by green 
plains; but as we proceeded, the shore became exceedingly rocky 
and sterile; and, at last, projecting considerably to the northward, 
it formed a high and steep promontory. Some ice had drifted down 
upon this cape, which, we feared, might check our progress; but, 
as the evening was fine, we ventured upon pushing the canoes 
through the small channels formed among it. After pursuing this 
kind of navigation, with some danger and more anxiety, we landed 
and encamped on a smooth rocky point; from whence we perceived, 
with much satifaction, that the ice consisted only of detached 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 365 


pieces, which would be removed by the first breeze. We sounded 
in seventeen fathoms, close to the shore, this day. The least depth 
ascertained by the lead, since our departure from the river, was six 
fathoms; and it may be remarked, that any ship might pass safely 
between the islands and the main. The water is of a light green 
colour, but not very clear; and it is much less salt than that of 
the Atlantic, judging from our recollection of its taste. In the 
course of the day we saw geese and ducks with their young, and 
two deer; and experienced very great variations of temperature, 
from the light breezes blowing alternately from the ice and the 
land. The name of “ Lawford’s Islands” was bestowed on a group 
we passed in the course of the day, as a mark of my respect for 
Vice-Admiral Lawford, under whose auspices I first entered the 
naval service. | 

_A fresh breeze blowing through the night had driven the ice from 
the land, and opened a channel of a mile in width; we, therefore, 
embarked at nine A.M. to pursue our journey along the coast, but 
at the distance of nine miles were obliged to seek shelter in Port 
i:pworth, the wind having become adverse, and too strong to admit 
of our proceeding. The Tree River of the Esquimaux which dis- 
charges its waters into this bay appears to be narrow, and much inter- 
rupted by rapids. The fishing-nets were set, but they obtained only 
one white fish and a few bull-heads. This part of the coast is the 
most sterile and inhospitable that can be imagined. One trap cliff 
succeeds another with a tiresome uniformity, and their debris cover 
the narrow valleys that intervene, to the exclusion of every kind of 
herbage. From the summit of these cliffs the ice appeared in every 
direction. 

We obtained the following observations during our stay; latitude 
67° 42' 15° N., longitude 112° 30' 00" W., variation 47° 37’ 42” E. 

The wind abating, at eight P.M. we re-embarked, and soon after- 
wards discovered, on an island, a rein-deer, which the interpreters 


366 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


fortunately killed. Resuming our voyage we were much impeded by 
the ice, and, at length, being wnable ‘to force a passage through a 


close stream that had collected round a cape, we put ashore at four 


A.M. On the 24th, several: stone fox-traps and other traces of the 
Esquimaux were seen near to the encampment. The horizontal 
refraction varied so much this morning, that the upper limb.of the 
sun twice appeared at the horizon before it finally rose. 

For the last two days the water:rose and fell about nine inches. 
The tides, however, seemed to be very irregular, and we could not 
determine the direction of the ebb or flood. A current setting to 
the eastward was running about two miles.an hour during our-stay. 
The ice having removed a short distance from the shore, by eleven 
A.M. we embarked, and with some difficulty effected a passage; then 
making a traverse across Gray’s Bay*, we paddled up under the 
eastern shore against a strong wind. The interpreters landed here, 
and went in pursuit of a deer, but had no success. This part of the 
coast is indented by deep bays, which are separated by peninsulas 
formed like wedges, sloping many miles into the sea, and. joined. by 
low land to the main: so that often mistaking them for islands, we 
were led by a circuitous route round the bays. Cliffs were numerous 
on the islands, which were all of the trap formation. ; 

At seven, a thunder-storm coming on, we encamped at the mouth 
of a river about eighty yards wide and set four nets. This stream, 
which has received the name of Wentzel, after our late companion, 
discharges a considerable body of water. Its banks are sandy and 
clothed with herbage. The Esquimaux had ‘recently piled up some 
drift timber here. A few ducks, ravens, and snow birds, were seen 
to-day. The distance we made was thirty-one miles. 

July 25.—We had constant rain with thunder during the night. 
The nets furnished only three salmon-trout. We attributed the 


“ Named after Mr. Gray, principal of the Belfast Academy. An island which lies across 
the-mouth. of this bay bears the name of our English sailor Hepburn. 


UOPUIy ADL, UYIL AQ ‘Gey YIM PEYSONT 


o=¢ 


i261 9S KIAL ‘MOWVNVE ATVO-ONITAHOC NOMICTAXA 


“NW BY ner] AQ Umer, 


_— 


san 


"t 


° 


Ht 


ie 


i My 


ew 


is 
¢ 
ie 
bach 
Dine at eh 
it ; 
wera 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 367 


want of greater success to the entrance of some seals into the mouth 
of the river. Embarking at six A.M. we paddled against a cold 
breeze, until the spreading of a thick fog caused us to land. The 
rocks here consisted of a beautiful mixture of red and gray granite, 
traversed from north to south by veins of red felspar, which were 
crossed in various directions by smaller veins filled with the same 
substance. 

At noon the wind coming froma favourable quarter tempted us 
to proceed, although the fog was unabated. We kept as close as we 
could to the main shore, but having to cross some: bays, it became 
a matter of doubt whether: we had. not: left: the main, and were 
running along an island. Just as we were endeavouring to double 
a bold cape, the fog partially cleared away, and allowed us an im- 
perfect view of a chain of islands on the outside, and of much heavy 
ice which was pressing down upon us. The shore near us was so 
steep and rugged that no landing of the cargoes could be effected, 
and we were preserved only by some men jumping on the rocks, and 
thrusting the ice off with poles. There was no alternative but to 
continue along this dreary shore, seeking a channel between the 
different masses of ice which had accumulated at the various points. 
In this operation both the canoes were in imminent danger of being 
crushed by the ice, which was now tossed about by the waves that 
the gale had excited. The annexed print, from a drawing by 
Mr. Back, will give the reader some idea of the peril of our situ- 
ation, and the dreariness.of our prospect. We effected a passage, 
_ however, and keeping close to the shore, landed at the entrance of 
Detention Harbour at nine.P.M., having come twenty-eight miles. 
An old Esquimaux encampment was traced on this spot; and an ice 
chisel, a copper knife, and»a small iron knife were found under 
the turf. I have named this cape after Mr. Barrow of the Admiralty, 
to whose exertions are mainly owing the discoveries that have 
recently been made in Arctic geography. An opening on its eastern 


368 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


side has received the appellation of Inman Harbour, after my friend 
the Professor at the Royal Naval College, Portsmouth; and to a 
group of islands to seaward of it, we gave the name of Jameson, in 
honour of the distinguished Professor of Mineralogy at Edinburgh. 

We had much wind and rain during the night; and by the 
morning of the 26th a great deal of ice had drifted into the inlet. 
We embarked at four and attempted to force a passage, when the 
first canoe got enclosed, and remained for some time in a very 
perilous situation: the pieces of ice, crowded together by the action 
of the current and wind, pressing strongly against its feeble sides. 
A. partial opening, however, occurring, we landed without having 
sustained any serious injury. Two men were then sent round the 
bay, and it was ascertained that instead of having entered a narrow 
passage between an island and the main, we were at the mouth of a 
harbour, having an island at its entrance; and that it was necessary 
to return by the way we came, and get round a point to the 
northward. This was, however, impracticable, the channel being 
blocked up by drift ice; and we had no prospect of release except 
by a change of wind. This detention was extremely vexatious, as 
we were losing the benefit of a fair wind, and expending our stock 
of provision. In the afternoon the weather cleared up, and. several 
men went hunting, but they were unsuccessful. During the day the 
ice floated backwards and forwards in the harbour, moved by 
currents, not regular enough to deserve the name of tide, and 
which appeared to be governed by the wind. We perceived great 
diminution by melting in the pieces near us. That none of this ice 
survives the summer is evident, from the rapidity of its decay; and 
because. no ice of last. year’s formation was hanging on the rocks. 
Whether any body of it exists at a distance from the shore, we 
cannot determine. | 

The land. around Cape Barrow, and to Detention Harbour, 
consists. of steep craggy mountains of granite, rising so abruptly 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 369 


from the water’s edge, as to admit of few landing-places even fora 
canoe. ‘The higher parts attain an elevation of one thousand four 
hundred or one thousand five hundred feet; and the whole is 
entirely destitute of vegetation. 

On the morning of the 27th the ice remaining stationary at the 
entrance, we went to the bottom of the harbour, and carried the 
canoes and cargoes about a mile and a half across the point of land 
that forms the east side of it; but the ice was not more favourable 
there for our advancement than at the place we had left. It consisted 
of small pieces closely packed together by the wind extending along 
the shore, but leaving a clear passage beyond the chain of islands 
with which the whole of this coast is girt. Indeed; when we started 
we had little hope of finding a passage; and the principal object in 
moving was, to employ the men, in order to prevent their reflecting 
upon and discussing the dangers of our situation, which we knew they 
were too apt to do when leisure permitted. Our observations place 
the entrance of Detention Harbour in latitude 67° 53’ 45", longitude 
110° 41’ 20" W., variation 40° 49' 34" E. It is a secure anchorage, 
being sheltered from the wind in every direction; the bottom is 
sandy. | 

July 28.—As the ice continued in the same state, several of the 
men were sent out to hunt; and one of them fired no less than four 
times at deer, but unfortunately without success. It was satisfactory, 
however, to ascertain that the country was not destitute of animals: 
We had the mortification to discover that two of the bags of pem- 
mican, which was our principal reliance, had become mouldy by wet. 
Our beef too had been so badly cured, as to be scarcely eatable, this 
was occasioned by our having been compelled, through haste, to dry 
it by fire instead of the sun: It was not, however, the quality of 
our provision that gave us uneasiness, but its diminution, and the 
utter incapacity to obtain any addition. Seals were the only 

3B 


370 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


animals that met our view at this place, and these we could never 
approach. 

Dr. Richardson discovered near the beach a small vein of wdlisite 
traversing gneiss rocks, and the people collected a quantity of it in the 
hope of adding to our stock of balls; but their endeavours to smelt 
it, were, as may be supposed, ineffectual. The drift timber on this 
part of the coast consists of pine and tacca mahac, (bopulus palsa- 
mifera) most probably from Mackenzie’s, or some’ other river to the 
eastward of the Copper-Mine. It all appears to have lain long in 
the water, the bark being completely worn off, and the ends of the 
pieces rubbed perfectly smooth. There was a sharp frost last night, 
which formed a pretty thick crust of ice in a kettle of water that 
stood in the tents; and for several nights past thin films of ice have 
been formed on the salt water amongst the cakes of stream ice*. 
Notwithstanding this state of temperature, we were tormented by 
swarms of musquitoes; we had persuaded ourselves that these pests 


could not sustain the cold in the vicinity of the sea, but it appears 


they hauntevery part of this country in defiance of climate. 
Mr. Back made an excursion to a hill at seven or eight miles 
distance, and from its summit he perceived the ice "close to the 
shore as far as his view extended. 

On the morning of the 29th the party er divine service. 
About noon the ice appearing less compact, we embarked to change 
our situation, having consumed all the fuel within our reach. (The 
wind came off the land just as the canoes had started, and we detér- 
mined on attempting to force a passage along the shore; in which we 
fortunately succeeded, after seven hours’ labour and much hazard to 
our frail vessels, The ice lay so:ciose that the crews disembarked on 
it, and: effected a passage by bearing against the pieces with their 


* This is termed bay ice by the Greenland-men,. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 371 


poles; but in conducting the canoes through the narrow channels 
thus formed, the greatest care was requisite, to prevent the sharp 
projecting points from breaking the bark. They fortunately received 
no material injury, though they were split in two places. 

At the distance of three miles, we came to the entrance of a deep 
bay, whose bottom was filled by a body of ice so compact as to 
preclude the idea of a passage through it; whilst:at the same time, 
the traverse across its mouth was attended with much: danger, from 
the approach ofa large field of ice, which was driving down before the 
wind. ‘The dread of further detention, however, prevented us from 
hesitating ; and we had the satisfaction of landing in an hour and a 
half on the opposite shore, where we halted to repair the canoes, 
and to dine. I have named this bay after my friend Mr. Daniel 
Moore of Lincoln’s Inn; to whose zeal for science, the Expedition 
was indebted for the use of a most valuable chronometer. Its shores 
are picturesque; sloping hills receding from the beach, and clothed 
with verdure, bound. its bottom and western side; and lofty cliffs of 
slate clay, with their intervening grassy valleys, skirt. its eastern 
border. Embarking at midnight, we pursued our voyage without 
interruption, passing between the Stockport and Marcet. Islands 
and the main, until six A.M. on July 30th; when, having rounded 
Pot Kater, we entered Arctic Sound, and were again involved in a 
stream of ice, but. after considerable delay extricated ourselves, and 
proceeded towards the bottom of the inlet in search of the mouth of 
a river, which we supposed it to receive, from the change in the 
colour of the water. 

About ten A.M. we landed, to breakfast on a small deer which 
St. Germain had killed; and sent men in pursuit of some others in 
sight, but with which they did not come up. . Re-embarking, we 
passed the river without perceiving it, and entered a deep arm of 
the sound; which I have named Baillie’s Cove, in honour of a 


3B 2 


372, A JOURNEY: TO ‘THE SHORES 


relative of the lamented Mr. Hood. As it was too late to return, we 
encamped, and by walking across the country, discovered the river, 
whose mouth being barred by low sandy islands and banks, was not 
perceived when we passed it. Course and distance from Galena 
Point to this encampment, were $.E.28.—forty-one miles. _ 

From the accounts of Black-meat and Boileau at Fort Chipewyan, 
we considered this river to be the Anatessy ; and Cape Barrow to be 
the projection which they supposed to be the N.E. termination of 
America. The outline of the coast, indeed, bears some resemblance 
to the chart they sketched; and the distance of this river from the 
Copper-Mine, nearly coincides with what we estimated the Anatessy 
to. be, from: their statements, In our subsequent journey, however, 
across the barren grounds, we ascertained that this conjecture was 
wrong, and that the Anatessy, which is known to come from Rum 
Lake, must fall into the sea to the eastward of this place. 

Our stock of provision being now reduced to eight, days’ con- 
sumption, it had become a matter of the first importance to obtain’ 
a, supply; and as we had learned from Terregannceuck that the 
Esquimaux frequent the rivers at this season, I determined on 
seeking a communication with them here, with the view of obtaining 
relief for our present wants, or even shelter for the winter, if the 
season should prevent us from returning either to the Hook’s party, 
or Fort Enterprise ; and I was the more induced to take this step at this 
time, as several deer had been seen to-day, and the river appeared 
good for fishing: which led me to hope we might support the party 
during our stay, if not add to our stock by our own exertions in 
hunting and fishing. Augustus, Junius, and Hepburn, were there- 
fore furnished. with the necessary presents, and desired to go along 
the bank of the river as far as they could, on the following day, in: 
search. of the natives, to obtain provision: and leather, as well as 
information respecting the coast. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. — 373 


They started) at four A.M., and at the same time our hunters 

were sent off in search of deer; and the rest of the party proceeded 
in the canoes to the first cascade in the river, at the foot of which 
we encamped, and. set four nets. This cascade, produced by a 
ridge of rocks crossing the stream, is about three or four feet in 
height, and about two hundred and fifty yards wide. Its position 
by our. observations is latitude 67° 19° 23" N., longitude 109° 44’ 
30" W., variation 41° 43° 22’, dip 88° 58’ 48". I have named this: 
river Hood, as a small tribute to the memory of our lamented friend: 
and companion. It is from three to four hundred yards wide below. 
the cascade, but it is in many places very shallow. The banks, 
bottom, and adjacent hills, are formed of a mixture of sand and clay. 
The ground.was overspread with small willows and the dwarf birch, 
both too diminutive for fuel; and the stream brought down no drift. 
wood. We were mortified to find the nets only procured one salmon 
and five white fish, and that we had to make another inroad- upon. 
our dried meat. 
- August 1.—At.two this morning the hunters returned with two: 
small deer and a brown bear. Augustus and: Junius arrived: at the 
same time, having traced the river twelve miles further up, without. 
discovering any vestige of inhabitants. _We had now an opportu- 
nity of. gratifying our curiosity respecting the bear so much 
dreaded by the Indians, and of whose: strength and ferocity we had 
heard such terrible accounts. It proved to be a lean male of a 
yellowish brown colour, and not longer than a common black bear. 
It made a feeble attempt to defend itself, and was easily despatched. 
The flesh was brought to the tent, but our fastidious voyagers sup- 
posing, from its: leanness, the animal had been sickly, declined. eat=. 
ing it; the officers, however, being less scrupulous, boiled the paws, 
and found them excellent. 

We embarked at ten A.M., and proceeding down the river, took. 
on-board another deer that had been killed by Credit last. evening. 


374 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


We then ran along the eastern shore of Arctic Sound, distinguished 
by the name of Banks’ Peninsula, in honour of the late Right 
Honourable Sir Joseph Banks, President of the Royal Society ; and 
rounding Point Wollaston at its eastern extremity, opened another 
extensive sheet of water; and the remainder of the afternoon was: 
spent m endeavouring to ascertain, from the tops of the hills, 
whether it was another bay, or merely a passage enclosed by a chain 
of islands. Appearances rather favouring the latter opimion, we 
determined on proceeding through it to the southward. During the 
delay four more deer were killed, all young and lean. It appears 
that the coast is pretty well frequented by rem-deer at this season ; 
but it is rather singular, that hitherto we have killed none (ex- 
cepting the first) but young ones of last season, which were all too 
lean to have been eaten by any but persons who had no choice. 

We paddled along the western shore with the intention of en- 
camping, but were prevented by the want of drift wood on the 
beach. This induced us to make a traverse to an island, where we 
put up at midnight, having found a small bay, whose shores fur- 
nished us with a little fire-wood. A heavy gale came on from the 
westward, attended with constant rain, and one of the squalls over- 
threw our tents. The course and distance made to-day were 
north-east sixteen miles and a half. I may here mention, that: 
Arctie Sound appears to be the most convenient,.and perhaps the: 
best, place for ships to anchor that we have seen along the coast; at 
this season especially, when they might increase their stock of pro~ 
vision, if provided with good marksmen. Deer are numerous in its 
vicinity, musk-oxen also may be found up Hood’s River, and the 
fine sandy bottom of the bays promise favourably for fishing” with: 
the seine. The hills on the western side are even in their outline 
and slope gradually to the water’s edge. ‘The rocks give place to 
an’ alluvial sandy soil, towards the bottom of the Sound; but on 
Banks’ Peninsula rocky eminences again prevail, which are rugged 


OF THE POLAR SEA, © 375 


and uneven, but they are intersected by valleys, now green; along 
their base is a fine sandy beach. From Point Wollaston to our 
present encampment the coast is skirted with trap cliffs, which have 
often a columnar form, and are very difficult of access. These cliffs 
lie in ranges parallel to the shore, and the deer that. we killed were 
feeding in small marshy grassy plats that lie in the valleys between 
them. | 

Being detained by the continuance of the gale, on the 2d of 
August some men were sent out to hunt, and the officers visited the 
tops of the highest hills, to ascertain the best channels to be pur- 
sued. ‘The wind abating at ten P.M., we embarked and paddled 
round the southern end of the island, and continued our course to 
the south-east. Much doubt at this time prevailed as to the land 
on the right being the main shore, or merely a chain of islands. 
The latter opinion was strengthened by the broken appearance of 
the land, and the extensive view we had up Brown’s Channel, 
(named after my friend Mr. Robert Brown,) the mouth of which we 
passed, and were in some apprehension of being led away from the 
main shore ; and, perhaps, after passing through a group of islands, 
of coming to a traverse greater than we durst venture upon in 
canoes. On the other hand, the continuous. appearance of the land 
on the north side of the channel, and its tending to the southward, 
produced a fear that we were entering a deep inlet. 

In this state of doubt. we landed. often, and endeavoured,, ferns 
the summits of the highest: hills adjoining the shore, to ascertain 
the true nature of the coast, but in vain, and we continued pad- 
dling through the channel all night against a fresh breeze, which, at 
half past four, increased to a violent: gale, and compelled. us to land. 
The gale diminished a short time after noon on the 3d, and per- 
mitted us to re-embark and continue our voyage until four P.M., 
when it returned with its former violence, and finally obliged. us. to 


316 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


encamp, having come twenty-four miles on a south-east three-quarter 
south course. 

From the want of drift wood to make a fire we had fasted all 
day, and were under the necessity, in the evening, of serving out 
pemmican, which was done with much reluctance, especially as we 
had some fresh deers’ meat remaining. The inlet, when viewed from 
a high hill adjoining to our encampment, exhibited so many arms, 
that the course we ought to pursue was more uncertain than ever. 
It was absolutely necessary, however, to see the end of it before we 
could determine that it was not a strait. Starting at three A.M., 
on the 4th, we paddled the whole day through channels, from two 
to five or six miles wide, all tending to the southward. In the 
course of the day’s voyage we ascertained, that the land which we 
had seen on our right hand since yesterday morning, consisted of 
several large islands, which have been distinguished by the names of 
Goulburn, Elliot, and Young; but the land on our left preserved its 
unbroken appearance, and when we encamped, we were still. un- 
certain whether it was the eastern side of a deep sound or merely 
a large island. It differed remarkably from the main shore, being 
very rugged, rocky, and sterile, whereas the outline of the main on 
the opposite side was even, and its hills covered with a compara- 
tively good sward of grass, and exhibited little naked rock. There 
was no drift timber, but the shores near the encampment were 
strewed with small pieces of willow, which indicated our vicinity to 
the mouth of a river. This fuel enabled us to make a hearty 
supper off a small deer killed this evening. 

The shallows we passed to-day were covered with shoals of sogselie 
the angmaggoviik of the Esquimaux. It was known to Augustus, 
who informed us that it frequents the coast of Hudson’s Bay, and is 
delicate eating. The course and distance made was, south by east 
half east, thirty-three miles. | | 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | att 


After paddling twelve miles in the morning of the 5th, we’ had 
the mortification to find the inlet terminated by a river; the size: of 
which we could not ascertain, as the entrance was blocked by shoals. 
Its mouth lies in lat. 66° 30' N., long. 107° 53' W. I have named 
this stream Back, as a mark of my friendship for my associate*. We 
were somewhat consoled for the loss of time in exploring this inlet, 
by the success of Junius in killing a musk-ox, the first we had seen 
on the coast; and afterwards by the acquisition of the flesh of a bear, 
that was shot as we were returning up the eastern side in the evening. 
The latter proved to be a female, in very excellent condition; and 
our Canadian voyagers, whose appetite for fat meat is ies 
were delighted. | 

We encamped on the shores of a sandy bay, and set the nets; 
and finding a quantity of dried willows on the beach, we were 
enabled to cook the bear’s flesh, which was superior to any meat we 
had tasted on. the coast. The water fell two feet at this place during 
the night. Our nets produced a great variety of fish, namely, a 
salmon-trout, some round fish, tittameg, bleak, star-fish, several 
herrings, and a flat fish resembling plaice, but covered on the back 
with horny excrescences. 

On the 6th we were detained in the encampment by stormy 
weather until five P.M., when we embarked and paddled along the 
northern shore of the inlet; the weather still continuing foggy, but 
the wind moderate. Observing on the beach a she bear with three 
young ones, we landed a party to attack them; but, being approached 
without due caution, they took the alarm and scaled a precipitous 
rocky hill, with a rapidity that baffled all pursuit. At eight o'clock, 
the fog changing into rain, we encamped. Many seals were seen 
to-day, but as they kept in deep water we did not fire at them. 

On August 7th the atmosphere was charged with fog and mun all 


* From subsequent conversation with the Copper Indians, we were inated to suppose 
this may be the Thlueetessy, described by Black-meat, mentioned in a former part of the 


narrative. 
3 C 


378 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the day, but as the wind was moderate we pursiied our journey ; 
our situation, however, was very unpleasant, being quite wet and 
without room to stretch a limb, much less to obtain warmth by 
exercise. We passed a cove, which I have named after my friend 
Mr. W. H. Tinney; and proceeded along the coast until five P.M., 
when we put up on a rocky point nearly opposite to our encampment 
on the 3d, having come twenty-three miles on a north-north-west 
course. iuAN | 

We were detained on the 8th by a northerly gale, which blew 
violently throughout the day, attended by fog and rain. Some of 
the men went out to hunt, but ‘they saw no other animal than a 
white wolf, which could not be approached. The fresh meat being 
expended, a little pemmican was served out this evening. 

The gale abated on the morning of the 9th; and the sea, which 
it had raised, having greatly subsided, we embarked at seven A.M., 
and after paddling three or four miles, opened Sir J. A. Gordon’s 
Bay, into which we penetrated thirteen miles, and then discovered 
from the summit of a hill that it would be vain to proceed in this 
direction, in search of a passage out of the inlet. 

Our breakfast diminished our provision to two bags of pemmican, 
and a single meal of dried meat. The men began to apprehend 
absolute want of food, and we had to listen to their gloomy fore- 
bodings of the deer entirely quitting the coast in a few days. As 
we were embarking, however, a large bear was discovered on the 
opposite shore, which we had the good fortune to kill; and the sight 
of this fat meat relieved their fears for the present. Dr. Richardson 
found in the stomach of this animal the remains of a seal, several 
marmots (arctomys Richardsonit), a large quantity of the liquorice 
root of Mackenzie (hedysarum.) which is common on these shores, 
and some berries. There was also intermixed with these substances 
a small quantity of grass. 

We got again into the main inlet, and paddled along its eastern 


- OF THE POLAR SEA. 379 


shore until forty minutes after eight A.M., when we encamped in a 
small cove. We found a single log of drift wood; it was pine, and 
sufficiently large to enable us to cook a portion of the bear, which 
had a slight fishy taste, but was deemed very palatable. 

August 10.—We followed up the east border of the inlet about 
twenty-four miles, and at. length emerged into the open sea; a 
body of islands to the westward concealing the channel by which 
we had entered. Here our progress was arrested by returning bad 
weather. We killed a bear and its young cub of this year, on the 
beach near to our encampment. We heartily congratulated our- 
selves at having arrived at the eastern entrance of this inlet, 
which had cost us nine invaluable days in exploring. It contains 
several secure harbours, especially near the mouth of Back’s River, 
where there is a sandy bottom im forty fathoms. There also fish 
are plentiful, and rein-deer and musk-oxen may be procured at this 
season, by spending a little time in hunting. 

On the 3d and 4th of August we observed a fall of more than two 
feet in the water during the night. There are various irregular and 
partial currents in the inlet, which may be attributed to the wind. 
I have distinguished it by the name of Bathurst’s Inlet, in honour of 
the noble Secretary of State, under whose orders I had the honour to 
act. It runs about seventy-six miles south-east from Cape Everitt, 
but in coasting its shores we went about one hundred and seventy- 
four geographical miles. It is remarkable that none of the Indians 
with whom we had spoken had mentioned this inlet ; and we sub- 
sequently learned, that in their journeys they strike across from 
the mouth of one river to the mouth of another, without tracing 
the intermediate line of coast. 

August 11.—Embarking at five A.M., we rounded Point. Everitt, 
and then encountered a strong breeze and heavy swell, which by 
causing the canoes to pitch very much, greatly impeded our pro- 
gress. Some deer being seen grazing in a valley near the beach, 

30 2 


380 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


we landed, and sent St. Germain and Adam in pursuit of them; 
who soon killed three which were very small and lean. Their 
appearance, however, quite revived the spirits of our men, who 
had suspected that the deer had retired to the woods. It 
would appear, from our not having seen any in passing along 
the shores of Bathurst’s Inlet, that at this season they confine 
themselves to the sea-coast and the islands. The magpie berries 
(arbutus alpina) were found quite ripe at this place, and very 
abundant on the acclivities of the hills. We also ascended the 
highest hill, and gained a view of a distant chain of islands, 
extending as far as the eye could reach, and perceived a few 
patches of ice still remaining near to some of them; but in every 
other part the sea was quite open. Resuming our voyage after 
noon, we proceeded along the coast, which is fringed by islands ; 
and, at five P.M., entered another bay, where we were for some 
time involved in our late difficulties by the intricacy of the pas- 
sages ; but we cleared them in the afternoon, and encamped near. 
the northern entrance of the bay, at a spot which had recently been 
visited by a small party of Esquimaux, as the remains of some eggs, 
containing young, were lying beside some half-burnt fire-wood. 
There were also several piles of stones put up by them. I have 
named this bay after my friend. Captain David Buchan, of the 
Royal Navy. It appears to be a safe anchorage, being well sheltered 
from the wind and sea by islands; the bottom is sandy. Its shores 
are high, and.composed. of red sand-stone. Two deer were seen on 
its beach, but could not be approached. The distance we made 
to-day was eighteen miles and three-quarters. 

Kmbarking at four on the morning of the 12th, we proceeded 
against a fresh piercing north-east wind, which raised the waves to a 
height that quite terrified our people, accustomed only to the navi- 
gation of rivers and lakes. We were obliged, however, to persevere 
in our advance, feeling, as we did, that the short season for our 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | - 38] 


operations was hastening away; but after rounding Cape Croker 
the wind became so strong that we could proceed no further. The 
‘distance we had made being only six miles on a north-east: by east 
course. .The shore on which we encamped is formed of the debris 
of red sand-stone, and is destitute of vegetation. The beach fur- 
nished no drift wood, and we dispensed with our usual meal rather 
than expend our pemmican. ‘Several deer. were seen, but the 
hunters could not approach them; they killed two swans. We 
observed the latitude 68° 1’ 20’, where we halted to breakfast this 
morning. 

August 13.—Though the wind was not much diminished, we were 
urged, by the want of fire-wood, to venture upon proceeding. We 
paddled close to the shore for some miles, and then ran before the 
breeze with reefed sails, scarcely two feet in depth. Both of the 
canoes received much water, and one of them struck twice on 
sunken rocks. At the end of eighteen miles we halted to breakfast 
in.a bay, which I have named after Vice-Admiral Sir William 
Johnstone Hope, one of the Lords of the Admiralty. 

We found here a considerable quantity of small willows, such as 
are brought down by the rivers we have hitherto seen; and hence 
we judged, that a river discharges itself into the bottom of this 
bay. A paddle was also found, which Augustus, on examination, 
declared to be made after the fashion of the White Goose Esqui- 
maux, a tribe with whom his countrymen had had some trading 
communication, as has been mentioned in a former part of the 
Narrative. 

This morning we saticced the embouchure of a pretty Let stream, 
and saw the vestiges of an Esquimaux encampment, not above a 
month old. Having obtained the latitude 68° 6’ 40’ N., we recom: 
menced our voyage under sail, taking the precaution to embark all 
the pieces of willow we could collect, as we had found the drift 
wood become more scarce as we:advanced. Our course was directed 


382 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


to a; distant. point, which we supposed to be a cape, and the land 
stretching to the westward of it to be islands; but we soon found 
ourselves in an extensive bay, from which no outlet could be per- 
ceived but the one by which we had entered. After examining, 
however, from the top of a hill, we found a winding shallow pas- 
sage running to the north-west, which we followed for a short time, 
and then encamped, having come twenty-three miles, north by-east 
half east. | Wrasse 

Some articles left by the Esquimaux attracted our attention; we 
found a winter sledge raised upon four stones, with some snow- 
shovels, and a small piece of whalebone. An ice-chisel, a knife, 
and some beads, were left at this pile. The shores of this bay, 
which I have named after Sir George Warrender, are low and clayey, 
and the country for many miles is level, and much intersected with 
water; but we had not leisure to ascertain whether they were 
branches of the bay or fresh-water lakes. Some white geese were 
seen this evening, and some young gray ones were caught on the 
' beach, being unable to fly. We fired at two rein-deer, but without 
success. te 

On August 14th we paddled the whole day along the northern 
shores of the sound, returning towards its mouth. The land which 
we were now tracing is generally so flat, that it could not be.descried 
from the canoes at the distance of four miles, and is invisible from 
the opposite side of the sound, otherwise a short traverse might have 
saved us some days. The few eminences that are on this side were 
mistaken for islands when seen from the opposite shore; they are 
for the most part cliffs of basalt, and are not above one hundred feet 
high; the subjacent strata are of white sand-stone. The rocks are 
mostly confined to the capes and ‘shores, the soil inland being flat, 
clayey, and barren. Most of the headlands shewed traces of visits 
from .the Esquimaux, but none of them recent. Many ducks 
were seen to-day, belonging to a species termed by the voyagers, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 383 


from: theix cry, “caccawees,” We also saw some gray geese and 
swans. The only seal we procured during our voyage, was killed 
this day; it happened to be blind, and our men imagining it to be 
in bad health, would not taste the flesh; we, however, were less 
nice. | | 

We éncampeda at the end of twenty-four miles’ march, on the 
north-west side of a bay, to which I have given the name of my 
friend Captain Parry, now employed in the interesting research 
for a North-West Passage. Drift wood had become very scarce, and 
we found none near the encampment; a fire, however, was not 
required, as we served out pemmican for supper, and the evening 
was unusually warm. 

On the Gailovein bel morning the buses was fresh, and the waves 
rather high. \ In paddling along the west side of Parry’s Bay, we 
saw several deer, but owing to the openness of the country, the 
hunters could not approach them. They killed, however, two swans 
that were moulting, several cranes, and many gray geese. We pro- 
cured also some caccawees, which were then moulting and assembled. 
in immense flocks. In the evening, having rounded Point Beechy, 
and passed Hurd’s Islands, we were exposed to much inconvenience 
and danger from a heavy rolling sea; the canoes receiving many 
severe blows, and shipping a good deal of water, which induced us 
to encamp at five P.M. opposite to Cape Croker, which we had 
passed on the morning of the 12th; the channel, which lay between 
our situation and it, being about seven miles wide. We had now 
reached the northern point of entrance into this sound, which I 
have named in honour of Lord Viscount Melville, the First Lord of 
the Admiralty. It is thirty miles wide from east to west, and twenty 
from north to south; and in coasting it we had sailed eighty-seven 
and: a quarter geographical miles. Shortly after the tents were 
pitched, Mr. Back reported from the steersmen that both 
canoes had sustained material injury during this day’s voyage. I 


384 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


found on examination: that fifteen timbers of the first canoe were’ 


broken, some of them in two places, and that the second canoe was: 


so loose in the frame that its timbers could not be bound in the: 


usual secure manner, and consequently there was danger of its bark 
separating from the gunwales if exposed to a heavy sea. Dis- 
tressing as were these circumstances, they gave me less pain than 
the discovery that our people, who had hitherto displayed in fol- 
lowing us through dangers and difficulties no less novel than ap- 
palling to them, a courage beyond our expectation, now felt serious 


apprehensions for their safety, which so possessed their minds that. 


they were not restrained even by the presence of their officers from: 
expressing them. Their fears, we imagined, had been principally 
excited by the interpreters, St. Germain and Adam, who from the 
outset had foreboded every calamity; and we now strongly sus- 
pected that their recent want of success in their hunting excursions, 
had proceeded from an intentional relaxation in their efforts to kill 
deer, in order that the want of provision might compel us to put a 
period to our voyage. 

I must now mention that many concurrent circumstances had 


caused me, during the few last days, to meditate on the approach of 


this painful necessity. The strong breezes we had encountered for 
some days, led me to fear that the season was breaking up, and 
severe weather would soon ensue, which we could not sustain in a 
country destitute of fuel. Our stock of provision was now reduced 
to a quantity of pemmican only’ sufficient. for three days’ con- 
sumption, and the prospect of increasing it was not encouraging, for 
though rein-deer were seen, they could not be easily approached on 
the level shores we were now coasting, besides it was to be appre- 


hended. they would. soon migrate to the south. It was evident: that 


the time spent in exploring the Arctic and Melville Sounds, and 
Bathurst's Inlet, had precluded the hope of reaching Repulse Bay, 
which at the outset of the voyage we had fondly cherished; and-it 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 385 


was equally obvious that as our distance from any of the trading 
establishments would increase as we proceeded, the hazardous 
traverse across the barren grounds, which we should have to make, 
if compelled to abandon the canoes upon any part of the coast, 
would become greater. 

I this evening communicated to the officers my sentiments on 
these points, as well as respecting our return, and was happy to find 
that their opinions coincided with my own. We were all convinced 
of the necessity of putting a speedy termination to our advance, as 
the hope which we had cherished of meeting the Esquimaux and 
procuring provision from them, could now scarcely be entertained ; 
but yet we were desirous of proceeding, until the land should be 
seen trending again to the eastward; that we might be satisfied of 
its separation from what we had conceived, in passing from Cape 
Barrow to Bathurst’s Inlet, to be a great chain of islands. As it was 
necessary, however, at all events, to set a limit to our advance, I 
announced my determination of returning after four days’ exami- 
nation, unless, indeed, we should previously meet the Esquimaux, 
and be enabled to make some arrangement for passing the winter 
with them. This communication was joyfully received by the men, 
and we hoped that the industry of our hunters being once more 
excited, we should be able to add to our stock of provision. 

It may here be remarked that we observed the first regular return 
of the tides in Warrender’s and Parry’s Bays; but their set could 
not be ascertained. The rise of water did not amount to more 
than two feet. Course to-day south one quarter east—nine miles 
and a quarter. . 

August 16.—Some rain fell in the night, but the morning was 
unusually fine. We set forward at five A.M., and the men paddled 
cheerfully along the coast for ten miles, when a dense tog caused us 
to land on Slate-clay Point. Here we found more traces of the 

3D 


386 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Esquimaux, and the skull ofa man placed between: two-:rocks. 
The fog dispersed at:noon, and we discerned a group of islands’ to 
the northward, which I have named after Vice-Admiral Sir George 
Cockburn, one’ of the Lords of the Admiralty. _Re-embarking, we 
rounded the point and entered Walker’s Bay, where, as in other 
instances, the low beach which lay between several high trap cliffs, 
could not be distinguished until we had coasted down the east side 
nearly to the bottom of the bay. When the continuity of the land 
was, perceived, we crossed to the western shore, and on landing, dis: 
covered.a channel leading through a group of islands. Having passed 
through this «channel, we ran under sail by the Porden Islands, 
across. Riley’s Bay, and rounding a cape which now bears the name 
of my. lamented friend Captain’ Flinders, had the pleasure to find 
the coast trending - north-north-east, with the sea in the offing 
unusually clear of islands; a circumstance which afforded matter of 
wonder. to our Canadians, who had not previously had an uninter- 
rupted view of the ocean. 

Our course was continued along the coast itil sight P.M., when 
a change in the wind and a threatening thunder squall induced us 
to encamp; but the water was so shallow, that we found some 
difficulty in approaching the shore. Large pieces of drift wood gave 
us assurance that we had finally escaped from the bays. - Our 'tents 
were scarcely pitched before we were assailed by a heavy squall and 
rain, which was succeeded by a violent gale from west-north-west ; 
which thrice overset the tents in the course of the night. The wind 
blew with equal violence on the following day, and the sea rolled 
furiously upon the beach. The Canadians had now an opportunity 
of witnessing the effect of a storm upon the sea; and the sight 
increased. their desire of quitting it. | ; 

Our hunters’were sent out, and saw many dees but sets flatness 
of the country: defeated their attempts to approach them; they 


7 at 
ct gees 
‘Tt = 

Z* 


—— a 


ly le 


rey prep A hime LL AG egy L Ge. LEyAP BULLS Eppes 


£09 - 


“SUD WINE, cL MIO 


af cil el 


MLV Galan yoNsl MO WILL Cl all Xcel 


== = = = = 
= —— SS = 
= —— = = — =— 


= = —— = = = = = . = 
—— SSS = =—— = = 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 387 


brought, however, a few unfledged geese. As there: was no appear- 
ance of increasing our stock of provision, the allowance was limited 
to a handful of pemmican, and a small portion of portable soup to 
each man per day. The thermometer this afternoon stood at 41°. 
The following observations were obtained: latitude 68° 18 50° N., 
longitude 110° 5 15° W.; but 109° 25° 00” W. was used in the con- 
struction of the chart, as the chronometers were found, on our return 
to Hood’s River, to have altered their rates; variation 44° 15’ 46” E., 
and dip of the needle 89° 31’ 12”. 

On August 18th the stormy weather and sea continuing, there 
was no prospect of our being able to embark. Dr. Richardson, 
Mr. Back, and I, therefore, set out on foot to discover whether the 
land. within a day’s march, inclined more to the east. We went 
from ten to twelve miles along the coast, which continued. flat, and 
kept the same direction as the encampment. ‘The most distant land 
we saw had the same bearing north-north-east, and appeared. like 
two islands, which we estimated to be six or seven miles off; the 
shore on their inside seemingly trended more to the east, so that it 
is probable Pomt Turnagain, for so this spot was named, forms the 
pitch of a low flat cape. 

Augustus killed a deer in the afternoon, but the men were not | 
able to find it. The hunters found the burrows of a number of 
white foxes, and Hepburn killed one of these animals, which proved 
excellent eating, esteemed by us as equal to the young geese, with 
which it was boiled, and far superior to the lean deer we had upon 
the coast. Large flocks of geese passed over the tents, flying to the 
southward. The lowest temperature to-day was 38°. 

Though it will appear from the chart, that the position of Point 
Turnagain is only six degrees and a half to the east of the mouth of 
the Copper-Mine River; we sailed, in tracing the deeply-indented 
coast, five hundred and fifty-five geographic miles, which is little 

3D 2 


388 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


less than the direct distance between the Copper-Mine River and 
Repulse Bay ; supposing the latter to be in the longitude assigned 
to it by Middleton. 

When the many perplexing incidents which occurred during the 
survey of the coast are considered in connexion with the shortness 
of the period, during which operations of the kind can be carried on, 
and the distance we had to travel before we could gain a place of 
shelter for the winter, I trust it will be judged that we prosecuted 
the enterprise as far as was prudent, and abandoned it only under 
a well-founded conviction that a further advance would endanger 
the lives of the whole party, and prevent the knowledge of what had 
been done from reaching England. The active assistance I received 
from the officers, in contending with the fears of the men, demands 
my warmest gratitude. 

Our researches, as far as they have gone, seem to favour the 
opinion of those who contend for the practicability of a North-West 
Passage. The general line of coast probably runs east and west, 
nearly in the latitude assigned to Mackenzie’s River, the Sound into 
which Kotzebue ‘entered, and Repulse Bay; and very little doubt 
can, in my opinion, be entertained of the existence of a continued 
sea, in or about that line of direction. The existence of whales too, 
on this part of the coast, evidenced by the whalebone we found in 
Esquimaux Cove, may be considered as an argument for an open 
sea; and a connexion with Hudson’s Bay is rendered more probable 
from the same kind of fish abounding on the coasts we visited, and on 
those to the north of Churchill River. I allude more particularly 
to the Capelin or Salmo Arctieus, which we found in large shoals in 
Bathurst’s Inlet, and which not only abounds, as Augustus told us, 
in the bays in his country, but swarms in the Greenland firths*. 


* Arctic Zoology, vol. 1, p. 394. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 389 


The portion of the sea over which we passed is navigable for vessels 
of any size; the ice we met, particularly after quitting Detention 
Harbour, would not have arrested a strong boat. The chain of 
islands affords shelter from all heavy seas, and there are good 
harbours at convenient distances. I entertain, indeed, sanguine 
hopes that the skill and exertions of my friend Captain Parry will 
‘soon render this question no longer problematical. His task is doubt- 
less an arduous one, and, if ultimately successful, may occupy two and 
perhaps three seasons; but confiding as I do, from personal know- 
ledge, in his perseverance and talent for surmounting difficulties, the 
strength of his ships, and the abundance of provisions with which 
they are stored, I have very little apprehension of his safety. As 
I understand his object was to keep the coast of America close on 
board, he will find in the spring of the year, before the breaking up 
of the ice can permit him to pursue his voyage, herds of deer 
flocking in abundance to all parts of the coast, which may be pro- 
cured without difficulty ; and, even later in the season, additions to 
his stock of provision may be obtained on many parts of the coast, 
should circumstances give him leisure to send out hunting parties. 
With the trawl or seine nets also, he may almost every where get 
abundance of fish even without retarding his progress. Under these 
circumstances I do not conceive that he runs any hazard of wanting 
provisions, should his voyage be prolonged even beyond the latest 
period of time which is calculated upon. Drift timber may be 
gathered at many places in considerable quantities, and there is a 
fair prospect of his opening a communication with the Esquimaux, 
who come down to the coast to kill seals in the spring, previous 
to the ice breaking up; and from whom, if he succeeds in con- 
ciliating their good-will, he may obtain provision, and much useful 
assistance. | 


If he makes for Copper-Mine River, as he probably will do, he 


390 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


will not find it in the longitude as laid down on the charts; but he 
will probably find what would be more interesting to him, a post, 
which we erected on the 26th August at the mouth of Hood’s 
River, which is nearly, as. will appear hereafter, in that longitude, 
with a flag upon it, and a letter at the foot of it, which may convey 
to him some useful information. It is possible, however, that he 
might keep outside of the range of islands which skirt. this sl 
of the coast. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. °39] 


CHAPTER XL. 


Journey across the barren Grounds—Difficulty and delay in crossing Copper-Mine River— 
Melancholy and fatal Results thereof—Extreme Misery of the whole Party—Murder of 
Mr. Hood—Death of several of the Canadians—Desolate State of Fort Enterprise— 
Distress suffered at that Place—Dr. Richardson’s Narrative—Mr. Back’s Narrative— 
Conclusion. 


1821. ig ' | 
- August 17. My original intention, whenever the season should 


compel us to relinquish the survey, had been to return by the way 
of the Copper-Mine River, and in pursuance of my arrangement 
with the Hook to travel to Slave Lake through the line of woods 
extending thither by the Great Bear and Marten Lakes, but our 
scanty stock of. provision and the length of the voyage rendered it 
necessary to make for a nearer place. We had already found that 
the country, between Cape Barrow and the Copper-Mine River, 
would not supply our wants, and this it seemed probable would now 
be still more the case; besides, at this advanced season, we expected 
the frequent recurrence of gales, which would cause great detention, 
if not danger in proceeding along that very rocky part of the coast. — 
- I determined, therefore, to make at once for Arctic Sound, where 
we had found the animals more numerous than at any other place; 
and entering Hood's River, to advance up that stream as far as it 
was navigable, and then to construct small canoes out of the. 
materials of the larger ones, which could be carried in crossing the 
barren grounds to Fort. Enterprise. 

August 19.—We were almost beaten out of our comfortless abodes _ 
by rain during the night, and this morning the gale continued 


392 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


without diminution. The thermometer fell to 33°. Two men were 
sent with Junius to search for the deer which Augustus had killed. 
Junius returned in the evening bringing part of the meat, but owing 
to the thickness of the weather, his companions parted from him 
and did not make their appearance. Divine service was read. On 
the 20th we were presented with the most chilling prospect, the 
small pools of water being frozen over, the ground being covered 
with snow, and the thermometer at the freezing point at mid-day. 
Flights of geese were passing to the southward. ‘The wind however 
was more moderate, having changed to the eastward. Considerable 
anxiety prevailing respecting Belanger and Michel, the two men 
who strayed from Junius yesterday, the rest were sent out to look 
for them. ‘The search was successful, and they all returned in the 
evening. The stragglers were much fatigued, and had suffered 
severely from the cold, one of them having his thighs frozen, and 
what under our present circumstances was most grievous, they had 
thrown away all the meat. The wind during the night returned to 
the north-west quarter, blew more violently than ever, and raised a 
very turbulent sea. The next day did not improve our condition, 
the snow remained on the ground, and the small pools were frozen. 
Our hunters were sent out, but they returned after a fatiguing 
day’s march without having seen any animals. We made a scanty 
meal off a handful of pemmican, after which only half a bag 
remained. } 
The wind abated after midnight, and the surf diminished rapidly, 
which caused us to be on the alert at a very early hour on the 22d, 
but we had to wait until six A.M. for the return of Augustus who 
had continued out all night on an unsuccessful pursuit of deer. 
It appears that he had walked a few miles farther along the coast, 
than the party had done on the 18th, and from a sketch he drew on 
the sand, we were confirmed in our former opinion that the shore 
inclined more to the eastward beyond Point Turnagain. He also 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 393 


drew a river of considerable size, that discharges its waters into 
‘Walker’s Bay; on the banks of which stream he saw a piece. of 
wood, such as the Esquimaux use in producing fire, and other marks 
so fresh that he supposed they had>recently visited the spot. We 
therefore left several iron materials for them. Our men, cheered by 
the prospect of returning, embarked with the utmost alacrity; and, 
paddling with unusual vigour, carried us across Riley’s and Walker’s 
Bays, a distance of twenty miles before noon, when we landed on 
Slate-Clay Point, as the wind had freshened too much to permit us 
to continue the voyage. The whole party went to hunt, but returned 
without’ success in the evening, drenched with the heavy rain which 
commenced soon after they had set out. Several: deer, were seen, 
but could not be approached in this naked country; and as our 
stock of pemmican did not setae of serving out two mens; we went 
dinnerless to bed. ele : 

Soon after our departure to-day, a erie tin-case, satipiende 
buoyant to float, was thrown overboard, containing a short account of 
our proceedings, and the position of the most conspicuous points. 
‘The wind blew off the land, the water was smooth, and as the sea 
is in this part more free from islands than in ‘any other, there was 
every probability of its being driven off the shore into the current ; 
which, as I have before mentioned, we suppose, from the circum- 
stance of Mackenzie’s River being the only known stream that 
brings down the wood we have found along the Shanes to set to the 
eastward. eligi hiss | . : 

August 23.—A severe frost eal us to pass a doufontldss aiehit 
At two P.M. we set sail, and the men voluntarily launched out. to 
make a traverse of fifteen miles across: Melville Sound, before a 
strong wind and heavy sea; ~The privation of food, under which 
our voyagers were then labouring, absorbed every other terror; 
otherwise the most powerful: persuasion could not have induced 
them to attempt such a traverse. It was with the utmost’ difficulty 

3 E 


394, | A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


that the canoes were kept from turning their broadsides to the 
waves, though we sometimes steered with all the paddles. One of | 
them narrowly escaped being overset by this accident, happening 
in mid-channel, where the waves were so high that the mast-head 
of our canoe was often. hid from the other, though it was sailing 
within hail. ‘The annexed plate, from Mr. Back’s sketch, will ie ad 
to the reader an accurate idea of the peril of our situation. | 

The traverse, however, was made; we were then near a high 
rocky lee shore, on which a heavy surf was beating. The wind 
being on the beam, the canoes drifted fast to leeward; and, on 
rounding a point, the recoil of the sea from the rocks was so great 
that they were with difficulty kept from foundering. We looked in 
vain for a sheltered bay to land in; but, at length, being unable to 
weather another point, we were obliged to put ashore on the open 
beach, which, fortunately, was sandy at this spot. The debarkation 
was effected in the manner represented in the plate; and, fortu- 
nately, without further injury than the splitting of the head of 
the second canoe, which was easily repaired. 

Our encampment being near to the place where we killed the deer 
on the 11th, almost the whole party went out to hunt, but they 
returned in the evening without having seen any game. The 
berries, however, were ripe and plentiful, and, with the addition 
of some country tea, furnished a supper. There were some showers 
in the afternoon, and the weather was cold, the thermometer 
being 42°, but the evening and night were calm and fine. It may be 
remarked that the musquitoes disappeared when the late oe 
commenced. 

August 25. —Embarking at three A. M., we stretched across 
the eastern entrance of Bathurst’s Inlet, and arrived at an island, 
which Ihave named after Colonel Barry, of Newton Barry. Some 
deer being seen on the beach, the hunters went in pursuit of 
them, and succeeded in killing three females, which, enabled us to 


‘ WepUury ,Mpy AG poswasuyy 


“UIP UIT Aeon Uy or Aq “GOT “yotUr Pausn ang 


Teel 62-0 


3 


mM TO TIVD VY NI“Od O 


| "i 


Ne 


a 


5)" 


OO’ 


al 


LOIN 


yp 


9) 


NOU 


speg jnery Aq umeaq 


ti ae 
as 


: carelh 
ni 
uy 


SEG ——<—<—— 


Zi f — eo re he 


Drawn by Tour. Rack, Ra Entraved by Haw? finden 


EXPEDITION LANDING ms 4 STORM, 


- OF THE POLAR SEA. . /. 395 


save our last remaining meal of pemmican. They saw also some 
fresh tracks of musk oxen on the banks of a small stream, which 
flowed into a lake in the centre of the island. These animals must 
have crossed. a channel, at least, three miles wide, to reach the nearest 
of these islands. Some specimens of-variegated pebbles and Jesper 
were found here imbedded in the amygdaloidal rock. | 

Re-embarking at two P.M., and continuing through what was 
supposed to be a\channel between two islands, we found our passage 
barred by a gravelly isthmus of only ten yards in width; the canoes 
and cargoes were carried across it, and we passed into Bathurst’s Inlet 
through another similar channel; bounded on both sides by steep 
rocky hills. The wind then changing from $.E. to’N.W. brought 
heavy rain, and we encamped at seven P. M., -having advanced 
eighteen miles. ne 

August 25.—Starting this morning ae a fresh breeze in our favour, 
we soon reached that part of Barry’s Island where the canoes were 
detained on the 2d and ard of this month, and contrary to what we 
then experienced, the deer were now plentiful. The hunters killed 
two, and we were relieved from all apprehension’ of an immediate 
want of food. One would suppose the deer were about to.retire to 
the main shore from their assembling at this time im such numbers 
on the islands nearest to the coast. Those we saw were, reoneaaly 
females with their young, and all of them very lean. 

The wind continued in the same direction until we had. onmiaed 
Point Wollaston, and then changed to a quarter, which enabled us 
‘to steer for Hood’s River, which we ascended as’ high as. the. first 
rapid and encamped. Here terminated our voyage on the Arctic 
sea, during which we had gone over six hundred and. fifty. geogra- 
phical miles. Our Canadian voyagers could not restrain their ex- 
pressions of joy at having turned their backs on the sea, and 
they passed the evening talking over their past adventures with 
much ‘humour and no little exaggeration, The consideration that 

any 


306 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the most: painful, and .certainly the most hazardous, part of the: 
journey was yet to come, did not depress their spirits at all. It is 
due to their character to mention that they displayed much courage 
in encountering the dangers of the sea, magnified to them by their 
novelty. 

The shores: between Cape Barrow and Cape Flinders, including 
the extensive branches of Arctic and Melville Sounds, and Bathurst’s 
Inlet, may be comprehended in one great gulf, which I have dis- 
tinguished by the appellation of George IV.’s Coronation Gulf, in 
honour of His Most Gracious Majesty, the latter name being added 
to mark the time of its discovery. The Archipelago of islands which 
fringe the coast from Copper-Mine River to Point Turnagain, I have 
named in honour of His Royal Highness the Duke of York. | 

It may be deserving of notice that the extremes in temperature 

of the sea water during our voyage were 53° and 35°, but its general 
temperature was between 43° and 48°. Throughout our return from 
Point Turnagain we observed that the sea had risen several feet 
above marks left at our former encampments. ‘This may, perhaps, 
be attributed to the north-west gales. 
- August 26.—Previous to our departure this morning, an assort- 
ment of iron materials, beads, looking-glasses, and other articles 
were put up in a conspicuous situation for the Esquimaux, and the 
English Union was planted on the loftiest sand-hill, where it might 
be seen by any ships passing in the offing. Here also, was deposited 
in a tin box, a letter containing an outline of our proceedings, the 
latitude and longitude of the principal places, and the course we 
intended to pursue towards Slave Lake. 

Embarking at eight A.M. we proceeded up the river, which is full 
of sandy shoals, but sufficiently deep for canoes in the channels. It is 
from one hundred to two hundred yards wide, and is bounded by high 
and steep banks of clay. We encamped at a cascade of eighteen or 
twenty feet high, which is produced by a ridge of rock crossing the 


ant 


in 


Engramecl hy Ei iwiFind eT, 


yo Eee mele 


O Marah ie23 hv. 


5 


°° OF THE’ POLAR SEA. 397 


river, and. the nets were set. . A mile below this cascade Hood’s 
River. is joined by a stream half its own size, which I have called 
James’ Branch. bear and deer tracks had been numerous on the 
banks of the river when we were here before, but not a single recent 
one was to be seen at this time. Crédit, however, killed a small 
deer at some. distance inland, which, with the addition of berries, 
furnished a delightful repast this evening. The weather was remark- 
ably fine, and the temperature somild, that the: musquitoes again 
made their appearance, but not in any great numbers.. Our distance 
made to-day was not more than six miles. . . | . 
The next morning the. net furnished. us with, ten white an M 
and trout. Having made a further deposit of 1 iron work ‘for the 
 Esquimaux we pursued our voyage up the river, but the shoals and. 
rapids in this part were so frequent, that we walked along the banks 
the whole day, and the crews laboured hard in carrying the canoes 
thus lightened over the shoals or dragging them up the rapids, yet 
our. journey ina direct’ line was only about seven miles. In: the 
evening we: encamped at, the lower end of a narrow chasm through 
which. the river flows for. upwards | of a mile. The walls. of this 
chasm. are. upwards of two hundred feet. high, quite perpendicular, 
and. in some places only a few yards apart. ‘The river precipitates 
itself into it over.a rock, forming two magnificent. and: picturesque 
falls close to each: other. The: upper fall is about sixty feet high, and: 
the lower one at least one hundred, but’ perhaps considerably more, 
for the narrowness of the chasm into which it fell prevented us from 
seeing. its bottom, and we could merely discern the top of the spray 
far beneath our feet. The lower. fall is divided into. two, by an 
insulated column of rock which rises about forty feet above it.. The’ 
whole descent of the river at this place probably’ exceeds. two. 
hundred and fifty feet. The rock is very, fine felspathose sandstone. 
It has a smooth‘surface and a light. red colour. ; Ihave named. these 
magnificent cascades “ Wilberforce: a as a tribute of ass respect, 


it 5 » * ae 


co 


398 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


for that distinguished philanthropist and christian. Messrs. Back and: 
Hood took beautiful sketches of this majestic. scene, which are 
combined in the annexed plate. py RM 

The river being surveyed from the summit of a hill, above these 
falls, appeared. so rapid and shallow, that it seemed useless to: 
attempt proceeding any farther in the large canoes. I therefore 
determined on constructing out of their materials two smaller ones 
of sufficient size to contain three persons, for the purpose of crossing 
any river that might obstruct our progress. This operation was 
accordingly commenced, and by the 31st both the canoes being 
finished, we prepared for our departure on the following day. 

The leather which had been preserved for making shoes was 
equally divided among the men, two pairs of flannel socks were given 
to each person, and such articles of warm clothing as remained, were 
issued to those who most required them. They were also furnished 
with one of the officers’ tents. This being done, I communicated to 
the men my intention of proceeding in as direct a course as possible 
to the part of Point Lake, opposite to our spring encampment, 
which was only distant one hundred and forty-nine miles in a 
straight line. They received the communication cheerfully, con- 
sidered the journey to be short, and left me, in high spirits, to 
arrange their own packages. The stores, books, &c., which were not. 
absolutely necessary to be carried, were then put up in boxes to: be 
left en cache here, in order that the men’s burdens might be as Hon 
as possible. 7 

The next morning was warm, and very fine. Every one was on 
the alert at an early hour, being anxious to commence the journey. 
Our luggage consisted of ammunition, nets, hatchets, ice chisels, 
astronomical instruments, clothing, blankets; three kettles, and: 
the two canoes, which were each carried by one man. The 
officers carried such a portion of their own things as their strength. 
would permit; the weight carried by each man was about ninety 


OF THE POLAR SEA. © 399 


pounds, and with this we advanced at the rate of about a mile an 
hour, including rests. In the evening the hunters killed a lean cow, 
out of a large drove of musk-oxen; but the men were too much 
laden to carry more than a small portion of its flesh. The alluvial 
soil, which towards the mouth of the river spreads into plains, 
covered with grass and willows, was now giving place to a more 
barren and hilly country; so that we could but just collect sufficient 
brush wood to cook our suppers. The part of the river we skirted 
to-day was shallow, and flowed over a bed of sand ; its width about 
one hundred and twenty. yards. About midnight our tent was blown 
down by a squall, and we were completely drenched with rain before 
it could be re-pitched. 

In the morning of the Ist of September a fall of snow took 
place; the canoes became a cause of delay, by the difficulty of 
carrying them in a high wind, and they sustained much damage 
from the falls of those who had charge of them. The face of the 
country was broken by hills of moderate elevation, but the ground 
was plentifully strewed with small stones, which, to men bearing 
heavy burthens, and whose feet were protected only by soft moose 
skin shoes, occasioned great pain. At the end of eleven miles we 
encamped, and sent for a musk-ox and a deer, which St. Germain 
and Augustus had killed. The day was extremely cold, the ther- 
mometer varying between 34° and 36°. In the afternoon a heavy 
fall of snow took place, on the wind changing from north-west to 
south-west. We found no wood at the encampment, but made a 
fire of moss to cook the supper, and crept under our blankets for 
warmth. At sun-rise the thermometer was at 31°, and the wind 
fresh from north-west; but the weather became mild in the course 
of the forenoon, and the snow disappeared from the gravel. The 
afternoon was remarkably fine, and the thermometer rose to 50°. 
One of the hunters killed a musk-ox. The hills in this part are 


400 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


lower and more round-backed than those we passed yesterday, and 
exhibited but little naked rock ; they weré covered with lichens. 
Having ascertained from the summit of the highest hill near the 
tents, that the river continued to preserve a west course ; and fear- 
ing that by pursuing it further we might lose much time, and un- 
necessarily walk over a great deal of ground, I determined on 
quitting its banks the next day, and making as directly as we could for 
Point Lake. We accordingly followed the river on the 3d, only to 
the place where the musk-ox had been killed last evening, and after 
the meat was procured, crossed the river in our two canoes lashed 
together. _We now emerged from the valley of the river, and entered 
a level, but very barren, country, varied only by small lakes and 
marshes, the ground being covered with small stones. Many old tracks 
of rein-deer were seen in the clayey soil, and some more recent 
ones of the musk-ox. We encamped on the borders of Wright's 
River, which flows to the eastward ; the direct distance walked to- 
day being ten miles and three-quarters. The: next morning was 
very fine, and, as the day advanced, the weather became quite 
warm. We set out at six A.M., and, having forded the river, 
walked over a perfectly level country, interspersed with small lakes, 
which communicated with each other, by streams running in various 
directions. No berry-bearing ‘plants were found in ‘this part, the 
surface of the earth being thinly covered in the moister piece with 
a few grasses, and on the drier spots with lichens. | 
Having walked twelve miles and a half, we encamped at seven P.M., 
and distributed our last piece of pemmican, and a little arrow-root 
tor supper, which afforded but a scanty meal. This’ evening. was 
warm, but dark clouds overspread the sky. Our men now began to 
find their burdens very oppressive, and were much fatigued by this 
day’s march, but did not complain. One of them was lame from an 
‘imflammation in the knee. Heavy rain commenced at midnight, and 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 401 


continued. without intermission until five in the morning, when it 
was succeeded by snow on the wind changing to north-west, which 
soon increased to a violent gale. As we had nothing to eat, and 
were destitute of the means of making a fire, we remained in our 
beds all the day ; but the covering of our blankets was insufficient to 
prevent us from feeling the severity of the frost, and suffering in- 
convenience from the drifting of the snow into our tents. There 
was no abatement of the storm next day ; our tents were completely 
frozen, and the snow had. drifted around them to a depth of three 
feet, and even in the inside there was a covering of several inches on 
our blankets. Our suffering from cold, in a: comfortless canvass tent 
in such weather, with the temperature.at 20°, and without fire, will 
easily be imagined ; it ips however, less than that which we felt 
from. hunger. 

The morning of the 7th cleared up a little, but the wind was still 
strong, and the weather extremely cold. From the unusual con- 
tinuance of the storm, we feared the winter had set in with all its 
rigour, and that by longer delay we should only be exposed to an 
accumulation of difficulties; we therefore prepared for our journey, 
although we were in a very unfit condition for starting, being weak 
from fasting, and our garments stiffened by the frost.. We had no 
means of making a fire to thaw them, the moss, at all times difficult 
to kindle, being now covered with ice and snow. A considerable 
time was consumed in packing up the frozen tents and bed clothes, 
the wind blowing so strong that no one could cis his hands long 
out of his mittens. : 

Just as we were about to commence our march, I was seized with 
a fainting fit, in consequence of exhaustion and sudden exposure to 
the wind; but after eating a morsel of portable soup, I recovered, so 
far as to be able to move on. - I. was unwilling at first to take this 
morsel of soup, which was diminishing the small and only remaining 
meal for the party; but several of the men: urged me to it, with 


3 F 


402 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


much kindness. ‘The ground was covered a foot deep with snow, 
the margin of the lakes was incrusted with ice, and the swamps over 
which we had to pass were entirely frozen; but the ice not being 
sufficiently strong to bear us, we frequently plunged knee-deep in 
water. ‘Those who carried the canoes were repeatedly blown down 
by the violence of the wind, and they often fell, from making an 
insecure step on a slippery stone; on one of these occasions, the 
largest canoe was so much broken as to be rendered utterly unser- 
viceable. This was felt as a serious disaster, as the remaining canoe 
having through mistake been made too small, it was doubtful 
whether it would be sufficient to carry us across a river. Indeed 
we had found it necessary in crossing Hood’s River, to lash the two 
canoes together. As there was some suspicion that Benoit, who 
carried the canoe, had broken it intentionally, he having on :a former 
occasion been overheard by some of the men to say, that he would 
do so when he got it in charge, we closely examined him on the 
point; he roundly denied having used the expressions attributed to 
him, and insisted that it was broken by his falling accidentally; and 
as he brought men to attest the latter fact, who saw him tumble, we 
did not press the matter further. I may here remark that our 
people had murmured a good deal at having to carry two canoes, 
though they were informed of the necessity of taking both, in case 
it should be deemed advisable to divide the party; which it had 
been thought probable we should be obliged to do, if animals proved 
scarce, in order to give the whole the better chance of procuring 
subsistence, and also for the purpose of sending forward some of the 
best walkers to search for Indians, and to get them to meet us with 
supplies of provision. The power of doing this was now at an end. 
As the accident could not be remedied, we turned it to the best 
account, by making a fire of the bark and timbers of the broken’ 
vessel, and cooked the remainder of our portable soup and arrow- 
root. This was a scanty meal after three days’ fasting, but it served 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 4,03 


to allay the pangs of hunger, and enabled us to proceed, at a quicker 
pace than before. The depth of the snow caused us to march in 
Indian file, that is in each other’s steps; the voyagers taking it in 
turn to lead the party. A distant object was pointed out to this 
man in the direction we wished to take, and Mr. Hood followed 
immediately behind him, to renew the bearings, and keep him from 
deviating more than could be helped from the mark. It may be 
here observed, that we proceeded in this manner throughout our 
route across the barren grounds. 

In the afternoon we got into a more hilly country, where the 
ground was strewed with large stones. The surface of these was 
covered with lichens of the genus gyrophora, which the Canadians 
term tripe de roche. A considerable quantity was gathered, and 
with half a partridge each, (which were shot in the course of the 
day,) furnished us with a slender supper, which we cooked with a 
few willows, dug up from beneath the snow. We passed a comfortless 
night in our damp clothes, but took the precaution of sleeping upon 
our socks and shoes to prevent them from freezing. This plan was 
afterwards adopted throughout the journey. 

At half past five in the morning we proceeded; and after walking 
about two miles, came to Cracroft’s River, flowing to the westward, 
with a very rapid current over a rocky channel. We had much diffi- 
culty in crossing this, the canoe being useless, not only from the bot- 
tom of the channel being obstructed by large stones, but also from its 
requiring gumming, an operation which, owing to the want of wood 
and. the frost, we were unable to perform. However, after following 
the course of the river some way, we effected a passage by means of a 
range of large rocks that crossed a rapid. As the current was strong, 
and many of the rocks were covered with water to the depth of two 


or three feet, the men were exposed to much danger in carrying their 


heavy burthens across, and several of them actually slipped into the 
stream, but were immediately rescued by the others. Junius went 
3 F 2 


4.04; A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


farther up the river in search of a better crossing place, and did not 
rejoin us to-day. As several of the party were drenched from head to 
foot, and we were all wet to the middle, our clothes became stiff with 
the frost, and we walked with much pain for the remainder of the day. 
The march was continued to a late hour, being anxious to rejoin the 
hunters who had gone before, but we were obliged to encamp at the 
end of ten miles and a quarter, without seeing them. Our only 
meal to-day consisted of a partridge each, (which the hunters shot,) 
mixed with tripe de roche. This repast although scanty for men, 
with appetites such as our daily fatigue created, proved a cheerful 
one, and was received with thankfulness. Most of the men had to 
sleep in the open air, in consequence of the absence of Crédit, who 
carried their tent ; but we fortunately found an unusual quantity of 
roots to make a fire, which prevented their suffering much from the 
cold, though the thermometer was at 17°. 

We started at six on the 9th, and at the end of two miles re- 
gained our hunters, who were halting on the borders of a lake amidst 
a clump of stunted willows. This lake stretched to the westward as 
far as we could see, and its waters were discharged by a rapid stream 
one hundred and fifty yards wide. Being entirely ignorant where 
we might be led by pursuing the course of the lake, and dreading 
the idea of going a mile unnecessarily out of the way, we deter- 
mined on crossing the river if possible; and the canoe was gummed 
for the purpose, the willows furnishing us with fire. But we had to 
await the return of Junius before we could make the traverse. In 
the mean time we gathered a little tripe de roche, and breakfasted 
upon it and a few partridges that were killed in the morning. 
St. Germain and Adam were sent upon some recent tracks of deer. 
Junius arrived in the afternoon, and informed us that he had seen 
a large herd of musk-oxen on the banks of Cracroft’s River, and had 
wounded one of them, but it had escaped.. He brought about four 
pounds of meat, the remains of a deer that had been devoured by 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 405 


the wolves. The poor fellow was much fatigued, having walked 
throughout the night, but as the weather was particularly favourable 
for our crossing the river, we could not allow him to rest. After he 
had taken some refreshment we proceeded to the river. The canoe 
being put into the water was found extremely ticklish, but it was 
managed with much dexterity by St. Germain, Adam, and Peltier, 
who ferried over one passenger at a time, causing him to lie flat in its 
bottom, by no means a pleasant position, owing to its leakiness, but 
there was no alternative. The transport of the whole party was 
effected by five o'clock, and we walked about two miles further, and 
encamped, having come five miles and three quarters on a south-west 
course. Two young alpine hares were shot by St. Germain, which, 
with the small piece of meat brought in by Junius, furnished the 
supper of the whole party. There was no tripe de roche here. The 
country had now become decidedly hilly, and was covered with snow. 
The lake preserved its western direction, as far as I could see from 
the summit of the highest mountain near the encampment. We 
subsequently learned from the Copper Indians, that the part at 
which we had crossed the river was the Congecatha wha chaga of 
Hearne, of which I had little idea at the time, not only from the 
difference of latitude, but also from its being so much farther east of 
the mouth of the Copper-Mine River, than his track is laid down. 
He only making one degree and three quarters’ difference of lon- 
gitude, and we, upwards of four. Had I been aware of the fact, 
‘several days’ harassing march, and a disastrous accident would have 
_ been prevented by keeping on the western side of the lake, instead 
of crossing the river. We were informed also, that this river is 
the Anatessy or River of Strangers, and is supposed to fall into 
Bathurst’s Inlet; but although the Indians have visited its mouth, 
their description was not sufficient to identify it with any of the 
rivers whose mouths we had’ seen. It probably falls in that part of 


4.06 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the coast which was hid from our view by Goulburn’s or Elliot’s 
Islands. 

September 10.—We had a cold north wind, and the atmosphere 
was foggy. ‘The thermometer 18° at five A.M. In the course of — 
our march this morning, we passed many small lakes; and the 
ground, becoming higher and more hilly as we receded from the 
river, was covered to a much greater depth with snow. ‘This ren- 
dered walking not only extremely laborious, but also hazardous in 
the highest degree; for the sides of the hills, as is usual throughout 
the barren grounds, abounding in accumulations of large angular 
stones, it often happened that the men fell into the interstices 
with their loads on their backs, being deceived by the smooth 
appearance of the drifted snow. If any one had broken a limb 
here, his fate would have been melancholy indeed ; we could neither 
have remained with him, nor carried him on. We halted at ten to 
gather tripe de roche, but it was so frozen, that we were quite 
benumbed with cold before a sufficiency could be collected even for 
a scanty meal. On proceeding our men were somewhat cheered, by 
observing on the sandy summit of a hill, from whence the snow had 
been blown, the summer track of a man; and afterwards by seeing 
several deer tracks on the snow. About noon the weather cleared 
up a little, and, to our great joy, we saw a herd of musk-oxen 
grazing in a valley below us. The party instantly halted, and the 
best hunters were sent out; they approached the animals with the 
utmost caution, no less than two hours being consumed before they 
got within gun-shot. In the mean time we beheld their proceed- 
ings with extreme anxiety, and many secret prayers were, doubtless, 
offered up for their success. At length they opened their fire, and 
we had the satisfaction of seeing one of the largest cows fall; another 
was wounded, but escaped. This success infused spirit into our 
starving party. To skin and cut up the animal was the work of a 


OF THE POLAR SEA. AQT 


few minutes. The contents of its stomach were devoured upon 
the spot, and the raw intestines, which were next attacked, were 
pronounced by the most delicate amongst us to be excellent. A few 
willows, whose tops were seen peeping through the snow in the bottom 
of the valley, were quickly grubbed, the tents pitched, and supper 
cooked, and devoured with avidity. This was the sixth day since we 
had had a good meal. The tripe de roche, even where we got 
enough, only serving to allay the pangs of hunger for a short time. 
After supper, two of the hunters went in pursuit of the herd, but 
could not get near them. 

We were detained all the next day by a strong southerly wind, 
and were much incommoded in the tents by the drift snow. The 
temperature was 20°. The average for the last ten days about 
24°.5. We restricted ourselves to one meal to-day as we were at 
rest, and there was only meat remaining sufficient for the next day. 

The gale had not diminished on the 12th, and, as we were 
fearful of its continuance for some time, we determined on going 
forward ; our only doubt regarded the preservation of the canoe, 
but the men promised to pay particular attention to it, and the 
most careful persons were appointed to take it in charge. ‘The snow 
was two feet deep, and the ground much broken, which’ rendered 
the march extremely painful. The whole party complained more of 
faintness and weakness than they had ever done before; their 
strength seemed to have been impaired by the recent supply of 
animal food. In the afternoon the wind abated, and the snow ceased ; 
_ cheered with the change we proceeded forward at a quicker pace, 
and encamped at six P.M., having come eleven miles. Our supper 
consumed the last of our meat. | 

We set out on the 13th, in thick hazy weather, and, after an hour’s | 
march, had the extreme mortification to find ourselves on the 
borders of a large lake, which we subsequently learned from the 
Indians was named Contwoy-to, or Rum Lake; neither of its extre- 


408 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


mities could be seen, and as the portion which lay to the east 
seemed the widest, we coasted along to the westward portion in 
search of a crossing-place. This lake being bounded by steep and 
lofty hills, our march was very fatiguing. Those sides which were 
exposed to the sun, were free from snow, and we found upon them 
some excellent berries. We encamped at six P.M., having come 
only six miles and a half. Crédit was then missing, and he did not 
return during the night. We supped off a single partridge and 
some tripe de roche; this unpalatable weed was now quite nau- 
seous to the whole party, and in several it produced bowel com- 
plaints. Mr. Hood was the greatest sufferer from this cause. . This 
evening we were extremely distressed, at discovering that our im- 
provident companions, since we left Hood’s River, had thrown 
away three of the fishing-nets, and burnt the floats; they knew we 
had brought them to procure subsistence for the party, when the 
animals should fail, and we could scarcely believe the fact of their 
having wilfully deprived themselves of this resource, especially 
when. we considered that most of them had passed the greater part of 
their servitude in situations where the nets alone had supplied them 
with food. Being thus deprived of our principal resource, that of 
fishing, and the men evidently getting weaker every day, it became 
necessary to lighten their burthens of every thing except ammuni- 
tion, clothing, and the instruments that were required to find our 
way. I, therefore, issued directions to deposit at this encampment 
the dipping needle, azimuth compass, magnet, a large thermometer, 
and a few books we had carried, having torn out of these such parts 
as we should require to work the observations for latitude» and 
longitude. I also promised, as an excitement to the efforts in 
hunting, my gun to St. Germain, and an ample compensation to 
Adam, or any of the other men who should kill any animals. 
Mr. Hood, on this occasion, lent his gun to Michel, the sissies 
who was very eager in the chase, and often successful. 


- OF THE POLAR SEA. ~ 409 


‘September 14.—This morning the officers being assembled round 
a small fire, Perrault presented each of us with a small piece of meat 
which he had saved from his allowance. It was received with great 
thankfulness, and such an act of self-denial and kindness, being 
totally unexpected in a Canadian voyager, filled our eyes with tears. 
In directing our course to a river issuing from the lake, we met 
Crédit, who communicated the joyful intelligence of his having 
killed two deer in the morning. We instantly halted, ‘and having 
shared the deer that was nearest to us, prepared. breakfast. After 
which, the other deer was sent for, and we went down to the river, 
which was about three hundred yards wide, and flowed ‘with 
great velocity through a broken rocky channel. Having searched 
for a part where the current was most smooth, the canoe was 
placed in the water at the head of a rapid, and St. Germain, Solomon 
Belanger, and I, embarked in order to cross. We went from the 
shore very well, but in mid-channel the canoe became difficult to 
manage under our burden as the breeze was fresh. The current 
drove us to the edge of the rapid, when Belanger unfortunately 
applied his paddle to avert the apparent danger of being forced 
down it, and lost his balance. The canoe was overset in con- 
sequence in the middle of the rapid. We fortunately kept hold of 
it, until we touched a rock where the water did not reach higher 
than our waists; here we kept our footing, notwithstanding the 
strength of the current, until the water was emptied out of the 
canoe. Belanger then held the canoe steady whilst St. Germain 
placed me in it, and afterwards embarked himself in a very dex- 
terous manner. It was impossible, however, to embark Belanger, 
as the canoe would have been hurried down the rapid, the moment 
he should have raised his foot from the rock on which he stood. 
We were, therefore, compelled to leave him in his perilous situation. 
We had not gone twenty yards before the canoe, striking on a 
sunken rock, went down: The place being shallow, we ‘were again 


3G 


410 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


enabled to empty it, and the third attempt brought us to the shore. 
In. the mean time Belanger was suffering extremely, immersed. to 
his middle in the centre of a rapid, the temperature of which was 
very little above the freezing point, and the upper part of his body 
covered with wet clothes, exposed in a temperature not much above 
zero, to a strong breeze. He called piteously for relief, and 
St. Germain on his return endeavoured to embark him, but in vain: 
The canoe was hurried down the rapid, and when he landed he was 
rendered by the cold incapable of further exertion, and Adam: at- 
tempted to embark Belanger, but found it impossible. An attempt 
was next made to carry out to him a line, made of the slings of the 
men’s loads. This also failed, the current acting so strongly upon 
it, as to prevent the canoe from steering, and it was finally broken 
and carried down the stream. At length, when Belanger’s strength 
seemed almost exhausted, the canoe reached him with a small cord 
belonging to one of the nets, and he was dragged perfectly senseless 
through the rapid. By the direction of Dr. Richardson, he was 
instantly stripped, and being rolled up in blankets, two men un- 
dressed themselves and went to bed with him; but it was some 
hours before he recovered his warmth and sensations. As soon as 
Belanger was placed in his bed, the officers immediately sent over 
my blankets, and a person to make a fire. Augustus brought the 
canoe over, and in returning he was obliged to descend both the 
rapids, before he could. get across the stream; which hazardous 
service he performed with the greatest coolness and judgment. It 
is impossible to describe my sensations as I witnessed the various 
unsuccessful attempts to relieve Belanger. The distance prevented 
my seeing distinctly what was going on, and I continued pacing up 
and down upon the rock on which I landed, regardless of the 
coldness of my drenched and stiffening garments. ‘The canoe, in 
every attempt to reach him, was hurried down the rapid, and was 
lost tothe view amongst the rocky islets, with a rapidity that 


_ OF THE POLAR SEA, ~ . | 411 


seemed. to threaten certain destruction ; once; indeed, I fancied that 
I.saw it overwhelmed in the waves. Such an event would have 
been fatal to the whole party. Separated as I was from my, com- 
panions, without gun, ammunition, hatchet, or the means of making 
a fire, and in wet clothes, my doom would. have been speedily sealed, 
My companions too, driven to the necessity of coasting the lake, 
must have sunk under the fatigue of rounding its innumerable arms 
and bays, which, as we have learned from the Indians, are very 
extensive. By the goodness of Providence, however, we were spared 
at that time, and some of us have been permitted to offer up our 
thanksgivings, in a civilized land, for the signal deliverances we then 
and. afterwards experienced. 

By, this accident I had the misfortune to lose. my peihee tlie con- 
taining my journal from Fort Enterprise, together with all the 
astronomical and meteorological observations made during the descent 
of the Copper-Mine River, and along the sea-coast, (except those 
for the dip and variation.) I was in the habit of carrying it strapped 
across my shoulders, but had taken it off on entering the canoe, to 
reduce the upper weight. The results of most. of the observations 
for latitude and longitude, had been registered in the sketch books, 
so that we preserved. the requisites for the construction of the chart. 
The meteorological. observations; not having been copied, were lost. 
My companions, Dr. Richardson, Mr. Back, and Mr. Hood, had 
been so careful in noting every occurrence! in their journals, that the 
loss of mine could) fortunately be well supplied. These friends 
- immediately offered me their documents, and every assistance in 
drawing up another narrative, of which kindness I availed. myself at 
the earliest opportunity afterwards. : 

September 15.—The rest of the party were brought across. this 
morning, and we were delighted: to find Belanger.so:much recovered 
asto. be able to proceed, but we could not set out until noon,).as the 
men had to: prepare substitutes for the slings which were lost yesterday.., 

8G 2 


412 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Soon after leaving the encampment we discerned a herd of deer, and 
after a long chase'a fine male was killed by Perrault, several others 
were wounded but they escaped. After this we passed round the north 
end of a branch of the lake, and ascended the Willingham Moun- 
tains, keeping near the border of the lake. These hills were steep, 
craggy, and covered with snow. We encamped at seven and enjoyed 
a substantial meal. ‘The party were in good spirits this evening at 
the recollection of having crossed the rapid, and being in possession 
of provision for the next day. Besides we had taken the precaution 
of bringing away the skin of the deer to eat when the meat should 
fail. The temperature at sxx P.M. was 30°. 

We started at seven next morning and marched until ten, edica 
the appearance of a few willows, peeping through the snow, induced 
us to halt and breakfast. Re-commencing the journey at noon, we 
passed over a more rugged country, where the hills were separated 
by deep ravines, whose steep sides were equally difficult to descend 
and to ascend. ‘The annexed accurate delineation of the country 
we then travelled over, and of the mode of getting our only food, 
will convey to the reader a better idea of the toil and suffering we 
experienced than any description of mine can do. 

The party was quite fatigued, and we encamped, having come ten 
miles and three quarters. We observed many summer deer roads, 
and some recent tracks. Some marks that had been put up by the 
Indians were also noticed. We have since learned that: this is a 
regular deer pass, and on that account, annually frequented by. the 
Copper Indians. The lake is called by them Contwoy-to, or Rum 
Lake; in consequence of Mr. Hearne having here given the Indians 
who accompanied him some of that liquor: They do not get fish 
here. : ead iual 
We walked next day over a more level: country, but it was 
strewed. with large stones. These galled our feet a good deal; we 
contrived, however, to wade through the snow at a tolerably quick 


OF THE POLAR SEA, 413 


‘pace until five P.M., having made twelve miles and a half. We had 
made to-day our proper course, south by east, which we could not 
venture upon doing before, for fear of falling again upon some branch 
of the Contwoy-to. Some deer were seen in the morning, but the 
hunters failed of killing any, and in the afternoon we fell into the 
track of a large herd, which had passed the day before, but did not 
overtake them. In consequence of this want of success we had no 
breakfast, and but a scanty supper; but we allayed the pangs of 
hunger, by eating pieces of singed hide. A little tripe de roche was 
also obtained. These would have satisfied us in ordinary times, but 
we were now almost exhausted by slender fare and travel, and our 
appetites had become ravenous. We looked, however, with humble 
confidence to the great Author and Giver of all good, for a con- 
tinuance of the support which had hitherto been always supplied to 
us at our greatest need. The thermometer varied to-day between 
25° and 28°. The wind blew fresh from the south. 

On the 18th the atmosphere was hazy, but the day was more 
pleasant for walking than usual. The country was level and gravelly, 
and the snow very deep. We went for a short time along a deeply- 
beaten road, made by the rein-deer, which turned suddenly off to 
the south-west, which was a direction so wide of our course that we 
could not venture upon following it. All the small lakes were frozen, 
and we marched across those which lay in our track. We supped off 
the tr¢pe de roche which had been gathered during our halts in the 
course of the march. Thermometer at six P.M. 32°. 

Showers of snow fell without intermission through the night, but 
they ceased in the morning, and we set out at the usual hour. The 
men were very faint from hunger, and marched with difficulty, 
having to oppose a fresh breeze, and to wade through the snow two 
feet deep. We gained, however, ten miles by four o’clock, and then 
encamped. The canoe was unfortunately broken by the fall of the 
person who had it in charge. No tripe de roche was seen ‘to-day, 


Alii A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


but in clearing the snow to pitch the tents we found a quantity of 
Iceland moss, which was boiled for supper. This weed, not having 


been soaked, proved so bitter, that few of the party — eat more 
than a few spoonfuls of it. 
Our blankets did not suffice this evening to keep us in tolerable 


warmth; the slightest breeze seeming to pierce through our debili- 


tated frames. The reader will, probably, be desirous to know how 
we passed our time in such a comfortless situation: the first 
operation after encamping. was to thaw our frozen shoes, if a 
sufficient fire could be made, and dry ones were put on; each 
person then wrote his notes of the daily occurrences, and evening 
prayers were read; as soon as supper was prepared it was eaten, 
generally in the dark, and we went to bed, and kept up a cheerful 
conversation until our blankets were thawed by the heat of our 
bodies, and we had gathered sufficient warmth to enable us to: fall 
asleep. On many nights we had not even the luxury of going to 
bed in dry clothes, for when the fire was insufficient to dry our 
shoes, we durst not venture to pull them off, lest they should freeze 
so hard as to be unfit to put on in the morning, and, therefore, 
inconvenient to carry. 

On the 20th we got into a hilly country, and. the thavelitls 
became much more laborious, even the stoutest experienced great 
difficulty in climbing the craggy eminences. Mr. Hood was parti- 
cularly weak, and was obliged to relinquish his station of second in 
the line, which Dr. Richardson now took, to direct the leading man 
in keeping the appointed course: I was also unable to keep pace 
with the men, who put forth their utmost speed, encouraged by 
the hope, which our reckoning had led us to form, of seeing Point 
Lake in the evening, but we were obliged to encamp without 
gaining a view of it. We had not seen either deer or their tracks 
through the day, and this circumistance, joined to the disappoint- 
ment of not. discovering the’ lake, rendered our  voyagers’ very 


———.— — — 


OF THE POLAR SEA, ALS. 


desponding, and the meagre supper of tripe de roche was little cal- 
culated to elevate their spirits. They now threatened to throw 
away their bundles, and quit us, which rash act they would pro- 
bably have done, if they had known what track to pursue. 
_ September 21.—We set out at seven this morning in dark foggy 
weather, and changed our course two points to the westward. ‘The 
party were very feeble, and the men much dispirited; we made 
slow progress, having to march over a hilly and very rugged 
country. 

Just before noon the sun beamed through the haze for the first 


time for six days, and we obtained an observation in latitude 65° '7 06" 


N., which was six miles to the southward of that part of Point Lake 
to which our course was directed. By this observation we disco- 
vered that we had kept to the eastward of the proper course, which 
may be attributed partly to the difficulty of preserving a straight 
line through an unknown country, unassisted by celestial observa- 
tions, and in such thick weather, that our view was often limited 
to afew hundred yards; but chiefly to our total ignorance of the 
amount of the variation of the compass. 

Wealtered the course immediately to west-south-west, and fired 
guns to apprize the hunters who were out of our view, and ignorant 
of our having done so. After walking about two miles we put up 
to collect the stragglers. Two partridges were killed, and these, 
with some tripe de roche, furnished our supper. Notwithstanding 
a full explanation was given to the men of the reasons for altering 


the course, and they were assured that the observation had enabled 


us to discover our exact distance from Fort Enterprise, they could 
not divest themselves of the idea of our having lost our way, and a 
gloom was spread over every countenance. At this encampment 
Dr. Richardson was obliged to deposit his specimens of plants and 
minerals, collected on the sea-coast, being unable to carry them any 
farther. ‘The way made to-day was five miles and a quarter. 


A4l6: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


September 22.—After walking about two miles this morning, we 
came upon the borders of a large lake, whose extremities could not 
be discerned in consequence of the density of the atmosphere ; but 
as its shores seemed to approach nearer to each other to the south- 
ward than to the northward, we determined on tracing it in that 
direction. We were grieved at finding the lake expand very 
much beyond the contracted part we had first seen, and incline now 
to the eastward of south. As it was considered more than pro- 
bable, from the direction and size of the body of water we were 
now tracing, that it was a branch of Point Lake; and as, in any 
case, we knew that by passing round itssouth end, we must shortly 
come to the Copper-Mine River, our course was continued in that 
direction. The appearance of some dwarf pines and willows, larger 
than usual, induced us to suppose the river was near. We en- 
camped early, having come eight miles. Our supper consisted of éripe 
de roche and. half a partridge each. 

Our progress next day was extremely slow, from Als difficulty of 
managing the canoe in passing over the hills, as the breeze was fresh: 
Peltier, who had it in charge, having received several severe falls, be- 
came impatient, and insisted on leaving his burden, as it had already 
been much injured by the accidents of this day ; and no arguments 
we could use were sufficient to prevail on him to continue carrying 
it. Vaillant was, therefore, directed to take it, and we proceeded 
forward. Having found he got on very well, and was walking 
even faster than Mr. Hood could, in his present debilitated state, I 
pushed forward. to stop the rest. of the party, who had got out of 
our sight during the delay which the discussion about the canoe 
had occasioned. I accidentally passed the body of the men, and 
followed the tracks of two persons, who had separated from the 
rest, until two P.M., when, not seeing any person, I retraced my 
steps, and on my way met Dr. Richardson, who had also missed the 
party whilst. he was employed gathering tripe de roche, and we went. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 417 


back: together in search of them. We found they had halted 
among some willows, where they had picked up some pieces of 
skin, and a few bones of deer that had been devoured by the wolves 
last spring. ‘They had.rendered the bones friable by burning, and 
eaten them, as’ well as the skin; and several of them had added 
their old shoes ‘to the repast. Peltier and Vaillant were with 
them, having left. the canoe, which, they said, was so completely 
broken by another fall, as to be rendered incapable of repair, and 
entirely useless. The anguish. this intelligence occasioned may be 
conceived, but it is beyond. my power to describe it. Impressed, 
however, with the necessity of taking it forward, even in the state these 
men represented it to be, we urgently desired them to fetch it: 
but they declined going, and the strength of the officers was inade- 
quate to the task. To their infatuated obstinacy on this occasion, a 
great portion of the melancholy circumstances which attended our 
subsequent progress may, perhaps, be attributed. The men now 
seemed to have lost all hope of being preserved; and all the argu- 
ments we could use failed in stimulating them to the least exertion. 
After consuming the remains of the bones and horns of the deer we 
resumed our march, and, in the evening, reached a contracted part of 
the lake, which perceiving to be shallow, we forded and encarnped on 
the opposite side. Heavy rain began soon afterwards, and continued 
all the night. On the following morning the rain had so wasted 
the snow, that the tracks of Mr. Back and his companions, who 
had gone before with the hunters, were traced with difficulty; and 
- the frequent showers during the day almost obliterated them. The 
men became furious at the apprehension of being deserted by the 
hunters, and some of the strongest throwing down their bundles, 
prepared to set out after them, intending to leave the more weak 
to follow as they could. The entreaties and threats of the officers, 
however, prevented their executing this mad scheme; but not before 
Solomon Belanger was despatched with orders for Mr. Back to -halt 
3H 


AAS A JOURNEY. TO THE SHORES 


until we should apa him. Soon afterwards a thick Pg came on, “ne 
datdae in dopseeniesive Be thie companions aie callewods ; some 
recent tracks of deer. After halting an hour, during which we 
refreshed ourselves with eating our old shoes and a few. scraps of 
leather, we set forward in the hope of ascertaining whether an 
adjoiming piece of water was the Copper-Mine River er not, but 
were soon compelled to return and encamp, for fear of a separation 
of the party, as we could not see each other at ten yards’ distance, 
The fog diminishing towards the evening, Augustus was sent. to 
examine the water, but having lost his way he did not reach the 
tents before midnight, when he brought the information of its 
being a lake. We supped upon tripe de roche*, and.enjoyed a com- 
fortable fire, having found some pines, seven or eight feet high, in a 
valley near the encampment. | 

The bounty of Providence was most seasonably. sasnifestad to us 
next morning, in our killing five small deer out of a herd, which 
came in sight as we were on the point of starting. This unexpected 
supply reanimated the drooping spirits of our men, and filled every 
heart. with gratitude. 

The voyagers instantly petitioned for a days’ rest) which we 
were most reluctant to grant, being aware of the importance of 
every moment at this critical period of our journey. But they so 
earnestly and strongly pleaded their recent sufferings, and their con- 
viction, that the quiet enjoyment of two substantial meals, after 
eight days’ famine, would enable them to proceed next: day more 
vigorously, that we could not resist their entreaties. The flesh, the 
skins, and even the contents of the stomachs of the deer were 
equally distributed among the party by Mr. pati who «had nolun: 


~ * Phe different kinds of ee termed sry fie the a yi de 
roche, ave xepresented in Plate 80. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 419 


teéred, on the departiire of Mr. Wentzel, to. perform the duty of 
issuing thé provision. This invidious task he had all along per- 
forinied with great impartiality, but seldom without producing some 
grumbling amongst the Canadians; and, on the present occasion, 
thé hunters were displeased that the heads, and some other parts, 
had not been added to theif portions. It is proper to remark, that 
Mr. Hood always took the smallest portion for his own mess, but 
this weighed little with these men, as long as their own appetites re- 
mained unsatisfied. We all suffered much inconvenience from eating 
animal food after our long abstinence, but particularly those men who 
indulged themselves beyond moderation. We learned, in thé evening 
that the Canadians, with their usual thoughtlessness, had consumed 
above a third of their portions of meat. 

‘We set out early on the 26th, and, after walking about three 
cHiiTes along the lake, came to the river, which we at once recog- 
nised, from its size, to be the Copper-Mine. It flowed to the 
northward, and after winding about five miles, terminated in Point 
Lake. Its ctitrent was swift, and there were two rapids in this 
‘part of its course, but in a canoe we could have crossed with ease 
and safety. These rapids, as well as every other part of the river, 
were carefully examined in search of a ford ; but finding none, the ex- 
pedients occurred, of attempting to cross on a raft made of the willows 
which were growing there, or in a vessel framed with willows, ahd co- 
vered with the canvass of the tents; but both these schemes were 
abandoned, through the obstinacy of the interpreters and. the most 
- experienced voyagers, who declared that they would prove inadequate 
to the conveyance of the party, ahd that much time would be lost in 
the attempt. The men, in fact, did not believe that this was the 
Copper-Mine River, and so little confidence had they m our reck- 
oning, and so much had they bewildered themselves on the march, 
that some of them asserted it was Hood’s River, and others that 
it- was the Bethe-tessy, (a river which rises from a lake ‘to the 

3H 2 


420 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


northward of Rum Lake, and. holds a course to the sea-parallel to the 
Copper-Mine.) In short; their despondency had returned, and they all 
despaired of seeing Fort Enterprise again.. However, the steady assur- 
ances of the officers, that we were actually on the banks of the Copper- 
Mine River, and that the distance to Fort Enterprise did not exceed 
forty. miles, made some: impression upon them, which was increased 
upon our finding some bear-berry plants, (arbutus uva ursi.), which 
is reported by the Indians not to grow to the eastward of . that. river. 
Then they deplored their folly and impatience in breaking the canoe, 
being all of opinion, that had it. not been. so completely demolished 
on the 23d, it might have been repaired sufficiently to take the party 
over. We again closely interrogated Peltier and Vaillant as to its state, 
with the intention of sending for it ; but they persisted in the declara- 
tion, that it was in a totally unserviceable condition. St. Germain being 
again called upon,to endeavour to construct a canoe frame. withwillows, 
stated that he was unable to make one sufficiently large... It became 
necessary, therefore, to search for pines of sufficient ‘size to form.a 
raft ; and being.aware that such trees grow on the borders of Point 
Lake; we considered it best.to trace its shores in search of them ; 
we, therefore, resumed our march, carefully looking, but in vain, 
for a fordable part, and encamped at the east end of Point Lake. - 
_As there was little danger of our losing the path of our hunters 
whilst we coasted the shores of this lake, I determined on again 
sending Mr.-Back forward, with the interpreters, to hunt.. I had 
in view, in this,arrangement, the further object: of enabling Mr. Back 
to get across the lake with two of these men, to convey the earliest 
possible. account, of our situation to the Indians. Accordingly 
I instructed bim to halt at the first pines he should come to, and 
then prepare a raft; and if his hunters had killed ‘animals, so. that 
the party could. be supported whilst we were making our raft, he 
was to cross immediately with St. Germain and Beauparlant, and 
send. the Indians to us as quickly as possible with supplies of meat.. 


OF THE POLAR. SEA. 421 


'. We had this evening the pain of discovering that two of our men 
had stolen part of the. officers’ provision, which had. been allotted to 
us with: strict impartiality... This conduct was the more reprehen- 
sible, as it was plain that we were suffering, even ina greater 
degree than themselves, from the. effects of famine; owing to our 
being of a less robust habit, and less accustomed to privations. We 
had no means of -punishing this crime, but by the threat that they 
should forfeit their wages, which had now ceased to operate. 

Mr. Back and his companions set) out at six in the morning, and 
we started at seven. As the snow had entirely disappeared, and 
there were no means of distinguishing the footsteps of stragglers, .I 
gave strict orders, previously to our setting out, for all the party to 
keep together: and especially I desired the two Esquimaux. not.-to 
leave us, they having often strayed in search of the. remains of 
animals. Our people, however, through. despondency,. had become 
careless and disobedient, and had ceased to dread punishment, ‘or 
hope for reward. - Much time. was lost in halting-and firing guns 
to collect them, but the labour of walking was so much. lightened 
by the disappearance. of the snow, that we advanced , seven.. or 
eight miles along the lake before noon, exclusive of the loss: of 
distance in rounding its numerous bays. At length we came. to 
an. arm, running away to the north-east, and apparently connected 
with the lake which we had coasted on the 22d, 23d, and 24th, of 
the month. 

. The idea of again waaandieek such an extensive piece of water no 
: of travelling over so barren a country was dreadful, and we. feared 
that other arms, equally large, might obstruct our path, and. that 
the strength of the party would entirely fail, long before we could 
reach the only part where we were certain of finding wood, distant 
in a-direct line twenty-five miles. While we halted: to. consider: of 
this subject, and to collect the party, the carcase of a deer was 
discovered in the cleft of a rock into which it had -fallen in the 


492 A JOURNSY TO THE SHORES 


skdawAe in our  prdeoint sirotinistanens saith a othe eerrnen kiftdledy mB, 
large portion of it was devoted on the spot, affording ws’ an un- 
expected’ breakfast, for in order to husband our sivall remaining 
portion of meat, we had agreed to make only one scanty meal a day. 
The men; cheered by this unlooked-for supply; became sanguine in 
thé hope of being able to cross the stream on a taft of willows, 
although they had before declared such a project impracticable, and 
they unanimously entréated us to return back to the rapid, a request 
which accorded ‘with otir own opinion, and was therefore acceded 
to; Crédit and Junius, however, were missing, and it was also 
necessary to send notice of our intention to My. Back and his party. 
Augustus being promised a reward, undertook the task, and Wwe 
agreed to wait for him at the rapid. It was supposed he could 
nd fail Meeting with the two stragelers on his way to or from 
Mr. Back, as it was likely they would keep on the borders of the 
lake. He accordingly set out after Mr. Back, whilst we returned 
about a milé towards the rapid, and encamped in a deep valley 
amongst some large willows. We supped on the rémains of the 
putrid deer, and the men having gone to the spot where it was 
found, scraped together the contents of its intestines which ‘were 
scattered on the rock, and added them to théir meal.’ We also 
énjoyed the luxury to-day of eating a large quantity of ‘excellent. 
blue-berries and cran-berries, ( vaccinium uliginosum and v. vités 
ided,) Which were laid Dare by the melting of ‘the snow, ed 
nothing could allay our inordinate appetites. 

In the night we heard the report of Crédit’s gun in answer to our 
signal muskets, and he rejoined us in the morning, but we got ‘no in- 
telligence of Junius. We set out about an hour after daybreak, and 
encamped at two P.M. between the rapids, where the tiver was 
about one hundred and thirty yards wide, being its narrowest part. 

» Eight deer were seen by Michel and Crédit; who loitered behind 


OF THE POLAR SEA. |). 


the zest of the party, but they could not approach'them. . A’ great 
many shots were fixed by those in the rear at partridges, but. they 
missed; or at least did not choose to add what they killed: to the 
common. stock. We subsequently learned that the hunters. often’ 
secreted, the partridges they shot, and ate them unknown to the 
officers. Some tripe de roche was collected, which we boiled for 
supper, with the moiety of the remainder of our deer’s meat. The 
men commenced cutting the willows for the construction of the raft. 
As an excitement to exertion, I promised a reward of three hundred 
livres to the first person who should convey a line across the river, 
hy which the raft could be managed in transporting the party. 

September 29.—Strong south-east winds with fog in the morning; 
more moderate in the evening. Temperature of the rapid 38°. 
The men began at an early hour to bind the willows in fagots for 
the: construction of the raft, and it was finished by seven; but as 
the willows were green, it proved to be very little buoyant, and was 
unable to support more than one man at a time. Even on this, 
however, we hoped the whole party might be transported, by 
hauling it from one side to the other, provided a line could be 
earried to the other bank. ,everal attempts were made by Belanger 
and Benoit, the strongest men of the party, to convey the raft across 
the stream, but they failed for want of ears. A pole constructed by 
tying the tent poles together, was too short to reach the bottom. at 
a short distance from the shore; anda paddle which had. been 
carried from the sea coast by Dr. Richardson, did not. possess suf. 
ficient power to move the raft im opposition to a strong breeze, 
which blew from the opposite shore. All the men suffered ex- 
tremely from the coldness of the water, in which they were ne- 
cessarily immersed up to the waists, in their endeavours to aid 
Belanger and Benoit; and having witnessed repeated. failures, they 
began to consider the scheme as hopeless. At this time Dr. Richardson, 
prompted by a desire of relieving his suffering companions, proposed 


4QA A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


to swim across the stream with a line, and to haul the raft over. 
He launched into the stream with the line round his. middle, but. 
when he had got a short distance from the bank, his arms became 
benumbed with cold, and he lost the power of moving them ; still he 
persevered, and turning on his back, had nearly gained the opposite: 
bank, when his legs also became powerless, and to our infinite alarm 
we beheld him sink. We instantly hauled upon the line and he 
came again on the surface, and was gradually drawn ashore in an 
almost lifeless. state... Being rolled up in blankets, he was. placed 
before a good fire of willows, and fortunately was just able to speak 
sufficiently to give some slight directions respecting the manner of 
treating him. | He recovered strength gradually, and by the blessing 
of God was enabled in the course of a few. hours to converse, and by 
the evening was sufficiently recovered to remove into the tent. We 
then regretted to learn, that the skin of his whole left side was 
deprived of feeling in consequence of exposure to too great. heat.’ 
He did not perfectly recover the sensation of that side until the 
following summer. I cannot describe what every one felt at be- 
holding the skeleton which the Doctor’s debilitated frame exhibited. 
When he stripped, the Canadians simultaneously exclaimed, “Ah 
que nous sommes maigres.” I shall best explain his state and that 
of the party, by the following extract from his journal: “ It may be 
worthy of remark that I would have had little hesitation in any 
former period of my life, of plunging into water even below 38° 
Fahrenheit ; but at this time I was reduced almost to skin and. bone, 
and like the rest of the party, suffered from. degrees: of cold that 
would have been disregarded whilst in health and vigour. During 
the whole of our march we experienced that no quantity of clothing 
could keep us warm whilst we fasted, but on those: occasions on 
which. we were enabled to go to bed with falls stomachs, we wiabiaeae 
the night ina warm and comfortable manner.’ 

In following the detail of our friend’s narrow escape, I vet 


OF THE POLAR: SEA. 425. 


omitted: to mention, that when he was about to step into the water, 
he put his foot on a dagger, which cut him to the bone; but this 
misfortune could not stop him from attempting the execution of his 
generous undertaking. | 
_ In the evening Augustus came in. He had walked a day and a 
half beyond. the place from whence we turned back, but had. neither 
seen Junius nor Mr. Back.. Of the former he had seen no traces, 
but he had followed the tracks of Mr. Back’s party for a considerable 
distance, until the hardness of the ground rendered them imper- 
ceptible. Junius was well equipped with ammunition, blankets, 
knives, a kettle and other necessaries; and it was the opinion of 
Augustus, that when he found he could not rejoin the party, he 
would endeavour to gain the woods on the west end of Point Lake, 
and follow the river until he fell in with the -Esquimaux, who, 
frequent its mouth. The Indians too, with whom we have since 
conversed upon this subject, are confident that he would be able to 
subsist himself during the winter. Crédit, on his hunting excursion 
to-day, found a cap, which our people recognised to belong to one of 
the: hunters who had left us in the spring. This circumstance 
produced the conviction of our being on the banks of the Copper- 
- Mine River, which all the assertions of the officers had hitherto 
failed to do with some of the party; and it had the happy effect of 
reviving their spirits considerably. We consumed the last. of our 
deer’s meat this evening at supper. . 
Next morning the men went out in search of dry willows, and. 
-eollected eight large fagots, with which they formed a more buoyant 
raft: than the former, but the wind. being still adverse and strong, 
they delayed attempting to cross until a more favourable oppor- 
tunity. Pleased, however, with the appearance: of this raft, they 
collected some tripe de roche, and. made a. cheerful. supper. Dr. 
Richardson was gaining strength, but his leg was much swelled and 
very painful. An observation for latitude placed the encampment 
31 


426 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


in 65° 00' 00" N., the longitude being 112° 20° 00" W., deduced 
from the last observation. 

On the morning of the Ist of October, the wind was strong, and the 
weather as unfavourable as before for crossing on the raft. We 
were rejoiced to see Mr. Back and his party in the afternoon. They 
had traced the lake about fifteen miles farther than we did, and 
found it undoubtedly connected, as we had supposed, with the lake 
we fell upon on the 22nd of September; and dreading, as we had 
done, the idea of coasting its barren shores, they returned to make 
an attempt at crossing here. St. Germain now proposed to make a 
canoe of the fragments of painted canvass, in which we wrapped up 
our bedding. ‘This scheme appearing practicable, a party was sent 
to our encampment of the 24th and 25th last, to collect pitch 
amongst the small pines that grew there, to pay over the seams of 
the canoe. 

In the afternoon we had a heavy fall of snow, which continued all 
the night. A small quantity of tripe de roche was gathered ; and 
Crédit, who had been hunting, brought in the antlers and back bone 
of a deer which had been killed in the summer. The wolves and 
birds of prey had picked them clean, but there still remained a 
quantity of the spinal marrow which they had not been able to 
extract. This, although putrid, was esteemed) a valuable prize, and. 
the spine being divided into portions, was distributed equally. After 
eating the marrow, which was so acrid as to excoriate the lips, we 
rendered. the bones friable by burning, and: ate them also. 

On the following morning the ground was covered with snow to 
the depth of a foot and: a half, and the weather was very stormy: 
These circumstances rendered the men again extremely despondent; 
a settled gloom hung over their countenances, and they refused: to 
pick tripe de roche, choosing rather to go: entirely without. eating, 
than to make any exertion. The party which went for gum 
returned early in the morning without having found any; but 


OF THE POLAR SEA. AQT 


St. Germain said he could still make the canoe with the willows 
covered with the canvass, and removed with Adam to a clump of 
willows for that purpose. Mr. Back accompanied them to stimulate 
his exertion, as we feared the lowness of his spirits would cause him 
to be slow in his operations. Augustus went to fish at the rapid, 
but a large trout having carried away his bait, we had nothing to 
replace it. 

The snow storm continued all the night, and during the forenoon 
of the 3d. . Having persuaded the people to gather some éripe de 
roche, | partook of a meal with them; and afterwards set out with 
the intention of going to St. Germain to hasten his operations, but 
though he was only three quarters of a mile distant, I spent three 
hours in a vain attempt to reach him, my strength being unequal 
to the labour of wading through the deep snow; and I returned 
quite exhausted, and much shaken by the numerous falls I had got. 
My associates were all in the same debilitated state, and poor Hood 
was reduced to.a perfect shadow, from the severe bowel complaints 
which the tripe de roche never failed to give him. Back was so 
feeble as to require the support of a stick in walking; and Dr. 
Richardson had lameness superadded to weakness. The voyagers 
were somewhat stronger than ourselves, but more indisposed to 
exertion, on account of their despondency. The sensation of hunger 
was no longer felt by any of us, yet we were scarcely able to 
converse upon any other subject than the pleasures of eating. We 
were much indebted to Hepburn at this crisis. The officers were 
unable from weakness to gather tripe de roche themselves, and 
Semandré, who had acted as our cook on the journey from the coast; 


sharing in the despair of the rest of the Canadians, refused to make 


the slightest exertion, Hepburn, on the contrary, animated by a 


firm relianee on the beneficence of the Supreme Being, tempered 


with resignation to his will, was indefatigable in his exertions: to 
serve us, and daily collected all the tripe de roche that was used in 
312 


428 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the officers’ mess. Mr. Hood could not partake of this miserable 
fare, and a partridge which had. been reserved for him was, I lament 
to say, this day stolen by one of the men. 

October 4.—The canoe being finished, it was brought to the 
encampment, and the whole party being assembled in anxious ex- 
pectation on the beach, St. Germain embarked, and amidst our 
prayers for his success, succeeded in reaching the opposite shore. 
The canoe was then drawn back again, and another person tran- 
sported, and in this manner by drawing it backwards and forwards, 
we were all conveyed over without any serious accident. By these 
{frequent traverses the canoe was materially injured; and latterly it 
filled each time with water before reaching the shore, so that all our 
garments and bedding were wet, and there was not a sufficiency 
of willows upon the side on which we now were, to make a fire to 
dry them. 

That no time might be lost in procuring relief, I immediately 
despatched Mr. Back with St. Germain, Solomon» Belanger, and 
Beauparlant, to search for the Indians, directing him to go to Fort 
Enterprise, where we expected they would be, or where, at least, a 
note from Mr. Wentzel would be found to direct us in our search 
for them. If St. Germain should kill any animals on his way, a 
portion of the meat was to be put up aioe for us, and con-_ 
spicuous marks placed over it. 

It is impossible to imagine a more gratifying change than was 
produced in our voyagers after we were all safely landed on the 
southern banks of the river. Their spirits immediately revived, each 
of them shook the officers cordially by the hand, and declared they 
now considered the worst of their difficulties over, as they did not 
doubt of reaching Fort Enterprise in a few days, even in their 
feeble condition. We had indeed every reason to be grateful, and 
our joy would have been complete were it not mingled with sincere 
regret at the separation of our poor Esquimaux; the faithful Junius. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 429 


The want. of tripe de roche caused us to go supperless to bed. 
Showers of snow fell frequently during the night. The breeze was 
light next morning, the weather cold and clear. We were all on 
foot by day-break, but from the frozen state of our tents and bed 
clothes, it was long before the bundles could be made, and as usual, 
the men lingered over a small fire they had kindled, so that it was 
eight o’clock before we started. Our advance from the depth of the 
snow was slow, and about noon coming to a spot where there was 
some tripe de roche, we stopped to collect it, and breakfasted. 
Mr. Hood, who was now very feeble, and Dr. Richardson, who 
attached himself to him, walked together at a gentle pace in the rear 
of the party. I kept with the foremost men, to cause them to 
halt occasionally, until the stragglers came up. Resuming our march 
after breakfast, we followed the track of Mr. Back’s party, and 
encamped early, as all of us were much fatigued, particularly Crédit, 
who having to-day carried the men’s tent, it being his turn to do so, 
was so exhausted, that when he reached the encampment he was 
unable to stand. The tripe de roche disagreed with this man and 
with Vaillant, in consequence of which, they were the first whose 
strength totally failed.- We had a small quantity of this weed in 
the evening, and the rest of our supper was made up of scraps of 
roasted leather. The distance walked to-day was six miles. As 
Crédit was very weak in the morning; his load was reduced to little 
more than his personal luggage, consisting of his blanket, shoes, and 
gun. Previous to setting out, the whole party ate the remains of 
their old shoes, and whatever scraps of leather they had, to 
strengthen their stomachs for the fatigue of the day’s journey. We 
left the encampment at nine, and pursued our route over a range of 
bleak hills. The wind having increased to a strong gale in the 
course of the morning, became piercingly cold, and the drift ren- 
dered. it difficult for those in the rear to follow the track over the 
heights, whilst in the valleys, where it was sufficiently marked, from 


4.30 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


the depth of the snow, the labour of walking was proportionably 
great. Those in advance made as usual frequent halts, yet being 
unable from the severity of the weather to remain long still, they 
were obliged to move on before the rear could come up, and the 
party, of course, straggled very much. 

About noon Samandré coming up, informed us that Crédit and 
Vaillant could advance no further. Some willows being discovered 
in a valley near to us, I proposed to halt the party there, whilst 
Dr. Richardson went back to visit them. I hoped too, that when 
the sufferers received the information of a fire being kindled at so 
short a distance, they would be cheered, and use their utmost 
efforts to reach it, but this proved a vain hope. ‘The Doctor found 
Vaillant about a mile and a half in the rear, much exhausted with 
cold and fatigue. Having encouraged him to advance to the fire, 
after repeated solicitations he made the attempt, but fell down 
amongst the deep snow at every step. Leaving him in this situation, 
the Doctor went about half a mile farther back, to the spot where 
Credit was said to have halted, and the track being nearly obliterated 
by the snow drift, it became unsafe for him to go further. Return- 
ing he passed Vaillant, who having moved only a few yards in his 
absence, had fallen down, was unable to rise, and could scarcely 
answer his questions. Being unable to afford him any effectual 
assistance, he hastened on to inform us of his:situation. When J. B. 
Belanger had heard the melancholy account, he went immediately 
to aid Vaillant, and_ bring up his burden. Respecting Crédit, we 
were informed by Samandré, that he had stopped a short distance 
behind Vaillant, but that his intention was to return to the yh sates: 
ment of the preceding evening. 

When Belanger came back with Vaillant’s load, he informed us 
that he had found him lying on his back, benumbed with cold, and 
incapable of being roused. The stoutest men of the party were 
now earnestly entreated to bring him to the fire, but they declared 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 43] 


themselves unequal to the task ; and, on the contrary, urged’ me to 
allow them to throw down their loads, and proceed to Fort Enter- 
prise with the utmost speed. A compliance with their desire would 
have caused the loss of the whole party, for the men were totally 
ignorant.of the course to be taken, and none of the officers, who 
could have directed the march, were sufficiently strong to keep up 
at the pace they would then walk; besides, even supposing them 
to have found their way, the strongest men would certainly have 
deserted the weak. Something, however, was absolutely necessary to 
be done, to relieve them as much as possible from their burdens, and 
the officers consulted on the subject. Mr. Hood: and Dr. Richardson. 
proposed to remaim behind, with a single attendant, at the first 
place where sufficient wood and tripe de roche should be found for 
ten days’ consumption; and that I should proceed as expeditiously 
as possible with the men to the house, and thence send them 
immediate relief. ‘They strongly urged that this arrangement would 
contribute to the safety of the rest of the party, by relieving 
them from the burden of a tent, and several other articles; and 
that they might afford: aid to Crédit, if he should unexpectedly 
come up. I was' distressed beyond description at the thought of 
leaving them in such a dangerous situation, and for a long time 
combated their proposal ; but they strenuously urged, that this step 
afforded the only chance of safety for the party, and I reluctantly 
acceded to it. The ammunition, of which we had a small barrel, 
was also to be left with them, and it was hoped that this deposit 
would be a strong inducement for the Indians to venture across the 
barren grounds to their aid. We communicated this resolution to 
the men, who were cheered at: the slightest prospect of alleviation of 
their present miseries, and they promised with great appearance of 
earnestness to return to those officers, upon the first supply of 
food. 

The party then moved on; Vaillant’s blanket and other neces- 


432 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


saries were left in the track, at the request of the Canadians, with- 
out any hope, however, of his being able to: reach’ them. After: 


marching until dusk without seeing a favourable place for encamp- 


ing, night compelled’ us to take shelter under the lee of a hill, 
amongst some willows, with which, after many attempts, we at 


length madea fire. It was not sufficient, however, to warm the whole: 


party, much less to thaw our shoes; and the weather not permitting 
the gathering of tripe de roche, we had nothing to cook. The painful 


retrospection of the melancholy events of the day banished sleep, 


and we shuddered as we contemplated the dreadful effects of this 


bitterly cold night on our two companions, if still living. Some 
faint hopes were entertained of Crédit’s surviving the storm, as he 


was provided with a good blanket, and had leather to eat. 


The weather was mild next morning. We left the encampment 
at nine, and a little before noon came to a pretty extensive thicket 


of small willows, near which there appeared a supply of tripe de 
roche on the face of the rocks. At this place Dr. Richardson and 
Mr. Hood determined to remain, with John Hepburn, who volun- 
teered to stop with them. ‘The tent was securely pitched, a few 
willows collected, and the ammunition and all other articles were 
deposited, except each man’s clothing, one tent, a sufficiency of 
ammunition for the journey, and the officer’s journals. I had 
only one blanket, which was carried for me, and two pair of 
shoes. The offer was now made for any of the men, who felt 
themselves too weak to proceed, to remain with the officers, but none 
of them accepted it. Michel alone felt some inclination to do: so. 
After we had united in thanksgiving and prayers to Almighty God, 
I separated from my companions, deeply afflicted that a train of 
melancholy circumstances should have demanded of me the severe 
trial of parting from friends in such a condition, who had become 
endeared to me by their constant kindness, and co-operation, and a 
participation of numerous sufferings. This trial I could not have 


OF THE POLAR SEA. ¥. 433 


been induced’ to undergo, but for the reasons they had so strongly 
urged the day before, to’ which my own judgment assented, and 
for the sanguine hope I felt of either finding a supply of provision 
at Fort Enterprise, or meeting the Indians «in the immediate 
vicinity of that place, according to my arrangements with Mr. 
Wentzel and Akaitcho. Previously to our starting, Peltier and 
Benoit repeated their promises, to return to them with provision, if 
any should be found at the seats or to guide the Indians to wisi 
if any were met. 

Greatly as Mr. Hood was exhausted, and, indeed, incapable as he 
must have proved, of encountering the fatigue of our very next day’s — 
journey, so that I felt his resolution to be prudent, I was sensible 
that his determination to remain, was mainly prompted by the disin- 
terested and generous wish to remove impediments to the progress 
of the rest of the party. Dr. Richardson and Hepburn, who were 
both in a state of strength to keep pace with the men, beside this 
motive which they shared with him, were influenced in their reso- 
lution to remain; the former by the desire which had distinguished 
his character, throughout the expedition, of devoting himself to thé 
succour of the weak, and the latter by the zealous attachment he 
had ever shewn towards his officers. 

We set out without waiting to take any of the éripe de roche, and 
walked at a tolerable pace, and in an hour arrived at a fine group of 
pines, about a:mile and a quarter from the tent. We sincerely 
regretted not having seen these before we had separated from: our 
companions, as they would have been better supplied with fuel 
here, and there Teages to be more tripe de roche than where we 
had left them. - | : 

Descending afterwards into a more level country, we found the 
snow very deep, and the labour of wading through it so fatigued 
the whole party, that we were compelled to encamp, after’ a march 
of four miles and a half. Belanger and Michel were left far behind, 


3K 


434: A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


and when they arrived at the encampment appeared quite ex- 
hausted. The former, bursting into tears, declared his inability to 
proceed with the party, and begged me to let him go back next 
morning to the tent, and shortly afterwards Michel made the same 
request. I was in hopes they might recover a little strength by the 
night’s rest and therefore deferred giving any permission until 
the morning. ‘The sudden failure in the strength of these men 
cast a gloom over the rest, which I tried in vain to remove, by re- 
peated assurances that the distance to Fort Enterprise was short, 
and that we should, in all probability, reach it. in four days. Not 
being able to find any tripe de roche, we drank an infusion of the 
Labrador tea plant, (ledum palustre), and ate a few morsels of burnt 
leather for supper. We were unable to raise the tent, and found its 
weight too great to carry it on; we, therefore, cut it up, and took. a 
part of the canvass for a cover. ‘The night was bitterly cold, and 
though we lay as close to each other as. possible, having no shelter, we 
could not keep ourselves sufficiently warm to sleep. A strong gale came 
on after midnight, which increased the severity of the weather. In the 
morning Belanger and Michel renewed their request. to be  per- 
mitted to go back to the tent, assuring me they were still weaker 
than on the preceding evening, and less capable of going forward ; 
and they urged; that the stoppig at a place where there was a 
supply of tripe de roche was their only chance of preserving life ; 
under these circumstances, I could not do otherwise than yield to 
their desire. I wrote a-note to Dr. Richardson and’ Mr. Hood, 
informing them of the pines we had passed, and recommending 
their removing thither.» Having found that: Michel was carrying a 
considerable quantity of ammunition, I desired him to divide. it: 
among my party, leaving him only ten balls-and ‘a little shot, to kill 
any animals he might meet on his way to the tent. © 'This man was 
very particular in his inquiries respecting the direction of the house, 
and the course’ we meant'to pursue; he also said, that if he should 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 435 


be able, he would go and search for Vaillant and Crédit; and he 
requested my permission to take Vaillant’s blanket, if he should 
find it, to which I agreed, and mentioned it in my notes to the 
officers. | 

Scarcely were these arrangements finished, before Perrault. and 
Fontano were seized with a fit of dizziness, and betrayed other 
symptoms of extreme debility. Some tea was quickly prepared for 
them, and after drinking it, and eating a few morsels of burnt 
leather, they recovered, and expressed their desire to go forward ; 
but the other men, alarmed at what they had just witnessed, became 
doubtful of their own strength, and, giving way to absolute dejec- 
tion, declared their own inability to move. I now earnestly pressed 
upon them the necessity of continuing our journey, as the only means 
of saving their own lives, as well as those of our friends at the tent; 
and, after much entreaty, got them to set out at ten A.M.: Be- 
langer and Michel were left at the encampment, and proposed to 
start shortly afterwards. By the time we had gone about two 
hundred yards, Perrault became again dizzy, and desired us to halt, 
which we did, until he, recovering, proposed to march on. Ten 
minutes more had hardly elapsed before he again desired us to stop, 
and, bursting into tears, declared he was totally exhausted, and un- 
able to accompany us further. As the encampment was not more 
than a quarter of a mile distant, we proposed that he should return 
to it, and rejoin Belanger and Michel, whom we knew to be still 
there, from perceiving the smoke of a fresh fire ; and because they 
had not made any preparation for starting when we left them. He 
readily acquiesced in the proposition, and having taken a friendly 
leave of each of us, and enjoined us to make all the haste we could 
in sending relief, he turned back, keeping his gun and ammunition. 
We watched him until he was near to the fire, and then proceeded. 
During these detentions, Augustus becoming impatient of the 
delay, had walked on, and we lost sight of him. The labour we 


3 K 2 


436 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


experienced in wading through the deep snow induced us to cross a 
moderate sized lake, which lay in our track, but we found this 
operation far more harassing. As the surface of the ice was. per- 
fectly smooth, we slipt at almost every step, and were frequently 
blown down by the wind with such force as to shake our whole frames. 

Poor Fontano was completely exhausted by the labour.of making 
this traverse, and we made a halt until his strength was recruited, 
by which time the party was benumbed with cold. Proceeding 
again, he got on tolerably well for a little time, but being again 
seized with faintness and dizziness, he fell often, and at. length 
exclaimed that he could go no further. We immediately stopped, 
and endeavoured to encourage him to persevere, until we should 
find some willows, to encamp ; he insisted, however, that he could 
not march any longer through this. deep snow ; and said, that if he 
should even reach our encampment this evening, he must be left 
there, provided. tripe de roche could not be procured to recruit his 
strength. The poor man was overwhelmed with. grief, and seemed 
desirous to remain at that spot. -We were about. two miles from 
the place where the other men had_ been left, and as the track 
to it was beaten, we proposed to him to return thither, as we 
thought it probable he would find the men still there: at any rate, 
he would be able’ to get fuel to keep him warm during the night; 
and, on the next day, he could follow their track to the officers’ tent ; 
and, should the path be covered by the snow, the pines we had 
passed yesterday would guide him, as they were yet in view. 

I cannot describe my anguish on the occasion of separating from. 
another companion under circumstances so distressing. There was, 
however, no alternative. The extreme debility of the rest of the 
party, put the carrying him quite out of the question, as he himself 
admitted; and it was evident) that the frequent delays he must | 
occasion if he accompanied us, and did not gain strength, must have 
endangered the lives of the whole. By. returning he had the prospect’ 


OF THE POLAR SEA. © 437 


of getting to the tent where tripe de roche could be obtained, which 
agreed with him better than with any other of the party, and which 
he was always very assiduous in gathering. After some. hesitation 
he determined on returning, and: set out, having bid each of us 
farewell in the tenderest manner. We watched him: with inex- 
pressible anxiety for some time, and were rejoiced to find, though 
he got on slowly, that he kept on his legs better than before. 
Antonio Fontano was an Italian, and had served many years in 
De Meuron’s regiment. He had ‘spoken to me that very morning, 
and after his first attack of dizziness, about his father; and had 
begged, that should he survive, I would take him with me to England, 
and put him in the way of reaching home. . 

‘The party was now reduced to five persons, Adam, Peltier, Benoit. 
Samandré, and myself. Continuing the journey, we came, after an 
hour’s walk, to some willows, and encamped under the shelter of a 
rock, having walked in. the whole four miles and a half. We made 
an attempt to gather some. tripe de roche, but could not, owing to 
the severity of the weather.. Our supper, therefore, consisted of tea 
and a few morsels of leather. 

Augustus did not make his appearance, but we felt no alarm at 
his. absence, supposing he would go to the tent if he missed our 
track. Having fire, we procured a little sleep. Next morning the 
breeze was light and the weather mild, which enabled us to collect 
some tripe de roche, and to enjoy the only meal we had for four 
days. We derived great benefit from it, and walked with consider- 
ably more ease than yesterday. Without the strength it supplied, 
we should certainly have been unable to oppose the strong breeze 
we had in the afternoon. After walking about five miles, we came 
upon. the borders of Marten Lake, and were rejoiced to find it frozen, 
so that we could continue our course straight for Fort Enterprize. 
We encamped at the first:rapid in Winter River amidst willows and 
alders ; but.these were so frozen, and the snow fell so thick, that the 


438 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


men had great difficulty in making a fire. This proving insufficient 
to warm us, or even thaw our shoes, and having no food to prepare, we 
crept under our blankets. The arrival in a well-known part raised 
the. spirits: of the men to a high pitch, and we kept up a cheerful 
conversation until sleep overpowered us. The night was. very 
stormy, and the morning scarcely less so; but, being desirous to 
reach the house to-day, we commenced our journey very early. We 
were gratified by the sight of a large herd of rein-deer on the side 
of the hill near the track, but our only hunter, Adam, was too feeble 
to pursue them. Our shoes and garments were stiffened by the 
frost, and we walked in great pain until we arrived at some stunted 
pines, at which we halted, made a good fire, and procured the re- 
freshment of tea. The weather becoming fine in the afternoon, we 
continued our journey, passed the Dog-rib Rock, and encamped 
among a clump of pines of considerable growth, about a mile further 
on. Here we enjoyed the comfort of a large fire for the first time 
since our departure from the sea-coast; but this gratification was 
purchased at the expense of many severe falls that we had in crossing 
a stony valley, to get to these pines. There was no éripe de roche, 
and we drank tea and ate some of our shoes for supper. Next 


morning, after taking the usual repast of tea, we proceeded to the . 


house. Musing on what we were likely to find there, our minds 
were agitated between hope and fear, and, contrary to the custom 
we had kept up, of supporting our spirits by conversation, we went 
silently forward. | 

At length we reached Fort Enterprise, and to our infinite disap- 
pointment and grief found it a perfectly desolate habitation. There 
was no deposit of provision, no trace of the. Indians, no letter from 
Mr. Wentzel to point out where the Indians might be found. It 
would be impossible for me to describe our sensations after entering 
this miserable abode, and discovering how we had been neglected : 
the whole party shed tears, not so much for our own fate, as for that of 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 439 


our friends in the rear, whose lives depended entirely on our sending 
immediate relief from this place. | ian 

I found a note, however, from Mr. Back, stating that he had 
reached the house two days ago, and was going in search of the 
Indians, at a part where St. Germain deemed it probable they might 
be found. If he was unsuccessful, he purposed walking to Fort 
Providence, and sending succour from thence. ‘But he doubted 
whether either he or his:party could perform the journey to that place 
in their present debilitated state. It was evident that any supply 
that could be sent from Fort Providence would be long in reaching 
us, and could not be sufficient to enable us to afford any assistance 
to our companions behind, and that the only relief for them ‘must 
be procured from the Indians. I resolved, therefore, in going also 
in search of them ; but my companions were absolutely incapable of 
proceeding, and I thought, by halting two or three days they might 
gather a little strength, whilst the delay would afford us the chance 
of learning whether Mr. Back had seen the Indians. e 

We now looked round for the means’ of subsistence, and were 
gratified to find several deer skins, which had been thrown away 
during our former residence. The bones were gathered from the 
heap of ashes, these with the skins, and the addition of irupe de roche, 
we considered would support us tolerably well for a time. As to 
the house, the parchment being torn from the windows, the apart- 
ment we selected for our abode was exposed to all the rigour of 
the season. We endeavoured to exclude the wind as much as 
possible, by placing loose boards against the apertures. The tem- 
perature was now between 15° and 20° below zero. We procured 
fuel by pulling up the flooring of the other rooms, and water for 
the purpose of cooking, by melting the snow. Whilst we were 
seated. round the fire, singeing the ‘deer skin for supper, we were 
rejoiced by the unexpected entrance of Augustus. | He had followed 
quite a different course from ours, and the circumstance ‘of his 


4.4.0 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


having found his way through a part of the country he had: never 
been in before, must be considered a remarkable proof of: sagacity. 
The unusual earliness of this. winter became manifest to us from the 
state of: things at this spot. Last year at the same season, and still 
later, there had been very little snow on the ground, and we were 
surrounded by vast herds of rein-deer. Now there were but few — 
recent tracks of these animals, and the snow was upwards of two 
feet deep. Winter River was then open, now it was frozen two feet 
thick. | 

- When I arose the following eee my body and limbs were 
so swollen that I was unable to walk more than a few yards. Adam 
was'ina still worse condition, being absolutely incapable of rising 
without. assistance. My other companions fortunately experienced 
this inconvenience in a less degree, and went to collect’ bones, 
and some tripe de roche which supplied us with two meals. The 
bones were quite acrid, and the soup extracted from them exco- 
riated the mouth if taken alone, but it was somewhat milder 
when boiled with tripe de roche, and we even thought the mixture 
palatable, with the addition of salt, of which a cask had been fortu- 
nately left here in the spring. Augustus to-day set two fishing 
lines below the rapid. On his way thither he saw two deer, but 
had_ not strength to follow them. : 

On the 13th the wind blew violently from south-east, and the 
snow drifted so much, that the party were confined to the house: 
In the afternoon of the following day Belanger arrived with a note 
from Mr, Back, stating that he had seen no trace of the Indians, and 
desiring further instructions as to the course he should pursue. 
Belanger’s situation, however, required our first care, as he came in 
almost. speechless, and covered. with ice, having fallen into a rapid, 
and, for the third time since we left the coast, narrowly escaped 
drowning. He did not recover sufficiently to answer our questions, 
until we had rubbed him for some time, changed his dress, and 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 441 


given him some warm soup. My companions nursed him with the 
greatest kindness, and the desire of restoring him to health seemed 
‘to absorb all regard for their own situation. I witnessed with 
peculiar -pleasure this conduct, so different from that which they 
had recently pursued, when every tender feeling was suspended by 
the desire of self-preservation. They now no longer betrayed im- 
patience or despondency, but were composed and cheerful, and 
had entirely given up the practice of swearing, to which the Ca- 
‘nadian voyagers are so lamentably addicted. Our conversation 
naturally turned upon the prospect of getting relief, and upon 
‘the means which were best adapted for obtaining it. The absence 
of all traces of Indians on Winter River, convinced me that they 
‘were at this time on the way to Fort Providence, and that by 
‘proceeding towards that post we should overtake them, as they 
move slowly when they have their families with them. This route 
also offered us the prospect of killing deer, in the vicinity of Rein- 
deer Lake, in which neighbourhood, our men in their journeys to 
and fro last winter, had always found them abundant. Upon these 
-grounds I determined on taking the route to Fort Providence as 
soon as possible, and wrote to Mr. Back desiring him to join me at 
Rein-deer Lake, and detailing the occurrences since we had parted, 
that our friends might receive relief, in case of any never hap- 
‘pening to me. 

Belanger did not recover sufficient strength to leave us before the 
18th. His answers as to the exact part of Round-Rock Lake in 
which he had left Mr. Back, were very unsatisfactory; and we could 
only collect that it was at a considerable distance, and he was still 
going on with the intention of halting at the place where Akaitcho 
was encamped last summer, about thirty miles off. This distance 
appeared so great, that I told Belanger it was very unsafe for him to 
attempt it alone, and that he would be several days in accomplishing 
it. He stated, however, that as the track. was beaten, he should 

3 L 


442 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


experience little fatigue, and seemed so confident, that I suffered 
him to depart with a supply of singed hide. Next day I received 
information which explained why he was so unwilling to acquaint us 
with the situation of Mr. Back’s party. He dreaded that I should 
resolve upon joining it, when our numbers would be so great as to 
consume at once every thing St. Germain might kill, if by accident 
he should be successful in hunting. He even endeavoured to entice 
away our other hunter Adam, and proposed to him to carry off the 
only kettle we had, and without which we could not have subsisted 
two days. Adam’s inability to move, however, precluded him from 
agreeing to the proposal, but he could assign no reason for not 
acquainting me with it, previous to Belanger’s departure. I was at 
first. inclined to consider the whole matter as a fiction of Adam’s, 
but he persisted in his story without wavering; and Belanger, when 
we met again, confessed that every part of it was true. It is painful 
to have to record a fact so derogatory to human nature, but I have 
deemed it proper to mention it, to shew the difficulties we had to 
contend with, and the effect which distress had in warping the 
feelings and understanding of the most, diligent and obedient of 
our party ; for such Belanger had been always esteemed up to this 
time. | 

In making arrangements for our departure, Adam disclosed to me, 
for the first time, that he was affected with cedematous swellings 
in some parts of the body, to such a degree as to preclude the 
slightest attempt at marching ; and upon my expressing my surprise 
at his having hitherto concealed from me the extent of his malady, 
among other explanations the details of the preceding story came out. 
It now became necessary to abandon the original intention of pro- 
ceeding with the whole party towards Fort Providence, and Peltier 
and Samandre having volunteered to remain with Adam, I determined 
on setting out with Benoit and Augustus, intending to send them 
relief by the first party of Indians we should meet. My clothes 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 443 


were so much torn, as to be quite inadequate to screen me from the 
wind, and Peltier and Samandré fearing that I might suffer on the 
journey im consequence, kindly exchanged with me parts of their 
dress, desiring me to send them skins in return by the Indians. 
Having patched up three pair of snow-shoes, and singed a consider- 
able quantity of skim for the journey, we started on the morning of 
the 20th. Previous to my departure, I packed up the journals’ of 
the officers, the charts, and some other documents, together with 
a letter addressed to the Under-Secretary of State, detailing the 
occurrences of the Expedition up to this period, which package was 
given in charge to Peltier and Samandré, with direction that it 
should be brought away by the Indians who might come to them. 
I also instructed them to forward succour immediately on its arrival 
to our companions in the rear, which they solemnly promised to do, 
and I left a letter for my friends, Richardson and Hood, to be sent 
at the same time. I thought it necessary to admonish Peltier, 
Samandre, and Adam, to eat two meals every day, in order to keep 
up their strength, which they promised me they would do. No 
language that I can use could adequately describe the parting scene. 
I shall only say there was far more calmness and resignation to the 
Divine will evinced by every one than could have been expected. 
We were all cheered by the hope that the Indians would be found 
by the one party, and relief sent to the other.. Those who remained 
entreated us to make all the haste we could, and: expressed their 
hope of seeing the Indians in ten or twelve days. 

At first starting we were so feeble as scarcely to be able to move 
forwards, and the descent of the bank of the river through the deep 
snow was a severe labour. When we came upon the ice, where the 
snow was less deep, we got on better, but after walking six hours we 
had only gained four miles, and were then compelled by fatigue to 
encamp on the borders of Round-Rock Lake. Augustus tried for 

ZL 2 


—_— 


 _—— 


AAA, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


fish here, but without success, so that our fare was skin and tea. 
Composing ourselves to rest, we lay close to each other for warmth. 
We found the night bitterly cold, and the wind pierced through our 
famished frames. 

The next morning was mild and pleasant: for travelling, and we 
set out after breakfast. We had not, however, gone many yards 
before I had the misfortune to break my snow shoes by falling be- 
tween two rocks. This accident prevented me from keeping pace 
with Benoit and Augustus, and in the attempt I became quite ex- 
hausted. Being convinced that their being delayed on my account 
might prove of fatal consequence to the rest, I resolved on return- 
ing to the house, and letting them proceed alone in search of the 
Indians. I therefore halted them only whilst I wrote a note to 
Mr. Back, stating the reason of my return, and requesting he would 
send meat from Rein-Deer Lake by these men, if St. Germain should 
kill any animals there. If Benoit should miss Mr. Back, I directed 
him to proceed to Fort Providence, and furnished him with a letter 
to the gentleman in cheigexe of it, requesting immediate eee 
might be sent to us. 

On my arrival at the house, I found Samandré very dispirited, and 
too weak, as he said, to render any assistance to Peltier ; upon whom 
the whole labour of getting wood and collecting the means of sub- 


sistence would have devolved. Conscious, too, that his ‘strength 


would have been unequal to these tasks, they had determined upon 
taking only one meal each day; under these circumstances I con- 
sidered my return as particularly fortunate, as I hoped to stimulate 
Samandré to exertion, and at any rate I could contribute some help 
to Peltier. I undertook the office of cooking, and insisted they 
should eat twice a-day whenever food could be procured, but -as I 
was too weak to pound the bones, Peltier agreed to do that in ad- 
dition to his more fatiguing task‘of getting wood: We had a violent 


~ OF THE POLAR SEA. | 445; 


snow storm all the next day, and this. gloomy weather contributed. 
to. the depression of spirits under which Adam and Samandré were. 
labouring. Neither of them would quit their beds, and they scarcely 
ceased from shedding tears all day; in vain did Peltier and myself 
endeavour to cheer them. We had even to use much entreaty be- 
fore we prevailed upon them to take the meals we had: prepared. 
Our situation was indeed distressing, but in comparison with that of 
our friends in the rear, we considered it happy. Their condition 
gave us unceasing solicitude, and was the principal subject of our 
conversation. 

Though the bek was stormy on the 26th, Samandre assisted 
me to gather éripe de roche. Adam, who was very ill, and could not 
now be prevailed upon to eat this weed, subsisted principally on 
bones, though he also partook of the soup. The tripe de roche had 
hitherto afforded us our chief support, and we naturally felt great 
uneasiness at the prospect. of being deprived of it, by its being so 
frozen as to render it impossible for us to gather it. 

We perceived our strength decline every day, and every exertion 
began to be irksome; when we were once seated the greatest effort 
was necessary in order to rise, and we had frequently to lift each 
other from our seats ; but even in this pitiable condition we conversed 

cheerfully, being sanguine as to the speedy arrival of the Indians. 

We calculated indeed that if they should be near the situation 
where they had remained last winter, our men would have reached 
them by this day. Having expended all the wood which we could 
procure from our present dwelling, without endangering its falling, 
Peltier began this day to pull down the partitions of the adjoining 

houses. Though these were only distant about twenty yards, yet 
the increase of labour in carrying the wood fatigued him so much, 
that by the evening he was exhausted. On the next day his weak- 
ness was such, especially in the arms, of which he chiefly complained, 

that he with difficulty lifted the hatchet: still he persevered, Sa- 


AAG A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


mandré and I assisting him in bringing in the wood) but our united 
strength could only collect sufficient to replenish the firé four times 
in the course of the day. As the insides of our mouths had become 
sore from eating the bone-soup, we relinquished the use of it, and 
now boiled our skin, which mode of dressing we found more palatable 
than frying it, as we had hitherto done. | 

On the 29th, Peltier felt his pains more severe, and could only cut 
a few pieces of wood. Samandré, who was still almost as weak, 
relieved him a little time, and I assisted them in carrying in the 
wood. We endeavoured to pick some tripe de roche, but in vain, as 
it was entirely frozen. In turning up the snow, in searching for 
bones, I found several pieces of bark, which proved a valuable acqui- 
sition, as we were almost destitute of dry wood proper for kindling 
the fire. Wesaw a herd of rein-deer sporting on the river, about 
half a mile from the house; they remained there a considerable time, 
but none of the party felt themselves sufficiently strong to go after 
them, nor was there one of us who could have fired a gun without 
resting it. 7 

Whilst we were seated round the fire this evening, discoursing 
about the anticipated relief, the conversation was suddenly inter- 
rupted by Peltier’s exclaiming with joy, “ Ah! le monde !” imagining 
that he heard the Indians m the other room ; immediately afterwards, 
to his bitter disappointment, Dr. Richardson and Hepburn entered, 
each carrying his' bundle. Peltier, however, soon recovered himself 
enough to express his joy at their safe arrival, and his regret that 
their companions were not with them. When I saw them alone my 
own mind: was instantly filled with apprehensions respecting my 
friend: Hood, and our other companions, which were immediately 
confirmed by the Doetor’s melancholy communication, that Mr. Hood 
and Michel were dead. Perrault and Fontano had neither reached 
the tent, nor been heard of by them. This intelligence produced 
a melancholy despondency in the minds of my party, and on that 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 447 


account the particulars were deferred until another opportunity. 
We were all shocked at beholding the emaciated countenances of 
the Doctor and Hepburn, as they strongly evidenced their extremely 
debilitated state. The alteration in our appearance was equally 
distressing to them, for since the swellings had subsided we were 
little more than skin and bone. The Doctor particularly remarked 
the sepulchral tone of our. voices, which he requested us to. make 
more cheerful if possible, unconscious that his own partook of the 
same key. 

Hepburn having shot a partridge, which was brought to the house, 
the Doctor tore out the feathers, and having held it to the fire a few 
minutes, divided it into seven portions. Each piece was ravenously 
devoured by my companions, as it was the first morsel of flesh any 
of us had tasted for thirty-one days, unless indeed the small gristly 
particles which we found occasionally adhering to the pounded bones 
may be termed flesh. Our spirits were revived by this small supply, 
and the Doctor endeavoured to raise them still higher by the prospect 
of Hepburn’s being able 'to kill a deer next day, as they had seen, 
and even fired at, several near the house. He endeavoured, too, to 
rouse us to some attention to the comfort of our apartment, and 
particularly to roll up, in the day, our blankets which (expressly for 
the convenience of Adam and Samandré,) we had been in the habit 
of leaving by the fire where we lay on them. The Doctor having 
brought his prayer-book and testament, some prayers and psalms, 
and portions of scripture, appropriate to our situation, were read, 
and we retired to bed. | 

Next morning the Doctor and Hepburn went out early in search 
of deer; but, though they saw several herds and fired some shots, 
they were not so fortunate as to kill any, being too weak to hold 
their guns steadily. The cold compelled the former to return soon, 
but Hepburn persisted until late in the evening. 

My occupation was to search for skins under the snow, it being 


“48 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


now our object immediately to get all that we could, but I had not 
‘strength to drag in more than two of those which were within twenty 
yards of the house -until the Doctor came and assisted me. We 
made up our stock to twenty-six, but several of them were putrid, 
and scarcely eatable, even by men suffering the extremity of famine. 
Peltier and Samandré continued very weak and dispirited, and 
they were unable to cut ‘fire-wood. Hepburn had in consequence 
that laborious task to perform after-he came back. ©The Doctor 
having scarified the swelled parts of Adam’s body, a large quan- 
tity of water flowed out, and-he obtained some ease, ‘but still kept 
his bed. - } Todas ad 

After our usual supper of singed skin and bone soup, Dr. Richard- 
‘son ‘acquainted me with the afflicting circumstances attending 
‘the death of Mr. Hood and Michel,-and detailed the occurrences 
‘subsequent to my departure from them, which I shall give from 
‘his journal, in his own words; but, I must here be permitted to 
-express the heart-felt sorrow with which I was overwhelmed at the 
loss of so many companions; especially for that of my friend Mr. Hood, 
‘to whose zealous and able co-operation I had been indebted for so 
‘much invaluable assistance during the Expedition, whilst the excel- 
‘lent qualities of his heart engaged my warmest regard. His scientific 
-observations, ‘together with his maps and drawings (a small part of — 
which only appear in-this work), evince a: variety of talent, which, 
‘had: his life been spared, must have rendered him a distinguished 
ornament to his profession, and which will cause his death to be felt 
as a loss to the service. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 449 


Dr. RICHARDSON’s NARRATIVE. 


Arter Captain Franklin had bidden us farewell we remained 
seated by the fire-side as long as the willows, the men had cut for 
us before they departed, lasted.. We-had no tripe de roche that day, 
but drank an infusion of the country tea-plant, which was grateful 
from its warmth, although it afforded no sustenance. We then 
retired to bed, where we remained all the next day, as the weather 
was stormy, and the snow-drift so heavy, as to destroy every prospect 
of success in our endeavours to light a fire. with the green and frozen 
willows, which were our only fuel. Through the extreme kindness 
and forethought of a lady, the party, previous to leaving London, 
had been furnished with a small collection of religious books, of 
which we still retained two or three of the most portable, and. they 
proved. of incalculable benefit to us. We read portions of them to 
each other as we lay in bed, in addition to the morning and evening 
service, and. found that they inspired us on each. perusal with so 
strong a sense of the omnipresence of a beneficent God, that. our 
situation, even in these wilds, appeared no longer destitute ; and we 
conversed, not only with calmness, but with cheerfulness, detailing 
with unrestrained confidence the past events of our lives, and 
dwelling with hope on our future prospects. Had my poor friend 
been spared to revisit his native land, I should look back to this 
period with unalloyed delight. - | 

On the morning of the 29th, the weather, although still cold, was 
clear, and I went out in quest of tripe.de roche, leaving Hepburn to 
cut willows for a fire, and Mr. Hood in bed. I had no success, as 
yesterday's snow drift was so frozen on the surface of the rocks that 
I could not collect any of the weed; but, on my return to the tent, 


I found that Michel, the Iroquois, had come with a note from. 
3M 


4.50 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Mr. Franklin, which stated, that this man, and Jean Baptiste Be- 
langer being unable to proceed, were about to return to us, and that 
a mile beyond our present encampment there was a clump of pine 
trees, to which he recommended us to remove the tent. Michel 
informed us that he quitted Mr. Franklin’s party yesterday morning, 
but, that. having missed his way, he had passed the night on the 
snow a mile or: two tothe northward of us. Belanger, he said, being 
impatient, had left the fire about two hours earlier, and, as he had 
not arrived, he supposed he had: gone astray. It will be seen in the 
sequel, that we had more than sufficient reason to doubt. the truth 
of this story. 

- Michel now cmoduceil achare and a partridge which he had killed 
in the morning. This unexpected supply of provision was: received 
by us with a deep sense of gratitude to the Almighty for his goodness, 
and we looked upon) Michel as the instrument he had chosen to 
preserve all our lives... He complained of cold, and:Mr. Heodoffered 
to share his buffalo robe with him at night: I gave him ‘one of two 
shirts which I wore, whilst Hepburn, in the warmth of ‘his heart, 
exclaimed, “How I shall love this man if I find that he does: not 
tell lies like the others.” Our meals being finished, we arranged 
that. the greatest part of the things should bescarried tothe pines 
the next day; and, after reading the. ile service, retired to bed 
full of hope. 

Early in the morning Hepburn, Michel, and: myself, carried the 
ammunition, and. most of the other heavy articles to the pines. 
Michel was our guide, and it did not occur to us at the time 
that his conducting us: perfectly straight was incompatible. with, his 
story of having gone astray on his way to us... He now informed us 
that hevhad, on his way tothe tent, left on the hill above the pines 
a gun'and forty-eight balls, which Perrault. had given to him when 
with the rest of Mr. Franklin’s party, he took leave of him. It - 
will -be-seen,'on a teference to Mr. Franklin’s journal, that Perrault 


OF THE POLAR SEA, ~ A51 


carried his gun and ammunition with him when they parted from 
Michel and Belanger. After we had made a fire, and drank a little 
of the country tea, Hepburn and I returned to the tent, where we 
arrived in the evening, much exhausted with our journey. Michel 
preferred sleeping where he was, and requested us to leave him the 
hatchet, which we did, after he had promised to come early in the 
morning to assist us in carrying “the tent and bedding. Mr. Hood 
remained. in bed all day. Seeing nothing of Belanger to-day, we 
gave him up for lost. 

On the 11th, after waiting until late in the morning for Michel, 
who did not come, Hepburn and I loaded ourselves with the bedding, 
and, accompanied ‘by Mr. Hood, ‘set out for the pines. Mr. Hood 
was much affected with dimness of sight, giddiness, and other 
symptoms of extreme debility, which caused us ‘to move very slow, 
and to make frequent halts. On arriving at the pines, we were 
much alarmed to find that Michel was absent. We feared that he 
had lost his way in coming to us ‘in the morning, although it was 
not easy to conjecture how that could. have happened, as our foot- 
steps of yesterday were very distinct. Hepburn went back for the 
tent, and returned with it after dusk, completely worn out with the 
fatigue of the day. Michel too arrived at the same time, and re- 
heved our anxiety on his account. He reported that he had been 
in chase of some deer which passed near his sleeping-place in the 
morning, and although he did not come up with them, yet that he 
found. a wolf which had ‘been killed: by the stroke of a deer’s horn, 
and had brought a part of it. ‘We implicitly believed this story 
then, but afterwards became convinced from circumstances, the 
detail of which may be spared, that it must have been a portion of the 
body of Belanger or Perrault. A question of moment here presents 
itself; namely, whether he actually murdered ‘these men, or either 
of them, or whether he found the bodies on the snow. Captain 
Franklin, who is the best: able to judge of this matter, from knowing 


3 M 2 


4.52 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


their situation when he parted from them, suggested the former 
idea, and that both Belanger and Perrault had been sacrificed. When 
Perrault turned back, Captain Franklin watched him until he 
reached a small group of willows, which was immediately adjoining 
to the fire, and concealed it from view, and at this time the smoke of 
fresh fuel was distinctly visible. Captain Franklin conjectures, that 
Michel -having already destroyed Belanger, completed his crime by 
Perrault’s death, in order to screen himself from detection. Although 
this opinion is founded only on circumstances, and is unsupported 
by direct evidence, it has been judged proper to mention it, especially 
as the subsequent conduct of the man shewed that he was capable 
of committing such a deed.. The circumstances are very strong. It 
is not easy to assign any other adequate motive for his concealing 
from us that Perrault had turnéd back, and his request overnight 
that we should leave him the hatchet; and his cumbering himself 
with it when he went out in the morning, unlike a hunter who 
makes use only of his knife when he kills a deer, seem to indicate 
that he took it for the purpose of cutting up something that he knew 
to be frozen. ‘These opinions, however, are the result of subsequent 
consideration. We passed this night in the open air. | 

On the following morning the tent was pitched, and Michel went 
out early, refused my offer to accompany him, and remained out the 
whole day. He would not sleep in the tent at night, but chose to 
lie at the fire-side. 

On the 13th there was a heavy gale of wind, and we aed dhe 
day by the fire. Next day, about two, P:M.; the gale abating, 
Michel set out as he said to-hunt, but returned unexpectedly in a 
very short time. This conduct surprised us, and his contradictory 
and evasory answers to our questions excited some Sansa eo 
they did not turn towards the truth. 

October 15th.—In the course of this: day Michel expressed ee 
regret that he had stayed behind; Mr: Franklin’s party, and declared 


he eee 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 453 


that he would set: out for the house at once if he knew the way. 
We endeavoured to soothe him, and to raise his hopes.of the In- 
dians speedily coming to our relief, but without success.. He refused 
to assist us in cutting wood, but about noon, after much solicitation, 
he set out to hunt. Hepburn gathered a kettle of tripe de roche, 
but froze his fingers.. Both Hepburn and I fatigued ourselves much 
to-day in pursuing a flock of partridges from one part to another of 
the group of willows, in which the hut was situated, but we were 
too weak to be able to approach them-with sufficient caution. In 
the evening Michel returned, having met with no success. | 

Next day he refused either to hunt or cut wood, spoke in a very 
surly manner, and threatened to leave us.. Under these circum- 
stances, Mr. Hood and I deemed it better to promise if he would 
hunt diligently for four days, that then we would give Hepburn a 
letter for. Mr. Franklin, a compass, inform him what course to pursue, 
and let them proceed together to the fort. .The non-arrival of the 
Indians to our relief, now led us to fear that. some accident had 
happened to Mr. Franklin, and we placed no confidence in the 
exertions of the Canadians that accompanied him, but we had the 
fullest confidence in Hepburn’s returning the moment he could ob- 
tain assistance. . 

On the 17th I went to Garndings Michel to splice Vaillant’s blanket 
was left, and after walking about. three miles, pointed out the hills 
to him at a distance, and returned to the hut, having: gathered a 
bagful of tripe de roche on the way. It was easier to gather this 
weed on a march than at the tent, for the exercise of walking pro- 
duced a glow of heat, which enabled us to withstand for a time the 
cold:to which we were exposed in scraping the frozen surface of the 
rocks. On the contrary, when we left the fire; to collect it in the 
neighbourhood of the hut, we became chilled’ at once, and were 
chtiged to return very quickly. 

_ Michel proposed to remain out all night, ad to mete next Cas 


454 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


on his way back. He returned. in the afternoon of the 18th, having 
found the blanket, together witha bag containing two pistols, and 
some other things which had been left beside it: We had some 
tripe de reche im the evening, but Mr. Hood, from the constant. grip- 
ing it produced, was unable to eat more than one or two spoonfuls. 
He was now so weak as to be scarcely able to sit up at the fire-side, 
and complained that the least: breeze of wind seemed to blow through | 
his frame. He also suffered much from cold during the night. We 
lay close to each other, but the heat of the body was no longer 
sufficient to thaw the frozen rime formed by our breaths on the 
blankets that covered him. 

At this period we avoided as much as possible conversing upon 
the hopelessness of our situation, and generally endeavoured to lead 
the conversation towards our future prospects in life: The fact is, 
that with the decay of our strength, our minds decayed, and we 
were no longer. able to bear the contemplation of the horrors that 
surrounded us. Each of us, if I may be allowed to judge from my 
own case, excused himself from so doing by a desire of not shocking 
the feelings of the others, for we were sensible of one another's 
weakness of intellect though blind to our own. Yet we were calm 
and resigned to our fate, not a murmur escaped us, and we were 
punctual and fervent:-in our addresses to the Supreme Being. 

On the 19th Michel refused to hunt, or even to assist in carrying 
a log of wood ‘to the fire, which :was: too heavy for Hepburn’s 
strength ‘and mine. »Mr. Hood endeavoured to point out to him 
the necesity and duty of exertion, and the cruelty of his quitting us 
without leaving something for our support; but the discourse’ far 
from producing any beneficial effect, seemed only to excite his anger, 
and amongst other expressions, he made use of the following re- 
markable one: “ It is no use hunting, there are no animals, you 
had better kill and eat me.” At length, however, he went out, but 
returned very soon, with a' report that he had seen three deer, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. AS 


which he was unable to follow from having wet his foot in a small 
stream of water thinly covered with ice, and being consequently 
obliged to come to the fire. "The day was rather mild and Hepburn 
and I gathered a large kettleful of tripe de roche; Michel slept in 
the tent this night. _ 

Sunday, October 20.—In the morning we again urged Michel to 
go a hunting that he might if possible leave us some provision, 
to-morrow being the day appointed for his quitting us; but he 


shewed great unwillingness to go out, and lingered about the fire, 


under the pretence of cleaning his gun. After we had read the 
morning service | went about noon to gather some tripe de’ roche, 
leaving Mr. Hood sitting before the tent at the fire-side, arguing 
with Michel; Hepburn was employed cutting down:a tree at a short 
distance from the tent, being desirous of accumulating a quantity 
of fire wood before: he left us. A-short time after I went out I 
heard the report of a gun, and about ten minutes afterwards Hepburn 
called to me ina voice of great alarm, to come directly. When I 
arrived, I found poor Hood lying lifeless at the fire-side, a ball 
having apparently entered his forehead. I was at. first horror- 
struck with the idea, that in a fit of despondency he had hurried 
himself into the presence of his Almighty Judge, by an act of his own 


_ hand; but the conduct of Michel soon gave rise to other thoughts, 


and excited suspicions which were confirmed, when upon examining 
the body, I discovered that the shot had entered the back part of 
the head, and passed out at the forehead, and that the muzzle of the 
gun had been applied so close as 'to set fire to the night-cap behind. 
The gun, which was of the longest kind supplied to .the Indians, 
could not have been placed in a position to inflict: such a wound, 
except by a second person. Upon inquiring of Michel how it hap- 
pened, he replied, that Mr. Hood had sent him into the tent. for 


the short gun, and. that.during his:absence the long gun had gone 


off, he did not know whether by accident or not. He held: the 


4.56 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


short gun in his hand at the time he was speaking to me. Hepburn 
afterwards informed me that previous to the report of the gun 
Mr. Hood and Michel were speaking to each other in an elevated 
angry tone; that Mr. Hood being seated at the fire-side, was hid 
from him by intervening willows, but that on hearing the report he 
looked up, and saw Michel rising up from before the’ tent-door, or 
just behind where Mr. Hood was seated, and then going into the 
tent. ‘Thinking that the gun had been discharged for the purpose 
of cleaning it, he did not goto the fire at first; and when Michel 
called to him that Mr. Hood was dead, a considerable time had 
elapsed. Although I dared not openly to evince any suspicion that 
I thought Michel guilty of the deed, yet he repeatedly protested 
that he was incapable of committing such an act, kept constantly on 
his guard, and carefully avoided leaving Hepburn and me together. 
He was evidently afraid of permitting us to converse in private, 
and whenever Hepburn spoke, he inquired if he accused him of 
the murder. It is to be ‘remarked, that he understood English 
very imperfectly, yet sufficiently to render it unsafe for us to speak 
on the subject in ‘his presence. We removed the body into a clump 
of willows behind the tent, and, returning to the fire, read the 
funeral service in addition to the evening prayers. The loss of | 
a young officer, of such distinguished and varied talents and appli- 
cation, may be felt and duly appreciated by the eminent cha- 
racters under whose command he had served; but the calmness 
with which he contemplated the probable ‘termination of a life of 
uncommon promise ; and the patience and fortitude with which 
he sustained, I may venture to say, unparalleled bodily suffer- 
ings, can only be known to the companions of his distresses: 
Owing to the effect that the tripe de roche invariably had, when “he 
ventured to taste it, he undoubtedly suffered miore than any of the 
_ survivors of the party. Bickersteth’s Scripture Help was lying open 
beside the body, as if it had fallen from his hand, and it is probable 


OF THE POLAR SEA. ~ AST 


that he was reading it at the instant of his death. We: passed the 
night in the tent together without rest, every one being: on his. 
guard. Next day, having determined on going to the Fort, we 
began to patch and prepare our clothes for the journey. We smged 
the hair off a part of the buffalo robe that belonged to Mr. Hood, 
and boiled and ate it. Michel tried to persuade me to go to the 
woods. on the Copper-Mine River, and hunt for deer instead of 
going to the Fort. In the afternoon a flock of partridges corning 
near the tent, he killed several which he shared with us. 

Thick snowy weather and a head wind prevented us from starting 
the following day, but on the morning of the 23d we set out, car- 
rying with us the remainder of the singed rebe. Hepburn and 
Michel had each a gun, and I carried a small pistol, which Hepburn 
had loaded for me. In the course of the march Michel alarmed us 
much by his gestures and conduct, was constantly muttering to 
himself, expressed an unwillingness to go to the Fort, and tried to 
persuade me to go to the southward to the woods, where he said he 
could maintain himself all the winter by killing deer. In conse- 
quence of this behaviour, and the expression of his countenance, I 
requested him to leave us and to go to the southward by himself. 
This proposal increased his ill-nature, he threw out some obscure 
hints of freeing himself from all restrainton the morrow; and I over- 
heard him muttering threats against Hepburn, whom he openly ac- 
cused of having told stories against him. He also, for the first time, 
assumed such a tone of superiority in addressing me, as evinced that he 
considered us to be completely in his power, and he gave vent to se- 
veral expressions of hatred towards the white people, or as he termed 
us in the idiom of the voyagers, the French, some of whom, he said, 
had killed and eaten his uncle and two of his relations. In short, 
taking every circumstance of his conduct into consideration, I came 
to the conclusion, that he would attempt to destroy us on the first 
opportunity that offered, and that he had hitherto abstained from 

3.N 


458 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


doing so from his ignorance of the way to the Fort, but that he 
would never suffer us to go thither in company with him. In the 
course of the day he had several times remarked that we were pur- 
suing the same course that Mr. Franklin was doing when he left him, 
and that by keeping towards the setting sun he could find his way 
himself. Hepburn and I were not in a condition to resist even an 
open attack, nor could we by any device escape from him. Our 
united strength was far inferior to his, and, beside his gun, he was 
armed with two pistols, an Indian bayonet, and a knife. In the 
afternoon, coming to a rock on which there was some tripe de roche, 
he halted, and said he would gather it whilst we went on, and that 
he would soon overtake us. Hepburn and I were now left together 
for the first time since Mr. Hood’s death, and he acquainted 
me with several material circumstances, which he had observed of 
Michel’s behaviour, and which confirmed me in the opinion that 
there was no safety for us except in his death, and he offered 
to be the instrument of it. I determined, however, as I was 
thoroughly convinced of the necessity of such a dreadful act, to 
take the whole responsibility upon myself; and immediately upon 
Michel’s coming up, I put an end to his life by shooting him 
through the head with a pistol. Had my own life alone been 
threatened, I would not have purchased it by such a measure ; 
but I considered myself as intrusted also with the protection 
of Hepburn’s, a man, who, by his humane attentions and. de- 
votedness, had so endeared himself to me, that I felt more anxiety 
for his safety than for my own. Michel had gathered no tripe de 
roche, and it was evident to us that he had halted for the purpose 
of putting his gun in order, with the intention of attacking us, 
perhaps, whilst we were in the act of encamping. | 

I have dwelt in the preceding part of the narrative upon 
many circumstances of Michel’s conduct, not for the purpose of 
ageravating his crime, but to put the reader in »possession of the 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 459 | 


_ reasons that influenced me in depriving a fellow-creature of life. 
Up to the period of his return to the tent, his conduct had been 
good and respectful to the officers, and in a conversation between 
Captain Franklin, Mr. Hood, and myself, at Obstruction Rapid, it 
had been proposed to give him a reward upon our arrival at a post: 
His principles, however, unsupported by a belief in the divine truths 
of Christianity, were unable to withstand the pressure of severe dis- 
tress. His countrymen, the Iroquois, are generally Christians, but 
he was totally uninstructed and ignorant of the duties inculcated 
by Christianity ; and from his long residence in the Indian country, 
seems to have imbibed, or retained, the rules of conduct which the | 
southern Indians prescribe to themselves. 

On the two following days we had mild but thick snowy weather, 
and as the view was too limited to enable us to preserve a straight 
course, we remained encamped amongst a few willows and dwarf 
pines, about five miles from the tent. We found a species of cornicu- 
laria, a kind of lichen, that was good to eat when moistened and 
toasted over the fire; and we had a / good many Pees of singed 
buffalo hide remaining. | 

On the 26th, the weather being clear and extremely cold, we 
resumed our march, which was very painful from the depth of 
the snow, particularly on the margins of the small Jakes that lay in 
our route. We frequently sunk under the load of our blankets, 
and were obliged to assist each other in getting up. After walking 
about three miles and a half, however, we were cheered by the sight 
of a large herd of rein-deer, and Hepburn went in pursuit of them; 
but his hand being unsteady through weakness he missed. He was 
so exhausted by this fruitless attempt that we were obliged to 
encamp upon the spot, although it was a very unfavourable one. 

Next day we had fine and clear, but cold, weather. We set 
out early, and, in crossing’a hill, found a considerable quantity of 
tripe de roché. About noon-we fell upon Little Marten Lake, having 

3.N 2 


4,60 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


walked about two miles. The sight of a place that we knew 
inspired us with fresh vigour, and there being comparatively little 
snow on the ice, we advanced ata pace to which we had lately been 
unaccustomed. In the: afternoon we crossed a recent track of a 
wolverene, which, from a parallel mark in the snow, appeared to have 
been dragging something. Hepburn traced it, and upon the borders 
of the lake found the spine of a deer, that it had dropped. It 
was clean picked, and, at’ least, one season old; but we extracted 
the spinal marrow from it, which, even in its frozen state, was so 
acrid as to excoriate the lips. We encamped within sight of the 
Dog-rib Rock, and from. the coldness of the night and the want of 
fuel, rested very ill. 

On the 28th we rose at day-break, but from the want of the 
small fire, that we usually made in the mornings to warm’ our 
fingers, a very long time was spent in making up our bundles. 
This task fell to Hepburn’s share, as I suffered so much from the 
cold asto be unable to take my hands out of my mittens. We kept 
a straight course for the Dog-rib Rock, but, owing to the depth of 
the snow in the valleys we had to cross, did not reach it until late 
in the afternoon. We would have encamped, but did not like to 
pass a second night without fire; and though scarcely able to drag 
our limbs after us, we pushed on to a clump of pines, about a 
mile to the southward of the rock, and arrived at them in. the dusk 
of the evening. During the last few hundred yards of our march, 
our track lay over some large stones, amongst which I fell down 
upwards of twenty times, and became at length so exhausted that 
I was unable to stand. If Hepburn had not exerted himself far 
beyond his strength, and speedily made the encampment and kindled 
a fire, I must have perished on the spot. This night we had plenty 
of dry wood. | 
_ On the 29th we had clear and fine weather. We set out at sun- 
rise, and hurried on in our anxiety to reach the house, but our pro- 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 461 


gress was much impeded by the great depth of the snow in the val- 
leys. Although every spot of ground over which we travelled to-day, 
had been repeatedly trodden by us, yet we got bewildered in a small 
lake. . We took it for Marten Lake, which was three times its size, 
and fancied that. we saw the rapid and the grounds about the fort, 
although they were still far distant. Our disappointment when this 
illusion was dispelled, by our reaching the end of the lake, so 
operated on our feeble minds as to exhaust our strength, and we 
decided upon encamping; but upon ascending a small eminence to 
look for a clump of wood, we caught a glimpse of the Big-Stone, a 
well known rock upon the summit of a hill opposite to the Fort, and 
determined upon proceeding. In the evening we saw several large 
herds of rein-deer, but Hepburn, who used to be considered a good 
marksman, was now unable to hold the gun straight, and although 
he got near them all his efforts proved fruitless. In passing through 
a small clump of pines we saw a flock of partridges, and. he suc- 
ceeded in killing one after firing several shots. We came in sight 
of the fort at dusk, and it is impossible to describe our sensations, 
when on attaining the eminence that overlooks it, we ‘beheld. the 
smoke issuing from one of the chimneys. From not having met 
with any footsteps in the snow, as we drew nigh our once cheerful 
residence, we had been agitated by many melancholy forebodings. 
Upon entering the now desolate building, we had the satisfaction. of 
embracing Captain Franklin, but no words can convey an idea of 
the filth and wretchedness that met our eyes on looking around. 
Our own misery had stolen upon us by degrees, and we were accus- 
tomed to the contemplation of each other’s emaciated figures, but 
the ghastly countenances, dilated eye-balls, and sepulchral voices 
of Mr. Franklin and those with him were more than we could at 
first bear. | 


Conclusion of Dr Richardson’s Narrative. 


4.62 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Tue morning of the 31st was very cold, the wind being strong 
from the north. Hepburn went again in quest of deer, and the 
Doctor endeavoured to kill some partridges: both were unsuccessful. 
A. large herd of deer passed close to the house, the Doctor fired 
once at them, but. was unable to pursue them. Adam was easier 
this day, and left his bed. Peltier and Semandré were much weaker, 
and could not assist in the labours of the day. Both complained of 
soreness in the throat, and Semandré suffered much from cramps in 
his fingers. The Doctor and Hepburn began this day to cut the 
wood, and also brought it to the house, Being too weak to aid in 
these laborious tasks, I was employed in searching for bones, and 
cooking, and attending to our more weakly companions. 

In the evening Peltier, complaining much of cold, requested of me 
a portion of a blanket to repair his shirt and drawers. The mending 
of these articles occupied him and Semandré until past one A.M., 
and their spirits were so much revived by the employment, that 
they conversed even cheerfully the whole time. Adam sat up 
with them. The Doctor, Hepburn, and myself, went to bed. We 
were afterwards agreeably surprised to see Peltier and Semandre 
carry three or four logs of wood across the room to replenish the 
fire, which: induced’ us to hope they still possessed more strength 
than we had supposed. 

November 1.—This day was fine and mild. Hepburn went 
hunting, but was as usual unsuccessful. As his strength was rapidly 
declining, we advised him to desist from the pursuit of deer; and 
only to go out for a short time, and endeavour to kill a few partridges 
for. Peltier: and Semandré. The Doctor obtained: a. little tripe de 
roche, but Peltier could not eat any of it, and Semandré only a few 
spoonfuls, owing to the soreness of their throats.. In the afternoon 
Peltier was so much exhausted, that he sat up with difficulty, and 
looked piteously ; at’ length he slided from: his stool upon his bed, 
as we supposed to sleep, and in this composed state he remained 


OF THE POLAR SEA. — 463. 


upwards of two hours, without our apprehending any danger. We 
were then alarmed by hearing a rattling in his throat, and on the 
Doctor's examining him, he was found to be speechless. He died 
in the course of the night. Semandré sat up the greater part of the 
day, and even assisted in pounding some bones; but on witnessing 
the melancholy state of Peltier, he became very low, and began to 
complain of cold and stiffness of the joints. Being unable to keep 
up a sufficient fire to warm him, we laid him down and covered him 
with several blankets. He did not, however, appear to get better 
and I deeply lament to add he also died before daylight. We 
removed the bodies of the deceased into the opposite part of the 
house, but our united strength was inadequate to the task of in 
terring them, or even carrying them down to the river. 

_ It may be worthy of remark that poor Peltier, from the time af 
Benoit’s departure, had fixed. on the first. of November as the time 
when he should cease to expect any relief from the Indians, and had 
repeatedly said that if they did not arrive by that day, he should 
not survive. 

» Peltier had endeared himself to each of us by his jhecafilenms 
his unceasing activity, and affectionate care and attentions, ever 
since our arrival at this place. He had nursed Adam with the 
tenderest solicitude the whole time. Poor Samandré was. will- 
ing to have taken his share in the labours of the party, had he 
not been wholly meapacitated by his weakness and low spirits. 
The severe shock occasioned by the sudden dissolution of our 
two companions rendered us very melancholy. Adam became low 
and, despondent, a change which we lamented the more, as we 
had perceived he had been gaining strength and spirits for the two 
preceding days. I was particularly distressed by the thought. that 
the labour of collecting wood must now devolve upon Dr. Richardson 
and Hepburn, and that my debility would disable me from affording 
them any material assistance; indeed both of them most: kindly 


464. | A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


urged me not to make the attempt. They were occupied the whole 
of the next day in tearing down the logs of which the store-house 
was built, but the mud plastered between them was so hard frozen 
that the labour of separation exceeded their strength, and they were 
completely exhausted by bringing in wood sufficient for less than 
twelve hours’ consumption. 

I found it necessary in their absence, to remain constantly near 
Adam, and to converse with him, in order to prevent his reflecting 
on our condition, and to keep up his spinits as far as possible. I 
also lay by his side at night. 

On the 3d the weather was very cold, though the atmosphere was 
cloudy. This morning Hepburn was affected with swelling in his 
limbs, his strength as well as that of the Doctor, was rapidly de- 
chning; they continued, however, to be full of hope. . Their utmost 
exertions could only supply wood, to renew the fire thrice, and on 
making it up the last time we went to bed. Adam was in rather 
better spirits, but he could not bear to be left alone. Our stock of 
bones was exhausted by a small quantity of soup. we made this 
evening. The toil of separating the hair from the skins, which in 
fact were our chief support, had now become so ‘wearisome as to 
prevent us from eating as much as we should otherwise have done. 

November 4.—Calm and comparatively mild weather. The 
Doctor and Hepburn, exclusive of their usual occupation, gathered 
some tripe de roche. I went a few yards from the house in search 
of bones, and returned quite fatigued, having found but three. The 
Doctor again made incisions in Adam’s leg, which discharged a 
considerable quantity-of water, and gave him great relief. We read 
prayers and a portion of the New Testament in the morning and 
evening, as had been our practice since Dr. Richardson’s arrival; and 
I may remark that the performance of these duties always afforded 
us the greatest consolation, serving to reanimate our hope in the 
mercy of the Omnipotent, who alone could save and deliver us. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 465 


On the 5th the breezes were light, with dark cloudy weather, and 
some snow. The Doctor and Hepburn were getting much ,weaker, 
and the limbs of the latter were now greatly swelled. -They came 
into the house frequently in. the course of the day to rest them- 
selves, and when once seated, were unable to rise without the help. of 
one another, or of a stick. Adam was for the most. part in the same 
low state as yesterday, but sometimes he surprised us by getting 
up and walking with an appearance of increased strength... His 
looks were now wild and ghastly, and his conversation was often 
incoherent. . 

-The next day was fine, but very cold. . The swellings in Acad S 
limbs having subsided, he was free from pain, and arose this morning 
in-much better spirits, and spoke of cleaning his, gun ready for. 
shooting. partridges,. or any animals that might appear near. the 
house, but his tone entirely changed before the day was half over ; 
he, became again dejected, and could scarcely be prevailed upon to 
eat.. The Doctor and Hepburn were almost exhausted. The cutting 
of one log of wood occupied the latter half,an. hour; and the other 
took as much time to drag it into the house, though the distance 
did not exceed thirty yards... I endeavoured to help the Doctor, 
but my assistance was very trifling. Yet it was evident that, in a 
day or. two, if their strength should continue to decline at the same 
rate, I. should be the strongest of the party. 

I may here remark that.owing to our loss of flesh, ae bagi ee 
of the floor, from which we were only protected. by a blanket, . pro- 
duced.soreness over the body, and especially those parts on which. 
the weight rested in lying, yet to turn ourselves for relief was a 
matter of toil and. difficulty. .However, during this period, and, 
indeed all along. after the acute pains of hunger, which lasted but 
three or four days, had subsided, we generally enjoyed the. comfort 
of a few hours’ sleep. ... The dreams. which for the most part, but not. 
always accompanies it, were usually (though not invariably,) of a 

3 0 


4.66 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


pleasant character, being very often about the enjoyments of 
feasting. In the day-time we fell into the practice of conversing 
on common and light subjects, although we sometimes discussed 
with seriousness and earnestness topics connected with religion. 
We generally avoided speaking directly of our present sufferings, 
or even of the prospect of relief. I observed, that in proportion 
as our strength decayed, our minds exhibited. symptoms of weakness, 
evinced by a kind of unreasonable pettishness with each other. 
Each of us thought the other weaker in intéllect than himself, and 
more in need of advice and assistance. So trifling a circumstance as 
a change of place, recommended by one as being warmer and more 
comfortable, and refused by the other from a dread of motion, 
frequently called forth fretful expressions which were no sooner 
uttered than atoned for, to be repeated perhaps in the course of a 
few minutes. The same thing often occurred when we endeavoured 
to assist each other in carrying wood to the fire; none of us were 
willing to receive assistance, although the task was disproportioned 
to our strength. On one of these occasions Hepburn was so con- 
vinced. of this waywardness that he exclaimed, “ Dear me, if we are 
spared to return to England, I wonder if we shall recover our 
understandings.” 

November 7.—Adam had passed a restless night, being disquieted 
by gloomy apprehensions. of approaching death, which we tried in 
vain to dispel. He was so low in the morning as to be scarcely able 
to speak. I remained in bed by his side to cheer him as much as 
possible. The Doctor and Hepburn went to cut wood. They had 
hardly begun theirlabour, when they were amazed at hearing the report 
of a musket. They could scarcely believe that there was really any one 
near, until they heard a shout, and immediately espied three Indians 
close to the house. Adam and I heard the latter noise, and I was 
fearful that a part of the house had fallen upon one of my com- 
panions, a disaster which had in fact been thought not unlikely. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. A67 


My alarm was only momentary, Dr. Richardson came in to commu- 
nicate the joyful intelligence that relief had arrived. He and myself 
immediately addressed thanksgiving to the throne of mercy for 
this deliverance, but poor Adam was in so low a state that he could 
scarcely comprehend the information. When the Indians entered, 
he attempted to rise but sank down again. But for this seasonable 
interposition of Providence, his existence must have terminated in 
a few hours, and that of the rest probably in not many days. 

The Indians had left Akaitcho’s encampment on the 5th No- 
vember, having been sent by Mr. Back with all possible expedition, 
after he had arrived at their tents. They brought but a small 
supply of provision that they might travel quickly. It consisted of 
dried deer’s meat, some fat, and a few tongues. Dr. Richardson, 
Hepburn, and I, eagerly devoured the food, which they imprudently 
presented to us, in too great abundance, and in consequence we 
suffered dreadfully from indigestion, and had no rest the whole 
night. Adam being unable to feed himself, was more judiciously 
treated by them, and suffered less; his spirits revived hourly. The 
circumstance of our eating more food than was proper in our present 
condition, was another striking proof of the debility of our minds. 
We were perfectly aware of the danger, and Dr. Richardson re- 
peatedly cautioned us to be moderate; but he was himself unable 
to practise the caution he so judiciously recommended. 

Boudel-kell, the youngest of the Indians, after resting about an 
hour, returned to Akaitcho with the intelligence of our situation, 
and he conveyed a note from me to Mr. Back, requesting another 
supply of meat as soon as possible. The two others “ Crooked-Foot 
and the Rat,” remained to take care of us, until we should be able 
to move forward. 

The note I received by the Indians from Mr. Back, communicated 
“a tale of distress, with regard to himself and his party, as painful 
302 


468 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


as that which we had suffered ; as will be seen hereafter, by his own 
narrative. 

November 8. The Indians this morning requested us to remove to 
an encampment on the banks of the river, as they were unwilling to 
remain in the house in which the bodies of our deceased com- 
panions were lying exposed to view. We agreed to remove, but the 
day proved too stormy, and Dr. Richardson and Hepburn having 
dragged the bodies to a short distance, and covered them with snow, 
the objections 'of the Indians to remain in the house were removed, 
and they began to clear our room of the accumulation of dirt and 
fragments of pounded bones. The improved state of our apartment, 
and the large and cheerful fires they kept up, produced in us a 
sensation of comfort to which we had long been strangers. In the 
evening they brought in a pile of dried wood, which was lying on 
the river-side, and on which we had often cast a wishful eye, being 
unable to drag it up the bank. The Indians set about every thing 
with an activity that amazed us. Indeed, contrasted with our 
emaciated figures. and extreme debility, their frames appeared to us 
gigantic, and their strength supernatural. These kind creatures 
next turned their attention to our personal appearance, and pre- 
vailed upon us to shave and wash ourselves. ‘The beards of the 
Doctor and Hepburn had been untouched since they left the sea- 
coast, and were become of a hideous length, and peculiarly offensive 
to the Indians*. The Doctor and I suffered extremely from dis- 
tention, and therefore ate sparingly. Hepburn was getting better, 
and Adam recovered his strength with amazing rapidity. 


* The first alvine discharges after we received food, were, as Hearne remarks on a 
similar occasion, attended with excessive pain. Previous to the arrival of the Indians the 
urinary secretion was extremely abundant, and we were obliged to rise from bed in con- 

sequence upwards of ten times m a night. This was’ an extreme annoyance m our 
reduced state. It may, perhaps, be attributed to the quantity of the country tea that we 
_ drank. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 4.69 


November 9.—This morning was pleasantly. fine. Crooked-Foot 
caught: four large trout in Winter Lake, which were very much 
prized, especially by the Doctor and myself, who had taken a dislike 
to meat, in consequence of our sufferings from repletion, which 
rendered us almost incapable of moving, Adam and Hepburn in 
a good measure escaped this. Though the night was stormy, and 
our. apartment freely admitted the wind, we felt no inconvenience, 
the Indians were so very careful in covering us up, and in keeping 
a good fire; and our plentiful cheer gave such power of resisting 
the cold, that we could scarcely believe otherwise than that the 
season had become milder. 

On the 13th, the weather was stormy, with constant snow. The 
Indians became desponding at the non-arrival of the supply, and 
would neither go to hunt or fish. They frequently expressed their 
fears of some misfortune having befallen Boudel-kell; and, in the 
evening, went off suddenly, without apprizing us of their intention, 
having first given to each of us a handful of pounded meat, which 
they had reserved.. Their departure, at first, gave rise to a suspi- 
cion of their having deserted us, not meaning to return, especially 
as the explanations of Adam, who appeared to be in their secret, 
were very unsatisfactory.. At length, by interrogations, we got from 
him the information, that they designed to march night and day, 
until they should reach Akaitcho’s encampment, whence they would 
send us aid. As we had combated their fears about Boudel-kell, 
they, perhaps, apprehended that we should oppose their determina- 
tion, and therefore concealed it. ._We were now left a second time 
without food, and with appetites recovered, and strongly excited by 
recent indulgence. 

On the followmg day the Doctor and Hepburn cpacdatta their 
former occupation of collecting wood, and I was able to assist a 
little in bringing it into the house. Adam, whose expectation of 
the arrival of the Indians had been raised by the fineness of the 


ATO A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


weather, became, towards night, very desponding, and refused to 
eat the singed skin. The night was stormy, and there was a heavy 
fall of snow. The next day he became still more dejected. About 
eleven Hepburn, who had gone out for wood, came in with the 
intelligence that a party appeared upon the river. The room was 
instantly swept, and, in compliance with the prejudices of the 
Indians, every scrap of skin was carefully removed out of sight ;. for 
these simple people imagine, that burning deer-skin renders them un- 
successful in hunting. ‘The party proved to be Crooked-F oot, 'Thoo- 
ee-yorre, and the Fop, with the wives of the two latter dragging pro- 
visions. ‘They were accompanied by Benoit, one of our own men. 
We were rejoiced to learn, by a note from Mr. Back, dated 
November 11, that he and his companions had so recruited their 
strength that they were preparing to proceed to Fort Providence. 
Adam recovered his spirits on the arrival of the Indians, and even 
walked about the room with an appearance of strength and activity 
that surprised us all. As it was of consequence to get amongst the 
rein-deer before our present supply should fail, we made prepara- 
tions for quitting Fort Enterprise the next day; and, accordingly, 
at an early hour, on the 16th, having united in thanksgiving and 
prayer, the whole party left the house after breakfast. Our feelings 
on quitting the Fort, where we had formerly enjoyed much com- 
fort, if not happiness, and, latterly, experienced a degree of misery 
scarcely to be paralleled, may be more easily conceived than de- 
scribed. The Indians treated us with the utmost tenderness, gave 
us their snow-shoes, and walked without themselves, keeping by 
our sides, that they might lift us when we fell. We descended 
Winter River, and, about noon, crossed the head of Round-Rock 
Lake, distant about three miles from the house, where we were 
obliged to halt, as Dr. Richardson was unable to proceed. The 
swellings in his limbs rendered him by much the weakest of the 
party. The Indians prepared our encampment, cooked for us, and 


OF THE POLAR SEA. AT) 


fed us as if we had been children; evincing humanity that would 
have done honour to the most civilized people. The night was 
mild, and fatigue made us sleep soundly. 


From this period to the 26th of November we gradually continued 
to improve, under the kindness and attention of our Indians. On this 
day we arrived in safety at the abode of our chief and companion, 
Akaitcho. We were received by the party assembled in the 
leader’s tent, with looks of compassion, and profound silence, which 
lasted about a quarter of an hour, and by which they meant to 
express their condolence for our sufferings. The conversation did 
not begin until we had tasted food. ‘The Chief, Akaitcho, shewed 
us the most friendly hospitality, and all sorts of personal attention, 
even ‘to cooking for us with his own hands, an office which he 
never performs for himself. Anncethai-yazzeh and Humpy, the 
Chief’s two brothers, and several of our hunters, with their families, 
were encamped here, together with a number of old men and wo- 
men. In the course of the day we were visited by every person 
of the band, not merely from curiosity, I conceive, but rather from 
a desire to evince their tender sympathy in our late distress. We 
learned that Mr. Back, with St. Germain and Belanger, had gone 
to Fort Providence; and that, previous to his departure, he had 
left a letter in a cache of pounded meat, which we had missed two 
days ago. As we supposed. that this letter might acquaint us with 
his intentions more fully than we could gather from the Indians, 
through our imperfect knowledge of their language, Augustus, the 
Esquimaux, whom we found here in perfect health, and an Indian 
lad, were despatched to bring it. 

We found several of the Indian families in great affliction, for the 
loss of three of their relatives, who had been drowned in the August 
preceding, by the upsetting of a canoe near to Fort Enterprise. "They 
bewailed the melancholy accident every morning and evening, by 


42 A JOURNEY TO ‘THE SHORES: 


repeating the names of the persons in a loud singing tone, which 
was frequently interrupted by bursts of tears.. One woman was so 
affected by the loss of her only son, that. she seemed deprived of 
reason, and wandered about the tents the whole day, sie and 
singing out his name. 

On the Ist of December we Renter with the Indians to hs 
southward. | 

On the 4th, we again set off after the Indians about noon, and 
soon overtook them,-as they had halted, to drag from the water, 
and cut up and share, a moose-deer, that had been drowned in a 
rapid part of the river, partially covered with ice. These opera- 
tions detained us a long time, which was the more disagreeable, as 
the weather was extremely unpleasant from cold low fogs. We 
were all much fatigued at the hour of encampment, which was 
after dark, though the ‘day’s journey did not exceed four miles. At 
every halt the elderly men of the tribe used to make holes in the 
ice and put in their lmes.. One of them shared the produce of his 
fishery with us this evening. 

In the afternoon of the 6th, Belanger, and nation Canadian, eee) 
from Fort Providence, sent by Mr. Weeks, with two trains of dogs, 
some spirits and tobacco for the Indians, a change of dress for 
ourselves, and a little tea. and sugar. They also brought letters for 
us from England, and. from Mr. Back and Mr. Wentzel. . By the 
former we received the gratifying intelligence of the successful ter- 
mination of Captain Parry’s voyage; and were informed of the. 
promotion of myself and Mr. Back, and of poor Hood, our grief 
for whose loss was renewed by this.intelligence. The gratification 
which it would otherwise have afforded, was materially damped. by 
our sincere regret that he had not lived to receive this just .reward 
of his merit and services. The letter from. Mr. Back. stated, that. 
the rival Companies in the fur trade had united ; but that, owing to 


OF THE POLAR SEA. ATS 


some cause which had not been explained to him, the goods in- 
tended as rewards to Akaitcho and his band, which we had demanded 
in the spring from the North-West Company, were not sent. There 
were, however, some stores lying for us at Moose-deer Island, 
which had been ordered for the equipment of our voyagers; and 
Mr. Back had gone across to that establishment, to make a selection 
of the articles we could spare for a temporary present to the Indians. 
The disappointment at the non-arrival of the goods was seriously 
felt by us, as we had looked forward with pleasure to the time 
when we should -be enabled to recompense our kind Indian 
friends, for their tender sympathy in our distresses, and the assist- 
ance they had so cheerfully and promptly rendered. I now regretted 
to find, that Mr. Wentzel and his party, in their return from the 
sea, had suffered severely on their march along the Copper-Mine 
River, having on one occasion, as he mentioned, had no food but 
tripe de roche for eleven days. 

All the Indians flocked to our encampment to learn the news, 
and to receive the articles brought for them. Having got some 
spirits and tobacco, they withdrew to the tent of the Chief, and 
passed the greater part of the night in singing. We had now the 
_ indescribable gratification of changing our linen, which we had worn 
ever since our departure from the sea-coast. 

December 8.—After a long conference with Akaitcho, we took 
leave of him and his kind companions, and set out with two 
sledges, heavily laden with provision and bedding, drawn by the 
dogs, and conducted by Belanger and the Canadian sent by 
Mr. Weeks. Hepburn and Augustus jointly dragged a’ smaller 
sledge, laden principally with their own bedding. Adam and 
Benoit were left to follow with the Indians. We encamped on the 
Grassy-Lake Portage, having walked about nine miles, principally 
on the Yellow-Knife River. It was open at the rapids, and in these 
places we had to ascend its banks, and walk through the wocds 

3 P 


AT 4. | A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


for some distance, which was very fatiguing, especially to Dr. Richard- 
son, whose feet were severely galled in consequence of some defect 
in his snow-shoes. 

On the 11th, however, we arrived at the Fort; it was still under 
the charge of Mr. Weeks. He welcomed us in the most kind 
manner, immediately gave us changes of dress, and did every thing 
in his power to make us comfortable. | 

Our sensations, on being once more in a comfortable dwelling, 
after the series of hardships and miseries we had experienced, will 
be much better imagined than any language of mine can describe 
them. Our first act was again to return our grateful praises to 
the Almighty for the manifold instances of his mercy towards us. 
Having found here some articles, which Mr. Back had sent. across 
from Moose-deer Island, I determined on awaiting the arrival of 
Akaitcho and his party, in order to present these to them, and to 
assure them of the promised reward, as soon as it could possibly be 
procured. 

In the afternoon of the 14th, Akaitcho, with his whole band, 
came to the Fort. He smoked his customary pipe, and made an 
address to Mr. Weeks in the hall, previous to. his coming into the 
room in which Dr, Richardson and I were. We discovered at the 
commencement of his speech to us, that he had been informed that 
our expected supplies had not come. He spoke of this circumstance 
as a disappointment, indeed, sufficiently severe to himself, to whom 
his band looked up for the protection of their interests, but without 
attaching any blame to us. “ The world goes badly,” he said, “all 
are poor, you are poor, the traders appear to be poor, I and my 
party are poor likewise; and since the goods have not come in, we 
cannot have them. I do not regret having supplied you with pro- 
visions, for a Copper Indian can never permit white men to suffer 
from want of food on his lands, without flying to their aid. I trust, 
however, that we shall, as you say, receive what is due next 


OF THE POLAR SEA. ANTS 


autumn ; and at all events,’ he added, in a tone of good-humour, 
“ itis the first time that the white people have been indebted to 
the Copper Indians.” We assured him the supplies should cer- 
tainly be sent to him by the autumn, if not before. He then 
cheerfully received the small present we made to himself; and, 
although we could give a few things only to those who had been 
most active in our service, the others who, perhaps, thought them- 
selves equally deserving, did not murmur at being left out in the 
distribution, Akaitcho afterwards expressed a strong desire, that we 
should represent the character of his nation in a favourable light to 
our countrymen. “ I know,” he said, “ you write down every 
occurrence in your books; but probably you have only noticed the 
bad things we have said and done, and have omitted to mention 
the good.” In the course of the desultory conversation which 
ensued, he said, that he had been always told by us, to consider 
the traders in the same light as ourselves ; and that, for his part, he 
looked upon both as equally respectable. This assurance, made in 
the presence of Mr. Weeks, was particularly gratifying to us, as it 
completely disproved the defence that had been set up, respecting 
the injurious reports that had been circulated against us amongst the 
indians in the spring; namely, that they were in retaliation for our 
endeavours to lower the traders in the eyes of the Indians. I take 
this opportunity of stating my opinion, that Mr. Weeks, in spread- 
ing these reports, was actuated by a mistaken idea that he was 
serving the interest of his employers. On the present occasion, we 
felt indebted to him for the sympathy he displayed for our dis- 
tresses, and the kindness with which he administered to our per- 
sonal wants. After this conference, such Indians as were indebted 
to the Company were paid for the provision they had given us, by 
deducting a corresponding sum from their debts; in the same way 
we gave a reward of sixteen skins of beaver to each of the persons 
who had come to our relief at Fort Enterprise. As the debts of 
& Beg 


476 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Akaitcho and his hunters had been effaced at the time of his engage- 
ment with us, we placed a sum, equal to the amount of provision they 
had recently supplied, to their credit on the Company’s books. These 
things being, through the moderation of the Indians, adjusted with 
an unexpected facility, we gave them a keg of mixed liquors, (five 
parts water,) and distributed among them several fathoms of tobacco, 
and they retired to their tents to spend the night in merriment. 

Adam, our interpreter, being desirous of uniting himself with 
the Copper Indians, applied to me for his discharge, which I 
granted, and gave him a bill on the Hudson’s Bay Company for the 
amount of his wages. These arrangements being completed, we 
prepared to cross the lake. 

Mr. Weeks provided Dr. Richardson and me with a cariole each, 
and we set out at eleven A.M., on the 15th, for Moose-deer 
Island.. Our party consisted of Belanger, who had charge of a 
sledge, laden with the bedding, and drawn by two dogs, our two 
cariole men, Benoit, and Augustus. Previous to our departure, we 
had another conference with Akaitcho, who, as wellas the rest of 
his party, bade us farewell, with a warmth of manner rare atone 
the Indians. 

The badness of Belanger’s dogs, and the roughness of the ice, 
impeded our progress very much, and obliged us to'encamp early. 
We had a good fire made of the drift wood, which lines the shores 
of this lake in great quantities. The next day was ‘very cold. 
We began the journey at nine A.M., and encamped at the Big 
Cape, having made another short march, in consequence of the 
roughness of the ice. 

On the 17th, we encamped on the most ‘eawhee of the Rein- 
deer Islands. This night was very stormy, but the wind abating in 
the morning, we proceeded, and by sunset reached the fishing-huts 
of the Company at Stony Point. Here we found Mr. Andrews, a 
clerk of the Hudson’s Bay Company, who regaled us with a supper 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 477 


of excellent white fish, for which this part of Slave Lake is particu- 
larly celebrated. Two men with sledges arrived soon afterwards, 
sent by Mr. M‘Vicar, who expected us about this time. We set off 
in the morning before day-break, with several companions, and 
arrived at Moose-deer Island about one P.M. Here we were 
received with the utmost hospitality by Mr. M‘Vicar, the chief 
trader of the Hudson’s Bay Company in this district, as well as by 
his assistant, Mr. M‘Auley. We had also the happiness of joining 
our friend, Mr. Back; our feelings on this occasion can be well 
imagined, we were deeply impressed with gratitude to him for his 
exertions in sending the supply of food to Fort Enterprise, to 
which, under Divine Providence, we felt the preservation of our 
lives to be owing. He gave us an affecting detail of the proceedings 
of his party since our separation; the substance of which I shall 
convey to the reader, by the following extracts from his Journal. 


Mr. BACK’s NARRATIVE. 


Tore Mr. Franxiin having directed me to proceed with 
October 4. St, Germain, Belanger, and Beauparlant, to Fort Enter- 
prise, in the hope of obtaining relief for the party, I took leave of 
my companions, and set out on my journey, through a very swampy 
country, which, with the cloudy state of the weather, and a keen 
north-east wind, accompanied by frequent snow showers, retarded us 
so much, that we scarcely got more than four miles, when we halted 
for the night, and made a meal of tripe de roche and some old 
leather. 

On the 5th, we set out early, amidst extremely deep snow, sinking 
frequently in it up to the thighs, a labour in our enfeebled and almost 
worn out state, that nothing but the cheering hopes of reaching the 
house, and affording relief to our friends, could have enabled us to 


478 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


support. As we advanced, we found to our mortification, that the 
tripe de roche, hitherto our sole dependence, began to be scarce, so 
that we could only collect sufficient to make half a kettleful, which, 
with the addition of a partridge each, that St. Germain had_ killed, 
made us a tolerable meal; during this day I felt very weak and 
sore in the joints, particularly between the shoulders. At night 
we encamped among a small clump of willows. | 

On the 6th we set out at an early hour, pursuing our route over a 
range of hills, at the foot of one of which we saw several large pines, 
and a great quantity of willows ; a sight that encouraged us to quicken 
our pace, as we were now certain we could not be far from the 
woods. Indeed we were making considerable progress, when Be- 
langer unfortunately broke through the ice, and sunk up to the 
hips. The weather being cold, he was in danger of freezing, but 
some brushwood on the borders of the lake enabled us to make a 
fire to dry him. At the same time we took the opportunity of 
refreshing ourselves with a kettle of swamp tea. 

My increasing debility had for some time obliged me to use a 
stick for the purpose of extending my arms; the pain in my shoul- 
ders being so acute, that I could not bear them to remain in the 
usual position for two minutes together. We halted at five among 
some small brushwood, and made a sorry meal of an old pair of 
leather trowsers, and some swamp tea. 

The night was cold with a hard frost, and though two persons 
_ slept together, yet we could not by any means keep ourselves warm, 
but remained trembling the whole time. The following morning 
we crossed several lakes, occasionally seeing the recent tracks of 
deer, and at noon we fell upon Marten Lake; and it happened to 
be the exact spot where we had been the last year with the canoes, 
and though I immediately recognised the place, the men would not 
believe it to be the same; at length, by pointing out. several marks, 
and. relating circumstances connected with them, they recovered 


OF THE POLAR SEA. AT9 


their memory, and a simultaneous expression of “ Mon Dieu, nous 
sommes sauvés,” broke out from the whole. Contrary to our expec- 
tations, the lake was frozen sufficiently to bear us, so that we were 
excused from making the tours of the different bays. This cir- 
cumstance seemed to add fresh vigour to us, and we walked. as fast 
as the extreme smoothness of the ice would permit, intending to 
reach the Slave Rock that night; but an unforeseen and almost 
fatal accident prevented the prosecution of our plan: Belanger (who 
seemed the victim of misfortune) again broke through the ice, in a 
deep part near the head of the rapid, but was timely saved, by fas- 
tening our worsted belts together, and pulling him out. By urging 
him forwards as quick as his icy garments. would admit of, to 
prevent his freezing, we reached a few pines, and kindled a fire; 
but it was late before he even felt warm, though he was so near the 
flame as to burn his hair twice, and to add to our distress three 
wolves crossed. the lake close to us. 

The night of the 7th was extremely stormy, and about ten the 
following morning, on attempting to go on, we found it totally 
impossible, being too feeble to oppose the wind and drift, which 
frequently blew us over, and on attempting to cross a small lake 
that lay in our way, drove us faster backwards than under all ad- 
vantages we could get forwards; therefore we encamped under the 
shelter of a small clump of pines, secure from the south-west sterm 
that was raging around us. In the evening, from there being no 
tripe de roche, we were compelled to satisfy, or rather allay, the 
cravings of hunger, by eating a gun cover and a pair of old shoes; 
at this time I had scarcely strength to get on my legs. 

_ The wind did not in the least abate during the night, but in the 
morning of the 9th it changed to north-east, and became moderate. 
We took advantage of this circumstance, and rising with great 
difficulty, set out, though had it not been for the hope of reaching 
the house, I am certain, from the excessive faintness which almost 


480 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


overpowered me, that I must have remained where I was. We 
passed the Slave Rock, and making frequent halts, arrived within a 
short distance of Tort Enterprise ; but as we perceived neither any 
marks of Indians, nor even of animals, the men began absolutely to 
despair: on a nearer approach, however, the tracks of large herds of 
deer, which had only passed a few hours, tended a little to revive 
their spirits, and shortly after we crossed the ruinous threshold of 
the long-sought-for spot; but what was our surprise, what our sen- 
sations, at beholding every thing in the most desolate and neglected 
state: the doors and windows of that room in which we expected to 
find provision, had been thrown down, and carelessly left so; and the 
wild animals of the woods had resorted there, as to a place of shelter 
and retreat. Mr. Wentzel had taken away the trunks and papers, 
but had left no note to guide us to the Indians. | This was to us the 
most grievous disappointment: without the assistance of the In- 
dians, bereft of every resource, we felt. ourselves reduced to the most 
miserable state, which was rendered still worse, from the recollection 
that our friends in the rear were as miserable as ourselves. For the 
moment, however, hunger prevailed, and each began to gnaw the 
scraps of putrid and frozen meat that were laying about, without 
waiting to prepare them. A fire, however, was made, and the neck 
and bones of a deer, found lying in the house, were boiled and 
devoured. i 

I determined to remain a day here to repose ourselves, and then 
to go in search of the Indians, and in the event of missing them, to 
proceed to the first trading establishment, which was distant about 
one hundred and thirty miles, and from thence to send succour to 
my companions. This indeed I should have done immediately, as 
the most certain manner of executing my purpose, had there been 
any probability of the river and lakes being frozen to the southward, 
or had we possessed sufficient strength to have clambered over the 
rocks and mountains which impeded the direct way; but as we 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 481 


were aware of our inability to do so, I listened to St. Germain’s 
proposal, which was, to follow the deer into the woods, (so long as 
they did not lead us out of our route to the Indians,) and if possible 
to collect sufficient food to carry us to Fort Providence. We now 
set about making mittens and snow shoes, whilst Belanger searched 
under the snow, and collected a mass of old bones, which when 
burned and used with a little salt, we found palatable enough, and. 
made a tolerable meal. At night St. Germain returned, having 
seen plenty of tracks, but no animals; the day was cloudy, with fresh 
breezes, and the river was frozen at the borders. 

On the 11th we prepared for our journey, having first collected a 
few old skins of deer, to serve us as food, and written a note to be 
left for our commander, to apprize him of our intentions. We 
pursued the course of the river to the lower lake, when St. Germain 
fell in, which obliged us to encamp directly to prevent his being 
frozen; indeed we were all glad of stopping, for in our meagre and 
reduced state it was impossible to resist. the weather, which at any 
other time would have been thought fine; my toes were frozen, and 
although wrapped in blanket I could not keep my hands warm. 

The 12th was excessively cold with fresh breezes. Our meal at 
night consisted of scraps of old deer skins and swamp tea, and. the 
men complained greatly of their increasing debility. The following 
morning I sent St. Germain to hunt, intending to go some distance 
down the lake, but the weather becoming exceedingly thick with 
snow storms, we were prevented from moving. He returned without 
success, not having seen any animals. We had nothing to eat. 

In the morning of the 14th the part of the lake before us was 
quite frozen. There was so much uncertainty in St. Germain’s 
answers as to the chance of any Indians being in the direction we 
were then going, (although he had previously said that the leader had 
told him he should be there,) and he gave me so much dissatisfaction 
in his hunting excursions, that I was induced to send a note to the 

3 Q 


4,89 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Commander, whom I supposed to be by this time at Fort Enterprise, 
to inform him of our situation; not that I imagined for a moment 
he could better it, but that by all returning to the fort we might, 
perhaps, have better success in hunting; with this view I de- 
spatched Belanger, much against his inclination, and told him to 
return as quick as possible toa place about four miles further on, 
where we intended to fish, and to await his arrival. ‘The men were 
so weak this day, that I could get neither of them to move from the 
encampment; and it was only necessity that compelled them to cut 
wood for fuel, in performing which operation Beauparlant’s face 
became so dreadfully swelled that he could scarcely see; I myself 
lost my temper on the most trivial circumstances, and was become 
very peevish; the day was fine but cold, with a freezing north-east 
wind. We had nothing to eat. 

October 15.—The night was calm and clear, but it was not. before 
two in the afternoon that we set out; and the one was so weak, 
and the other so full of complaints, that we did not get: more than 
three-quarters of a mile from our last encampment, before we were 
obliged to put up; but in this distance we were fortunate enough to 
kill a partridge, the bones of which were eaten, and the remainder 
reserved for baits to fish with. We were fortunate, however, in col- 
lecting sufficient tripe de roche to make a meal; and I now anxiously 
awaited Belanger’s return, to know what course to take. I was 
now so much reduced, that my shoulders were as if they would fall 
from my body, my legs seemed unable to support me, and in the 
disposition which I then found myself, had it not been for the re- 
membrance of my friends behind, who relied on me for relief, as well 
as the persons of whom I had charge, I certainly should have pre- 
ferred remaining where I was, to the miserable pain of attempting 
to move. , . | : | 

October 16.—We waited until two in the afternoon for Belanger; 
but not seeing any thing of him on the lake, we set out, purposing 


OF THE POLAR SEA. | 483 


to encamp at the Narrows, the place which was said to be so good 
for fishing, and where, according to St. Germain’s account, the 
Indians never failed to catch plenty; its distance at most could not 
be more than two miles. We had not proceeded far before Beau- 
parlant began to complain of increasing weakness. ‘This was so 
usual with us that no particular notice was taken of it, for in fact 
there was little difference, all being alike feeble: among other things, 
he said whilst we were resting, that he should never get beyond the 
next encampment, for his strength had quite failed him. I endea- 
voured to encourage him by explaining the mercy of the Supreme 
Being, who ever beholds with an eye of pity those that seek his aid. 
This passed as common discourse, when he inquired where we 
were to put up; St. Germain pointed to a small clump of pines near 
us, the only place indeed that offered for fuel. “ Well,” replied the 
poor man, “ take your axe Mr. Back, and I will follow at my leisure, 
I shall join you by the time the encampment is made.” This is a 
usual practice of the country, and St. Germain and myself went on 
towards the spot ; it was five o'clock and not very cold, but rather 
milder than we had experienced it for some time, when, on leaving | 
the ice, we saw a number of crows perched on the top of some high 
pines near us. St. Germain immediately said there must be some 
dead animal thereabouts, and proceeded to search, when we saw 
several heads of deer half buried in the snow and ice, without eyes 
or tongues. The previous severity of the weather only having 
obliged the wolves and other animals to abandon them. An ex- 
pression of “ Oh merciful God! we are saved,” broke from us both : 
and with feelings more easily imagined than described, we shook 
hands, not knowing what to say for joy. It was twilight, and a fog 
was rapidly darkening the surface of the lake, when St. Germain 
commenced making the encampment; the task was too laborious for 
me to render him any assistance, and had we not thus providentially 
found provision, I feel convinced that the next twenty-four hours 


3 Q 2 


ASA, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


would have terminated my existence. But this good fortune, in 
some measure renovated me for the moment, and putting out my 
whole strength, I contrived to collect a few heads, and with in- 
credible difficulty carried them singly about thirty paces to the fire. 

Darkness stole on us apace, and I became extremely anxious 
about Beauparlant; several guns were fired, to each of which he 
answered. We then called out, and again heard his responses 
though faintly, when I told St. Germain to go and look for him, as I 
had not strength myself, being quite exhausted. He said, that he 
had already placed a pine branch on the ice, and he could then 
scarcely find his way back, but if he went now he should certainly 
be lost.. In this situation I could only hope that as Beauparlant 
had my blanket, and every thing requisite to light a fire, he rage 
have encamped at a little distance from us. 

October 17.—The night was cold and clear, but we could ri6t 
sleep at all, from the pains of having eaten: We suffered the most 
excruciating torments, though I in particular did not eat a quarter 
of what would have satisfied me; it might have been from using a 
quantity of raw or frozen sinews of the legs of deer, which neither 
of us could avoid doing, so great was our hunger. In the morning, 
being much agitated for the safety of Beauparlant, I desired St. Ger- 
main to go in search of him, and to return with him as quick as 
possible, when I would have something prepared for them to eat. 

‘It was, however, late when he arrived, with a small bundle which 
Beauparlant was accustomed to carry, and with tears: in his eyes, 
told me that he had found our poor companion dead. Dead! I 
could not believe him. “It is so, Sir,” said St. Germain, “ after 
hallooing and calling his name to no purpose, I went towards our 
last encampment, about three quarters of a mile, and found him 
stretched upon his back on a sand bank frozen to death, his limbs 
all extended and swelled enormously, and as hard as the ice that 
was near him; his bundle was behind him, as if it had rolled away 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 485 


when he fell, and the blanket which he wore around his neck and 
shoulders thrown on one'side. Seeing that there was no longer life 
in him, I threw your covering over him, and placed his snow shoes 
on the top of it.” 

I had not even thought of so serious an occurrence in our little 
party, and for a short time was obliged to give vent to my grief. 
Left with one person and both of us weak, no appearance of Be- 
langer, a likelihood that great calamity had taken place amongst 
our other companions, and upwards of seventeen days’ march from 
the nearest Establishment, and myself unable to carry a burden, 
all these things pressed heavy on me; and how to get to the 
Indians or to the fort I did not know; but that I might’not depress 
St. Germain’s spirits, I suppressed the feelings which these thoughts 
gave rise to, and made some arrangements for the journey to Fort 
Providence. We continued very weak. 

October 18.—While we were this day occupied in scraping to- 
gether the remains of some deer’s meat, we observed Belanger 
coming round a point apparently scarcely moving. I went to 
meet him, and made immediate inquiries about my friends. Five, 
with the Captain, he said, were at the house, the rest were left 
near the river, unable to proceed; but he was too weak to relate 
the whole. He was conducted to the encampment, and paid 
every attention to, and by degrees we heard the remainder of his 
tragic tale, at which the interpreter could not avoid crying. He 
then gave me a letter from my friend the Commander, which indeed 
was truly afflicting. The simple story of Belanger I could hear, but 
when I read it in another language, mingled with the pious resigna- 
tion of a good. man, I could not sustain it any longer. The poor 
man was much affected at the death of our lamented companion, but 
his appetite prevailed over every other feeling; and, had I per- 
mitted it, he would have done himself an injury ; for after two hours’ 
eating, principally skin and sinews, he complained of hunger. The 


486 | A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


day was cloudy, with snow and fresh breezes from the north-east 
by east. | = hates 
The last evening, as well as this morning, the 19th, I mentioned 
my wishes to the men, that we should proceed towards Rein-Deer 
Lake, but this proposal met with a direct refusal. Belanger stated his 
inability to move, and St. Germain used similar language; adding, for 
the first time, that he did not know the route, and that it was of no 
use to goin the direction I mentioned, which was the one agreed 
upon between the Commander and myself. I then insisted that we 
should go by the known route, and join the Commander, but they 
would not hear of it ; they would remain where they were until they 
had regained their strength; they said I wanted to expose them 
again to death (faire perir). In vain did I use every argument to the 
contrary, for they were equally heedless to all. Thus situated, I 
was compelled to remain, and from this time to the 25th we em- 
ployed ourselves in looking about for the remnants of the deer and 
pieces of skin, which even the wolves had left; and by pounding 
the bones, we were enabled to make a sort of soup, which strength- 
ened us greatly, though each still complained of weakness. It was 
not without the greatest difficulty that I could restrain the men 
from eating every scrap they found, though they were well aware of 
the necessity there was of being economical in our present situation, 
and to save whatever they could for our journey ; yet they could not 
resist the temptation, and directly my back was turned they seldom 
failed to snatch at the nearest piece to.them, whether cooked or raw 
it made no difference. | | 
We had set fishing-lines, but without any success ; and we often saw 
large herds of deer crossing the lake at full speed, and wolves pur- 
suing them. | | 
The night of the 25th was cold, with hard frost. Early the next 
morning I sent the men‘to cover the body of our departed compa- 
mion Beauparlant with the trunks and branches of trees, which they 


_..OF THE POLAR SEA. q | A487 


did; and.shortly after their return I opened his bundle, and. found it 
contained two papers of vermilion, several strings of beads, some fire- 
steels, flints, awls, fish-hooks, rings, linen, and the glass of an arti- 
ficial horizon. My two men began to recover a little as well as my- 
self, though I was by far the weakest of the three; the soles of my 
feet were cracked all over, and the other parts were as hard as horn, 
from constant walking. I again urged the necessity of advancing to 
join the Commander’s party, but they said they were not. yet suffi- 
ciently strong. 

On the 27th we discovered the remains of a deer, on which we 
feasted. The night was unusually cold, and ice formed in a pint-pot 
within two feet of a fire. The coruscations of the Aurora were 
beautifully brillant; they served to shew us eight wolves, which we 
had some trouble to frighten away from our collection of deer’s 
bones ; and, with their howling, and the constant cracking of the ice, 
we did not get much rest. 

Having collected with great care, and by self-denial, two small 
packets of dried meat. or sinews, sufficient (for men who knew 
what it was to fast) to last for eight days at the rate of one indif- 


ferent meal per day, we prepared to set out on the 30th. I ealeu 


lated that we should be about fourteen days in reaching Fort’ Provi- 
dence ; and, allowing that we neither killed deer nor found Indians, 
we could but be unprovided with food six days, and this we heeded 
not whilst the prospect of obtaining full relief was before us. Ac- 
cordingly we set.out against a keen north-east wind, in order to gain 
the known route to Fort Providence. We saw a number of wolves 
and some crows on the middle of the lake, and supposing such an 
assembly was not met idly, we made for them, and came in for a 
share of a deer, which they had killed a short time before, and thus 
added a couple of meals to our stock. By four P.M. we gained the 
head -of the lake, or the direct road to Fort Providence, and some 
dry wood being at hand, we encamped; by accident it was the same 


4.88 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


place where the Commander’s party had slept on the 19th, the day 
on which I supposed they had left Fort Enterprise ; but the encamp- 
ment was so small, that we feared great mortality had taken place 
amongst them; and I am sorry to say the stubborn resolution of my 
men, not to go to the house, prevented me from determining this 
most anxious point, so that I now almost dreaded passing their en- 
campments, lest I should see some of our unfortunate friends dead 
at each spot. Our fire was hardly kindled when a fine herd of deer 
passed: close to us. St. Germain pursued them a short distance, but 
with his usual want of success, so that we made a meal off the 
muscles and sinews we had dried, though they were so tough that 
we could scarcely cut them. My hands were benumbed throughout 
the march, and we were all stiff and fatigued. The marching of two 
days weakened us all very much, and the more so on account of 
our exertion to follow the tracks of our Commander’s party; but 
we lost them, and concluded that they were not before us, 
Though the weather was not cold, I was frozen in the face, and was 
so reduced and affected by these constant calamities, as well in mind 
as in body, that I found much difficulty in proceeding even with the 
advantages I had enjoyed. 

November 3.—We set out before day, though, in fact, we were all 
better adapted to remain, from the excessive pain which we suffered 
in our joints, and proceeded till one P.M., without halting, when 
Belanger, who was before, stopped, and cried out, “ Footsteps of 


Indians.” It is needless to mention the joy that brightened the | 


countenances of each at this unlooked-for sight; we knew relief 
must be at hand, and considered our sufferings at an end. St. 
Germain inspected the tracks, and said that three persons had 
passed the day before; and that he knew the remainder must be 
advancing to the southward, as it was customary with Indians, 
when they sent to the trading establishment on the first ice. On 
this information we encamped, and, being too weak to walk myself, 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 489 


‘Ivsent St. Germain to follow the tracks, with instructions to the 
Chief of the Indians>to provide. immediate assistance for such of 
our friends who might be at Fort Enterprise, as well as for our- 
selves, and to lose no time in returning to me. IJ was now so 
exhausted, that had we not seen the tracks this day, I had deter- 
mined on remaining at the next encampment, until the men could 
have sent aid from Fort Providence. We had finished our small 
portion of sinews, and were preparing for rest, when an Indian boy 
made his appearance with meat. St. Germain had arrived before 
sunset at the tents of Akaitcho, whom he found at the spot where 
he had wintered last year; but imagine’ my surprise, when he gave 
me a note from the Commander, and said, that Benoit and Augustus, 
two of the men, had just joined them. The note was so confused, 
by the pencil marks being partly rubbed out, that. I could not 
decipher it clearly ; but it informed me, that he had attempted to 
come with the two men, but finding his strength inadequate to the 
task, he relinquished his design, and returned to Fort Enterprise, 
to await relief with the others. There was another note for the 
gentleman in charge of Fort Providence, desiring him to send meat, 
blankets, shoes, and tobacco. Akaitcho wished me to join him on 
the ensuing day, at a place which the boy knew, where they were 
going to fish; and I was the more anxious to do so, on account of 
my two companions: but particularly to hear a full relation of what 
had happened, and of the Commander’s true situation, which I 
suspected to be much worse than he had described. 

‘In the afternoon I joined the Indians, and repeated to Akaitcho 
what St. Germain had told him ; he seemed much affected, and said, 
he would have sent relief directly, though I had not been there; 
indeed, his conduct was generous and humane. The next morn- 
ing, at an early hour, three Indians, with loaded sledges of meat, 
skins, shoes, and a blanket, set out for Fort Enterprise; one of 
them was to return directly with an answer from Captain Franklin, 

3.R 


490 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


to whom I wrote; but in the event of his death, he was to bring 
away all the papers he could find; and he promised to travel with 
such haste, as to be able to return to us on the fourth day. I was 
now somewhat more easy, having done allin my power to succour 
my unfortunate companions; but was very anxious for the return of 
the messenger. The Indians brought me meat in small quantities, 
though sufficient for our daily consumption; and, as we had a 
little ammunition, many were paid on the spot for what they 
gave. | | | 

On the 9th I had the satisfaction of seeing the Indian arrive 
from Fort Enterprise. At first he said they were all dead, but 
shortly after he gave me a note, which was from the Commander, 
and then I learned all the fatal particulars which had befallen 
them. I now proposed that the Chief should immediately send 
three sledges, loaded with meat, to Fort Enterprise, to make a 
cache of provision at our present encampment, and also, that he 
should here await the arrival of the Commander. By noon two large 
trains, laden with meat, were sent off for Fort Enterprise. The 
next day we proceeded on our journey, and arrived at Fort Provi- 
denée on the 21st of November. 


Conclusion of Mr. Back’s Narrative. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 49] 


I nave little now to add to’ the melancholy detail into which I 
felt it proper to enter; but I cannot omit to state, that the unre- 
mitting care and attentions of our kind friends, Mr. M‘Vicar and 
Mr. M‘Auley, together with the improvement of our diet, mate- 
rially contributed to the restoration of our health; so that, by the 
end of February, the swellings of our limbs, which had returned 
upon us, had entirely subsided, and we were able to walk to any 
part of the island. Our appetites gradually moderated, and we 
nearly regained our ordinary state of body before the spring. Hep- 
burn alone suffered from a severe attack of rheumatism, which con- 
fined him to his bed for some weeks. The usual symptoms of 
spring having appeared, on the 25th of May we prepared to embark 
for Fort Chipewyan. Fortunately, on the following morning, a 
canoe arrived from that place with the whole of the stores which 
we required for the payment of Akaitcho and the hunters. It was 
extremely gratifying to us to be thus enabled, previous to our 
departure, to make arrangements respecting the payment of our 
late Indian companions ; and the more so, as we had recently dis- 
covered that Akaitcho, and the whole of the tribe, in consequence 
of the death of the leader’s mother, and the wife of our old guide 
Keskarrah; had broken and destroyed every useful article belonging 
to them, and that they were in the greatest distress. It was an 
additional pleasure to find our stock of ammunition was more than 
sufficient to pay them what was due, and that we could make a 
considerable present of this most essential article to every individual 
that had been attached to the Expedition. 

We quitted Moose-deer Island at five P.M., on the 26th, accom- 
panied by Mr. M‘Vicar and Mr. M*‘Auley, and nearly all the 
voyagers at the establishment, having resided there about five 
months, not a day of which had passed without our having cause 
of gratitude, for the kind and unvaried attentions of Mr. M‘Vicar 
and Mr. M‘Auley. These gentlemen accompanied us as far as Fort 

3 R 2 


492 A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES 


Chipewyan, where we arrived on the 2d of. June; here we met 
Mr. Wentzel, and the four men, who had been sent with him from 
the mouth of the Copper-Mine River; and I think it due to that 
gentleman, to give his own explanation of the unfortunate circum- 
stances which prevented him from fulfilling my last instructions, 
respecting the provisions to have been left for us at Fort En- 
terprise *. 


* « After you sent me back from the mouth of the Copper-Mine River, and I had 
overtaken the Leader, Guides, and Hunters, on the fifth day, leaving the sea-coast, as well 
as on our journey up the River, they always expressed the same desire of fulfilling their pro- 
mises, although somewhat dissatisfied at being exposed to privation while on our return, 
from a scarcity of animals; for, as I have already stated in my first communication from 
Moose-Deer Island, we had been eleven days with no other food but tripe de roche. In 
the course of this time an Indian, with his wife and child, who were travelling 1 in company 
with us, were left in the rear, and are since supposed to have perished through want, as 
no intelligence had been received of them at Fort Providence in December last. On the 
seventh day after I had jomed the Leader, Sc. &c., and journeying on together, all the 
Indians, excepting Petit Pied and Bald-Head, left me to seek their families, and crossed 
Point Lake at the Crow’s Nest, where Humpy had promised to meet his brother Ekehcho * 
with the families, but did not fulfil, nor did any of my party of Indians know where to 
find them; for we had frequently made fires to apprize them of our approach, yet none 
appeared in return as answers. This disappomtment, as might be expected, served to 
increase the ill-humour of the Leader and party, the brooding of which (agreeably to 
Indian custom) was liberally discharged on me, in bitter reproach for having led them 
from their families, and exposed them to dangers and hardships, which but for my influ- 
ence, they said, they might have spared themselves. Nevertheless, they still continued to 
profess the sincerest desire of meeting your wishes in making caches of provisions, and 
remaining until a late season on the road that leads from Fort Enterprise to Fort Provi- 
dence, through which the Expedition-men had travelled so often the year before—remark- 
ing, however, at the same time, that they had not the least hopes of ever seeing one per- 
son.return from the Expedition. These. alarming fears I never could persuade them to 
dismiss from their minds; they always sneered at what they called ‘ my credulity.— 
‘If,’ said the Gros Pied +, ‘ the Great Chief (meaning Captain Franklin), or any of his 
party, should pass at my tents, he or they shall be welcome to all my provisions, or any 
thing else that I may have. And I am sincerely happy to understand, by your com-~ 


* Akaitcho the Leader. + Also Akaitcho. 


OF THE POLAR SEA. 493 


In a subsequent conversation he stated to me, that the two 
Indians, who were actually with him at Fort Enterprise, whilst he 
remained there altering his canoe, were prevented from hunting, 
one by an accidental lameness, the other by the fear of meeting 
alone some of the Dog-Rib Indians. 

We were here furnished with a canoe by Mr. Smith, and a bow- 
man, to act as our guide; and having left Fort Chipewyan on the 
5th, we arrived, on the 4th of July, at Norway House. F inding, 


munication, that in this he had kept his word—in sending you with such promptitude and 
liberality the assistance your truly dreadful situation required. But the party of Indians, 
on whom I had placed the utmost confidence and dependance, was Humpy and the White 
Capot Guide, with their sons, and several of the discharged hunters from the Expedition. 
This party was well-disposed, and readily promised to collect provisions for the possible 
return of the Expedition, provided they could get a supply of ammunition from Fort 
Providence; for when I came up with them they were actually starving, and converting 
old axes into ball, having no other substitute—this was unlucky. Yet they were well 
inclined, and I expected to find means at Fort Providence to send them a supply, in which 
I was, however, disappointed, for I found that establishment quite destitute of neces- 
saries; and then, shortly after I had left them, they had the misfortune of losing three of 
their hunters, who were drowned in Martin Lake: this accident was, of all others, the 
most fatal that could have happened—a truth which no one, who has the least knowledge 
of the Indian character, will deny; and as they were nearly connected by relationship to 
the Leader, Humpy, and White Capot Guide, the three leading men of this part of the 
Copper Indian Tribe, it had the effect of unhinging (if I may use the expression) the 
minds of all these families, and finally destroying all the fond hopes I had so sanguinely 
conceived of their assisting the Expedition, should it come back by the Annadessé River, 
of which they were not certain. 

“ As to my not leaving a letter at Fort Enterprise, it was because, by some mischance, 
you had forgot to give me paper when we parted *. 

“<I however wrote this news on a plank, in pencil, and placed it m the top of your 
former bedstead, where I left it. Since it has not been found there, some Indians must 
have gone to the house after my departure, and destroyed it. These details, Sir, I have 
been induced to enter into (rather unexpectedly) in justification of myself, and hope it will 
be satisfactory.” 


* I certainly offered Mr. Wentzel some paper when he quitted us, but he declined it, having then a 
note-book ; and Mr. Back gave him a pencil. 


494, A JOURNEY TO THE SHORES, &c. 


at this place, that canoes were about to go down to Montreal, I 
gave all our Canadian voyagers their discharges, and sent them by 
those vessels, furnishing them with orders on the Agent of the 
Hudson’s Bay Company, for the amount of their wages. We carried 
Augustus down to York F actory, where we arrived on the 14th of 
July, and were received with every mark of attention and kindness 
by Mr. Simpson, the Governor, Mr. M‘Tavish, and, indeed, by all 
the officers of the United Companies. And thus terminated our long, 
fatiguing, and disastrous travels in North America, having journeyed 
by water and by land (including our navigation of the Polar Sea,) 
five thousand five hundred and fifty miles. 


END OF THE NARRATIVE. 


+, 


a: 
A 7 


Mk a mn i Ht ape aoa 


rae Sea 
Rupa 
F u 


No. I. 


GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS, 


BY JOHN RICHARDSON, M.D., 


AND SURGEON TO. THE EXPEDITION. 


IN the following paper I have aimed merely ata very general account of the 


different rock formations that presented themselves on the line of our journey. 
To have given a satisfactory account.of the structure of so large an extent of 
country, would have required not only a much better acquaintance with 
geognosy than I can lay any claim to, but that I should have turned my un- 
divided attention to that object. Whilst we travelled in canoes, which 
includes the greatest part of our journey, and nearly the whole of the season 
in which the ground was uncovered, my opportunities of making collections 
in Natural History were limited to the short halts it was necessary to make 
for the needful refreshment. or repose of the men—a further delay being in- 
compatible with the attainment of the main object of the Expedition. The 
want of opportunity for observation it was impossible ‘o remedy, but I was 
desirous of compensating for my own inexperience in geognosy, by making 
as extensive a collection of specimens as circumstances would permit. Be- 
yond Fort Enterprise, however, the want of means of transport prevented 
me from even making an attempt at collection. ‘Those specimens that were 
obtained to the southward of that place have been submitted to the inspection 
of Professor Jameson, and I feel happy in an opportunity of acknowledging a 
small part of my obligations to that distinguished mineralogist. His zeal 
for the promotion of science led him to take an early and deep interest in 
our proceedings, and his endeavours to serve us have been unwearied. 


The western shores of Hudson’s Bay between the 56 and 58 parallels of 
38 


4.98 APPENDIX. [No. I. 


latitude are flat, and the depth of the sea decreases very gradually on 
approaching them. In seven fathoms of water the tops of the trees are just 
visible from a ship’s deck. Large boulder stones strew the beach, and form 
shoals, even at the distance of five miles from the shore, which are very 
hazardous to boats. Nearly in the centre of this district, Nelson’s and 
Hayes’ Rivers pour their waters together into the bay. The former is a 
mighty stream, and carries off the waters from a vast extent of country. The 
Saskatchawan, its principal-branch, rises by two heads in the Rocky Moun- 
tains, one adjoining the sources of the Missouri and Columbia*, and the 
other near the heads of the Elk, Caledonia, and Peace Rivers. As these 
rivers diverging nearly at right angles, flow into the four bounding seas, it 
is more than probable that the Saskatchawan originates in the loftiest height 
of land in North America. 

Red River, another of the branches of Nelson River, has a source far in- 
ferior to that of the Saskatchawan in altitude, but remarkable as being in 
the same height of land from whence the Mississippi f and St. Lawrence 
derive their origin. The altitude of this latter height has been calculated 
by Mr. Schoolcraft at one thousand three hundred and sixty feet above the 
Atlantict.—By Split Lake and the chain of lakes communicating with it, and 
by Beaver Lake and its chain of waters, Nelson River receives supplies from 
the very banks of the Missinippi§. or Churchill River. Indeed, the Beaver 
Lake chain which lay in our route, originates within a hundred yards of the 
latter stream. A consideration of these circumstances will give a pretty 
correct notion of the general declination of a large extent of country. 

Hayes’ River, although it pours out a considerable body of water, traverses a 
district which appears very small when compared with the one just mentioned. 
It is separated from Nelson River at its mouth by a low point of alluvial land, 
upon which, at the distance of five or six miles from the sea, York Factory stands. 


* Specimens of agates and calcedonies, collected near the source of the Colombia, by Mr. 
M‘Kenzie, one of the chief factors of Hudson’s Bay Company, have been probably washed from 
amygdaloidal rocks. . 

+ Meessee seepee, great river. 

{ Schoolcraft’s Narrative of Governor Cass’s Expedition. 

§ Meessee or Meectchee-neepee, much water. ~ 


No. 1] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 4.99 


The surrounding country, and the banks of the river as far as the junction of 
the Shamattawa, fifty miles from the sea, has’a low uniform swampy appear- 
ance. Immediately under a thin stratum of half-decayed mosses, there is a 
thick bed of tenacious and somewhat slaty bluish clay, containing many 
boulder stones. As the stream is continually encroaching upon some points, 
and. depositing its spoils on others, its banks are alternately steep and shelv- 
~ ing, but the bed of the river is in general from thirty to forty feet below the 
level of the adjoining ground. The soil nourishes a pretty thick forest, but 
the trees, consisting chiefly of spruces, larches, and poplars *, are small ex- 
cept in very favourable situations. Slips of the banks are frequent, and the 
trees either retain their erect position or lie in various directions athwart the 
stream, and seem to thrive in both conditions until cut down by the ice in the 
spring floods. It is worthy of remark that the sub-soil is perpetually frozen. 
This retains the surface water, and converts the country into a swamp in which 
sphagna and ‘other mosses grow, but owing to the shortness of summer they 
decay very slowly, and little peat is formed. The surface is still hard 
when the smaller plants, under the powerful influence of an almost midsum- 
mer sun, begin to flower ; and by the middle of September, when the heat has 
penetrated the farthest into the earth, the leaves are falling. In a favourable 
summer the ground is thawed to the depth of four feet, but there still remains 
a frozen bed, whose thickness we had not an opportunity of ascertaining by 
personal observation, although we were informed by the residents that it ‘€x- 
ceeds eleven feet, and that underneath there is loose sand. 

We did not observe the ground permanently frozen any where in the inte- 
rior; and its occurrence at York Factory ought, perhaps, to be attributed to 
the vicinity of the sea. A frozen ocean can contribute nothing towards’tem- 
pering the severity of winter, but the ice which hangs upon these shores ‘gene: 
rally to the middle of August, must have a powerful effect in diminishing the 
summer heat; hence the warmest summers on the American continent, between 
the 55 and 65 parallels of north latitude, are to be looked for at the greatest 
distance from the sea: accordingly we find that vegetation is much more active 
even on the elevated range of the Rocky Mountains than it is on the same 
parallel_on the shore of Hudson’s Bay. The same rule does not apply to 
both sides of the American continent, for, to the westward of the Rocky 


* Pinus alba, nigra et microcarpa; Populus trepida‘et balsamifera. 
38 2 


500 APPENDIX, = [No: I 


Mountains, the winter, ameliorated by an open sea, is much milder than to 
the eastward, and this difference is likely to be permanent : because the cur- 
rent’ setting through Behring’s Straits, and along the northern shorés of the 
continent, must continue to bring down annually large bodies of ice tothe east 
coast, to be detained there in the winding passages of a vast archipelago, and 
in bays and inland seas for the summer. It may be proper’ to remark. that 
this accumulation of ice principally operates on the temperature of summer, 
and has only a remote effect in increasing the:cold of winter ; but that it is 
upon the heat of the former season, that vegetation entirely deaeudes in these 
northern climates. 

Returning after this digression to Hayes River, we may state that the 
boulders which obstruct.its channels and line its banks, shew that there occur 
in its 7wer district rocks of the primitive class, as red granite, hornblende rock, 
gneiss, and sienite ; of the transition class, as grey wacke ; and of the secondary 
class, as red ddrileuia! belonging most probably to the new red sandstone 
formation, under which we include the rothliegende and the variegated sand- 
stone ; and two kinds of limestone, one having a bluish-grey. colour, splintery 
ferhire: glimmering lustre, and translucent edges ; the other resembling marl, 
and having a yellowish-grey colour, an earthy fracture, and being dull and 
‘opaque. 

The limestones appear to belong tothe same or a similar formation with the 
vast beds, to be hereafter mentioned in our account of the Saskatchawan and 
Elk Rivers, and to: have been. brought down by the Shamattawa, on whoge 
banks it is said to form high cliffs. Indeed a low ridge of this sort of lime- 
stone, about twenty miles wide, seems to run from the northward of Churchill 
to Severn River, at the distance of bila or forty miles from the sea-shore, and 
nearly parallel to it*. 

The principal branch of Hayes River above the Shamattawa is named Steel 
River. The banks of this stream have the same general character with those 
of Hayes River, but their elevation is greater although they shelve more gra- 
‘dually down to the water. Steel River is formed of two branches of nearly. 
equal size, named Fox and Hill Rivers. The former flows from the N.W., and 
it is most probable that fragments of grey wacke, which we observed on the 
banks of Hayes River, came from that source, as we found no traces of the 


* See Mr, Auld, Transactions of the Gaatadicn| Society, vol. v..p. 2. 


No. 1] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 50] 


transition series on Hill River, the other branch and the one through which our 
route lay. 

In the lower parts of Hill Pin the banks are composed ister of the same 
materials as those in Hayes and Steel Rivers, but they rise more precipitously 
from the very narrow channel of the river to an elevation of: nearly two hun- 
dred feet. Their outline, too, is more varied, being broken into conical emi- 
nences by numerous ravines which open into the river at right angles. Many 
steep cliffs, sections of these eminences, and: of course of a conical form, have 
their bases washed by the streams ; one of the most remarkable is named the 
Sugar Loaf. The banks being exactly similar in form and constituent parts 
to those which occur on Lake Winipeg and the Saskatchawan on the confines 
of the limestone formation there, I am inclined to believe that this part of Hill 
River cuts the western boundary of the other limestone district; which has been 
spoken of as running parallel to the coast. We did not observe, however, any 
of the solid strata in the bed of the river, although the clay on the banks con- 
tained many imbedded fragments of the .stone, as well as much calcareous 
matter intimately blended with it. 

About a mile below the Rock Portage, or ninety-nine miles from the sea, 
(including the windings of the river course) rocks) in situ first’ occur. They 
consist of gneiss, and rise in the bhoanel of the river from under the lofty clay 
banks which still continue. ; 

The gneiss formation appears.to extend from this place to Lake Winipeg, 
and to contain subordinate beds and:veins of granite, beds of hornblende, 
rock, and mica slate, which.we shall enumerate in the order in which they 
occurred on our route. -The general direction of the strata appears to be 
from NE to SW, but our opportunities of observation were too limited to 
decide this fact. | 

At the Rock Portage a ridge of gneiss, crossing: ihe stream obliquely, forms 
a chain of small.islands, and produces several cascades. The gneiss at this 
spot is intersected in every. direction by veins of quartz, and there is but 
little mica disseminated through it, the greatest part of this mineral being 
confined to kidneys, which are insensibly blended with the enclosing roek. 
The great number of the veins, their intricate ramifications, and Teunions, 
viewed i in conjunction with the different portions of. the rock very” dissimilar 
to each other, but uniting together by imperceptible gradations, seem to 


502 - APPENDIX. a [No. I. 


mark that the whole of this bed of rock is: of eotemporaneous origin. Hand 
" specimens from one part of the teers pacha me een opanied een rock, from 
another, mica slate. 

After passing the Rock Baresi the clayey banks kesaveite decrease in 
height, and in the upper parts of the river they entirely disappear, and the 
gneiss rises into small ridges on the’ borders of the stream, and forms nume: 
rous islands in the small lakes into which the river expands, or rather through 
which it flows. Whilst the clay continues the ‘country is well clothed with 
wood, but afterwards, for want of soil the trees are in general stunted: “The 
bed of the river is every where uneven, arid composed’ of strata’ of rock, 
which are divided by deep fissures into irregular lozenge-formed masses. 

At the point of rocks four miles above the Rock Portage, a grey gneiss 
occurs containing much mica, and intersécted by veins of quartz. ‘And five 
miles further on, there are several detached conical hills; the highest having an 
altitude of about six hundred feet, is named the Hill, and is the origin of the 
appellation of the river. -From the summit of the Hill thirty-five lakes are 
said to be visible ; indeed, all the valleys seem to be filled with water, the 
almost insulated vans of the-hills and ridges being alone visible. We 
had no opportunity of visiting these hills. | 

A few miles above the Hill, at the Lower Burntwood Portage, ‘a vein of gra- 
nite was observed crossing the gneiss, and a similar vein occurs about one 
quarter of a mile higher up the river. At Morgan’s Rocks the exposed bed of 
rock: appears to be granitic gneiss, and at the Upper Burntwood Carrying Place 
half a mile farther on, there is a bed of hornblende rock and another of a red 
granite which is composed of red felspar, grey quartz, and very little mica. 

At the Swampy Portage there isa bed of red’ félspar, containing small 
disseminated grains of epidote—and at the Upper Portage hornblende slate 
oceurs alternating with grey gneiss, slightly intermixed with homblende, 
together with beds of quartz-rock, containing precious garnets. The direction 
of the strata here is from éast to west, the dip about 80° to the northward. 

In Ground-Water Creek, two miles distant, the same kind of hornblende 
slate is found, having the same dip, and alternating with red granite composed 
of red felspar, grey quartz, and dark green mica. And at Bird’s Lake, and | 
on Sail Island, near the debouchure of ‘Swampy Lake, extensive portions” of 
grey gneiss ate exposed, unaccompanied by other rocks. After crossing 


No. I.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 5038 


Swampy Lake, the river changes its name from Hill to Jack River. At the 
Lower Portage in Jack River, a red granite occurs ; and at the Long Carrying 
Place a little higher up, a granitic gneiss, having disseminated iron pyrites, 
alternates with a compact grey micaceous gneiss. ‘The strata of gneiss are 
much contorted at their line of junction with the granite; but their general 
line of direction is north and south, and they apparently dip to the eastward. 
At the Upper Portage, the strata of grey gneiss have a direction from E.S.E. 
to W.N.W. anda northerly dip, but they are much convoluted and contorted. 
They contain a bed of primitive greenstone, having disseminated iron pyrites. 
This greenstone contains diallage, and is therefore passing into diallage rock. 
The rocks in Jack River are low, and sparingly covered with soil ; the woods 
thin, and the surrounding country flat, and destitute even of the moderate 
elevations which occur in Hill River. 

The borders of Knee Lake presented the same appearatices that were ob- 
served in Jack River. In one place, which we were induced to examine from 
the unusual luxuriance of the trees, the soil was very thin ; but the subjacent 
rock consisted of primitive greenstone, with disseminated iron pyrites. This 
rock, situated about fifteen miles from the lower end of the lake, forms a low 
cliff which has somewhat of a columnar structure. Nine miles farther, verti- 
cal strata of mica slate rising a little above the water, formed a number of 
smooth flat islands. The direction of its strata was E.N.E. and W.S.W. The 
magnetic islet near the énee of the lake, referred to in page 36 of the Narra- 
tive, is composed of the same rock highly impregnated with magnetic iron ore, 
and having its thin layers alternating with layers of that mineral. The strata 
of this islet are vertical, and very much undulated in direction. The gneiss 
rose on the borders of the lake into roundish eminences, whilst the mica slate 
formed even islands scarcely appearing above the water. At the upper end 
of the lake the gneiss exposed is grey and compact. Sal 

The same rock was observed in Trout River (the name which the stream 
now assumes), and half a mile above the Lower Carrying Place it was found 
impregnated with magnetic iron ore. The strata have a direction from E.S.E. 
to W.N.W.—the dip, if any, is to the north. At the second portage, in Trout 
River, the bed of the river is formed of vertical mica slate, whose thin layers 
lacerating the boatmen’s feet, have obtained for it the name of Knife-edge 
Portage. At the third portage, the ground is strewed with large. boulder 


504 "APPENDIX. » [No. 1. 


stones of grey gneiss, containing well crystallized precious garnets. At the 
Upper Carrying-Place, mica slate occurs, and halfa mile above it vertical strata 
of gneiss appear, its layers alternating with layers of magnetic iron ore. 

An island, near the centre of Holy Lake, is composed of chlorite, and 
mica slates. At the upper end of Holy Lake, the designation of the river is 
changed to Weepinapannis. This stream flows through a marshy country, - 
and is divided by low barren rounded masses of rock into a great variety 
of channels. ; | 

At the Lower Portage, in the Weepinapannis, granitic and hornblendic gneiss 
occur, the former intersected by a vein of red granite.—Moore’s Island is com- 
posed of a bed of granite. Half a mile above it, the rocks consisting of 
granitic gneiss are intersected by a vein of red granite. The direction of the 
strata here is N.E. b. E. and S.W.b. W.—Near the Crooked Spout, hornblendic 
gneiss alternates with porphyritic staple gneiss, and red Branits passing into 
gneiss. 

At the upper end of the small piece of water termed the Windy Lake, the 
stream, now very much diminished, obtains the name of Rabbit Ground.. The 
rocks here resemble those in the Weepinapannis. 

At Hill Gates, the stream runs through a narrow chasm in the rocks, above 
ten miles long. The predominating rock is grey gneiss, more or less com- 
pact, and sometimes inclining to granite, but more often to mica slate. Near 
the centre of the chasm, the eminences separated by narrow valleys, and 
composed as it were of rounded masses heaped one upon another, rise to 
the height of two hundred and fifty feet. The predominating stone here is a 
granite inclining to gneiss. The stratification of the rocks that bound this 
chasm is obscurely mantleform. 

After leaving Hill Gates we passed through a marshy lake, and arrived at 
the White Fall, where the stream, rushing through another chasm, forms a suc- 
cession of cascades. The rocks at this place, consisted of compact grey gneiss 
containing an extensive bed of graphic granite. Kidneys of a less commpagh 
gneiss were contained in the granite. 

A shallow swampy piece of water, bounded by gneiss, conducted us from 
the White Fall to the Painted Stone, where the principal branch of Hill River 
may be said to originate. The portage at the Painted Stone is made over a 
low rock of grey gneiss, much intersected with veins of quartz and felspar. 


No. 1] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS, 505 


It is only a few yards long, and separates the Echemamis, a rivulet tributary 
to the Nelson, from one of the sources of Hayes’ River. 

The Echemamis flows, or rather filters, through a swamp for thirty miles ; 
when, having previously formed a slight expansion termed Hairy Lake, and 
assumed the name of Blackwater Creek, it terminates in Sea River, one of the 
arms of the Nelson. This swampy district is traversed by many round- 
backed ridges of gneiss, having a direction from east to west, and rising to 
the height of one hundred and fifty feet. Several beds of hornblende slate are 
enclosed in the gneiss. On Sea River, and in Play-Green Lake; the same rocks 
were observed. At Sea River Carrying-Place, a granitic gneiss forms a round- 
backed low ridge, running nearly east and west. It contains some small 
beds of porphyritic red granite, in which there are included some masses of 
mica slate; the slate penetrating and intimately mixing with the granite at 
the line of junction. In Play-Green Lake the gneiss forms many low smooth 
round-backed islands. 

The primitive rocks disappear under the clay, below Norway Point. The 
north shore of Lake Winipeg is formed into a peninsula by Play-Green Lake 
and Limestone Bay. It consists of steep clay cliffs, similar to those which pre- 
ceded the gneiss in Hill River, but containing rather more calcareous matter.— 
When the lake is low, there is a flat beach betwixt it and these cliffs ; but in 
southerly winds the waves wash their bases. The beach is composed of a 
fine calcareous sand, and small fragments of water-worn limestone. The 
same materials form a narrow bank, which running to the S.W. for about 
eight miles, separates Limestone Bay from the body of the lake. The frag- 
ments belong to two kinds of limestone; the one yellowish white and dull 
with a conchoidal fracture, and translucent edges; the other bluish and 
yellowish grey, dull, with an earthy fracture and opaque. 

We did not observe any rocks of the former kind i situ in this neighbour- 
hood* ; but cliffs of the latter appear on the west side of Limestone Bay, 
and continue to bound the lake as far as the mouth of the Saskatchawan, and 
as we have been informed, down the whole of its western shore. 1 

This limestone, which extends over a vast tract of country, probably belongs 
to the great series of limestone formations under the green sand, and above the 


*A similar rock, however, was found in Pine Island Lake, fifteen miles N.N.E. of Cumberland-House. 


3 T 


506 “APPENDIX. [No. 1. 


new red sandstone. It may in general be characterized as compact, splinty, 
yellowish-grey limestone. It appears to contain aconsiderable portion of clay, as 
most of the varieties adhere to thetongue when newly broken. Perhaps the whole 
bed owes its origin to shells cemented together by argillaceous matter. Many 
portions of it are almost entirely composed of bivalve shells; and even the 
most compact kinds, when long exposed to the weather or to the action of fire, 
shew traces of shells. It yields readily to the action of the weather, and burns 
into a very white lime, but requires to be long exposed to the heat. 

Its strata are in general horizontal ; and where large beds of it are exposed, 
it is traversed by fissures crossing each other at right angles. When washed 
by the rivers, too, it tumbles down in large cubical fragments, which soon se- 
parate in the direction of the strata into thin layers. This is well exhibited 
at the Grand Rapid near the mouth of the Saskatchawan, where there isa fine 
section of it. | 

It may be proper here to take a general view of the extent of this forma- 
tion; and in so doing, to make a few general remarks upon the districts in 
which we observed it, or through which we suspect it to extend. We obtained 
specimens exactly similar to those in Lake Winipeg from Manito-baw Lake, 
and were informed that it abounds much farther to the southward. In our 
journey up the Saskatchawan, we traced it to the Neepewan, a distance of 
three hundred miles, where it is succeeded or covered by calcareous clayey 
cliffs, similar to those which preceded. it on our route. 

From this place to the foot of the Rocky Afountains, the river flows through 
a plain of fine sand. Its bed is about two hundred feet below the plain, and 
it presents almost every where a regular gradation: of three distinct banks, 
shewing the height of the water at former periods. The channel of the river 
is continually shifting, encroaching on the steep bank on one side, and form- 
ing with its alluvia low flat points on the opposite shore. 

Between the Neepewan and Carlton, the plains are interspersed with clumps 
of wood ; but above the latter place the dry sandy soil produces only a short 
grass, which supports numerous herds of buffalo. The newer depositions be- 
neath the high bank contain more vegetable matter, and. are covered with wil- 
lows, and occasionally with aspen trees, These plains are said to extend to the 
Missouri, and to be interrupted by few hills. Two only of moderate height, 
and even outline, were observed in the neighbourhood of Carlton, the limit of 


No. I.) GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS, 507 


our journey in this direction. The older traders relate, that many lakes have 
dried up on the plains since they first visited the country. The hollows are 
annually partially filled by the melting snow, but the water filters away, or is 
evaporated early in the summer. Many ponds or small lakes, however, still 
remain. : 

The traders: report that they have observed limestone in several of the 
creeks that flow into the upper parts of the Saskatchawan ; and it is probable 
that the limestone formation not only extends through a vast portion of the 
plains, but also that it runs parallel to the Rocky Mountains as far as M‘Ken- 
zie’s River. Captain Franklin observed it-on' the Beaver River : it éxists abun- 
dantly and almost exclusively on the Clear Water and Elk Rivers ; and we found 
it again on the islands on the south side of Great Slave Lake. Between this 
limestone and the Rocky Mountains, rocks of the coal formation exist ; beds 
of coal on fire having been known to the traders for many years’ on the upper 
part of the Saskatchawan and on M‘Kenzie’s River. These’ were:the only cit- 
cumstances we could gather with regard: to the western boundaries of this’ for- 
mation. We touched more than once on its eastern boundary im the course 
of our journey, but no where had we a good opportunity of observing'its geog- 
nostical relation to other rocks. The most singular circumstance attend- 
ine it ig the entire exclusion of foreign beds. We: never observed it: as: 
sociated with any other rock, except perhaps on Elk River, where it appears 
in’ contact’ with compact’ earthy marl, and slaggy mineral pitch, or bituminous 
sandstone; and on the Copper-Mine River, where rolled fragments of a similar 
stone were found connected with layers.of dark flinty slate. The cliffs on the 
west sideof Lake Winipeg are from twenty to thirty feet high; and atthe Grand 
Rapid there is a section‘of it nearly sixty feet deep.. It.is‘here covered witha 
very thin layer of soil, and: its strata-dip to’ the northward at anangle of 10°. 

About Cumberland-House, the country is uniformly flat and swampy,. but the 
rock shews itself frequently above the surface. Its strata here are generally 
horizontal, but in one place we observed it dipping to northward at an angle 
of 40°. 

About thirty miles to the southward of Cumberland-House there is a round- 
backed: hill; named’ Basquiau, of considerable altitude, being visible at. that 
distance. It forms along ridge'with an even outline, but we had no opportu: 
nity of examining it more nearly. There are several salt springs’ at’ its' foot, 

37 2 


508 APPENDIX. No. E. 


from which a considerable quantity of salt is annually extracted *. Salt springs 
and lakes also exist from twelve to twenty miles to the northward of Carlton 
House, as was ascertained by Captain Franklin in his winter journey; and I 
obtained a small quantity of a salt which the Indians procure in that neigh- 
bourhood, and use as a purgative. They report that in the state of a fine 
powder, it covers the shores of a small lake in the summer-time to the depth 
of two or three inches f. 

In our voyage in the spring of 1820, we traced the limestone to the north 
side of Beaver Lake. In Pine Island Lake the strata are in general horizon- 
tal. Onan island beyond the fishing place, fifteen miles N.E. from Cumber- 
land House, the strata dipping east 10°, consist of yellowish-grey, very com- 
pact limestone, resembling hornstone. Twelve miles further on, at the port- 
age of the Little Red Rock, near the mouth of Sturgeon-Weir River, a more 
crystalline limestone is coloured reddish-yellow, by oxide of iron. Its strata 
dip to the eastward at a very small angle. At the Rat Portage, two miles 
higher up the river, there is an extensive bed of yellowish-grey and somewhat 
crystalline limestone, perfectly flat, and splitting readily into thin horizontal 
slabs. A number of parallel fissures running N.W. and S.E., are crossed in 
different directions by minor cracks. The bed of Sturgeon-Weir River is every 
where composed of limestone. It has a considerable descent. On the east 
and west sides of Beaver Lake, the ground is broken by eminences from a hun- 
dred and fifty to two hundred feet high. These consist of a limestone similar 
to that which occurs at the Rat Portage, sometimes having a yellowish-grey 
colour, but more generally coloured deep red by oxide of iron. There are 
many mural precipices amongst these small hills, and also some deep rents or 
caves, in which the snow remains unmelted the whole summer. On the east 
side of the lake, near the site of an old fort, the strata dip to the S.W. at an 
angle of 30°. 

About three miles from the mouth of Ridge River, primitive hornblende 


* The salt springs, mentioned above in all probability arise from the upper part of the new red 
sandstone. , 

+ Dr. Fife analyzed a small portion of this salt, which was obtained from an Indian, and found it to be 
effloresced sulphate of soda. See page 5i5. The occurrence of so much sulphate of soda is an inter- 
esting and remarkable fact; for though it appears more abundantly in colder latitudes than in others, 
_yet there are no accounts of its having been found in such abundance as the Indians report it to be in 
the place just mentioned. 


No. LJ GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 509 


slate forms a small island. The primitive strata which we fell in with here, 
and traced to Isle-a-la-Crosse Lake, seem to be a continuation of the range 
we quitted at the south end of Play-Green Lake; and neither at that place nor 
here could we discover any rocks interposed between them and the limestone. 
About a mile distant from the above-mentioned island of hornblende slate, cliffs 
of limestone bound the lake. We had no opportunity of observing the limestone 
more nearly in contact with other rocks than at this place. The bounding line 
between the two formations seems to run about W.b.N. from Play-Green Lake 
to the upper part of Isle-4-la-Crosse Lake. We crossed this boundary line on 
entering the Ridge River. 

At the Ridge Portage, two miles from the mouth of the river, a ridge of 
mica slate crosses the stream. Its strata dip N.E. at an angle of 45°. From 
this place up to the junction of Hay River, the mica slate in irregular ridges 
bounds the stream. Above Hay River, sixteen miles from Beaver Lake, 
the river is wider and less rapid, and is termed by the Canadian voyagers, 
La grande riviére. Here the mica slate is succeeded by gneiss, which 
forms irregular roundish eminences, rising a hundred and fifty feet above 
_the water. The gneiss is traversed in every direction by veins of flesh-colour- 
ed felspar, and contains many kidneys of mica slate. These rocks are very 
sparingly covered with soil, and consequently support few trees. At the Carp 
Portage *, fifteen miles N.W.b.N. of the Ridge Portage, there occurs a light 
red-coloured rock, composed of felspar intermixed with hornblende, together 
with a small quantity of quartz of the same colour with the felspar, and having 
disseminated a few grains of iron pyrites. This rock is intersected by veins 
of felspar, and contains kidneys of mica slate. 

At the Birch Discharge, six miles N.N.W. of the Carp Portage, the same 
rock alternates with mica slate. The boundaries of the stream between 
these portages consist of the rounded ridges of gneiss above-mentioned. At 
the Birch-point Portage, two miles and-a-half above the Birch Discharge, the 
strata, consisting of grey gneiss, dip to the N.N.E. at an angle of 30°. The 
gneiss rocks continue with little variation for eleven miles, as far as Island Port- 
age, where the rock running across the river, and producing a fine cascade, may 
be termed thick mica slate, containing much quartz. The strata dip here to the 


* So named from the great number of sucking Carp (Catas tomus Hudsonius), which are ob. 
served endeavouring to surmount the rapid in the spawning season. 


510 APPENDIX. : [No. I. 


northward at an angle of 25°. Above this portage there is a small expansion 
of the river termed Island Lake, beyond which another contraction and fall is 
produced by the same rock. On the north sides of Heron and Pelican Lakes, 
the gneiss continues to form small naked eminences, but on the S.W. side of 
the latter, there are some conical hills, perhaps four hundred feet high, which 
laid at a distance from our route. 

Above the Pelican Lake, the rocks approaching again, confine the stream, 
and produce several rapids. The strata here consist of gneiss approaching to 
mica slate, and contain beds of mica slate. They are much curved and dis- 
torted, and form bluntly conical eminences, rising abruptly from the stream. 
There are several mural precipices on the banks of the river. At the third 
portage, the gneiss dips to the eastward at an angle of 80°. | 

The shores of the Lake of the Woods are rocky, of moderate elevation, 
with some small conical hills, and generally pretty well wooded. The beds 
of mica slate are rather more numerous than in Pelican Lake. Above four 
miles and a half from the Three Portages, above the upper end of the lake, 
there is a bed of hornblende slate enclosed in the gneiss. 

A small narrow piece of water, bounded by a continuation. of the same 
rocks, conducted us from the Lake of the Woods to the Frog Portage, which 
forms the boundary betwixt the Mississippi and the waters falling into the 
Saskatchawan or Nelson River, and’ is three hundred and eighty paces long. 
The path leads through a low swampy wood, and over a flat tract of gneiss 
rising only a few feet above the waters on each side. The prevailing dip of 
the strata on our route between Beaver Lake and this place is. N.E. 

The Missinippi, or English River, through which our course now laid, re- 
sembles a chain of lakes with many arms, more than a river. The rocks. to 
the eastward of the Otter Portage are, perhaps, members.of the mica slate 
formation, but beyond that, they belong undoubtedly to the gneiss: formation. 
They rise into craggy eminences, scarcely ever exceeding three hundred. feet 
in height, and: form numerous. groups of islands: in the lakes or skirt. their 
irregular borders. It is only where the. water has: to force its way over: a 
ridge of rocks, that it is narrowed into the dimensions of a.river, and:the con- 
traction is always accompanied’ by a cascade-or rapid. 

An island in Race Lake, a short way above the Frog Portage, consists of 
hornblende slate. It dips N.W. at an angle of 45°—at the Grand Rapid eleven 
miles S.b. W. from the Frog Portage, the strata, consisting of mica slate, dip 


No. 1.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. Ea 


to the eastward at an angle of 80°, and contain beds of hornblende rock and 
slaty quartz rock; the latter resting upon the former, and containing many 
minute veins and disseminated particles of cale-spar. At the Barrel Portage, 
two miles farther to the eastward, the same rock dipping to the northward. at 
80°. contains precious garnets. The river here has a majestic appearance, 
being upwards of a mile wide, and bounded by rocks two hundred feet high. 
The current is gentle. | 

At the Island Portage, four miles to the eastward of the last mentioned place, 
the stream is barred across by a ridge of red gneiss containing much felspar. 
It dips N.N.W. at an angle of 80°, and encloses many kidneys of flesh-coloured 
felspar. Eleven and a half miles to the westward, the gneiss contains horn- 
blende ; and half a mile farther on it approaches tomica slate, and dips N.N.W. 
at an angle of 45°. Beyond this place the river expands a little, and the rocky 
eminences have a general round-backed outline ; but ona near approach they 
are rugged, and some short conical peaks occur. At the Little Rock and Moun- 
tain Portages, the strata consisting of mica slate dip N.W. at an angle of 60°; 
and at the Otter Portage, a light-red fine-grained. gneiss dips to the northward 
at.an angle of 70°. At the Great Devil Portage, two and.a half miles N.W.b. W. 
of the Otter Portage, compact gneiss oceurs dipping to the N.W. 80°. An ex- 
pansion of the river above this place, termed the Devil’s Lake, is very beauti- 
ful, containing many rocky islands, covered with spruce and aspen trees. The 
strata of gneiss in this lake had. a direction from east to west, and. were near- 
ly vertical. At the Big Rock Discharge, nine and a half miles west of the Devil’s 
Portage, the strata consist of gneiss. In anisland, a. little above it, there is. a 
vertical bed of mica slate ; anda mile farther on, at the Little Trout Rock, there 
is a bed of granite. Half a mile above, at the Trout Portage, the strata of 
gneiss enclose a bed of granite ; and seven and.ahalf miles S.W. b. W., at the 
Osier Portage, the strata consist of gneiss. Above this the river forms a con- 
siderable expansion, which is termed Black Bear Island Lake: The islands in 
this: lake are very numerous, and consist mostly of round-backed elevations of 
gneiss extremely barren. One steep conical island, near the east end of the 
lake, consists entirely of large rounded masses of light-red granite, piled.on each 
other to. the height of a hundred. and fifty feet. It. seemed as if the softer parts 
of a bed of granite, projecting above the. gneiss strata here, had been washed 
away, and. left, the more durable masses in their present position. This island 


512 APPENDIX. — ENow ld. 


can scarcely have been formed by a collection of boulder stones, for it is not 
easy to conceive in what manner the action of the waves could have piled stones 
up in such a form, and still less to account for all these boulders, consisting of 
a coarse-grained granite, in a country composed of gneiss with many subor- 
dinate beds. At Cardinal’s Rapid, at the west end of Bear Island Lake, there 
is a bed of mica slate ; a short way below this the gneiss rises abruptly into 
a rounded island two hundred feet high. At the Portage de Canot Tourne, six 
miles and a half W.N.W. of Cardinal’s Rapid, the strata, consisting of fine 
granular gneiss, with much mica, dip to the westward at an angle of 80°; and at 
the Pine Portage, a mile further, the same rock, preserving the same dip, alter- 
nates with a grey gneiss containing much less mica. 

Above this place the country is more flat, better clothed with wood, and ex- 
hibits much less naked rock; the gneiss formation continues. In Sand Fly 
and Sandy Lakes, there are some moderate elevations of gneiss; the soil is 
sandy, and supports some groves of the Pinus Banksiana, which seldom grow 
in any other soil. The same rocks rose in round-backed ridges of greater ele- 
vation as we went to the northward in Knee Lake. Between Lake Primeau 
and Isle-a-la-Crosse Lakes, several beds of granite rise to the height of fifty or 
sixy feet above the gneiss, and some of them crossing the stream form a series 
of bad rapids. : 

After surmounting the last of these rapids, we ran for forty miles to 
the southward through Isle-a-la-Crosse Lake, and I imagine came again 
upon the verge of the limestone formation. The country is flat and sandy, 
varied only by some long low even ridges. Many fragments of the lime- 
stone, that has been already described, lie on the surface. Captain Franklin 
observed limestone in one part of Beaver River, which flows into the south 
side of Isle-a-la-Crosse Lake; and we were informed by the traders that 
it occurs throughout the river. The same sandy soil was observed in our pro- 
gress up Deep River, and through Cross, Buffalo, and Methye Lakes. The 
eround here, however,.is slightly varied with hill and dale. Where the river 
had made a section of the hills, they were observed to be composed of small 
boulders of gneiss and limestone, intermixed with fine white quartzy calca- 
reous sand. On the south side of Buffalo Lake, there is a long low ridge, 
with a slightly crenated or indented outline. In Methye River the boulders 
are larger and more numerous, forming a long series of bad rapids in that 


No. I.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 513 


small stream. On the north side of Methye Lake, the elevations of sand 
assume a more decided hilly form, and on the further side of Methye Portage, 
they form boundaries to the beautiful valley of the Washacummow, from one 
thousand two hundred to one thousand five hundred feet high. The prevail- 
ing tree, in this sandy district, is the Pinus Banksiana. This valley from two 
to three miles wide, and bounded on each side by these almost precipitous sand- 
hills, is traversed by the Clear Water or Washacummow River. At the dis- 
tance of ten miles below the portage, the channel of the river is obstructed by 
a ridge of limestone. This ridge appears to have once blocked up the outlet 
of the valley altogether, for portions of it still rise from the solid strata through 
the thin sandy soil of the plain to the height of fifty or sixty feet. These pro- 
jecting parts have generally a columnar form, and bear from their arrange- 
ment a striking resemblance to the ruins of an extensive city. The stone much 
resembles that at the Grand Rapid on the Saskatchawan, but perhaps contains 
silica instead of alumina. Like that it yields readily to the action of the 
stream, falling down in large tabular masses. ‘The outline of the sandy boun- 
daries of this singular valley, strongly countenances the idea of the waters of 
the Washacummow having been at some distant period accumulated therein. 
Tongues of sand frequently project from the hills on each side, and run across 
the plain, exactly similar in appearance to the ridges thrown up by the currents, 
and eddies of an extensive lake. The ground on the portages sounds hollow; 
and this, together with the rwmaform appearance of the rocks, and the occur- 
rence of sulphureous springs in the neighbourhood, has impressed the traders 
with a notion that the whole has been the work of a volcano. From this spot 
| downwards, the bed of the Washacummow is formed of this stone, or of a cal- 

‘eareous sandstone into which it passes. It produces a long succession of cas- 
cades and rapids. At the White Mud Portage the strata are horizontal, and 
consist of siliceous limestone. The portage obtains its name from the exis- 
tence of some whitish marlin the hollows, formed by the decomposition of the 
rock. The same rock occurs at the Cascade and intermediate portages. A 
short way below the last portage, a small rivulet, having a strong smell of sul- 

phurated hydrogen gas, flows in ; and two or three sulphureous springs arise 

on the bank of the river, issuing aparently from a siliceous limestone. The 
beds of the springs were incrusted with calcareous tufa. Further down, the 
channel of the river is composed of horizontal beds of common yellowish-grey 
compact limestone. At the junction of the Red Willow River, there rises 

3U 


514 APPENDIX. [No. I. 


through the soil a large mass of limestone which contains hornstone. We did 
not ascertain whether this mass was connected with the strata’ underneath, 
which consists of sandstone in plates. 

Below this, where the Washacummow, ‘in its winding course through the 
valley, approaches the high-bounding hills, ‘sections of their sides, formed by 
the ravines which opened into the river, enabled us to observe that they were 
composed of sand more or less agglutinated by bitumen, which latter hardens into 
slaggy mineral pitch. This sandy bed, from six hundred to eight hundred feet 
thick, rests immediately upon yellowish-grey limestone containing many bivalve 
shells and orthoceratites. The dip, where it could be observed, (for it -was very 
slight,) appeared to be to the northward. The limestone forms the ‘channel of 
the river throughout, and some portions of it, decaying more rapidly than others, 
exhibit more plainly the shells which enter very largely into its composition. At 
the junction of the Washacummow with the Elk River, or as it is termed, at 
the Forks of the Athabasca, the northerly dip is more clearly discerned than 
elsewhere. ‘The stream here, too, has made a section of the superincumbent 
bed of sand, upwards of one hundred and fifty feet in depth, and shews it 
to consist of a variety of strata, having different shades of colour and 
tenacity according to the quantity of bitumen they contain. 

The limestone, more or less thickly covered with slaggy mineral pitch, con- 
tinues to form the banks of Elk River, as far down as Pierre au Calumet, in 
lat. 57° 25’. The hills or banks, which bound the view on each side, do not 
rise so high as in Clear Water River; and we have been informed, that at a 
little distance from the river, a plain upon a level with the summit of these 
hills extends from near Athabasca Lake to the Clear Water River ithe 
well wooded, and frequented by buffalo. , 

About nineteen miles below the Forks, and a mile within the right bank of 
the river, a saline sulphureous spring occurs.. This spring rises from the 
summit of a rounded eminence, which is about fifty-six yards in diameter, sixty 
feet high, and entirely incrusted with, or perhaps in a great proportion composed 
of, saline deposits*. This eminence is bounded on three sides by the high 
bank of the river, which here recedes a little, and forms an even round-backed 


* The following letter from Dr. Fife te Professor Jameson gives the analysis of a salt mentioned 
‘im a former page, as being found on the shores of a lake near Carlton-House, and also of the 
incrustation just spoken of in the text: 


No. I.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 515 


ridge, rising two hundred feet above the spring... A small clayey plainon the 
S. W. side of the eminence is traversed by the rivulet from the spring, and 
opens into'a bay of the river. A large and apparently-travelled fragment. of 
hornblendic gneiss lies on the acclivity under the spring, but: the nearest 
rocks observed i situ were composed of yellowish-white arene? splintery: 


limestone. 
At the new Fort, a considerable eponitt above Pierre au: eaves a lime- 


stone similar to that last mentioned occurs,. having its strata waved or dip- 


Edinburgh, January 13, 1823. 
DEAR Sir, 


Enclosed is an account of the experiments performed on the substances you sent me 
for analysis. 

First incrustation of white matter from the lake near Carlton-House:— 

When put into water, it immediately agglutinated, forming minute hard globules which seemed ‘to’ 
prevent the farther action of the fluid; but by heating it, it was entirely dissolved. The only sub- 
stance I could detect in the solution by the use of re-agents was sulphuric acid» in a state of com- 
bination. I accordingly suspected that the white matter was effloresced sulphate of soda. To 
ascertain if I was right in my suspicions, I dissolved a few grains by the aid of heat, and procured 
from the solution a beautiful group of regularly-formed prismatic crystals, resembling those of sul- 
phate of soda, and which effloresced on exposure to adry air. I consider the white matter then 
to be merely sulphate of soda deprived- of its water of crystallization by long exposure to the’ 
atmosphere. 

Second deposition from the Salt ee in the Elk River:— ) 

When recently broken, it presented in several places. groups of irregular-shaped crystals, inter- 
mixed with a white powdery matter, and with a yellow substance resembling flowers of sulphur. 
It had a slightly saline taste, and, when rubbed, a faint sulphureous odour. When thrown on a hot 
iron, it emitted ‘blue flame and the vapour of sulphureous acid. By long boiling in successive 
portions of water, it was almost all dissolved, the solution affording by the usual tests sulphuric acid, 
muriatic acid, lime, and magnesia. -The muriatic acid and magnesia were, however, in small 
quantity compared to the others, and)in the last portions of water in which the saline matter was boiled 
could scarcely be detected. As it did not attract moisture on exposure to air, J I suppose the 
muriatic acid must have been in combination with soda, as muriates of lime and magnesia are both 
deliquescent. What was left undissolved by the water contained a and a very minute’ 
quantity of iron. 

I consider this incrustation, then, as composed principally of sulphate of lime, with a slight 
admixture of sulphate of magnesia and-muriate of soda, and with sulphur and iron. 

I regret that the time allotted me for the analyses was not sufficient to enable me to ascertain the 
proportion of the ingredients. | Yours, &c. ‘HINES &. 
ANDREW FYFeE, 

3.U 2 


516 APPENDIX. [No. I. 


ping both to the east and west. Below this, there is a peaty bog whose 
crevices are filled: with petroleum. Lan | 9 abies ily 

This mineral exists in great abundance in this district. We never observed. 
it flowing from the limestone, but always above it, and generally agglutinating 
the beds of sand into a kind of pitchy sandstone... Sometimes fragments of 
this stone contain so much petroleum as to float down the stream. The:lime- 
stone dips under the water and disappears at Pierre au Calumet, and the 
pitchy sandstone: cliffs which rest on it also terminate there... This spot, 
situated between three or four miles below an old fort, obtains its name from 
a bed of yellowish-grey compact marl, which forms a small cliff on the bank 
of the river, and is quarried by the voyagers for the purpose of making 
calumets or pipes. A portion of this bed, acted on by the weather and the 
water of the river, is converted into earthy marl, and is much used by the 
traders under the name of white earth for whitewashing their apartments, 
Immediately under the marl, and generally covered by the river, there is a bed 
of limestone almost entirely composed of orthoceratites and bivalve shells*. 
For some distance below Pierre au Calumet to a place called Burnt Point , 
the banks of the river rise in a gentle swell until they attain the height of 300 
feet at a short distance from the shore. They appeared to consist of sand 
with limestone boulders, but we saw few sections of them. Between Burnt 
Point and Athabasca Lake, the banks are every where low and alluvial, con- 
taining much vegetable matter, and overgrown with willows and aspens. 

In Athabasca Lake we again came upon the edge of the primitive forma- 
tion. ‘The country around Fort Chipewyan is composed of roundish masses 
of naked rock, which heaped, as it were, on each other, and rising as they 
recede from the lake, attain, at the distance of a mile from the shore, an 
elevation of five or six hundred feet.. The valleys are narrow, their sides often 
precipitous, and the general form of the hills may be termed short ‘conical, but 
their outline is very uneven. The rocks also form many islands in the lake from 
two to three hundred feet high, and generally bounded on one or more sides by 
precipices. The Fort seems to stand upon a granite rock. A little to the 
eastward, a reddish granite is associated with grey gneiss.. The strata much 
convoluted and intersected in various directions by veins filled with a bluish 


* This orthoceratitic limestone bears some resemblance to the mountain limestone of mineralogists, 
It may therefore possibly belong to the formation under the new red sandstone. 


No. 1.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 517 


grey vitreous looking quartz. Ina bay of the lake, about a mile farther to 
the eastward, there is a cliff of clay slate. On leaving Fort Chipewyan, we 
paddled through several miles of lake, and then descended the Stony River. 
Rocks; similar to those in Athabasca Lake, but possessing less elevation, rise 
above the swampy borders of this stream. At the distance of eighteen miles 
from Fort Chipewyan, it falls into the Peace River, when the united streams 
assume the name of Slave River. | | 
The most abundant rock on the Slave River is granite. A red granite occurs 
opposite to the portage into Duck Lake. Near a point termed the Bute, the rocks, 
comprised of felspar, quartz, and chlorite, have a slaty structure. Below this, the 
granite rising in the channel of the river forms the Carrebceuf Islands, A rock, 
examined opposite these islands, was composed of felspar and quartz, probably a 
variety of granite. Lower down, the ridges of granite rise higher and prove a 
more formidable obstruction to the river, producing many cascades and rapids. 
At the Cassette Portage, a bed of mica slate, composed of grey quartz and mica, 
occurs in the granite. Atthe Little Rock Portage below the Portage d’Embarras, 
a rock, composed of felspar quartz and chlorite, occurs. It is similar to that 
observed at the Bute above-mentioned, but wants the slaty structure. It is 
the protogine of Jurine. At the upper end of Mountain Portage, the same 
chloritic, granite, or protogine, again occurs in large quantity. In the middle 
of the portage, a variety of this rock occurs, composed principally of quartz, 
with a little chlorite and felspar; and adjoining to this bed there is another, 
composed of red felspar and grey quartz. The protogine succeeding again 
forms the lower and principal part of the portage. At the Hauling Place 
below the Mountain Portage, a variety of granite which has been just men- 
tioned as composed of red felspar and grey quartz again occurs, and alter- 
nates with the. protogine both there, at the Pelican Fall, and at the Portage des 
Noyes. The granite disappears about a mile and a half below the latter 
portage, and the banks of the river from thence to Slave Lake are alluvial. 
The Salt River flows in from the westward a short way below the portages. 
We ascended it for twenty-two miles, including its windings, but not above 
half that distance in a straight line, for the purpose of visiting the salt springs 
from whence it derives its taste and name. Seven or eight copious saline 
springs issue from the base of a long even ridge about six hundred feet high, and 
spreading their waters over an extensive clayey plain, deposit a considerable 
quantity of very pure common salt in large cubical crystals. The mother 


518 APPENDIX. | [No. I. 


water flowing into the Salt River gives it a very bitter taste, which it, retains 
until near its junction with the Slave River, when the addition of some fresh. 
water streams renders. it only slightly brackish, A few patches of greyish 
compact gypsum were exposed on the side of the ridge from whence the springs 
issue, a fact which seems to point out the upper part of the new red sand-: 
stone, as the formation from whence they take their rise. A pure white gypsum 
is Said to be found at Peace Point in Peace River, which is probably a continua- 
tion of this formation, The salt plains are much frequented by deer and buffalo. 

The banks of Slave River, below the influx of Salt River, are, as have been 
already mentioned, entirely alluvial. A great quantity of large drift timber: 
is brought down by, Peace River; and. as the trees retain their roots, which 
are often loaded with earth or stones, they readily sink, especially when 
water soaked, and accumulating in the eddies, form shoals which ultimately. 
augment into islands. -A thicket of small willows covers the new-formed. 
island as soon as it appears above water, and their fibrous roots serve to bind 
the whole firmly together. Sections of these islands are annually made by. 
the river, assisted by the frost; and it is interesting to study the diversity of 
appearances they present, according to their different ages. The trunks of 
the trees gradually decay until they are. converted into a blackish-brown sub- 
stance resembling peat, but which still retains more or less of the fibrous 
structure of the wood, and layers of this often alternate with layers of clay 
and sand, the whole being penetrated to the depth of four or five yards or more 
by the long fibrous roots of the willows. A deposition of this kind, with the aid: 
of a little infiltration of bituminous matter, would produce an excellent imitation 
of coal with vegetable impressions of the willow root. What appeared most 
remarkable was the horizontal slaty structure that the older alluvial banks pre-. 
sented, or the regular curve that the strata assumed from unequal subsidence. 
It was on the rivers only that we could observe sections of these deposits, but 
the same operation goes on in a much more magnificent scale inthe lakes. A 
shoal of many miles in extent is formed on the south side of Athabasca Lake, 
by the drift timber and vegetable debris brought down by the Elk River ; and 
the Slave Lake itself must in process of time be filled up by the matters daily. 
conveyed into it from Slave River... Vast quantities of drift timber are buried 
under the sand at the mouth of the river, and enormous piles of it’ are accu-: 
mulated on the shores of every part of the lake. The waves, washing up much. 
disintegrated vegetable matter, fill the interstices of these entangled masses, - 


No. I.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. ol9 


and in process of time a border of spurious peat is formed round the various 
bays of the lake. | | 
Moose Deer Island, and the islands adjoining to it, seem to be on the 
boundary of the limestone formation which we have so often mentioned. Large 
fragments of the stones containing shells were imbedded in the soil; and al- 
though we did not discover any of the rocks in situ, yet the form of the rising 
grounds, on the different islands, strongly countenanced the opinion that the 
strata underneath consisted of limestone. The stone, from Mr. Wentzel’s infor: 
mation, occurs in horizontal strata, traversing the bed of the Riviere aux Liards, 
(the south branch of M‘Kenzie’s River,) and betwixt that and Slave Lake 
near the Trout River there is an extensive plain of white earthy marl, similar 
to that which we observed at Pierre au Calumet, on Athabasca River, asso- 
ciated with the limestone. Farther down M‘Kenzie’s River, and more to the 
westward, the coal formation exists. There are beds of coal on fire twenty or 
thirty miles above the influx of Great Bear Lake River, and below that there 
are petroleum and sulphur springs. | 

Reverting again to our route. Primitive rocks occur a little to the eastward 
of Rwiere d Jean, one of the many channels by which Slave River pours its 
waters into the lake. Stony Island is a small naked rock rising fifty or sixty 
feet above the water, and precipitous on the north side. It is amass of granite 
consisting of flesh-coloured felspar and quartz, with but little or no mica. The 
Rein-deer Islands, which lie in the traverse to the north side of the lake, con- 
sist of a much coarser granite with the mica. in large plates.. These islands 
are numerous, and rise from a hundred to two hundred feet above the water. 
They abound in precipices, and are for the most part naked; but towards 
the centres of the larger ones, there is a little soil and a few groves of pine. 
The same kind of granite prevails on the northern shores of the lake, from 
the Big Cape to some distance to the westward of Fort Providence. It forms 
small hills, with steep, somewhat precipitous, sides, and narrow valleys be- 
tween. 4 

The lower part of these hills generally consists of coarse granite, much in: 
tersected by veins of quartz and felspar, and frequently enclosing masses of fel- 
spar ; their summits, on the contrary mostly smooth and rounded, never peaked, 
are formed of a more compact and durable rock, which is the same kind of gra- 
nite that is observed at Fort Chipewyan, and is composed of a crystallized red 


520 APPENDIX, [No. I. 


felspar, intermixed with small rounded grains of quartz, generally grey, but 
sometimes tinged red. It contains little or no mica. | 

The granite formation continued for a considerable distance on our route to- 
wards Fort Enterprise, but it contained more and more foreign beds as we 
advanced to the northward. At our encampment of August 2d, on the borders 
of the lake, the strata consisted of clay slate, and had a slight dip to the north- 
ward. At the mouth of the Yellow-Knife River, and in Lake Prosperous, 
mica slate prevailed. Between Rocky and Carp Lakes, the granite contains 
many beds of mica slate, often passing into clay slate, and the country is 
tolerably well wooded. White spruce occupies the rocky situations, Pinus 
Banksiana the sandy spots, and aspen the low moist places. 

At Carp Lake the hills are of lower altitude, have fewer precipices, and 
more rounded summits; the valleys are less fertile, contain a gravelly soil, 
and nourish fewer trees. This appears to be the commencement of the 
gneiss, Or, aS it may be termed in this latitude, the Barren Ground for- 
mation, for it seems to exist throughout the great district to the eastward 
of the Copper-Mine River, termed the Barren Grounds by the Indians. The 
soil appears to be very favourable to the production of the cenomyces ran- 
giferina and nwalis, and some other congenerous lichens, but very inimical 
to every other species of vegetation. On the borders of the formation, as 
at. Prospect Hill, a little above Carp Lake, trees occur only in detached and 
distant clumps. At Fort Enterprise, a thin grove grows in a very favour- 
able situation on the sheltered banks of Winter River; but nearer the middle 
of the Barren Grounds there is not even a shrub to be seen, although parallel 
to them a strip of wood follows the transition, and secondary formations on 
the Copper-Mine River to a much higher latitude.. Instead of enumerating 
the different places where the rocks were cursorily examined on our route, 
we shall confine ourselves more particularly to those of the same formation 
in the neighbourhood of Fort Enterprise, where, during our long stay, we had 
an opportunity of observing more eely the relations of the different rocks 
to each other. , 

The country about Fort Enterprise consists of cog and, very eeinee 
conical, or sometimes round-backed, hills, of moderate elevations, never dis- 
posed in mountain ranges, but entirely unconnected and separated from each 
other by inclined valleys of moderate extent. Their summits are almost 


No. LJ GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 5O] 


universally formed of naked smooth rock, and generally of a species of 
durable red granite that has been more than once mentioned as composed of 
well crystallized reddish felspar and grey quartz. Large irregular, but some- 
what cubical, fragments of this rock are scattered over the surface of the 
hills, or rest upon their very summits, by two or three angular points, as if 
left exposed there by the decay of the less durable material that enclosed 
them. A remarkable instance of this occurs about a mile and a half to the 
southward of Fort Enterprise, on a hill which is thence termed the Big Stone 
Hul. This hill, which is the highest for many miles, rises from six to eight 
hundred feet above Winter River. The acclivities of the hills, generally speak- 
ing, consist of gneiss wrapped in a mantle form round the granite. These accli- 
vities are more or less thickly covered with a coarse gravelly soil, and very 
often exhibit accumulations of large cubical fragments of gneiss, which fall 
from small mural precipices. In the upper parts of the inclined valleys, at the 
base of the hills, there is commonly a very thin layer of mountain peat, but 
the bottom of almost every valley is ovcupied by a lake. Most of these lakes 
communicate with each other only when flooded by the melting snow, and 
many of the smaller ones are entirely land-locked ; they all contain fish. On 
the borders of the formation, where a few trees exist, the white spruce is 
confined to the sandy soil that is partially accumulated on the banks of the 
streams. A few birches sometimes grow amongst the large stones on the 
banks of a rapid, and two or three stunted black -spruces now and then occur _ 
on the peaty spots. 

It may be proper to mention the localities of some of the rocks about Fort 
Enterprise, where we had the best opportunity of examining this formation. 

The strata at the base, and on the acclivities of the Big Stone Hili already 
mentioned, consist of granitic gneiss, its summit of red granite. A hill about 
a mile to the 8.8. W. of this, composed of gneiss, dipping S. E. b. E. at an 
angle of 70°, presents a mural precipice of red granite traversed by a thick 
vein of augite green-stone ; one portion of the vein may be termed basaltic 
augite green-stone. Half a mile further, in the same direction, there is a 
mural precipice, the loftiest in the neighbourhood, being one hundred and 
twenty feet high, which is formed of red granite, alternating with granitic 
gneiss. In a dilatation of Winter River, termed by the Indians the Lake of 

3X 


522 APPENDIX. _ [No. 1. 


the Round Rock, which commences about half.a mile below the last-mentioned 
hill, and runs twelve miles in a 8.8. W. direction, a red porphyritic gneiss, 
forming many mural precipices, exists subordinate to grey gneiss; the same 
rocks occur, with little variation, in Snare Lake, which immediately succeeds 
the other, and is fifteen miles long. But about thirty-six miles S. S. W. from 
Fort Enterprise, we again come upon the granite formation, through which we 
passed on our route from Fort Providence, and the country is well wooded. 
Specimens of the rocks obtained from that neighbourhood consisted of red 
granite, granite with pistacite, porphyritic, and homblendic gneiss. 
Returning again to Fort Knterprise—about two miles E. N. E. of the fort, or 
nearly the same distance N. E. of Big Stone Hill, there occur-a succession of 
low cliffs formed by strata dipping north at an angle of 30°. The strata occur 
in the following order, beginning with the lowest :—gneiss with hornblende 
—red gneiss—ditto—coarse granular grey gneiss—ditto—ditto—and the 
covering stratum is composed of red granite and granitic gneiss, with kidneys 
of hornblende and mica. An obtuse conical hill, bearing N. N. E. from the 
fort, and three miles and a half distant, consists of strata arranged in a mantle 
form, but deficient on the N. E. side, where itis precipitous. This precipice 
is separated by regular fissures into large cubical masses similar to many 
which have accumulated at its base, and consists of hornblendic gneiss, which 
seems to constitute the nucleus or body of the hill, A thin layer of compact 
gneiss is wrapped round the hornblendic gneiss, and forms the acclivity and 
summit of the hill, making an angle of 70° with the horizon. Covering the 
base of this stratum, there is one of micaceous gneiss, over which there lies 
a thick bed of compact quartzy greenstone with disseminated magnetic 
pyrites. This rock affects the compass strongly, and its surface is variegated 
with streaks of a rusty brown colour from the weathering of the pyrites. 
Over the greenstone there is a bed of white granite. About half a mile to 
the eastward of the last-mentioned hill, there is a high bluff one which has a 
precipitous side fronting the S.W. The base of the precipice is formed of 
coarse granular gneiss, the summit of red granite, which falls down in tabular 
or cubical fragments. The Dog-Rib Rock, a remarkable hill, having three 
precipitous sides but a gradual ascent on the fourth, lies about eight miles 
N.b. E. from Fort Enterprise. The base of the hill consists of compact 


No. [.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS, 523 


hornblendic gneiss, which’ is traversed by a vein of very coarse granite 
several yards wide. The upper part of the hill consists of strata of horn- 
blendic gneiss, dipping N. b. W. at an angle of 45°. 

About thirty miles due north of Dog-Rib Rock, an irregular ridge of hills of 
coarse sand and gravel occurs. The intermediate district is a continuation of 
the gneiss formation, without any material alteration in appearance, and beds 
of gneiss or granite occasionally shew themselves at the foot of the ridge. 
These sand hills constitute a small height of land between the source of 
Winter River and a dilatation of the Copper-Mine River, named Point Lake. 
The gneiss appears in abundance on the north side of this height, associated 
with much mica slate and some clay slate. The hills are higher here, and the 
valleys narrower and deeper, than in the neighbourhood of Fort Enterprise. 

On an arm of Point Lake, about forty-five miles due north of Fort Enter- 
prise, the rocks belong to the transition class. The hills here are six or 
seven hundred feet high, and are in their general character rather round- 
backed, but obtuse conieal elevations and high and steep cliffs are very 
numerous. | 

At the encampment in lat. 65° 13’ N., from whence we started on June 
25th, the following strata occur, dipping to the westward at an angle of 80°, but 
much waved and convoluted:—Greywacke passing into Greywacke slate— 
Greywacke with small imbedded crystals of hornblende—dark greenish or 
blackish grey transition clay slate, having a thick slaty structure. Several 
flat islands in the lake consist of transition green stone. A rock standing 
apart from the neighbouring hills on the borders of the lake, about a mile and 
a half to the southward of the encampment, having a rounded summit, but 
bounded on three sides by mural précipices about two hundred feet high, is 
composed of compact earthy greenstone, containing disseminated iron pyrites 
covered with layers of transition greenstone slate. The precipices in some 
places present a very obscure appearance of twisted columnar structure, and 
the rock falls down in large irregular but somewhat rhomboidail fragments. 
The upper and under surfaces of these fragments ‘are smoothish, and present 
a greater quantity of pyrites than is disseminated through the rest of the rock. 
On the north side of the lake, two miles from the encampment, there is a high 
bluff hill with a precipitous side, which seems to consist principally of a tran- 
sition conglomerate. ‘The basis is earthy clay slate: The imbedded masses 

3X2 


5QA APPENDIX. [No. 1. 


have an ellipsoidal form and smooth surface, are from one to two feet in 
diameter, and appear to consist of the same material with the basis, but im- 
pregnated with much silica, and not shewing evident slaty structure. When 
broken, they present an even fine grained fracture. 

In the sheltered valleys on this part of Point Lake, a few asap of ae 
sized spruce fir occur ; farther to the eastward, at Obstruction Rapid, where the 
gneiss formation of Fort Enterprise seems to cross athe river, and extend beyond. 
Rum Lake, there is no wood. 

During our first and second day’s journey Het Point Lake from ths above- 
mentioned encampment, being eleven and a half miles ona W.N.W. course, 
the rocks we had an opportunity of examining, .consisted of greenish-grey 
transition clay slate, generally having a curved structure, and splitting into 
slates of very unequal thickness. 

On the following day, June 27th, our route lay to the N.W. for ten and a 
half miles through a part of the lake, whose bounding hills bore a strong re- 
semblance in altitude and form to those about Fort Enterprise. The rocks we 
examined were grey gneiss, red granite, hornblendic gneiss, and a crystalline 
greenstone. These rocks form high and precipitous islands, and shores at the 
west end of Point Lake, but the appearance of the country alters immediately 
on entering Red Rock Lake. The strata here belong, most probably, to the 
transition series, which, at the lower end of Point Lake, had given place to, 
or perhaps alternated with, primitive rocks. The hills which bound Red Rock 
Lake are four hundred or five hundred feet high, have an even round-backed 
outline, present few cliffs and little naked rock, have rather moderate acclivi- 
ties, and are thinly covered with small white spruce trees. The cenomyce 
rangiferina, and other lichens; so abundant on the barren grounds, become 
rare here, and continue so throughout. the remainder of the Copper-Mine River. 
A bed of reddish clay slate was observed at the upper end of the lake, and 
large fragments of the same rock thickly strew its shores. At the lower end 
of the lake, a greenish-grey faintly glimmering clay slate occurs, dipping 
W.b.N. at an angle of 30°. 

We passed through Rock-Nest Lake on June 30th. With the exception of 
the Rock-Nest, and one or two hills adjoining it apparently composed -of trap 
rocks, the borders of this lake are low, consisting of long even gentle cleva- 
tions, every where yell clothed with spruce trees. . The strata, where we had 


No. 1] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 525 


an opportunity of examining them, consisted of clay slate. At the place of 
our encampment, on the 30th, the clay slate had a colour intermediate between 
greenish grey and clove brown; the surface of the slates feebly glistening, 
cross fracture dull, structure rather thick slaty, and dip of its strata E.N.E. at 
an angle of 40°. The Rock Nest bore an exact resemblance in altitude and 
form to Salisbury Craigs in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh. I am inclined 
to think that the cliff which crowned it was transition green-stone, and the steep 
acclivity clay slate, but we had not an opportunity of examining them. 

After leaving Rock-Nest Lake, the Copper-Mine River flows for six or 
seven miles between banks, consisting of gentle elevations and dales, 
wooded to the edge of the stream, and flanked on both sides, at the distance of 
three or four miles, by a range of very barren hills, with steep acclivities and 
rounded summits. ‘The channel of the river is rocky, producing a series: of 
rapids ; but unfortunately the notices respecting the strata have been lost, and 
we-have only a general impression that a hornblendic gneiss, probably of the 
transition series, was abundant. On descending the river still farther, the 
high hills recede a little, and the rocks on the immediate borders of the stream 
give place to fine sand, in which the river has made sections from one hundred 
to two hundred feet deep. Sandy plains, on a level with the summits of the 
cliffs; thus produced, extend six or seven miles backwards, and are bounded 
by irregular ranges of hills eight hundred or a thousand feet high. These 
hills are round-backed, with moderately steep acclivities, but they are some- 
tumes, though not frequently, terminated by high cliffs. We were precluded 
from visiting them by their distance. The plains are chequered with small 
clumps of wood, and produce a short grass which attracts the musk oxen 
thither at certain seasons, but few rein deer frequent this part. of the country. 
About twenty or twenty-five miles below the Fairy-Lake River, the woods be- 
come thinner and more stunted, and the barren hills approach the water’s edge. 
The sandy banks re-appeared, however, at intervals, and in some places the 
river expanded considerably, flowing with a gentle current over a fine sandy 
bottom. Its medium breadth may be stated at three hundred yards, which in 
the rapids was diminished to half that width. A few miles farther down we 
approached hills from twelve to fifteen hundred feet high, running in ranges 
nearly paraliel to the river or about N.W. These were the first hills we had 
seen in the country that can be said to possess the form of a connected moun- 


e 


526 APPENDIX. ti [No. L 


tain range, They are in general rather round-backed, but the outline is not 
even, being interrupted by craggy eminences rather obtusely conical. It is 
very probable that they are a part of the range upon which Hearne bestowed 
the name of Stony Mountains. 

We encamped on the night of July 6th in lat: 66° 45’ 11’, longitude 115° 42’ 
23", and forty-three miles W.b. N. of the Sandy River, at the foot of the most 
rugged part of the range, where it is washed by the river. A high peak, which 
was examined here, consisted of red granite and sienite, and some large beds 
of greenstone were also observed; but perhaps all these rocks are subordinate 
to the clay-slate formation, that rock occurring in considerable quantity, here, 
having-a greenish colour, and continuous pearly lustre. The rocks at this spot 
appear to be primitive, but they are soon succeeded by others, which have 
more the aspect of the transition class: Seven miles further down the river, 
at the encampment of July 7th, the hills shewed less elevation and a more even 
outline, with less exposed rock. That which was observed hea g of a more 
dull and earthy clay’ slate.: 3 : 

‘Leaving this place on July 8th; we cok bane our course down. the river, 
which flowed for some miles between two ranges of hills, pretty even in their 
outline, and round-backed, but with rather steep acclivities. The immediate 
borders of the stream were either high banks of fine sand, or steep gravel cliffs ; 
and'sometimes in places where the hills receded to a little distance, the inter- 
vening ‘space was occupied by high sandy ridges, apparently the ancient banks 
of the river. We now approached a range of hills which were visible from 
yesterday’s encampment, and which in form bore a considerable resemblance 
to those in the neighbourhood of Point Lake, but having more the appearance 
ofa connected range. We had no opportunity of examining these hills, but 
judging from the analogous forms: of those at Point Lake, we infer that they 
consist of clay slate, hornblendic’ gneiss, and granite, connected with rocks 
of the transition series: The °Copper-Mine River runs to the westward in a 
tortuous course along the’ foot of this range, until it succeeds in effecting a pas- 
sage through it'in 116° 31’ west‘longitude. At this place, according to Indian 
account, the Bear’! Lake approaches nearest to the Copper-Mine River, the 
breadth of the height of land between them not exceeding thirty or forty miles. 
Below this spot, which is marked by the influx of a small stream, the river 
assumes a northerly course, and becoming much narrower and more rapid, 


No. L]) GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 527 


passes betwixt high but even ranges of round-backed hills, between which and 
the water there are interposed high and Sie rounded banks of a clayey 
soil, well covered with.trees, 

The beds of the Mountain Torrents, vahick open into the river here, contain 
many fragments of a dark red sandstone, which would seem to indicate thatthe 
‘old red sandstone formation occurs in these mountains. . The river contracting 
to the width of a hundred and twenty yards, at length forces itself through the 
Rocky Defile, a narrow channel which it has cut during a lapse of ages in the 
shelving foot of a hill. . The channel is bounded by perpendicular rocky walls, 
varying in height from fifty to a hundred and fifty feet, above which there is 
imposed an immense body of fine sand. The form of the land would lead one 
to suppose, that the river at some distant period, pent in by the rock, formed 
a long narrow lake, whose superfluous waters were discharged by a magnificent 
cascade—an opinion which is countenanced by the figures of the sandy ridges, 
which rise immediately above the rapid to the height of five hundred or six 
hundred feet. The walls of the rapid consist of a very dark purplish-red com- 
pact felspar rock. It probably belongs to the old red sandstone formation, and 
seems to rest upon or to alternate with a rock, which.seems to be a variety of the 
old red sandstone, and which is composed of light-reddish and. greyish felspar 
and quartz, the former indistinctly crystallized. This latter rock is every where ex- 
posed in the bed of the river for ten or twelve miles below the rapid. For this space 
the river flows about three hundred feet below the level of a sandy plain, which 
is bounded to the westward at a considerable distance, by a continuation of the 
range of hills through which the river forces itself at the Bear-Lake Portage, 
and to the eastward and northward by a lofty ridge of trap rocks, which consti- 
tute the famous Copper Mountains... The surface of these plains is variegated 
by some small conical sandy eminences, and. ornamented by clumps of mode- 
rately large spruce trees (thirty feet high), amongst which the River Mouse 
winds, and falls into the Copper-Mine River from the westward: In the beds 
of the torrents that intersect thé»plains, there are found fragments of reddish- 
grey granular foliated limestone, of deep red sandstone, of grey sandstone com- 
posed of grey quartz and felspar, probably a variety of the preceding, and of 
red sienite, all members, perhaps, of the old red sandstone formation, or that 
which lies under coal, and occasionally alternates with transition rocks. « There 
occur also fragments of pale red sandstone, composed. principally of quartz, and. 


529 APPENDIX. [No. I. 


a little felspar with imbedded circular coneretions of quartz ; and of greyish-white 
quartzose sandstone, with imbedded portions of the pale-red kind, both of which 
probably belong to the new red sandstone formation. Fragments were also found 
of dark-greeny felspathose trap, coloured by hornblende, of greenstone, of dark- 
flesh red felspar in granular concretions, with imbedded patches of hornblende, 
of red felspar, associated with hornblende, and passing to greenstone; and of 
red felspar partly coloured with hornblende, and containing amygdaloidal por- 
tions of prehnite, most of which belong to the trap formation, connected with the 
new red sandstone. Many pretty large masses also occur of a compact wine- 
yellow limestone, resembling conchoidal hornstone, having a flat conchoidal 
iracture, and alternating with thin layers of flint inclining to flinty slate. This 
stone 1s precisely similar to some of the more compact varieties of the limestone 
near Cumberland-House, although in the latter situation we never observed it 
associated with flinty slate. | 

The Copper Mountains consist principally of trap rocks, which seem to be 
imposed upon the new red sandstone or the floetz limestone which covers it. A 
short way below the influx of the Mouse, the Copper-Mine River washes the 
base of some bluish-grey claystone cliffs, having a somewhat slaty structure, 
dipping to the north at an angle of 20°. 

The Copper Mountains appear to form a range running S.E. and N.W. The 
great mass of rock in the mountains seems to consist of felspar in various condi- 
tions ; sometimes in the form of felspar rock or claystone, sometimes coloured by 
hornblende, and approaching to greenstone, but most generally inthe form of 
dark reddish-brown amygdaloid. The amygdaloidal masses, contained in the 
amygdalord, are either entirely pistacite, or pistacite enclosing cale-spar. Scales 
of native copper are very generally disseminated through this rock, through a spe- 
cies of trap tuff which nearly resembled it, and also through a reddish sandstone 
on which it appears to rest. When the felspar assumed the appearance of a slaty 
clay-stone, which it did towards the base of the mountains on the banks of the 
river, we observed no copper in it. The rough, and in general rounded and 
more elevated parts of the mountain, are composed of the amygdaloid ; but be- 
tween the eminences there occur many narrow and deep valleys, which are 
bounded by perpendicular mural precipices of greenstone. It is in these val- 
leys, amongst the loose soil, that the Indians search for copper. Amongst the 
specimens we picked up in these valleys, were plates of native copper: 


No. I.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 529 


masses of pistacite containing native copper ; of trap rock with associated na- 
tive copper, green malachite, copper glance or variegated copper ore and iron- 
shot copper green, of greenish-grey prehnite in trap, (the trap is felspar, deep- 
ly coloured with. hornblende,) with disseminated native copper: the copper, 
in some specimens, was crystallized in rhomboidal dodecahedrons. We 
also found some- large tabular fragments, evidently portions of a vein con- 
sisting of prehnite, associated with calcareous spar, and native copper. The 
Indians dig wherever they observe the prehnite lying on the soil, experience 
having taught them that the largest pieces of copper are found associated with 
it. Wedid not observe the vein in its original repository, nor does it appear 
that the Indians have found it, but judging from the specimens just mentioned, 
it most probably traverses felspathose trap. We also picked up some frag- 
ments of a greenish-grey coloured rock, apparently sandstone, with dissemi- 
nated variegated. copper ore and copper glance ; likewise rhomboidal frag- 
ments of white calcareous spar, and some rock crystals. The Indians report 
that they have found copper in every part of this range, which.they have exa- 
mined for thirty or forty miles to the N.W., and that the Esquimaux come hither 
to search for that metal. We afterwards found some ice chisels in possession 
of the latter people twelve or fourteen inches long, and half an inch in diameter, 
formed of pure copper. 

To the northward of the Copper Moanrnine, at the distance of ten miles, in 
a direct line, a similar range of trap hills occurs, having, however, less altitude. 
The intermediate country is uneven, but not hilly, and consists of a deep sandy 
soil, which, when cut through by the rivulets, discloses extensive beds of light- 
brownish red sandstone, which appears to belong to the new red sandstone for- 
mation. The same rock having a thin slaty: structure, and dipping to the north- 
ward, forms perpendicular walls to the river, whose beds lie a hundred and 
fifty feet below the level of the plain. The eminences in the plain are well 
clothed with grass, and free from the large loose stones so common on the 
Barren Grounds, but the ridges of trap are nearly destitute of vegetation. 

Beyond. the last-mentioned trap range, which is about twenty miles from 
the sea, the country becomes still more level, the same kind of sandstone 
continuing as a subsoil. The plains nourish only a coarse short grass, and 
the trees which had latterly dwindled to small clumps, growing only on low 
points on the edge of the river under shelter of the high bank, entirely disap- 

3Y¥ 


530. APPENDIX. | [No. I. 


pear. A few ranges of trap hills intersect this plain also, but they have much 
less elevation than those we passed higher up the stream. 

The river in its section of the plain, as far as Bloody Fall, presents alter- 
nately cliffs of reddish sandstone, and red-coloured slaty indurated clay or 
marl, and shelving white clay banks. At Bloody Fall, the stream cuts through 
a thick bed of dark purplish red felspar rock, similar to that observed at the 
Rocky Defile, and associated as at that place, with a rock composed principally 
of light red felspar.and quartz, but which is probably a species of red secon- 
dary granite. At the Bloody Fall, the felspar rock is covered to the. depth 
of six or seven hundred feet with a bed of greyish white, and rather tenaceous 
clay, which being deeply intersected with ravines, forms steep hills. Nearer 
the sea, the river is bounded by very steep cliffs of yellowish-white sand; and 
on the sea-coast, the above-mentioned red granite re-appears on the west 
bank of the river, forming a rugged ridge about two hundred and fifty feet. high. 

The islands that we observed in the Arctic Sea are uniformly rocky, and 
generally bounded with mural precipices of trap rocks, clinkstone or clay- 
stone, which have a surprising uniformity of appearance. The main shore, 
however, presents some diversity. For sixty miles eastward of the Copper- 
Mine River, the beach is low, shelving, and gravelly, and the ground in the 
interior has a gentle rise and even outline. ‘Towards Tree River, however, 
the trap rocks re-appearing form an exceedingly sterile and rocky coast. The 
cliffs of the islands on which we landed were composed of greenstone, dark 
brown claystone, porphyry, and perhaps of basalt, but of the occurrence of 
the last-mentioned. rock we are not quite certain. Three or four miles to the 
westward of Port Epworth, a steep promontory is formed of a rock which is com- 
posed of red felspar, quartz, and is a variety of the secondary granite already 
mentioned. At Port Epworth, the country is exceedingly sterile; one. cliff 
rising above another with stony valleys between, almost destitute of herbage. 
The rocks observed here. were liver-brown clinkstone porphyry, with a few 
beds. of earthy, greenstone: .The sdme formation extended to. the mouth of 
Wentzel’s: River; the trap cliffs succeeding each other with tiresome uniformity, 
and their debris entirely covering the narrow valleys that intervene. to. the ex- 
clusion of all vegetation. None of the rivers on this part of the coast bring 
down any drift timber. . To the eastward of Wentzel’s River, the coast run- 
ning out forms Cape Barrow. We rounded this large projection in thick 


No. 1] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 53] 


foggy weather, which permitted us tohave a very indistinct view of the shore; 
but we landed on several parts near the pitch of the cape, and found the rocks 
to consist of a beautiful admixture of red and grey granite, forming very steep 
‘craggy, and acute peaks, rising abruptly from the water to the height of one 
thousand five hundred feet. The granite is traversed by large veins of red 
felspar running from N. to S., intersected at right angles by smaller veins. 
In one or two places, the larger veins were filled with greenstone. The 
granite hills terminate abruptly, or recede from the coast at Detention Har- 
bour, and give place to much less elevated strata of gneiss, enclosing some 
beds of red granite. A vein of galena was traced for two hundred yards, run- 
ning through the gneiss at Galena Point. This vein, about two inches in 
diameter, was entirely filled with galena, without the slightest appearance of 
any sparry substance. A few miles to the eastward of Galena Point, the 
gneiss recedes from the shore, and appears to enter into the composition of a 
ridge which runs nearly in a straight line until itis cut’by Hood's River, about 
fifteen miles above its mouth. On the western point of Moore’s Bay, there 
is a precipice of indurated iron-shot slaty clay. The promontory which forms 
the east side of the same bay is formed of trap rocks and claystone porphyry, 
whose mural precipices constitute the sides of very narrow valleys that open 
at each end to the sea. ‘Several species of carex grow in\these wet and 
spongy valleys, on which account the rein-deer seem to resort to them. Very 
few lichens were observed. Some small fragments were found amongst the 
debris of the porphyry, containing copper green and scales of native copper. 

From Moore’s Bay to the entrance of Arctic Sound, an iron-shot clinkstone 
porphyry prevails, having a columnar appearance. The eastern shore of 
Arctic Sound, rising gently towards the ridge of gneiss lately mentioned, ‘is 
covered with grass, and presents little or no naked rock; but on Banks’s 
Peninsula, the clinkstone porphyry re-appears along with an earthy-looking 
greenstone, forming, as usual, parallel ranges of mural precipices. 

On the eastern point of Brown’s Passage, the strata consist of light red 
sandstone: dipping slightly to the westward, succeeded by bluish-grey slate 
clay, and having lofty cliffs of greenstone, iron-shot amygdaloid and trap tuff 
superimposed. On Barry’s Island, which lies off this part of the coast, the 
rocks consist of trap rocks, forming cliffs from fifty to one hundred and sixty 
feet high, superimposed on’ thick beds of indurated clay or marl, variously 

3 ¥ 2 


532 | "APPENDIX. [No. 1. 


coloured red or grey in thin horizontal strata. On the northern extremity of 
the island, there is a red amygdaloidal rock which contains many beautiful 
pebbles, and some imbedded masses of jasper. Most of the pebbles are 
composed of concentric layers of calcedony with drusy cavities, but some of 
them approach nearly to pure carnelian. 

Near the encampment of August 3, a dark red cliff, probably of claystone 
porphyry, is intersected by a vein several yards thick of a bluish-white 
substance. ‘The vein made an angle of forty-five with the horizon, and was 
seen at a considerable distance. We had no opportunity of examining it. 
Nearly opposite to this; near Sir James Gordon’s Bay and Tinney’s Cove, 
some portions of the sandstone strata, of a reddish-grey colour, have a beau- 
tiful porphyritic appearance from: imbedded pieces of white quartz, mostly 
quadrangular, and about an inch in diameter. Other portions of the rock had 
none of these imbedded pieces. 

‘Between this spot and the mouth of Back’s River, the eastern shore of 
Bathurst’s Inlet consists of gneiss, with beds of granite, forming a continued 
range of hills rising pretty steeply from the water to the height of five or six 
hundred feet. 

In Sir James Gordon’s Bay, the strata consist chiefly of light red and 
greyish sandstone, still of the new red sandstone formation, with trap rocks 
generally greenstone. To the northward of Fowler’s Bay, the gneiss re- 
appears, containing beds of granite and hornblendic gneiss. In one spot near 
Point Evritt, hexagonal crystals of hornblende, some of them above a foot | 
long, occur, imbedded in the gneiss. Most of the crystals were contaminated 
with scales of mica. The islands in the offing consist, as usual, of fleetz 
trap, or porphyry ; and on the north side of Buchan’s Bay, the new red:sand- 
stone re-appears, having a fine grain and light-red colour... Cape Croker is 
composed of red sandstone, whose debris form a shelving and utterly barren 
shore. | a | 
The northern. shore of Melville Sound has a barren. clayey soil, which, 
when washed away, exposes strata of greyish-white sandstone, associated 
with or passing into a slaty clay. A few cliffs of greenstone or claystone 
porphyry, superimposed on the flat strata, presented from the opposite coast 
as we entered the sound, the appearance of islands. Had. the intermediate 
low land been visible, a tedious circumnavigation of the sound would have 


No. I.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 533 


been spared. The coast presented the same appearance as far as Point 
Turnagain. | 

The horizontal strata consisted of a kind of greyish-blue slaty clay, much 
impregnated with quartz, and passing into the new red sandstone. Cliffs of 
greenstone, porphyry slate, or red amygdaloid, were frequently imposed on 
the clay. At Slate Clay Point, onthe eastern side of Walker’s Bay, the layers 
of the indurated slate clay were disposed in a concentric mamner, so as to form 
large globular concretions. The outer layers of the concretions running in- 
sensibly into each other. 

Having now enumerated, as distinctly as circumstances would permit, the 
rocks we had an opportunity of observing on the coast, we may state that the 
new red sandstone formation seems to prevail, All the islands visited were 
formed of trap or porphyry belonging to that formation, and judging from simi- 
larity of form, the rocks of the other islands belong to the same class.. The gneiss 
formation is next in extent, and indeed it appears to run nearly parallel to the 
coast within the red sandstone from Cape Barrow across Hood’s River above 
Wilberforce Falls to the bottom of Bathurst’s Inlet, and from thence to 
Hope’s Bay, on the western side of Melville Sound. The only foreign beds 
we observed in the: gneiss were granite, perhaps quartz rock, and horn- 
blendic gneiss, or sienite. We saw no clay or mica slate, nor did we observe 
any formations intermediate between the gneiss, and new red sandstone ; nor, 
except at Cape Barrow, where granite predominates, any other formation 
than the two just mentioned. Our opportunities for observation, however, 
were not extensive, the necessity of proceeding without delay limiting our 
geognostical and botanical excursions to'the short period that was required to 
prepare breakfast or supper. 

From Point Turnagain, we proceeded to Hood’s River, and traced it for 
some distance. The river, at its mouth, is from one to three hundred yards 
wide, and is bounded by steep and high banks of clay, reposing on fleetz rocks, 
which occasionally shew themselves. At the first rapid, in lat. 67° 19' 28”, a 
bed of reddish secondary granite crosses the stream. At the second rapid, in 
lat. 67° 12’ 14", and in other places, the rocks consist mostly of the red indu- 
rated slaty clay, or the red amygdaloid, which we often saw on the coast asso- 
ciated with the new red sandstone. Six or seven miles higher up, at Wilber- 


5A. , BF _ . APPENDIX. [No. I. 


force’s Falls, the river makes a descent of about two hundred and fifty feet 
into a chasm, whose walls consist of light-red felspathose sandstone, belonging 
most probably to the old red sandstone formation, or that which lies under 
coal, and occasionally alternates with transition rocks. 

The gneiss formation appears a short distance above these falls, producing 
hills precisely similar in character to those about Fort Enterprise. After quit- 
ting Hood’s River, and ascending out of the valley through which it flows, we 
entered upon an even clayey and very barren country, interspersed with shal- 
low lakes. ‘This plain continued nearly to Craycroft’s River, when the gneiss 
re-appeared, presenting the genuine barren ground hills and precipices, toge- 
ther with their vegetable associates, cenomyce rangiferina, cetraria nivalis, cucul- 
lata and wslandica, cornicularia ochrileuca, dufourea arctica, arbutus alpina, rhodo- 
dendron lappomcum, and empetrum nigrum, plants which geem to characterize 
the Barren Grounds. ‘This formation continues without any essential change 
of aspect, but. with some occasional differences in the altitude of its hills, until 
it unites with the Fort Enterprise district at Obstruction Rapid, between Provi- 
dence:and Point Lakes. Its hills assume the form of ranges in the neighbour. 
hood of Congecathewachaga and Rum Lakes. It is to be observed, however, 
that we travelled over this district when the ground was deeply covered with 
snow; and when circumstances were not favourable either for observing or 
recording the appearances of the rocks, with sufficient accuracy for drawing 
up ‘a geognostical' account of them at a future period. 

We shall now proceed to offer a few 


CONCLUDING REMARKS. 


Tue observations of Werner, Humboldt, Von Buch, Saussure, Ebel, and 
Daubuisson, in many districts in the continent of Europe and in America, and 
by Jameson in Scotland, shew that the general direction of the primitive and 
transition strata, is nearly from N.E. to S.W. It is, therefore, interesting to 
find, that the general result of my notes on the positions of these rocks which 
we traced (except in a few instances when our route lay to the westward of 

their boundary) through twelve degrees of latitude, Le gives N.E. and 8.W. 
as the average direction of their strata. 

' The strata of the two classes of rocks just mentioned, were always more or 


No. 1.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 535 


less inclined to the horizon, the mean angle considerably. exceeding 450. 
Their dip was sometimes to the east, sometimes to the west. 

These rocks exhibited the same varieties of structure, that they do in. other 
extensive tracts of country. In general, the slaty structure was parallel to the 
direction of the strata, as in gneiss, mica-slate, clay-slate, &c. When the waved 
structure made its appearance, it was sometimes conformable with the seams 
of stratification, as was very often noticed in the transition clay-slate of the 
Copper-Mine River ; or it was entirely independent of these, and then it: was 
very irregular in its direction. The apparently-confused arrangements. of struc- 
ture of clay-slate and other slaty rocks, more particularly observed. at the. mag- 
netic islet in Knee Lake, and on Point Lake, proved, on a more extended and 
accurate examination, to be caused by the arrangement of the mass of strata into 
variously-formed distinct concretions, in many of which the direction of the slaty 
structure was under very different angles, and in yery different. directions... In 
short, in these apparently-disturbed strata we had, though on a, great scale, the 
same beautiful arrangement that occurs in the rock named by Werner, ‘‘ Topaz 
Rock.” Independent of these various structures observable in individual strata; 
we remarked that the strata themselves, whatever their structure might be, 
were either variously waved or quite straight in their direction... 

The general forms, connexions, and distributions of the mountains, hills, and 
plains, in the tracts we traversed, and of the cliffs on the coast of the Arctic Sea, 
were nearly the same that geologists have remarked as characterizing similar 
rocks, similarly circumstanced in other quarters of the globe. | 

Granite with sienite, gneiss, mica-slate, and clay-slate, which some geologists 
consider to be the predominating primitive rocks, occur in. all. their. usual rela- 
tions ; of these the gneiss appears to be the most extensively distributed, and to 
be always attended with a very scanty vegetation. Granite is the next in fre- 
quency, then mica-slate, and the least abundant are the clay-slate and protogine. 
The granite is generally of a red colour, and varies from coarse to small. gra-. 
nular. The loose blocks of stone, which crown the summits of almost all the 
hills in the Barren Grounds, are generally of this latter variety.. Of the gneiss 
there are two varieties, the one'red and the other grey. The. mica-slate, clay- 
slate, and’ sienite, present the’ common varieties. The protogine granite, of 
which there is considerable abundance in Slave River, and in some other quar- 
ters, appears to belong to the mica-slate formations. 


536 ~ APPENDIX, a. [No. L 


These primitive rocks are traversed by veins of felspar, quartz, and granite; 
and the granite of Cape Barrow was also intersected by veins of augite green- 
stone of the same description with those met with in the granite districts of 
Great Britain. The occurrence of the vein of galena, at Galena Point; is an 
interesting fact, as connected with the geographical distribution of that impor- 
tant ore. The Esquimaux, that frequent the shores of the Arctic Sea, make their 
culinary utensils of potstone, but we did not discover the place from whence my 
obtained it. 

The transition rocks were observed mm situ, only on Point Lake, on the 
Copper-Mine River, and, perhaps, at Wilberforce Falls on Hood’s River, and 
as far as our observétions extended, afforded neither limestone nor lydian 
stone. None of the transition slate that we examined contained chiastolite : 
and if any beds or imbedded masses of glance coal existed, they escaped our 
notice. The transition rocks being principally clay-slate and grey wacke, bore 
a strong resemblance to those in Dumfries-shire, my native county. 

The secondary formations, if examined by travellers more fortunately situ- 
ated than we were, will doubtless exhibit many curious and highly-important 
relations. The facts already stated, shew that the following formations of this 
class occurred on or near the line of our journey. 

First, The old red sandstone, or that which lies under coal, and occasionally 
alternates with transition rocks. This was observed upon the Copper-Mine River. 

Second, The coal formation, which did not present itself in the direct line of 
our route ; but as it is known to occur in some districts in M‘Kenzie’s River, 
and also towards the Rocky Mountains, placed apparently upon the old red sand- 
stone, and under the vast deposit of secondary limestone, it is here mentioned. 

Third, The new red or variegated sandstone. This important formation is of 
very considerable extent in several of the tracts we passed through, and pro- 
bably lies over an extensive deposite of the coal formation. In some instances, 
where the old red sandstone was wanting, it appeared to us resting upon gneiss 
and other primitive rocks. Here, as in other quarters of the world, the new 
red sandstone contains gypsum and salt springs that seem to issue from it, 
implying that it contains beds of salt or of muriatiferous clay, which afford the 
impregnating material to the springs. The springs on the Slave River afford 
by spontaneous evaporation during the short summers, a very large quantity of 
fine salt. 


No. 1.] GEOGNOSTICAL OBSERVATIONS. 537 


Fourth,’ The secondary limestone appears generally to belong to the vast 
deposite which lies above the new red sandstone and under chalk, and which 
is known to form very extensive tracts of country, not only in other quarters of 
North America, but also on the continent of Europe and in England. Some of 
the varieties may, on more minute examination, prove to ee to the mountain 
limestone of geologists. 

Fifth, The secondary trap and porphyry rocks, which occur so mutiny 
on the coast of the Arctic Sea, and throughout the whole extent of the Copper 
Mountains, are to all appearance connected with the new red sandstone: The 
frequency of native copper in those rocks, both on the Copper Mountains and 
on the sea-coast, is a very interesting feature in their composition, and deserves 
the particular consideration of those who make the grouping or associations of 
simple minerals objects of attention. Many of these trap and porphyry rocks 
presented the columnar structure which has been considered as indicative of -a 
voleanic origin, but their other characters and the horizontal strata upon which 
they reposed seemed to give them a still greater claim to Neptunian origin. 
Our opportunities of observation, however, were much too limited to permit us 
to offer a decided opinion upon this disputed point. a? 

Alluvial Deposites.—The extensive’ formation’ of these deposites in the line 
of our journey, afforded us numerous examples of their different kinds. In the 
preceding notes, we have alluded to extensive alluvial formations, occasioned 
by lakes which have either gradually dried up, or have burst suddenly and left 
their concavities more or less deeply covered with sand, gravel, and other alluvial 
matters. Other kinds have evidently had their origin from the action of rivers. 
Some formations on the sea-coast were occasioned by the conjoined action of 
the sea, and the wasting influence of the weather. The peninsula, between 
Point Turnagain and Melville Sound, is almost entirely composed of a low flat 
of this kind, a few trap cliffs appearing at considerable distances only. The 
general wasting influence of the weather on the more elevated exposed rocks 
throughout the country, has formed a covering of alluvial matter of greater or 
less depth to the subjacent rocks, which protects them from the further gnawing 
effects of the atmosphere. 

With regard to the large rolled Bic: which are so plentifully. scattered 
over the surface of some countries, and which have been considered to have 
been deposited by the waters of the flood, we have no remarks of moment to 


3 Z 


538 APPENDIX. | [No. I. 


make. During our journey from. York Factory.to Fort. Enterprise, we seldom 
had an opportunity of ascending out of the valley of the river through. which 
our route lay, and any blocks of stone observed in, such a situation may as 
readily be supposed to have been transported by the river as by a more 
general cause. On the Barren Grounds, where we adopted.a different style of 
travelling, the loose stones which were very numerous, even in the most.ele- 
vated situations, were, as far as we observed, similar to the rocks ‘on which 
they rested, and may be supposed to be the more durable remains of the 
covering strata, which have been destroyed, by. long-continued action. of 
the. atmosphere. Their, angular forms and their resting-places, often upon 
the very summit. of the hills, militate against their having travelled home a. 
distance. 

The very, general, though rude, resemblance these blocks. bore to large 
crystals is a.remarkable circumstance, and) seems.to indicate. a crystallization 
in the great of the red granite, of which they were very frequently Sen ROES 
and. of whose beds, or, strata they, are perhaps the remains.,. 

We may conclude. with observing, that, the preceding details ee that. in 
the regions we traversed, the rocks of the primitive, transition, secondary, and 
alluvial.classes: have the same general composition, structure, position, and 
distribution, as in other parts of America which have been. examined ; and as 
these agree in all respects, with the rock formations in Europe and Asia, they 
may with propriety, be considered as universal. formations, parts of a grand 
and harmonious, whole, the production of infinite wisdom. 


No. IL 


AURORA BOREALIS. 


GENERAL REMARKS. 


SO few observations of the Aurora Borealis in high northern latitudes have 
been recorded, that I trust a minute account of the various appearances it ex- 
hibits, will not be thought superfluous or uninteresting. The remarks of the 
late Lieutenant Hood are copied verbatim from his journal. They speak suf 
ciently for themselves, to render any eulogium of mine unnecessary. To this. 
excellent and lamented young officer, the merit is due’ of having been, I be- 
lieve, the first who ascertained by his observations at Basquiau-Hill, (combined 
with those of Dr. Richardson at Cumberland-House,) that the altitude of the 
Aurora upon these occasions was far inferior to that which had been assigned to 
it by any former observer. He also, by a skilful adaptation of a vernier to the 
graduated circle of a Kater’s Compass, enabled himself to read off small devia- 
tions of the needle, and was the first who satisfactorily proved, by his observa- 
tions at Cumberland-House, the important fact of the action of the Aurora upon 
the compass-needle. By his ingenious Electrometer mvented at Fort Enter- 
prise, he seems also to have proved the Aurora to be an electrical phenomenon, 
or at least that it induces a certain unusual state of electricity in the at- 
mosphere. 

The observations of Dr. Richardson, independent of their merit in other 
respects, point peculiarly to the Aurora being formed at no great eleva- 
tion, and that it is dependent upon certain other atmospheric phenomena, such 
as the formation of one or other of the various modifications of cirro-stratus. 

With respect to my own observations, they were principally directed to the 
effects of the Aurora upon the magnetic needle, and the connexion of the 


amount, &c., of this effect, with the position and appearance of the Aurora. 
3 Z 2 


540 APPENDIX. [No, IL. 


I have been anxious to confine myself to a mere detail of facts, without ventur- 
ing upon any theory. My notes upon the appearances of the Aurora coincide 
with those of Dr. Richardson, in proving, that that phenomenon is frequently 
seated within the region of the clouds, and that it is dependent, in some degree, 
upon the cloudy state of the atmosphere. . 

The manner in which the needle was affected by the Aurora will need some 
description. ‘The motion communicated to it wag neither sudden nor vibra- 
tory. Sometimes it was simultaneous with the formation of arches, prolonga- 
tion of beams, or certain other changes of form, or of activity of the Au- 
rora; but generally the effect of these phenomena upon the needle, was not vi- 
sible immediately, but in about half an hour or an hour, the needle had at- 
tained its maximum of deviation. 

From this, its return to its former position was very gradual, seldom regain- 
ing it before the following morning, and frequently not until the afternoon, un- 
less it was expedited by another arch of the Aurora operating in a: direction 
different from the former one. 

The bearings of the terminations of the arches are to be taken with consi- 
derable allowance. ‘They were estimated by the position of the Aurora, with 
respect to the sides of the house, the angles of which had been previously de- 
termined. The bearings given in the whole of my observations refer to the 
magnetic meridian, and are reckoned from the magnetic north, towards the 
east round the whole circle, which, it is conceived, will afford a means of more 
readily computing the horizontal extent of the arches. | 

It is to be noticed, that the bearings given by Dr. Richardson and Lieu- 
tenant Hood are true, and not magnetic. 


ON THE AURORA BOREALIS, 
CUMBERLAND-HOUSE. 


EXTRACTED FROM THE JOURNAL OF LIEUT. ROBERT HOOD, R.N. 


Tue most material information we had obtained at this period regarded 
the height of the Aurora from the earth. 

The following is the result of the observations that were made at the Bas- 
- quiau Hill, and at the same time by Dr. Richardson at Cumberland-House. 
The instruments used for the purpose were two small wooden quadrants, re- 
volving on pivots, and furnished with plummets. Our chronometers were 
previously regulated; though great accuracy was not necessary in this parti: 
cular, as the arches of the Aurora are sometimes stationary for many minutes. 
On the 2nd of April, the altitude of a brilliant beam was 10° 0’ 0’, at 
10hs. lm. Os. p.m., at Cumberland-House. Fifty-five miles S.S. W., it was 
not visible. As the trees at the latter station rose about 5° above the horizon, it 
may be estimated, that the beam was not more than seven miles from the earth, 
and twenty-seven from Cumberland-House. On the 6th of April, the Aurora was, 
for some hours, in the zenith at that place, forming a confused mass of flashes and 
beams; and in lat. 53° 22’ 48" N., long. 103° 7’ 17” W., it appeared in the 
form of an arch, stationary about 9° high, and bearing N.b.E. It was there- 
fore seven miles from the earth. On the 7th of April, the Aurora was again 
in the zenith before 10° p. m., at Cumberland-House, and in lat. 53° 36’ 40" N., 
and long. 102° 31’ 41"; the altitude of the highest of two concentric arches at 
Qhs. p-m., was 9°; at Qhs. 30m., it was 11° 30’; and at 1Ohs. Om. Os. p.m, 
15° 0' 0", its centre always bearing N.b.E. During this time, it was be- 
tween six and seven miles from the earth. After 1Ohs. p. m., it covered the 
sky at Cumberland-House, and passed the zenith at the other place. 

These observations are opposed to the general opinion of meteorologists; 
they are nevertheless facts. We have sometimes seen an attenuated Aurora 
flashing across 100° of the sky in a single second; a quickness of motion 


542 APPENDIX. [No. II, 


Inconsistent with the height of sixty or seventy miles, the least which has 
hitherto been ascribed to it. This kind of Aurora is not brighter than the 
milky way, and resembles sheet:-lightning in its motions. 

For the sake of perspicuity, I shall describe the several parts of the Aurora, 
which I term beams, flashes, and arches. 'The beams are little conical pencils 
of light, ranged in parallel lines, with their pointed extremities towards the 
earth, generally in the direction of the dipping needle. ‘The flashes seem to 
be scattered beams approaching nearer to the earth, because they are similarly 
shaped and infinitely larger. I have called them flashes because their appear- 
ance is sudden, and seldom continues long. «When the Aurora first becomes 
visible, itis formed like a rainbow, the light of which is faint, and the motion of 
the beams undistinguishable. It is then in the horizon. As it approaches the 
zenith, it resolves itself at intervals into beams, which, by a quick undulating 
motion, project themselves into wreaths, afterwards fading away, and again 
brightening, without any visible expansion or concentration of matter.  Nume:- 
rous flashes attend m different parts of the sky. That this mass, from its short 
distance above the earth, would appear like an arch to a person situated at the 
horizon, may be demonstrated by the rules of perspective, supposing its parts 
to be nearly equidistant from the earth. An undeniable proof of it, however, 
is afforded by the observations of the 6th and 7th of April, when the Aurora 
which filled the sky at Cumberland-House, from the northern horizon to the 
zenith, with wreaths and flashes, assumed the shape of arches at some distance 
to the southward. - 

But the Aurora does not always make its first appearance as an arch. © It 
sometimes rises from a confused mass of light in the east or west, and crosses 
the sky towards the opposite point, exhibiting wreaths of beams, or coronz 
boreales, in its way. An arch, also,which is pale and uniform at the horizon; 
passes the zenith without displaying ‘any irregularity or additional brilliancy ; 
and. we have seen three arches together, very near the northern horizon, one of 
which exhibited beams and even colours, but the other two were faint and 
uniform. , | 

On the 7th of April, an arch was visible to the southward, exactly similar to 
that inthe north, and it disappeared in fifteen minutes. It had probably passed 
the zenith before sun-set. The motion of the whole body of Aurora is from the 
northward to the southward, at. angles not more thon 20° fromthe ‘magnetic 


No. IL] AURORA BOREALIS. 543 


meridian,...The centres.of the arches, were .as, often, in. the magnetic as.in the 
true meridian. | 

The colours do not seem to depend.on the presence of any. luminary, but to 
be generated by the motion of the beams, and then only when that motion is 
rapid, and the light brilliant. The, lower extremities quiver with a fiery red 
colour, and the upper with orange... We once saw, violet in the former. The 
number of Aurore visible in September was. two ;in, October three ; in, No- 
vember three; in December five; in January five; in February seven; in 
March sixteen ;, in April fifteen ; andin May eleven. Calm and clear weather 
was the most fayourable for observation ; but it is discernible in cloudy weather, 
and through mists. We could not perceive that it affected the weather.. The 
magnetic. needle, in the open air, was disturbed by the Aurora, whenever it ap- 
proached the zenith. Its motion was not vibratory, as observed by Mr. Dalton; 
and this was, perhaps, owing to the weight of the card attached to it. It moved 
slowly to the I. or W. of the magnetic meridian, and seldom recovered: its 
original, direction in less than eight, or nine hours.. The greatest, extent.of its 
aberration. was 45’. | 

A delicate electrometer, suspended at the height of fifty feetfrom the ground, 
was never perceptibly affected by the Aurora, nor could we distinguish. its 
rustling noise, of which, however, such strong testimony has been given to.us, 
that, no doubt can remain of the fact. The conclusions to, be drawn from the 
above. will be found in the observations for the winter of 1820. 


An Account of the Aurora Borealis, seen at Cumberland-House, between the 23d 
of October, 1819, and the 13th of June, 1820; Lat. 53° 56’ 40” N. Long. 
102° 16 41” W. Variation 17° 17’ 31” E. 


From the 23d of October to the 25th of November, the aurora was not visi- 
ble, or it did not appear before one a. m. 

November 26th, at one a.m., an Aurora, arched like a rainbow, about 20° 
high; centre bearing north; colour pale-yellow, faint. At eight p.m., a very 
faint arch, centre north. — 

December 6th, at ten p. m., a faint-arched Aurora, centre N.b. E. 

Sth. A similar Aurora, centre north, at ten p. m. 


BAA: APPENDIX. [No. I: 


December 9th, at eleven p. m., an arched Aurora, centre north; colour light- 
yellow, very bright. 

12th. At eight p.m., an arched Aurora, centre north ; colour light-yellow ; 
faint. 

January 14th, 1820, at ten p.m. Aurora faintly visible, north. 

19th. An Aurora, embracing the horizon, from N.N.W. to N.N.E., about 
12° high, 5° broad ; faint, but permanent; twelve p. m. 

20th. At eleven p.m., an arched Aurora, centre north, 15° high, and 5° 
broad. 

27th. At ten p.m., an Aurora, 40° high, and 5° broad; usual colour, and 
faint ; centre north. 

February 2d, an Aurora, very faint; centre north, about 2° high, extending 
from east to west. 

Sth. Appearance of an Aurora, at ten p.m., in the northern horizon. 

{0th. An Aurora arched; centre N.b.E., about 4° high, and 30° long. 

12th. At ten p.m., an arched Aurora; centre north, about 6° high. 
Between it and the zenith were sometimes visible, several perpendicular 
streams, with one extremity pointed, and declining nearly in the direction of 
the dipping needle. They sometimes re-appeared in the same place, which 
they had occupied at first. I shall, for the future, call them flashes. 

19th. An Aurora across the zenith, cutting the meridian at right 
angles. That side of it which faced the south was a regular line; but the 
other streamed at intervals towards the east or west, separating itself into por- 
tions resembling the flashes, but much smaller; colour ag usual ; many flashes 
near the northern horizon. This Aurora was followed, on the 20th, by a storm 
of snow E.S.E. : | 

29th. An Aurora arched, centre north; extending 60°, height 30°, 
breadth 5°. Towards the eastern extremity, it was broken by a quick undulat- 
ing motion, into those portions described above, which I shall call beams’; be- 
cause they appear to tend towards a common centre, though their direction is 
sometimes altered when in motion; colour as usual. | 

March 4th, at twelve p.m., a beautiful and singular Aurora; four regular 
concentric arches, the outermost extending from N.N.W. to E.N.E., about 30° 
high, and the others at equal distances within it, the last being 7° high. Each 
was 3° broad ; faint, but visible for three hours. 


No. IL] AURORA BOREALIS. 545 


March 5th. An appearance of Aurora in the northern horizon. 

6th. A large, brilliant, arched Aurora, centre N.N.E., at nine p.m. It ad- 
vanced rapidly to the southward, separating into beams, and scattering many 
flashes. The motion of the beams was exceedingly quick, and they were 
bright, but of the usual colour. They ranged themselves in wreaths, forming 
corone boreales in the zenith, which faded gradually, leaving a pale undistin- 
guished body of light, out of which they were soon again renovated, without 
apparent communication with any other body of the Aurora. 

7th. At one a.m., the above Aurora spread over the whole sky, except a 
portion from 8.8.E. to S.S.W. - 

At nine p.m., an arched Aurora, centre N.N.E.; many flashes, which at 
twelve p. m. filled the northern half of the sky. 

8th. an arched Aurora, centre N.N.E. It did not advance to the zenith, 
but separated into brilliant beams, and scattered many flashes. The mo- 
tion of the beams was in wreaths, or segments of circles ; rapid, and exhi- 
biting at the lower extremities a red- as colour, and at the upper, faint 
yellow... 

9th. At eight p.m., an Aurora, consisting of several-arches, the highest of 
which was the faintest. They were almost obscured by flashes between 
them and the spectator. | 

10th. At nine p.m., an Aurora, in rapid motion, seen through breaks in 
the clouds. 

llth. An Aurora, in many eae from .N.E. to W.N.W. ; beams in 
rapid motion, ordinary colour. 

12th. At eight p. m.,an arched Aurora, centre N.b.E. At ten p. m. it 
approached near the zenith, and broke into beams and flashes, ordinary 
colour. | 

‘14th and L5th, Aurore just cence through the clouds. 

16th. A bright Aurora, but almost hid by the clouds. 

17th. Aurora visible through a dense haze. 

18th. At twelve p.m., an arched Aurora, centre N.N.E., about 20° high, 
6° broad, extending from N. W. to east. 

19th. At eight p. m., an appearance of Aurora in the northern horizon, 

N.B. From March 22 to April the 8th, the descriptions of the Aurore and 
other observations relative to their height, have been delivered ina separate 
paper. 

4A 


546 APPENDIX. (No. IL. 


April 10th and-12th... Appearance of Aurora north. 

14th. At 9.p,m., an arched Aurora, about 15° high, centre north. 

15th... An arched. Aurora, 16° high; centre N. b. E. 

16th... Appearance of Aurora, N.N.E. 

19th, At 10 p. m., an arched Aurora 25° high; centre N. b. E., extend- 
ing from N.E, to N.N.W. At 11, p.m: it was 35° high, and. its eastern 
extremity turned back upon itself, and.appeared to dart a flash perpendicu- 
larly towards the earth. At 11h. 30’p. m. several flashes reached the zenith, 
colour.as usual. 

20th. Appearance of Aurora through a thick fog. 

2¢th. At 12 p.m,., a segment of an arch, and several. flashes, north; and 
about 30° high. 

29th... Several flashes. of Aurora, bearing north. 

30th. At8 p.m. an arched. Aurora 30° high; centre bearing N.N.E. ex- 
tremes N.E.b. E. and N.W.b.N. 

May Ist. At 12p. m., a remarkable Aurora rose from E.N.E,; like the trunk of 
a tree, and spread forth branches all over the sky, but principally towards the 
South. They were composed of beams which always are distinguishable 
when the Aurora is much agitated; ordinary colour; many scattered flashes 
round the horizon. 

2d... At ll p. m., an arch across the zenith; 6° broad, and faint; ex- 
tremes E.b.S. and W.b.N. 

- 8d. At 10 p.m., an Aurora in rapid motion, seen through the clouds. 

oth. At 11 p.m.an arched Aurora, very faint; centre N.N.E. 

12th. At12p. m., the northern half of the sky was filled with a. light 
attenuated. Aurora, not more brilliant than the milky. way; but flashing with 
such rapidity, that the eye could not follow its motion, nor edeterne 1 its form. 

12th. AtS p.m., appearance of Aurora, north. 

18th, Ditto. 

23rd. An arched Aurora, 15°-high; centre N.b. RB. 

28th. Appearance of. Aurora in the northern horizon. . 

N.B. The above descriptions were taken at the times inserted; the Aurora 
no doubt often changed its form afterwards. Many of the faint arches, however, 
altered-only their. ponngns in the course of four.or five hours, by approaching 
nearerto the zenith. | 


TABLE L 


OBSERVATIONS ON THE MAGNETIC-NEEDLE, 


AT CUMBERLAND-HOUSE, HUDSON’S BAY, 
JUNE 11, 1820, 


By LIEUTENANT ROBERT HOOD, R.N. 


eee 


In the month of February 1820, an Azimuth Compass was fixed in the open air, with a small minutely-divided 
metal arch on the edge of the card ; and the diurnal variation of the needle was ascertained as noted in the following 
table. Many interruptions prevented a more complete series of observations ; and the present will serve only to shew 
the amount in general, and the direction of the variation. 


EASTERLY VARIATION. 


FEBRUARY, 1820. MARCH. 


~ Noon. | 1P.M. { 4P.M. | '8P.M. | 12P.M.|l Days. oA at | Noon. | 1P.M. | 4P.M. | 8P.M. | 12P.M. 


CAND Os & 0 = 


—<o 


ft fe 


ome fed fed ede feed feed ft feed 
CMONACEWNHWH OCHODYOA RA & we 
(oot 
SSFOHNSOH8GCOOCDHAHMHOAND 


— 
OPOAAONND 


d9 2 © 
oO = © 
font foe 


fmt ed feet pet 
© os © 


a" 
f—_ 


fad fe 
WO & WW 


* See the observations at the end. 


048 APPENDIX. [No, IL. 


APRIL, 1820. 


8A. M. 1P. M. 4P,M. 4P-M. 12 P. M. 


‘ iy Oo vi 
1 8 9|17 o* 
g 9 10 | 16 52% 
3 8 9 | 17 14 
4 8 8 | 17 14 
5 a 7 Te 14, 
6 Va we 14, 
7 7 7117 15 
8 8 8117 15 
9 8 ce ae 
10 9 9 | 17 16 
11 8 8 | 17 15 
ie ee ‘a BO 8 8 | 17 15 
13 | 17 14])17 9] 17 1o 8 8117 16 
14/17 13/17 8]17 8 8 8|17 15 
15| 17 15 | 17 8 | 17 10 8 8 | 17 16 
16} 1715/17 911711 8 SL be 
17 | 17 16/17 9117 11 9 9} 17 15 
i h17 17 |17 9] 17 11 9 9] 17 14 
19 | 17 16 | 17 10} 17 12 8 9117 16 
20117 16|17 91|17 11 8 S| 17 15 
/ 21117 16 | 17 10/17 8 s 8117 15 
122117 16117 9)|17 11 8 8 | 17 16 
23117 23117 8117 9 9 0 | 17 33* 
24 | 17 17 | 17 9 117 lo 8 9 | 17 14 
25 |17 17117 10] 17 12 7 FN Te 18 
2611716117 9117 9 v4 FA TA 
a7 17 16 17° 9117 7 7 ae hg at Al 
98|17 16117 8|17 9g 73 8 | 16 54* 
2911716117 S|17 8 7 8 | 17 14 
30 PT NS PIR 7 17, 7 i 7 | 17 14 
7 ih Po) a? AB 


* Where the figures are marked with an asterisk, the Aurora had approached, or passed, 
the zenith, and was. doubtless the cause of the increased or diminished variation. The varia- 
tion assumed for the 12th of February, is, that which was observed by Mr. Franklin in No- 
vember, the coldness of the weather not afterwards permitting the use of instruments, until 
the month of February. It may be remarked, that the greatest variation was found between 
Sand9 A. M., and the least at 1 P.M. The needle was nearly stationary during the heat of 
the day ; and the variation, then, gradually increased until the next niorning. If the needle 
had not been affected by the Aurora, and by some unavoidable unsteadiness, the variations 
would probably have been much more regular. The most striking circumstance in these ob- 
servations is, that though the needle varies, and is stationary, at the same hours here, in: 
London, and at Sumatra, the laws which govern it are exactly reversed.; the variation 
here being greatest at the coldest period, instead of least; and vice vers, For this pheno-- 
menon, it is not, perhaps, difficult to account on Dr. Lorimer’s principles. 

The annual variation seems to be inconsiderable. , 

The variations of the dipping needle were, also, observed ; but they differed very unac- 
countably, The amount varied from 10’ to 25’; and. the dip was generally least in the- 
morning, and greatest at 3 P.M. 


No. III. 


OBSERVATIONS ON THE AURORA 
AT FORT ENTERPRISE, 


EXTRACTED FROM THE JOURNAL OF CAPTAIN FRANKLIN. 


Tue forms of the Aurora Borealis, during the winter, have been so various 
and fleeting, that it is impossible to comprehend them in a general outline ; 
and the inferences I have drawn on a subject, respecting which I had not pre- 
pared my mind by previous study, are offered’ with diffidence ; but 1 hope the 
observations of the position of the needle, given in the following tables, may, 
together with those, made with great attention by Mr. Hood, be found useful to 
such persons as are more conversant with such inquiries. 

The horizontal compass was placed in a firm-sheltered stand, fixed to the 
back wall of the house, three feet above the ground, on a northern exposure, 
and the dipping needle was similarly fixed to the end of the store-house, atthe 
distance of forty feet. There was no iron near either of them, the house stands 
on a sand hill, and there were no large stones in its immediate vicinity *. 

The horizontal compass belonged to a small variation transit, made by Dol- 
lond ; and its graduated circle of one and a half inch radius, is divided into de- 


grees, the degrees counting from the north towards the west to three hundred and 


sixty. Each degree is sub- divided to twenty, but by the assistance of a mag- 
nifying glass, I could read off accurately, to within three minutes. The hori- 
zontal position was preserved by means of a spirit level attached to the instru- 


* The Kater’s Compass, with which Mr. Hood made his observations, was fixed in a room on the 
Gpposite side of the house, close to a parchment window that admitted the air, and it was about 


twenty-four feet apart from the horizontal compass. 


SEP ee ee 


- ee a 


550 APPENDIX. [No. III. 


ment. It was twice accidently shaken, but re-adjusted each time, without 
being moved out of its place : these circumstances are noted in the table, and 
asterisks are placed against observations that were made when the bubble 
shewed a slight deviation from the horizontal position, the adjustment, then 
required, was made after the observation had been read off. 

For the convenience of reading off, the compass was placed on the stand 
with the north end of the needle, pointing to 348° 30’ at three p. m. ; and the 
observations, made with the graduated circle in this position, are given in the 
following tables, together with the temperatures, and some brief notices of the 
weather. It must be recollected that this point of 348° 30’, is preserved merely 
for the sake of referring to the original observations, and that it has’‘no con- 
nexion whatever with the degrees indicating the bearings which will be here- 
after given of the Aurora. 

Before adverting to the effect of the Aurora on the needle, I must premise, that 
the arch-like appearance of the Aurora, noted in the daily remarks, did not 
always resemble a portion of a great circle ; but, on the contrary, frequently 
crossed the zenith, without originating and terminating in opposite points of 
the horizon ; and although the general arrangement of the parts gave the idea 
of an arch, yet this arch was frequently broken, and its portions disconnected. 

The colour of these arches varied from grey to a lively yellow, and in clear 
weather, the light emitted was generally observed to be more brilliant and 
dense than when an opposite state of the atmosphere existed. 

The horizontal bands or masses of light, mentioned in the notes, appeared 
indiscriminately in every quarter of the sky, and at different elevations ; they 
more frequently originated or terminated in the magnetic east or west, but not 
invariably so, and we have seen them on more than one occasion begin and end 
in the magnetic meridian. Their light varied much in density, and was gene- 
rally of a yellowish hue. 

The arches and horizontal bands of Aurora occasionally separated into’ parts 
or beams, which had a quick lateral motion. At such times, the colours were 
generally most vivid, and now and then prismatic. The extremities of these 
beams did not appear to point upiformly to any particular part of the sky, but 
to depend entirely upon the direction of the arch which they composed. 

The term “‘ beam,” used in the notes, does not always allude to the appear- 
ances just mentioned, but is also applied to the commencement of an arch 


No, III.] CAPTAIN FRANKLIN ON THE AURORA. 55] 


when it appears in an uniform stream of light, issuing from the horizon, and 
before it has attained an altitude sufficient to give it an arched form, 

The arches of the Aurora most commonly traverse: the. sky, nearly at right 
angles.to the magnetic meridian, but the deviations from, this. direction, as. has 
been already stated, were not rare; and I.am inclined: to consider, that these 
different positions of the: Aurora have considerable influence. upon the. direction 
of the needle. When an arch was nearly at right angles to the magnetic meri- 
dian; the motion of the needle was: towards the west ; this westward motion was 
still greater when one extremity of amarchbore 301”, or (about: 59° tothe west 
of the magnetic: north,) that: is, when the extremity of the arch approached from 
the west towards the:magnetic north; .A westerly motion also took. place when 
the extremity-of an-arch was:in:the:true north, or about 36° to the west. of the 
magnetic north, but not in-so great a.degree as:when its bearing: was: about 301°. 
A contrary effect was produced when the same end of an arch originated: to the 
southward.-of the magnetic west, viz:, when it bore from about 245° to 234° : 
and, of course, when its opposite extremity approached nearer to.the magnetic 
north. In these cases, I say; the motion of the needle. was towards the east. 

In one:instance only; a complete arch was: formed inthe magnetic meridian: 
in, another; the: beam. shot: up: from the. magnetic north to the zenith; and in 
both: these: cases;the needle moved towards the west. 

The:needle.was;most disturbed on February 13, p.m., at atime when the 
Aurora was-distinctly:seen passing between.a stratum of clouds. and. the earth, 
or at: least.illuminating the face of the clouds, opposed to.the observer. . This 
and several other appearances, recorded in the accompanying notes,, induced 
me to:infer,that the: distance of the Aurora. from, the. earth varied on different 
nights, and produced a, proportionate effect; on the needle. , When the light 
shone; through: a dense, hazy atmosphere, when there was a halo. round: the 
moon, or when a.small snow: was falling, the disturbance, was; generally. con- 
siderable ; and on certain hazy cloudy nights, the needle. frequently. deviated. 
inia:considerable degree, although, the Aurora was: not; visible at.the .time, 
Our observations do not:enable.us:to decide-whether:this ought tobe attributed, 
to am Auroraconcealed by a;cloud or haze, or entirely to.the state of the atmo- 
sphere. Similar, deviations have been observed: in the day-time,, both in a 
clear» and: cloudy state of; the» sky; but: more frequently in: the: latter case. 


552 APPENDIX. | [No. IIL. - 


Upon one occasion, the Aurora was seen immediately after sunset, whilst’ 
bright daylight was remaining. 

A circumstance to which I attach some importance must not be omaittB 
Clouds have been sometimes observed during the day to assume the 
forms of the aurora, and I am inclined to connect with the appearance of 
these clouds the deviation of the needle, which was. occasionally remarked at 
such times. : 

An Aurora sometimes Lnnitonelet the zenith, without producing any change 
in the position of the needle, as was more generally the case, whilst at other 
times a considerable alteration took place, although the beams or arches did 
not come near the zenith. ‘The Aurora was frequently seen without producing. 
any perceptible effect on the needle. At such times its appearance was that 
of an arch or an horizontal stream of dense yellowish light, with little or no 
internal motion. 

The disturbance in the needle was not always proportionate to the agitation. 
of the Aurora, but it was always greater when the quick motion and vivid 
light were observed to take place in a hazy atmosphere.. : | 

In a few instances, the motion of the needle was observed to commence at 
the instant a beam darted upwards from the horizon. And its former position 
was more quickly or slowly regained according to circumstances. If an arch. 
was formed immediately afterwards, having its extremities placed on opposite 
sides of the magnetic north and. south to the former one, the return of the 
needle was more speedy, and it a Ne: went beyond the pote from whence 
it first started. , 

When the disturbance of the needle wag be nciclersblee it detaeth regained: 
its usual position before three or four, p.m. on the following day. | 

On February 13, at 11h 50 p. m., the needle had a quick vibratory motion 
between 348° 50’ and 344° 40’. This is the ji occasion. on which a vibra-. 
tory motion was observed. | 

The disturbances produced by the Ait were so great that no. accurate. 
deductions could be made respecting the diurnal variation. 

[ have not heard the noise ascribed to the Aurora, but the viata eesestinonsa 
of the natives and of the residents in this country induces. me. to believe that 
itis occasionally audible. The circumstance, however, must be of. rare occur-: 


No. III.] CAPTAIN FRANKLIN ON THE AURORA. 553 


rence, as is evidenced by our having witnessed the Aurora upwards of two 
hundred times without being able to attest the fact. I was almost inclined, last 
year, to suppose that unusual agitations of the Aurora were followed by storms 
of wind; but the more extended opportunities I enjoyed of observing it in 
1821, at Fort Enterprise, have commie me that no such inference ought to 
have been drawn. | 

The Pith Ball Electrometer, which was placed in an elevated situation in the 
air, never indicated an atmosphere charged with electricity. 

Upon a review of the observations made upon the dipping-needle, its varia- 
tions appear to be so uncertain in their occurrence, that I cannot confidently 
ascribe them to the influence of the Aurora. | 

Observations were made on the ‘Aurora Borealis, in 1822, at Moose: Dee 
Island, lat. 61° 18’ 8" N. long..113° 51’ 35°. W., variation, 25° 40' 47" E. 
Being unwilling, however, to swell the Appendix more than necessary, I shall 
not insert the tables, but merely remark, that 

Although the Aurora was frequently seen there, the corusc ations were , seldom 
either brilliant or of the variable kind. They caused but little alteration: in 
the position of the needle; the greatest-deviation observed being 18’, and did 
not-furnish grounds for any addititional inferences to those which were drawn 
from the observations on the Aurora made at Fort Enterprise. The display 
of light was generally confined to the northern part of the sky, between the 
true N. Ey and 8. W. points, usually at a low altitude; and the Aurora was 
observed extending to the southward on four occasions only.- This, as well 
as the circumstance of the magnetic needle being but slightly affected by 
the presence of the Aurora during the winter at that place, appears to me 
to’ be deserving of notice, as affording an indication that the seat of the 
phenomenon lies more to the northward ; and were I to venture an opinion 
as to its probable situation, | should say between the latitudes of 64° and 
65° north, or about the position of Fort Enterprise, because the coruscations 
were as often seen there in the southern as in the northern parts of the sky, 
and-I should consider that. latitude the most favourable in, this part of the 
globe for making good observations on this interesting phenomenon.. 


NOTICES OF THE APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA, 
AT FORT ENTERPRISE, 


EXTRACTED FROM CAPTAIN FRANKLIN’S JOURNAL. 


Tur following appearances of the Aurora Borealis were noted at the times when 
the position of the horizontal needle was observed, and are intended to illus- 
trate, Table, No. Il. They have been described as they appeared to the eye, 
without any regard to perspective. The bearings of the terminations of the 
arches or beams, are reckoned from the magnetic north towards the east round 
the whole circle. 

January 12th, 1821, midnight, a very faint arch in the zenith, lying 324° 
and 144°. ‘The sky cloudless. 

14th. At 7h. 30° p.m., the Aurora first appeared in a patch, bearing 279°, 
from which darted a slender faint beam, which passed about 4° east of the 
zenith, and then instantly disappeared. A horizontal stream extended from 
279° to 54°, elevated about 20°. At 8h. 20’, a faint coruscation across the 
zenith. At 11h. 20’, a brilliant irregular wreathed arch across the zenith, 
from 279° to 99°, the interior motion passing rapidly from the horizon at 
the former bearing, to the latter. Soon afterwards this arch twisted round, so 
that its extremities were directed to 122° and 234°, the internal motion very 
rapid. At 11h. 30’, the coruscation had removed from the zenith, and ap- 
peared in a line parallel to the horizon, extending from 99° to 234. At mid- 
night, horizontal streams from 99° to 934°, and from 279 to 234°: but the lat- 
ter had the greater elevation. The needle drawn considerably to the west- 
ward. Just as I had left the instrument, a flash darted from a beam 113° to- 
wards the zenith, and instantly a different Aurora appeared tinged with the 
prismatic colours, having an agitated circular motion. A few seconds after- 
wards, a beam flashed from 279°, and united with that which shot from bear- 
ing 113° ; and then a continuous, though irregular arch, was formed from the one 
horizon to the other, and the interior motion passed rapidly from both these 
extremities towards the zenith. As long as the arch continued in that direc- 


No. IIL] APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA. Bobb 


tion, the needle pointed as at midnight; but in about two minutes, the arch 
descended towards the east, and then the needle gradually returned eastward 
to its zero*, in which position it remained until the coruscation had dis- 
appeared. 
. At Th. a. m., Aurora ‘visible in patches, 279° and 99°, and a beam 346°, the 
needle then stood at 348° 16’ having moved eastward 34’ since midnight. At 
9h. p. m., January 15th, the needle had attained the usual position at that hour, 
the aurora then appeared in the zenith. At midnight, a waving irregular arch 
continued across the zenith from 279° to 99°, and a rapid interior motion 
passed from the former to the latter direction. Motion of the needle westward. 

16th. At 12h. 20° westward, faint streams from 99°, inclining to the west- 
ward. 

20th. At Lh, ,an wT crossed the zenith ; and at midnight, a patch appeared 
54°, lying slehiite to the horizon. 

2st. An arch from 99° to 212°, elevation about 10°. At midnight, a 
broad patch in the zenith. Slender beams rose from 234° and 31°, which were 


prolonged to the zenith, and came almost in contact with this patch, at the same > 


time a low arch proceeded from 279° to 54°. Between nine and midnight, the 
needle moved westward 32 minutes. 

22nd, At 9h. p. m., an arched horizontal stream from 110° to 54°. At Be. 
night no Aurora perceptible, yet the needle had changed its position. 

23rd. 9h. p. m., a brilliant arch across the zenith, from 279° to 99°, com: 
posed of slender beams, lying parallel to each other. The motion passed 
from 99° to the zenith. This arch separated in the zenith. The westward 
part disappeared entirely, but a column of light remained at 99°, motion of the 
needle westward. At 12h. thick hazy weather, no Aurora visible. Needle had 
moved eastward. | 

24th. Qh. p. m., two low arches extending from 99° to 178°. At mid- 
night, the coruscations were generally diffused over the upper part of the 
sky; but the streams traversed the zenith in a different direction from the 
course they more frequently take, and their extremities were at 54° and 234°. 
The most conspicuous beam, rising 245°, proceeded to the zenith, and curled 


* 348° 30’, as mentioned in page 550. 
4B 2 


556 APPENDIX. (No. ILL. 


round so as to point towards 335°. The next in brilliancy came from bearing 
76°, which also crossed the zenith, but did not unite with the other beam. 
There were two other streams of light running in the same direction. . The 
needle had moved 48' eastward since nine, and in a contrary way tothe course 
it usually followed when vertical arches crossed the zenith, at about 279° or 
324°, 

January 25th, 9h. p.m. a Brillians curve, terminations. 324° and 76°, eye 
tion about 50°. Several beams jutted from this curve, pointing towards the 
horizon. At 11h., a beam rose at 279°, passed over the zenith to 99°, then ran 
horizontally, and formed an irregular band from 99° to 171° ; the portion of light 
at 99° was stratified by intervening layers of clouds. 

27th. A beam elevated about 13°, at midnight, whilst snow was alice 

28th, 9h. p.m. An arch from 99° to 349°. At 11h. the coruscation gene- 
rally diffused over the south and eastern parts of the sky, which seemed to 
have proceeded from a slender beam bearing 99°, from whence a flash darted 
to the zenith, which instantly dilated into a bfead mass of light. At midnight, 
an elevated arch, and a low convexed stream, extended from 99° to 200°. A 
beam at 94° pointing towards the zenith. Needle stationary. . 

29th. At 11gh., a broad arch across the zenith from 99° to 257°, and an 
horizontal fringed belt from 99° towards the east, at a low elevation. At 
midnight, the S.E. portion of the sky was occupied by a dense mass of light, 
which resembled an open fan, branching upwards; a stream shot from the 
eastern part of it, and proceeded in an arch to 290°, the centre being elevated 
70°. Several patches in the zenith parallel to this arch. In two minutes after- 
wards the fan disappeared, and a brilliant curved stream darted forth at 110°, 
and shot to the westward ; its centre bore 133° elevated 25°. : 

30th. An arch across the zenith from 302° to 121°, but the extremities did 
not approach either horizon by 20°. 

31st. At 9h. p..m., two horizontal bands of light eenics Fe 99°. to 
212°, the lowest being elevated 8°. The.S.E. end was wavy, and it appeared 
as if several beams had been twisted together. . There was also a beam at 
302°, directed towards the zenith, . At midnight, an elliptical arch proceeded 
from 99° to 279° by the south and westward, at a low elevation. Several 
streams issued from this band between 279° and 245°, each pointing towards 


No. IIL] APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA. BST 


the zenith. - This arch separated after a few minutes, and then two parallel 
arches were displayed, having the same direction. Slight motion of the needle 
eastward. | 

February Ist. At 11h. an arch across the zenith from 279° to 99° for a 
considerable time stationary. This arch descended to the westward a few mi- 
nutes before midnight, and when at an elevation of 20 degrees it disappeared. 
The stars were perfectly visible through the column of light. Needle sta- 
tionary. : | 

2nd. At midnight a stream spread from 110° to 167°, ascending gradually 
from the horizon to an elevation of 30°. The stars appeared through the ment 
with undiminished brilliancy. 

8rd. At 9h. p. m. Aurora commenced by a brilliant ut across the zenith, 
from 279° to 99°, extending to each horizon, which remained stationary and 
motionless for several minutes.. By midnight the coruscation was generally 
diffused over the sky. A broad brilliant band elevated 10°, extended from 99° 
to 200° through an arch of about 279°. An illuminated curve branched from 
the latter. termination, which pointed to 245°, and from this bearing, a beam 
shot across the zenith, towards the opposite direction ; but it had not proceeded 
above five degrees eastward of the zenith, when it suddenly turned to the north, 
and assumed a scroll shape. The needle immediately moved eastward, which is 
the same direction it had been:observed to follow on January 14th, when the 
streams of light appeared in nearly a similar position in the zenith, namely, ly- 
ing east and west true, or about 54° and 234° magnetic bearings, but in a con- 
trary direction to that in which it had been observed to move when the arches 
crossed the zenith, having their extremities at 279° and 99°, or at 324° and 144°. 
This coruscation remained for several minutes, when the vertical arch disap- 
peared, and a band was presented lying parallel to the horizon from 212° to 
279°. Shortly afterwards, a similar band of light proceeded from 76° to 324°, and 
the horizon was almost encompassed with a brilliant zone, colour pale-yellow. 
No motion of the Aurora perceptible. 

Ath. At midnight, a faint slender beam arose at 290°, and flashed to the 
zenith; at the same instant, another proceeded from 99° to an elevation of 
50°. A broad low stream of light from 76° to 346°, and a faint belt from 189° to 
234°. No change was perceived in the needle. 


= 


Bag APPENDIX. | [No. LIE: 


Sth. The atmosphere very dense and hazy. The needle had been disturbed 
in the night, and shewed this morning a considerable change of position. At 
midnight Aurora gleamed through the haze in two arches, the extremities 54° 
and 234°, and they passed the zenith. One of them turned towards the north, 
and the other towards the south. The needle moved to the eastward, as on 
February 3d and January 14th, when the Aurora appeared in a similar position. 

6th. At midnight, Aurora was perceived across the zenith 279° and 99°, 
gleaming through a very dense atmosphere, and when snow was falling; two 
stars only were visible. Motion of the needle since 9h. p. m. 28' westward. 

8th. A faint stream at 99° towards the zenith. | | 

9th. At 9h. p.m. a beam at 290°; at 11h., a broad arch traversed the zenith 
from 290° to 110°, which remained until 45’ after midnight, and then disappear- 
ed at bearing 99°. Motion of the needle westward. 

10th. At midnight, an arch resembling a horge-shoe, the extremities of 
which bore 99° and 76°; from each of these points streams were projected 
across the zenith towards 290°, but they did not reach the opposite horizon. 
They were ofa faint greyish-yellow colour. The stars shone brilliantly through 
the columns of light ; moon very bright. The needle was not the least affected. 
T have observed that the needle is usually most disturbed by the appearance 
of the Aurora in dense hazy weather. 

ilth. At three p.m. a cloud extended in an arch from 99° to 279°, ‘lenahed 
30°, which bore a strong resemblance to the Aurora, particularly at the end at 
279°, from whence some beams were projected towards the zenith. The needle 
was not affected. 

12th. At 8h. 30° p.m. faint curved streams in they zenith. At 9h. an arch 
from 99° to 279°, exactly similar in shape to the cloud seen yesterday. The 
colour resembled the halo round the moon. The needle was not affected, At 
11h. 40° the coruscations occupied a considerable portion of the northern part of 
the sky lying in parallel arches from 76° to 279°. The centre one was brilliant; 
and the motion, resembling a volume of smoke, passed from the former bearing 
towards the latter. Some arches appeared in the zenith lying 65° and 245°, and 
flashes darted with instantaneous motion from these towards the point.to which 
their extremities were directed. The needle betrayed a slight motioneastward. 
At 12h. a broad band of light from 302° to 54°, elevated 20°. 


No. III.] APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA. 559. 


February 13th, the atmosphere was so dense this night, that the stars were 
completely obscured, and the edges of the moon could only be faintly traced 
through the haze. At nine p. m., there was not any appearance of the 
Aurora, and the needle rested at 348° 30’, its usual position at this hour, 
when undisturbed by the Aurora. At 11° 30’, faint streams of light gleamed 


through a large portion of the heavens, both in the zenith and near the hori- 


‘zon, and immediately afterwards brilliant coruscations burst forth of the 
most agitated kind. At 11h. 40°, a horizontal stream extended from 279° 
to 31°, and the interior motion, similar to rolling smoke, passed from the first 
point to the latter. The needle was now drawn 3° 30’ to the eastward, or 
as far as 845° 00, At 11h. 50', there appeared another stream of irregular 
shape, which proceeded from 279° in a line nearly parallel to the horizon, until it 
curled round at 9°, or near the direction of the magnetic meridian. The interior 
motion flashed along this stream with the utmost rapidity. The needle moved 
now to 343° 50’, or 4° 40’ eastward of its first position. And during the appear- 
ance of this coruscation, I perceived the needle to oscillate between 343° 
50’, and 344° 40’; and it may be remarked this was the only occasion on which 
a vibratory motion was observed. On the disappearance of this display, bril- 


liant semicircular curves were presented in the same quarter, ornamented with 


all the prismatic colours. At 11h. 55m., the needle had receded westward as 
far as 847° 00’. The important fact of the existence of the Aurora, at a less 
elevation than that of dense clouds, was evinced on two or three occasions this 
night, and particularly at 11h. 50m., when a brilliant mass of light, variegated 
with the prismatic colours, passed between an uniform steady dense cloud and 
the earth ; and, in its progress, completely concealed that portion of the cloud 
which jhe stream of light covered, until the coruscation had passed over it, 
when the cloud appeared as before. 

The observations of this evening seem to corroborate the remark which I had 
previously made—that the direction in which the needle moves, appears to 
depend on the position in which the streams of Aurora are placed, and the 
quantity of the effect upon its proximity to, or distance from, the earth. When 
the extremities of arches lay near the bearings of 234° and 54°, the needle 
moved eastward ; and when near the bearings 324° and 144°, or 279° and 99°, 
the motion of the needle was westward. Both of these facts were shewn to- 


560 APPENDIX. [No. III. 


night. At the first display, when the extremities of the arches pointed near 
934° and 54°, and the interior motion’ followed the same direction, the needle 
moved eastward as far as 345° 00'; but after midnight, the coruscations: ceased 
to appear in that direction, and at 12h. 10’ were presented in three arches, 
traversing the zenith, whose extremities pointed 121° and 302°: the needle then 
i towards the west, and rested at 349° 30’; having varied ‘its pleat 

°'40' in the course of twenty minutes. 

eultsorbnty 14th, at 11h. 30’ a faint low band proceeded from 110° to 17 78° 
elevated 8° degrees, and another at a higher elevation from 121° to 212°. These 
streams crossed each other in the bearing 155°; and it may: be remarked, that 
this is the only occasion on which I have seen the streams to cross each other. 
They separated before midnight : the eastern one ascended some degrees higher, 
but the other remained in the same state. Cloudless sky: 

15th. At 9h. p. m. Aurora across the zenith from 257° to 76°—None 
visible at midnight, yet the needle had moved forty minutes westward. : 

18th. At 9h. p.m. Aurora gleamed through the horizon in a continuous amen 
from 279° to 99°. : | 

10th. At 8h. p. m. Aurora appeared to the eastward in five ws sl 
having the same extremities at 88° and 279°; the upper arch crossed’ the 
zenith, and the others were elevated’ between 15° ‘and 20°. At midnight, two 
concentric arches appeared through the haze, lying across the zenith, their — 
extremities bore 65° and 245. The needle then pointed to 348° 5’, having 
moved 40° eastward: At 12h. 25’ a broad and more brilliant arch crossed the 
zenith, from 133° to 313°; the needle then moved westward 1° 5’ to 349° 
10°". This change is a further confirmation ee the observations on ani cd 
13th. . gi fy 

20th. At 9h. p. m. biowa of light issued at 99°, and Suttle towards 
the zenith. At 10h. 30’, a brilliant arch from’ 99° to 279°; elevated 80°; a 
small: arch in the «zenith, and several sbeams at 279°. At midnight, several 
beams ‘arose parallel to‘each other, between 335° and 349°. In:a few seconds, 
flashes were emitted from them, which first darted to’ the zenith, and then twist- 
ing round, shot towards a stream that had’ proceeded at the* same instant 
from 212°, which they jomed. The coruscation now resembled an irregular 
horse-shoe, composed of many slender beams of brilliant light. _This display 


No: UJ APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA. 561 


soon passed off to the eastward, having descended to the horizon before it 
disappeared. ‘The needle was not in any way disturbed after nine, from which 
circumstance I am induced to suppose that the Aurora was very distant. We 
seldom witnessed a greater variety of arches, beams, and flashes, than were 
displayed this night, both in the horizon and zenith. If these coruscations 
had passed as near to the earth as they appear to have done at other times, 
some effect I conceive would have been produced on the needle: the sky was 
cloudless. 

On the following morning, it was perceived that the needle had receded two 
degrees eastward, and it did not regain its usual position before 4h. p. m.—At 
Sh, p. m. a horizontal band of faint light extended from 88° to 245° elevated 
7° degrees, which remained almost stationary until midnight, at which hour two 
brilliant arches appeared, whose united extremities bore 279° and 76°; and a 
faint broad arch traversed the zenith from 279° to 88°:—needle moved eastward, 
Shortly afterwards, the horizon was encircled with an illuminated zone, and the 
northern part of the sky covered with Aurora. 

22d. At 9h. p.m. a continuous arch across the zenith, from 279° to 99°, the 
colour pale yellow :—needle moved westward. 

23d. At 9h. p. m. a low band, parallel to the horizon, extending from 302° 
to 346°, patches at 76°, and some faint streams in the zenith pointing to 
234° and 54°:—the needle had moved eastward. At 11h. 15’ a broad brilliant 
arch extended from 279° to 99° across the zenith, reaching to each horizon. 
The needle had since 9h. receded 24° westward. At midnight, two arches 
appeared, one from 54° to 324°, elevated 50°, the other from 234° to 144°— 
elevated 12°. 

24th. At 9h. p.m. a continuous arch, through aiieh the stars were dis- 
tinctly visible, passed from 99° to 279° across the zenith, and a beam appeared 
parallel to this, proceeding from 99°, which terminated in the zenith. At 
midnight, two belts of brilliant light extended from 99°; one by the south and 
west, the other by the north, which encircled the horizon at an elevation of 20°, 
except between the points 324° and 322°: no perceptible disturbance of the 
needle. | 

26th. At midnight, a brilliant arch issued from 313°, and reached to 99°, 
the centre being elevated 20°. At the latter point, the coruscation curved 
upwards, and was then prolonged across the zenith to 200°. The stars shone 

4¢ 


562 APPENDIX. — (No. IL 


through this stream with undiminished brilliancy—the needle moved a few 
minutes westward. 

February 27th, at 9h. p.m. two arches crossed the zenith from 76° to 279°, 
very broad and brilliant; the stars were distinctly visible through them. At 
midnight, the Aurora was diffused over a great portion of the sky. Three 
arches appeared parallel to each other in the zenith, whose extremities pointed 
to 54° and 234°, and a horizontal stream about 30° high, reaching from 302° to 
31°, along which the interior motion was extremely rapid. Soon after- 
wards, some dense clouds overspread the sky, but the Aurora gleamed through. 
The needle moved near two degrees eastward after nine. It kept an easterly 
position until after 2h. p.m. on the next day, and then it receded 40’ in the course 
of an hour. The clouds were of the fleecy kind, which sailors denominate a 
mackarel sky. At midnight an irregular band extended from 88° to 200, at.an 
elevation of 15°. A beam at 324° pointing towards the zenith. 

March Ist, at 9h. p.m., an arch stretched from 99° to 155°. At 11fh., 
when the snow was falling heavily, and a dense atmosphere obscured the 
stars, the Aurora appeared in an arch across the zenith, having its extremities 
88° and 200°, but did not extend: to either horizon. This stream disappeared 
before midnight. The atmosphere was then more dense, and the snow de- 
scended in larger flakes. Between midnight and the following morning, the 
needle was drawn 45’ to the eastward, and it did not recover its usual position 
before 9h. p.m. on March 2d. | 

2d. At 8h. 30’ p.m., Aurora appeared in a broad arch from 279° to 99°, and 
continued without any alteration until nine, when the needle had moved 32 
minutes westward. ‘The breadth of the arch then increased considerably, and 
a dark cloud passing along its middle gave an appearance of two arches. At 
midnight, the coruscations occupied many parts of the sky. Two faint arches 
crossed the zenith from 99° to 279°. A more brilliant arch extended from 76° 
to 290°, at an elevation of 60° degrees. Several patches between 54° and 
346°, arid a broad band from 270 to 223°. The needle did not evince any 
material change. | cial 

3d. At midnight, a slender beam at 76°, and a patch at 279°. — 
had moved 10 minutes westward since nine. 

4th. At midnight, an arch across the zenith 54° and 234°, in which the 
interior motion ran swiftly from the former'to the latter bearing. A low band 


No. I11.] APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA. 563 


extended from 279° to 346°. Motion of the needle 10 minutes eastward 
since nine. 

5th. A low stream from 121° to 189°, at an elevation of 10 degrees. No 
change in the position of the needle. 

6th. The atmosphere very hazy, and snow fell. No Aurora visible, but 
the needle moved 30 minutes westward between nine and midnight. 

7th. Dense Atmosphere. No Aurora or stars visible, but the needle moved 
westward 20 minutes between nine and midnight. 

Sth. At 6h. 30’, p.m. Aurora appeared, whilst the western horizon was tinged 
with the rays of the recently departed sun, in two beams from 99° extended 
to the zenith. At 9h. p.m., a brilliant stream from 121° to 212°, elevated 10 
degrees. A beam, having a wavy form, ascended from 99° to the zenith; its 
colour a bright yellow ; the stars were seen distinctly through it. No change 
in the needle. At midnight, Aurora was diffused over a great portion of the 
sky. A broad arch crossed the zenith, whose extremities were at 88° and 
200°, but they did not reach either horizon. A band stretched from 279° to 
76°, elevated 12 degrees, from which three beams were prolonged nearly to 
the zenith between 302° and 335°. Needle moved 1° 5’ westward. 

9th. At nine, Aurora brilliant and variable; the interior motion passed 
rapidly from 234°to54°. An arch across the zenith, extremities 279° and 99°. 
A horizontal band from 245° to 76°. No change in the needle. At midnight, 
some patches bearing 324°. An arch was instantly projected from that, bear- 
ing across the zenith to 144°. This arch separated in the zenith, and both 
parts passed off against the wind to the westward. The needle moved 30 
minutes westward between nine and 11h. 30m. | 

llth. At 9h. p.m., a waving arch passed from 290° to 88°, about 2° east 
of the zenith, and reached from one horizon to the other. An elliptical arch 
from 313° to 76°, elevated about 50°. At 11h., two waving streams stretched 
from 279° to 43°, and some beams shot from both these extremities towards 
the zenith, but more numerously from 279°. The needle had moved 1° 8 
westward between nine and eleven. Whilst I was looking at the instrument, 
a flash darted towards the zenith from a low beam bearing 9°, and the needle im- 
_ mediately moved 8’ westward; but the arch having in afew seconds passed over 
to the south, the needle returned eastward to its first position. At midnight, a 
beam arose at 54°, darted to the zenith, and then the upper extremity turned 

4 2 


564 APPENDIX: —— [No. IIL. 


so as to point to 144°. Another beam darted from 257°, and joined the former 
one. ‘The arch, thus formed, descended gradually against the wind. There 
was only a slight lateral motion: perceptible while it remained across: the 
zenith; but when it had sunk to about 60° from the horizon, an interior motion 
rushed from each of the extremities towards the middle, and at the place of 
contact the greatest commotion was excited, and the prismatic colours were 
exhibited. The motion of the needle 8 minutes eastward. This arch 
disappeared at an elevation of 25°. Between I1lh. and, midnight, sounds 
were repeatedly heard resembling the hissing of a musket-ball, or the 
shaking of a thin pliant stick in the air, which were at first. supposed 
to have been occasioned by the motion of the Aurora. Mr. Wentzel, 
however, who assured us that he had often heard the noise of the Aurora, 
said these sounds were very dissimilar to that which the Aurora makes, and 
that he supposed the noise to be occasioned by the cracking of the snow, in 
consequence of a great decrease in temperature immediately after the two 
preceding days of mild weather. I was of the same opinion, from the cir- 
cumstance of a similar noise having been heard after midnight coming from 
the eastward, in which quarter there was not the least appearance of Aurora, 
and when only a faint motionless beam was visible to the eastward, This 
opinion was further confirmed on the following morning, when similar sounds 
were distinctly heard at the time the sun was shining bright, and there was 
not any symptom of Aurora. 

12th. At midnight, faint streams from 88° directed towards the zenith. 
Some patches visible in other parts of the sky. 

13th. At midnight, a beam shot from 302° across the zenith to 88°. 
Another extended to the zenith, whose lower extremity bore 290°. A 
horizontal band from 234° to 257°. The needle since nine moved 1° 25’ 
westward. 3 ) 

14th. At nine p.m. a faint beam at 99° pointing towards the zenith. At 
midnight a faint low stream from 76° to 110°. No change in the needle. 

15th. At midnight, waving streams from 110° to 144° and from 189 to 212°, 
elevated 20°. No change in the needle. 

16th. At 3h. p.m. some clouds appeared about 279°, ain bore a strong 
resemblance to the Aurora, particularly one of the beams, which extended 40° 
towards the zenith. The needle moved 18' westward, between 3h. and 5h. p. m. 


No. III] APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA. 565 


At midnight, a faint stream of Aurora reached from 65° to 279°, elevation 25°. 
No change in the needle. | 

19th. At 9h. p.m. a faint arch from 121° to 212°, elevated 25°. At mid- 
night, low streams from 144° to 324°, which nearly encircled the horizon. 
Seven beams were projected upwards, from different parts of this zone. Their 
- points did not meet in the zenith, but terminated about 3° short of that part. 
The whole appearance strongly resembled an artificial globe, the zone being the 
equator, and the beams the meridian lines. The needle moved 25’ eastward 
between nine and midnight, but I observed it to. move gradually westward, as 
these beams were disappearing. Immediately after they had ceased to be 
visible, an arch was exhibited crossing the zenith, in the direction of the 
magnetic meridian. The needle still continued to recede westward, until it. 
rested nearly in the position at which it was at 9h. p. m. 

20th. At 9h., an arch from 99° to 279°. A beam at 99° pointing towards 
the zenith. A stream from 257° to 290°. At midnight, a low stream from 
302° to 54°, along which the interior motion passed very rapidly. The needle 
moved 1° westward. ‘The sky was overspread with fleecy clouds. 

21st. At 11h. a.m., some clouds lying parallel to the horizon between 346° 
and 76° strongly resembled the Aurora. At 9h. p.m. Aurora in a bright arch 
from 99° to 280°, passing within 3° of the zenith. This descended to the 
eastward against the wind. At midnight two beams darted from 144°, one 
shot across the zenith to 290°, the end of the other curved round just beyond 
the zenith, and, in a few minutes, both of them rushed back to 144°, and then 
disappeared. A waving stream reached from 279° to 99°, elevated 12°, several 
beams were projected upwards from this stream. A beam darted from 54° 
across the zenith, and immediately after this flash, the lower extremity of the 
beam moved,round to 99°, and an arch was formed. from 99° to 279°. The 
needle moved nearly 2° westward, between nine and midnight. At 12h.30m., 
Aurora generally diffused over the sky. A brilliant arch crossed the zenith 
from 279° to 110°; this soon afterwards separated, so as to form three arches 
parallel to each other.. Some beams laid at right angles to this arch, which 
had come from the eastern horizon or bearing 54°. No motion in the needle 
perceptible. 

22nd. At9h., Aurora in an arch from 290° to 88°, a bright band from 88° 
to 65°. At midnight, the following appearances of the Aurora were visible 


566 J APPENDIX. f [No. HII. 


through a very dense atmosphere. A beam, at 324°, elevated 15°. An arch 
from 234° to 121° and some short beams at 76°. el 

~93d.. At nine, two parallel arches from 313° to 76°, anal on. buttreses 
at both extremities. The appearance resembled a bridge of light. At 
11h. 30. The northern and eastern parts of the sky were entirely free from 
Aurora. Some irregularly curved streams extended from 99° to 234°, and 
dark clouds intervened between them. At midnight three arches from 110° to 
234°, the upper one most brilliant. No perceptible interior motion of the 
Aurora. The needle moved 10° westward after nine. 

24th. At 9h. p.m. Aurora appeared through the clouds and snow, tra- 
versing the zenith in the direction of 65° and 245°. The needle moved 
eastward l° 5. At midnight, a beam from 99°, of slender breadth when near 
the horizon, dilated considerably in its ascent, and at its termination in the 
zenith spread so as nearly to cover the upper part of the heavens. Another 
beam arose from the same point, curved several degrees to the westward, and 
then proceeded to the zenith. These beams quickly disappeared, but a low 
arch extending from 279°to 65° remained stationary. The needle moved 
westward between nine and midnight 1° 22’, 

25th. At 9h. p.m. faint beams at 324° and 144°. At midnight, a hori- 
zontal stream from 133°; to 223° some beams at 324°, and patches in several 
other parts: all very faint. 

26th. At 9h. p.m. a faint Aurora at 99°. At midnight, a mass of dense 
light burst forth bearing 65°, at an elevation of 20°, which presently curved 
round, and assumed the shape of a horse-shoe ; at that instant a beam flashed 
from 324° to the nearest part of the curve, and immediately an arch proceeded 
upwards, and passed about 3° eastward of the zenith. The needle moved 
eastward 12. 

28th. At 8h. p.m., when day-light ¥ was perceptible to ition oe 
a stream of Aurora tesited from a dark mass of cloud bearing 110°, and 
proceeded upwards in the direction of 346°; but when it reached the zenith, 
the upper part inclined to the westward, and an arch was formed from 110° 
to 290°, reaching from one horizon to the other. Some smaller streams 
appeared about 189°, lying parallel to a range of clouds which resembled it 
in colour, both being a steel-grey. The extremities of these streams. pointed 
121° and 257°, At 9h. p.m. clear weather. Three arches appeared, one. from 


No. IIL] | APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA. 567 


94° to 290°, elevated 80°, the other from:290°, passing about 2° east of the 
zenith, and the third went parallel to this, and united in the same points in the 
horizon, but they were separated in the zenith by a stream of cloud. In two 
minutes afterwards, the first arch disappeared, and the two others closing in 
the zenith, formed one broad stream, and passed off to the westward. Stars 
were faintly seen. At midnight, a very dense atmosphere obscured the sky; 
neither stars nor Aurora visible. The needle, however, moved 35’ westward 
between nine and midnight. 

29th. <A faint gleam of Aurora fringed the upper part of some dark 
clouds between 133° and 155°. 

30th. At Qh. a broad arch across the zenith from 88° to 290°, and the 
interior motion was rapid. At midnight, an arch from 110° to 257°, elevated 
20°; it separated in the zenith, and then the light passed instantaneously down 
to each horizon. Needle moved westward. 

April Ist, the changes in the position of the needle this morning deserve 
some notice. At 8h. a.m. it was nearly in the same position as at midnight; 
an hour afterwards it had moved 12’ eastward, and by eleven, 10’ more. At 
Sh. a.m. there was a mackerel sky to the north, the strata of the clouds being 
vertical. Near the west horizon there was a layer of dense clouds which soon 
spread over the whole sky. At 11h. these dark clouds gave place to a thin 
fleecy sky, and many blue portions were seen. The needle then returned 
towards the westward, and by four had reached within two minutes of the 
point at which it stood at 9h. a.m. At 9h. 30'p. m. the Aurora appeared 
through a hazy atmosphere, in an arch from 99° to 234°. | 

5th. An arch passed from 88° to 178°, at a low elevation. At midnight, 
an arch composed of several streams apparently blended together, issued from 
110° and passed about 10° west of the zenith to the horizon at 279°. This 
arch separated in the zenith, and then each part passed over to the horizon at 
279°. A very slender faint arch remained from 9° to 189°. The needle 
moved a little westward. | 

6th. At nine, masses of light of irregular breadth fringed the upper 
part of a range of clouds extending from 99° to 212°. At midnight, a waving 
low stream from 99° to 212°, of dense light, the motion rapid, going towards 
the latter bearing. Motion of the needle westward. 

7th. At 9h. p.m., an arch stretching from 279° to 110°; motion of the 


568 APPENDIX. . (No. II. 


needle westward. “At 10h. 30m., a very irregular arch from 99° to 234°. The 
interior motion darted rapidly in opposite directions, and the red, purple, and 
violet colours were exhibited. Numerous slender beams, in which there was 
a quick lateral motion, shot from this arch; some of them were projected to 
the zenith. The arch separated at 121°, and the western portion immediately 
rushed towards the north, preserving the same elevation; at this instant, the 
wind changed from north to the opposite direction, south. At midnight, a 
horizontal band appeared from 99° to 234°, and several beams to the south- 
ward. The needle moved eastward 27’ between nine and midnight. 

8th. At 11h. 10m. p.m., various streams appeared, stratifying a dense 
mass of cloud. In two parts of this coruscation, the motion darted from 144 
and 324° towards the zenith; in another, from 76° to the horizon at 144°. The 
needle had moved westward 2° 19’ since nine. At midnight, a beam rose at 
bearing 65°, and darted to an elevation of 30°... Nearly at the same instant, 
another beam issued from 9°, and joined this; and then an arch was formed, 
terminating in these bearings. Several other masses of light were seen to the 
eastward. The needle had moved eastward 1° 55’ since. the last observation. 
Heavy dark clouds spread over'a large portion of the sky. 

Ilth. At midnight, a faint gleam of Aurora appeared through a very Boke 
atmosphere, and when there was a halo round the moon. — 

13th. Atmosphere hazy, no Aurora or stars were visible, yet there was a 
motion of the needle 7° to the westward, between nine and midnight. 

14th. _ A faint arch from 313° to 133° at midnight. 

15th. At Qh. several brilliant beams bearing 54°, in which ihivte was 
much lateral motion and a variety of colours. An arch crossed the zenith 
from 313° to 133°. Needle moved westward 9’. At midnight, an arch across 
the zenith from 290° to 110°. | Another from 65° to 313°, the motion passing 
rapidly from the latter to the former horizon. Needle moved a little more 
westward. 

18th. At vasa a faint patch bore 144°. 

19th. At midnight, streams of a dense pale yellow light, at a low elevation 
nearly parallel to the horizon, and extending from 99° to 200°... These were sta- 
tionary for some hours—dark clouds lay between them. 

20th. Whilst day-light remained, the : Aurora was perceived: fdabinig 
the upper part of a mass of dense cloud, in shape like the festoons of a 


No. IIL] AURORA BOREALIS. 569 


curtain. It extended from 99° to 200°. At midnight, a waving arch of low 
elevation from 76° to 212°. Needle had moved 45’ westward since nine. 

21st. At 7h. p.m., some streams of cloud which resembled the Aurora in 
shape and colour crossed the zenith; but when the daylight disappeared, no — 
Aurora was visible. 

23d. At 10h. 30m. p.m., Aurora first appeared in an arch from 279° to 189°; 
elevation 12°. Needle moved westward 1° 11’. 

27th. At midnight, Aurora appeared through the haze 1 in two low arches, 
from 99° to 189°. 

29th. Aurora beamed through the haze in low streams of faint yellow 
colour. 

30th. At1lh. 40m., some patches of Aurora at 144°, elevated 20°. No 
motion perceptible in the needle. 

May Ist. The coruscations were very agitated and brilliant between 11h. 
and midnight, but they did not produce any change in the needle. 

3d. Midnight, Aurora proceeded from a mass of dense cloud, bearing 99°, 
passed near the zenith to 257°. The attenuated beams of which this arch 
was composed, had a quick lateral motion. Little change in the needle. 
Daylight in the eastern part of the sky, 

oth. A faint stream proceeded from 144° to an elevation of 45°. Needle 
moved westward. 

1 did not observe any Aurora, after this day, but Mr. Hood saw it on the 
6th, 10th, 11th, 12th, and 13th, after which date there was constant daylight, 
which prevented us from seeing it. 


4D 


570 APPENDIX. [No. 
a S 
TABLE 
TABLE of OBSERVATIONS on the Deviations of the Magnetic Needle, made at Fort ExTanenegay 
The Asterisks indicate when the Instrument required slight Adjustment. The Degrees of the 
= | 
January At 10 A.M. At Noon At 2 P.M. At 3 P.M. 
Position ; Position : Position : Position : 
Winds Wind Winds Wind 
1821 nu Ther. and wWraaiteier N Lee Ther. and Veathet Lao Ther. and Weather N oe e Ther. and Weatlich | 
pad 2,| East, moderate, || oS. ¢ 2) East peat ENE. moderate,]| o%, ¢ © | South, light | 
Jan12 || 348 18 | — 65, “8 et nay || 348 25 | — 5 eat sis 28 | —10% very clear, || 948 80] -14 | pecred, clean I 
pp uN, Helnatrs NE. light airs _4a | SW. light airs West, light airs) 
18 (SAB 8G eee’ cloudy ea TE a cloudy ores 1 hazy. By az8k 25} 18 snow. | 
_9, | West, light airs WNW. lightairs _991| WNW. light West, light airs,} 
14 || 348 18 a ven leuk || 348 22 | —29 clear ’|) 348 28 207 airs, very clear. 348 25 | —32 cee. | 
1 
_a4 (South, light airs West, light West, clear South, light | 
15. Oands at ‘clear 4 caoieay (i breezes, clear || 847 52 | —31) some clouds. pho Gat airs, cloudy. | 
| 
A West, fresh b. WSW. fresh = el: WSW. fresh b. |) 
16 348 30 24 thick alonds 348 35 | —18 breezes, snow 348 40 15 | WSW. snow. 348 40 14 snow and drifts | 
1 
SbW, thick WSW. light airs,|| * WSW. light airs Nearly calm, } 
V7 348 28 | zero cloudy weather 348.35 | +> 4 foggy |, 349 10 | -F 5 foggy. 1 849 15 | + 5 dense fog. ; 
: : Kast, light b. | 
West, light airs NW. light airs SWbW. light 8 t 
18 || 348 15 | +14 dense clouds || 348 28 +19 ee = 2 |) 348 30 | +-162 nee ones 348 30 | +12 thiek cloudy | 
osphere. | 
East. fresh b. East, strong b. = East, strong || _ 4 |.EHast, strong b. 
19 |) 848 22 | zero |qark and cloudy 348 30 | zero | Grift’and snow ese breezes, snow. || °48 32 snow. 
East, fresh b. EDN. strong b. rf Fast, strong - East, modt. b. 
20 |] 348 28 | —21 ata 348 30 | —22 aa ree 348 35 | —26 breezes, claudy, 348 35 | —29 cloudy. | 
_ag |West, light airs _agt| _ West, light U Nearly calm 2, SW. light airs, | 
21 || 348 28 | —44 dear. || 848. 30 | ~393) a cones ice SN Meats ee es 348 40 | —39 very clear. 
West, light ane . 5 a i 
é hazy near the West, light airs a: est, lig tain 
22 || 348 42 | —48 horizon, clear Se more clear Ee cp clear. | 
above 
x|{SWbW. modt. b. WSW. moderate _ja| WSW. dark _13 | WSW. modt. b.| 
23 || 348 40 | —202)" “Gark clouds || 248 35 | —14 b. dark, cloudy ae 40 13) and cloudy. ey iy dark and cloudy 
ENE. modt. b. East, light airs =. East, light airs . ENE. light b. | 
24 || 346 50 | —14 J aark and cloudy|| °47 8) —l dense fog || 249 2 very foggy. || °4° i "2| thick weather, | 
| 
East, modt. b. : , | 
25 || 348 10 | —21 very thick The Nleedle |was accidentally|| shaken,| and | the instrument j||required| to be | readjusted. | 
atmosphere | 
EDN. licht airs EDN. light airs _1s | EDN. light airs alec: EDN. light ainsi | 
26 || 348 10 | —20 planay : pS IP at cloudy Ayes % cloudy. 7|| 328 28 15 cloudy. | | 
* t 1 
WBS. light b. Sun shone, eval tee WDS. light b. y WBS. light b. 
a7 || 348 42 | —175 ce 348 50} —18 | some clouds |) 948 5° ay clear. oa oe clear. | 
WNW. lightairs WNW. light airs WNw. light |] | | ia 
28° || 348 30) — 8 dark Bee ‘|| 348.32 | — 7 cloudy, fog bow 348 32 | — 7 airs, hazy ; 
¥* : be : 
29 NWbW., light es WNW. light “4 WNW. light |7 
CES eee airs, clear 348 10 26 airs, clear 3 eeeee 22 breezes, clear | 
_oa | WbS. modt. b. WSW. fresh b. WSW. moderate,) 
80, || 348 80 | -28 [ar and cloudy|| 848 80 | —24 laaske and cloudyl| | —~ ow 1/848 82°) —26 | "more cleat il 
31 348 25 | —35 North, light. b. 348 32 | —35 NE. moderate, 348 32 | —38 NE. moderate, 


very clear 


clear, very cold 


clear, cold 


Position 


At 6 PM. 


—14 


Winds 
and Weather 


ENE. light b. 
clear. 


NW. light b. 
snow. 


—38i West, light airs, 


very clear. 


— 


a ee aia) 


PPPOE IAI 


NEDN. moderate 
clear and cold 


DEVIATIONS OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE. 


At 9 P.M. 
Position = 
Winds 
Nay Ther. and Woekitier 
S48 daellniy | NOMny Saheb, 
348 25 | —11 path Hight airs, 
2 West, light airs 
348 25 | —38 very clear. 
West, fresh b. 
348 25 | —23 |mottled,streaked 
clouds. 
WSW. fresh b. 
anil ain very dense atm. 
NW. fresh b. 
SAO) =F-10 constant snow. 
34g 22/1113 Calm, very 
1 East, strong b. 
show. 
East, fresh b. 
leis very clear. 
SW. light airs 
Bie BEB Veet very clear. ‘ 
348 35 | —26 Porth anedt. b. 
WSW. modt. b. 
348 50 | —I7 | gark & cloudy 
$48) 30s (11-| PON. freshibe 
EDS. fresh b. 
348 00 | —24 | hazy below, 
clear above 
WNW. light b. 
348 10 | —11 | gark weather 
WNW. light 
348 30 | —18 airs, Clear. 
WDN. moderate 
348 35 | —30 and clear 
WSW. moderate 
348 28 | —28.) and cloudy 
348 35 | —48 NNE. light airs, 


clear 


Aurora visible 


or not 


not 


visible 


visible 


not 


visible 


not 


visible 


visible 


visible 


visible 


not 


visible 


not 


not 


visible 


At Midnight 


571 


Aurora visible 


or not 


Position : 
Winds 
sauecne Ther and Weather 
Co) 6 a 
348 35 | Se | NDE. light b. 
not obs.| —12 an b. 
348 42 
at 114 —A3 West, light airs, 
348 50 very clear 
at 12 


West, moderate 


348 52 | —26 


and clear 
348 28 | — St Werks pest b. 
NW. fresh b. 
Bae ay pa constant snow 


West, light airs 
sides dense haze ‘ 


EDN. strong b. 


348.18 


snow 
. | East, modt. b. 
348 30 | —38 Tea 
349 10 | 48 SW. light airs, 
349 10 very clear 


at 125 30° 


SWDS. fresh b. 


348 42 far 


, _y7 | West, light b. 
pase We thick weather 
111 East moderate | 

11Z 5) Tay 2 


EDS. fresh b. 
hazy at the 
horizon 


347 42 


—23 


WDN. moderate 


rie breezes, snow 


348 8 


West, moderate 


348.48 | —16 | i rechun guow 
348 30 | —22 baie pa 
sa | | Nr 
as a0 | a5] West got 
348 28 | —48 a a airs, 


visible 

not 
visible Pe 
visible 
visible 

not 

not 

not 
visible 


visible 
not 


not 
visible 
visible 
not . 
visible 
visible 
visible 
visible 
visible 


4D2 


572 


Feb. 


1821 


Feb. 1 


13 


14 


15 


16 
17 
18 
19 


20 


2) 


22 


23 


of 

Needle 

On ci 
348 28 
348 28 
348 28 
348 25 
347 40 
3:48 22 
at 9h 
349 00 
at 10h 
348 57 
348 43 
348 28 
348 35 


348 28 


348 28 


347 38 


348 22 


348 25 
348 25 
347 30 
348 35 


347 50 


8 A.M. 
346 52 


9 
346 52 
347 50 


348 25 


Position 


At 10 AM. 


Winds 
Ther. and weather 
o,| WbS. light airs, 
474 


very clear © 


WDN. light b. 
—47 \clear above, hazy 
near horizon 


49 NNE. light airs, 


very clear 
NE. light airs 
—45 clear : 
_991 WSW. moderate 
2!dark and gloomy 
East, light b. 
mes dark weather 
_19 |, NE. fresh b. 


dark and cloudy 


NW. fresh b. 


—92 
193 dark and cluudy 
“41 Calm, 
very clear 


_43 | SSW. light airs, 
clear 


EDN. light b. 


271 
373 clear 
Calm and 
ae) cloudy 


ENE. fresh b. 
—25 |some clouds, but 
generally clear 


SW. light airs, 
— 8 | thick weather, 
small snow 


3| ENE. light b. 


ale very clear 


—191/ENE. moderate, 
2! some clouds. 


NNE. light b. 


—6 thick hazy 
atmosphere. 

NE. light airs 

—19 “clear, ; 


EDN. light b. 
—15 |dark and cloudy, 
snow, afog bow. 


_96 NNE. fresh b. . 
clear, cold. 
—35 | SbE. light b. 
very clear. 
_9¢ | WbS. moderate 
and clear. 


NW. fresh b. 


—31 clear. 


Position 


of 
Needle 
{e} L 
348 35 
348 32 


348 33 
348 30 
4 


347 50 


348 28 
348 52 


348 38 
348 25 
348 30 
348 30 


348 32 


348 26 


347 50 


348 30 


348 28 


- 348 28 


347 45 


348 35 


348 10 


348 10 


348 10 


348 30 


APPENDIX. 


At Noon. 
Wind 
Ther. and Weather 
_oy1| WDS. light b. 
3T, clear, very cold 
—4g |North, light airs, 
clear 
_41 | NNE, light b. 
clear 
_3g | SSW. light b. 
cloudy 
_18 WSW. modt. b. 
show 
East, light b. 
— 8 ldark atmosphere, 
snow 
—y | NE. modt. b. 
snow 
. NW. strong b. 
20 dark and cloudy 
EbS, light b. 
—34 | hazy belew, 
clear above 
—37 | East, light b. 
very clear 
very clear 
—y72| Calm and 
We cloudy 
—17 | ENE. fresh b. 
clear 
SE. light b. 
2 \clear, some faint 
+ “clouds 
NE. light b. 
=H hazy 
NEbE. moderate 
— 8 very clear 
NNE. light b. 
Zero | thick weather 
NE. light b. 
—15 clear 
East, light airs 
i "hazy : 
NbE. moderate 
—19 cloudy ; 
WDN. light b. 
—25 clear 
20 'WbS. moderate, 
= hazy 
os NW. strong b. 


much drift 


Position 


of 
Needle 


te} ] 


348 26 


348 00 


348 28 
348 28 
347 53 
348 40 
348 30 
348 50 


348 28 


348 32 


At 2 PM. 


At 3 PM. 


iT 


ir 


y 
| 


Winds Postion Winds — 
Ther. and Weather N So dle Ther. and Weather 
° oa» | 2, | WDS. light b, | 
of cae i Ld clear, cold : 
_eq \South, light airs South, light airs) 9 
ay ‘clear ‘paces eat ree ’ 
2 NNE. light b. 
—| ~~ 348 35 4] clea 
=f SW. light b. oh hate SSW. light b. [77 
29 laark and cloudy) °48 32 27 laark and cloudy, 
ah SW. modt. b, oa SW. moderate 
a snow S45et0 i dark and cloudy 
EDS. light b. EbS. gloom 
me snow el ie ae ss 
NE. fresh b. NE. fresh b. 
11 | dense atmosph. sare snow 
_91 |[NNW. moderate 
more clear 
SEDS. light b. : 
35 | “mist from the || 348 30 | —35% el b. 
Rapid see 
very clear very Clear | 
_39 | ENE. light b. |] 949 39 | —31 | ENE. light b. 
very clear clear 
clear clear 
ENE. streaked ENE. fresh b. 
—17 = 
I clouds ese) I streaked clouds} 
SE. light b. Ps 
Zeno fleecy ‘clouds ea ae 
NE. light b. 
—_— ees 348 30 i? 8 hazy. 
mosey NE. moderate, | 
348 28 | — 6 | Very clear , 
NNE. licht b. NEDN. light b. | 
-—2 hay. 348 30 | — 2 |” thick weather | 
NE. light b. Et EDN. light b. 
15 eae 347 55 | —17 oie 
— gl Kast, light airs, 248 40 | —12 Snow 
2 snow 
-19 NbE. fresh b. |} — | 
cloudy 
24 WNW. modt. mp 
~ very clear 
_j9 |West, eal 348 30 | —21! West, hazy 
oar| NW. Strong b. nea NW. strong b. | 7 


sition 


At 4 PM. 


—19! 


—5 


Winds 
and Weather 


eee 


NNW. light b> 
clear 


ENE. light b. 
clear 


ENE. moderate 
and clear 


DEVIATIONS OF THE MAGN 


Position 


of 
Needle 


(i i 
3418 30 
348 30 


348 36 
348 28 
348 8 


348 25 
348 45 


348 30 
348 30 
348 30 


348 30 


ENE. light b. ° 
clear 


ENE. fresh b. 
cloudy 


South, light b. 
dark clouds 


NE. moderate, ' 


clear 


NE. moderate, | 


clear 


NNE. hazy 


RR 


East, light b. 


dark and cloudy, 


ShOW 


NNW. moderate 
and clear 


NWbW. modt. 
very clear 


moderate, hazy 


NW. strong b. 


348 33 


348 30 


| 


348 50 


Hl 
} 


| 348 50 


| 


348 38 


348 28 


At 9 PM. 


Ther. 


fe) 
—43 


—48 


Si 
—25 
172 


—10 


Winds 
and Weather 


West, moderate 
and clear 


East, light airs, 
very clear 


NNE. light b. 
clear 


SSW. moderate 
and cloudy 


Nearly calm, 
show 


East, fresh b. 
dark weather 


NNE. modt. b. 
thick weather 


5'|West, light airs, 


very clear 


NE. light b. 
clear 


EDN.. light b. 
clear 


NE. moderate, 
streaked clouds: 


NE. moderate 
and hazy 


East, moderate 
and hazy 


calm, fleecy 
clouds 


East, fresh b. 
cloudy 


calm, thick hazy 

atmosphere — 
| 
NNE. light airs, 


hazy 


EDN light b. 
hazy ) 


North, moderate, 
hazy 


NbE. light b. 
clear 


WDN. moderate || 


and clear 


NW. fresh b. 
hazy 


NW. strong b. 
cloudy 


Aurora visible 


or not 
not 
not 
visible 
not 


not 


not 
not 


not 
visible 

not 

not 


visible | 


not 


not 


visible 


not 


not, halo round 


the moon 


visible 


visible 


visible 


visible 


' visible 


visible 


ETIC NEEDLE. 


573 


At Midnight. 


Position of Needle 


(eo) 1 
348 30 
348 28 


348 18 
348 30 
347 55 


348 53 
348 43 


348 33 
348 38 
348 30 
348 32 


348 26 


hm 
345 00 11 40 
343 50 11 50 
347 00 11 55 
349 30 12 10 
349 10 12 35 


348 8 


349 8 


348 30 
348 25 


PRAIA ARIPO 


348 5 
349 10 
at 12h 25m 


348 50 


348 22 


348 52 


Ther. 


fo) 
—46 


—2g1 


Winds 
and Weather 


WNW. light b. 
very clear 


NNE. light airs, 
clear 


NNE. light b. 
clear 


West, light b. 
more clear 


ESE. light airs, 
dense hazy 
atmosphere 


East, moderate, 
thick weather, 
small snow 


NNE. light b. 
SNOW 


WSW. light b. 
very clear 


NE. light b. 
very clear 


EDN. light b. 
very clear 


NE. moderate, 
streaked clouds 


NE. moderate, 
some clouds 


Fast, modt. b. 
atmosphere very 
dense, stars not 
visible 


EDN. light airs, 
very clear 


ENE. fresh b. 
and cloudy 


NNE. light b. 
thick and hazy 


ENE. light b. 
very hazy 


hazy 


ENE. light b. 
hazy and snow 


NbE. light b. 
clear 


WDN. moderate 
and clear 


fresh breezes, 
hazy 


NWbW. fresh 
gales, cloudy 


| 


Aurora visible 


or not 


visible 
visible 
visible 
visible 
visible 


visible 
not 


visible 

visible 

visible 
not 


visible 


visible 


visible 
not 


not 
not 
: | 
visible 
. Visible 


visible 


visible 


| 
| 
{ 
| 


- OTA 
Feb. At 9 AM, 
Position Winds 
18214 wae dle Ther. and Weather 
fe) . light b. 
Feb.24 || 348 go | —i8 ee 
95 348 90 | —=24 Sout ee airs, 
NW. moderate 
26 || 348 25 | —12 |dark and cloudy 
o7 | 348 15 | —22 Te ast 
8 /A.M. Cal 
347 20 aim 
28 9 —31 very clear 
347 40 
WS. light b. 
Mar.1 || 348 25 | —44 | misty near the 
horizon 
2 8 96 SW. fresh b. 
347 40 thick weather 
3 || 348 26 93 NE. moderate 
at 9 and cloudy 
4 || 34810) _ 1 East, light b. 
at 9 cloudy weather 
abe EDS. light b. 
347 10 ight 
5 9 | 7°¥O \dark and cloudy 
347 20 . 
348 40 East, light airs 
6 at Omiee ae foggy 4 
Calm 
7 348 55 | — 5 dark clouds 
Cy 7 
8 || 347 35 | zero] SE Nene. 
SE. light b. 
9 || 347 50 | — 6 | constant snow 
WDS. light airs 
10 || 348 40 | —10 | “come Clouds - 
NWbW. strong 
1 || 347 30 | —18 | 4. lear &_cold 
WDN. moderate 
12 || 348 50 | —35 clear and cold’ 
NbW. fresh b. 
13 || 348 12 32 | clear and cold 
WDN. fresh b. 
14 || 348 12 | —25 | “pany. ‘cold 
SW. light b, 
1S) |) $18:00) | 10 en aaa 
16 ve WSW. light b. 
348 10 17 cloudless sky 
West, light airg 
17 || 348 40 | —23 | sky free from — 
clouds 
18 || 348 12| —o, | Calm and 
clear 
} Calm and clear 
19 || 348 40 | —31 


above, hazy near] 348 30 


horizon 


APPENDIX. 


At Noon. 


Position 


of 
Needle © 


le] 


318 26 | —13 


348 30 


Ther. 


Winds 
and W eather 


WSW. light b. 
SnOW 


South, light airs 
WV clear é 


x11 NbW. fresh b, 
848 82 | — 73) coudy 
NW. fresh b. 
348 22 | —22 nina 
ov | WSW. light b. 
347 50 | —27. clean 


348 25 


347 53 


348 30 


348 25 


348 5 


348 48 | 114 


348 50 


348 25 


1 
348 00 
noon 
348 10 


348 45 


—18 


WSW. light b. 
clear 


SW. moderate, 


dense haze 


ENE. “moderate, 
dense atmosp. 


ESE. light b. 
dark and. “cloudy| 


At 2 PM. 

a Wash, ana Waathee 
348 30 | —15 WSW. light b. 
348 82 | —16 Beoeh dake airs, 
ss a5 | — ng oubanlert 
348 22 | —20 aes sesh b. 
347 50 | —26 oe 
os 35] 20 |, pate 
347 55 | —15 ee ee 
sasa0 |—0| SE more 
348 28 | +112 EDS. light airs, 


ENE. ae and B48 15 


clo 


Calm, 
foggy 


SW. light b. 


dark and ulondy 


SE. light b. | 
and clear | 


SE. constant 
snow 


West, light b. 
dark clouds 


NWbW. strong | 


breezes, clear 
and cold 


West, moderate 
and clear 


348 48 


North, moderate | 


and clear 


WDN. strong b. 
much drift 


WDS. light and 
clear 


WSW. cloudless 
sky 


NW. light airs, 
clear 


NWDN. light b. 


| streaked clouds 


Kast, light b: 
clear 


cloudy 


-+ 93/East, more clear 


-+15 | Calm and foggy 


the obselrvatio |ns at 2 p.m. were 


discon tinued, 


PRR AAS 


Position 


of 
Needle 


348 32 
342 34 
348 26 


348_ 30 
348 28 


347 56 


348 33 


348 22 


348 30 
348 20 
348 25 
348 30 
348 33 
348 50 
348 45 


348 35 


At 3 PM. 


Ther. 


Winds 


and Weather i 


Calm and clear | | 


North, moderala 


and clear 


NbE. moderate,| 
very clear 


North, light airs, 
clear | 


SW. fresh and | 
cloudy | 
SW. more clea: ; 


) 


| 
EDS. light airs, } 
cloudy 


North, light airs, 


small ‘snow | 


| 


Calm and clean 


Snow ceased Jj 


Clouded atme-— 
sphere | 


| 
f 


Strong breezes, | | 
very cold 

SW. moderate, | | 

clear | 


WSW. light b. } | 


clear | 
WDN. strong b. | 


NW. light b. 
clear 


WNW. light b. | 
cloudy 


1 
| 
| 
| 
| 
i | 
NW. light airs, | 
clear 


| 


North, streaked} 
clouds 


East, light b. 


| 
j 
| 
| 
clear | 
| 


: i I.] 


| (Oar 
) Yosition 


At 4 PM. 


Winds 


Ther. and Weather 


PRR 


_-| Calm and clear 


Some streaked 
clouds 


NW. moderate, 


—26 clear 


North, light airs, 
very clear 


WbS. moderate, 
hazy 


WbS. moderate, 
clear 


ESE. moderate, 


aL clear 


-- 7 | Calm and clear 


-+- 64] Dark clouds 


East, light b. 
‘cloudy 


P.M. 
NNW. light b. 
dark and cloudy 


Calm and clear 


Cloudy 


West, light b. 
dark and cloudy 


x) 


— 


NWbW. strong 


=e breezes, clear 


. | SW. moderate 


—25 and clear 
ae and clear 
—10 NW. strong bd. 
cloudy 
WNW. light b. 
SA very clear 
—j0 | NWDN. light b. 
clear 
NW. light airs 
—I8 clear : 
—19 North, light and 
clear 
East, light b. 
—22 clear 


DEVIATIONS OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE. 


Position 


of 
Needle 
fo) / 
348 28 
348 25 
348 30 
348 20 


348 40 


348 22 


348 30 


348 30 


348 50 


348 25 


348 40 


348 50 
348 30 


348 40 


348 30 


348 50 
348 25 
348 20 
348 40 
348 50 
At 10 
348 55 


348 56 


348 50 


At 9 PM. 


Winds 
and Weather 


Ther. 


9, |WSW. light airs 
—24 hazy ‘ 
SW. light airs, 
—171 thick and hazy, 
snow 


North, light b. 
hazy 


NW. moderate, 
clear 


WSW. nearly 
calm, clear 


WbS. moderate, 


me hazy 
SW. moderate 
7 clear j 


ESE. light b. 


2 clear 
North, fresh b. 
Zer0 and clo udy 
— 1] Calm and clear 
East, fresh hb. 
+ 2 hazy 


9! ENE. modt. b. 
™~ *2!dark and cloudy 


NW. light airs, 
very clear 


NW. moderate, 
cloudy 


—17 


+5 


NW. strong b. 
cloudy 


_NEDN. fresh b. 
clear 


WDN. fresh b. 


T=26 hazy 


West moderate 
mae "haz : 


_15 NW. strong b. 


hazy 
nse] ogee 
_90 Sa ee b, 
—28 | Calm, clear 
30 er eee b. 
nmi | NB tet 


Aurora visible 


or not 


visible 
not 
not 
visible 
not 
visible 
visible 
not 


not 


not 


not 
not 
visible 


not 


visible 


not 
not 
visible 
not 
not 
not 
not 


visible 


» At Midnight - 


Position 
of 
Needle 
GL 
348 30 
348 28 
348 33 
346 30 


348 40 
348 25 


348 26 
348 40 


348 40 
348 25 


549 10 
349 10 


349 35 


at 11 30 
349 10 
midnight 
349 10 


Oe ee 


at 11 30 
349 38 
349 45 
349 38 

at midn. 
349 30 


atil 15 
348 55 


349 50 


at 11 10 
348 20 


348 38 
348 50 


348 52 


‘Winds 
Ther. and Weather 
_o, |WSW. light airs, 
hazy 
_15 | SW- moderate, 
f show 
—i9 | Nearly calm, 
clear 
_39 | NW. moderate, 
clear 
—452 North, light airs, 


clear 


SW. moderate, 


—27 | dense atmo- 

sphere, snow 

_32 | EDS. light b. 
very clear 

_g | Nearly calm, 


and clear 


North, moderate 
and cloudy 


l 
> 


East, light airs, 
clear 


| 
on 


East, dense clds. 
small snow 


ENE. light b. 


| 
n 


— 81 dense clouds 
Fast, light airs 
Po cloudy 
=; NWbW. fresh b. 
clear 
_ 7 | NW. strong b. 
cloudy 
_39 | West, light b. 
—39 clear, 
SW. ditto, ditto 
WNW. modt. 
fags: hazy 
SW. moderate 
ae hazy 
North, strong b. 
7 hazy R 
NNW. light b. 
7 clear 
NWDN. light b. 
—25 clear 
NWDN. light b. 
—31 clear 
xxy| NE. light b. 
—35% hace 


5V5 


Aurora visible 


or not 


visible 
not 
visible 
visible 
visible 
not 
visible 
visible 
visible’ 
visible 
not 
not 
visible 
visible 


visible. 


visible 


visible 
visible 
visible 
visible 
visible 
not 
not 


visible 


516 


March 
1821 


March 20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 


31 


13 


14: 


At 8 A.M. 


Position Position 
of Ther. Winds and Weather of Ther. Winds and Weather 
Needle : Needle 
Onn J i "Aer fs) . 
348 00 | —31 | NE. epee 348 30 | —1g | NE. a pene 
348 10 rs es Se 
at 103 | —29| NE. light airs, | 545 39 | __ 9 West, light airs, 
348 20 
Calm SWbW. light airs 
pom il ome and clear DESEO oul some clouds 
348 49 | —15 | WSW. peut breezes, 348 40 | —19 [NWDN. light breezes, 
WDN. fleecy clouds South, light airs 
Se alae aT snow, light airs || 847 56 | — 2 snow : 
348 43 : . 
Calm EDS. light airs 
Tee SE and clear ate a — 83 clear 1 
7 A.M. + ht at ¢ ‘ 
348 30 | —20 eo Winer airs, 348 33 | 4.2 eemaient airs, 
East, light airs EDS. light breezes 
BAS aoa 7 cloudy : ES a ad dark weather ” 
348 45 | +112 5 eth ie dark,|| 349 45 91 | ENE. fe pivbneeace 
I io 
348 50 | + 93) ENE woe? 348 54 | 101 ENE. light 
11 
ESE. fresh b. dense || 348 52 | +27 | South, haze over- 
BAe a eae haze, snow 12; |+28] spread the sky 
eo 348 46 
SSW. light airs SbW. moderate b. 
aa Ae fae cloudless” SASTE epee very clear 
349 8 11 
Oh fleecy clouds 
at 9h | +17 | West, mackerel sky, || 348 46 WSW. Se ae 
Meet Te |< temectouas iisaso [| moval 
348 55 ‘ 

105 | +10 | Calm, cloudless sky East, light airs, - 
348 50 +26 dense clouds ~” ca cloudy i 
348 50 : 

: EbS. moderate, dense EDS. light breezes 
wen pe clouds, more clear EAS eae fleecy round clouds 
WDS. light airs, dark WhS. light airs, dark 
SEAR Viale & cloudy, small snow SS? pire clouds, snow 
NbW. moderate NbW. moderate 
TCP Pac oa fleecy clouds, snow BAS 20. erdL more clear 
at 7 A.M 
NWDN. fresh breezes WNW. fresh breezes 
were aoe some clouds 7|| 848 42 | zero streaked clouds 
* 
348 15 | 19 NbW. fuevh bieezes, 348 15 | — 5 | North, fesh preeres 
348 40 | 411 Pa ee ae airs, 348 88 | 110 WSw. bit reece, 
WSW. moderate WNW. light breezes,} 
348 40 | +14 cloudy AiMHiea8: 48 eal fleece clouds ° 
su ] 
348 36 | +10 ore ee SE a oe ae 
590 | nm [PSY vm aus | 9] NNO nen 
348 25 | — 2 NE. moderate, dark 348 30 | + 9 ee 
348 30 | — 9 _NNE. Ba 348 30 | —a9 | NE. ee Te 
348 28 | —17 | NNW. aap eh 348 35 | —J2 SE ae Pee 


APPENDIX. 


At Noon. 


At 3 P.M. 
Position ' 
f 
Nee dle Ther. Winds and Weather _ 
(o) + 2 | 
348 38 | —13 | NE. pene bien. 
348 32 | — gt Merle digi airs, 
sus 40] — 5 | SWOV some tnt 
NW. moderate | 
348 46 - 2 breezes 
SbE. light airs, thick] 
348 25 | + 5 weather’ | 
348 36 | + 5 Pipe Bent airs, | 
East, light breezes, | | 
348 30 | -F16 dark weather 
348 50 | +16 ENE. fresh breeze 
| 
ENE. light breezes, } 
348 52 | 19 fleecy clouds | 
ESE. moderate, light 
348 50 | 422 Snowe | 
SE. fresh breezes, | 
348 22 | +22 clear 4 | 
| 
348 54 | +40 | Calm, clouded sky | 
|. 
¥ 1 
EDS. moderate, very | 
348 50 | +21 hare ie 
East, light breezes, | 
B48760 | ot-20 neces: lendaa 
348.50] +26 | WHS. dense 
| 
348 50 | 10 NNW. Hpht breezy 
WNW. fresh breezes} 
348 40) — 1 fleecy clouds | 
348 25 | — 5 NbwW. Tesh breecag | 
SW. fresh breezes, |} 
348 38 | +18 streaked clouds” 
ee eee fl 
North, light breezes, | 
848 35 | -F10 streaked clouds ‘| 
348 30 | +10 NNW. light breezea 
| 
| 
348 33 | —1] | NE. fresh, Dnata | 
348 35 —10 NWODN. oe 


es Are 

‘At 5 PM. Aurora At Midnight 

| Wi = visible a } visible 
Been ' Winds Poe ' Winds ic aa Winds 

| Needle Hetpr- and Weather Needle aert and Weather Sea Needle Sey and Weather OF Ob 


9, | NE. light airs, fleecy 


visible } 


NE. light breezes, 


Ga RS NE. light airs ese ©) aly 
lec 348 52 Taare : visible || 349 52 | —33 clouds 

- 350 30 SSW. clear above 

WhbS. light breezes SSW. some clouds he ? ae | 

348 32 | —12 > 1 348 33 | —22 : visible || at 12% | —22 cloudy near the visible | 
clear near the horizon 350 36 hone 
a NWDN. light breezes _19 |WNW. light breezes +s WDsS. light airs oe 
348 45 | —10 lear | 348 42 19 leak >|! visible |) 348 45 | —20 din awed © visible | 


NW. fresh breezes, 
clear 


NE, light airs, 
clear 


NW. moderate, 1 34g 40 | —g0 | NW. fresh breezes, 1}! visible || sag 52 | —28 


clear clear visible | 


348 46 | —13 


_ 9 SbE. Light airs, thick|| 947 9g-| 3, | SbE. light airs, erable 


weather snow visible 


348 50 | —17 


e 


348 45 | — 5 Be airs, 348 46 | —22 Calm, clear visible 


348 50 | —242z| Calm and clear visible | 


348 40 | —- 13 Calm, clear 348 42 | —17 Calm, eee visible || 348 30 | —20 | Calm, cloudless sky | visible | 


East, moderate, 


348 40 | 12 | BPS: Tight breezes, | 34s as | 4 7 sears ME lesoede | 8 Th aceaueg, ee visible | 
31s 60 | 410 [NEDE. ftesh breezes, ays 59 | _ g |NEDE: ftesh breezes, | visipto| g4p a5 | — 5 ERE. fest breezes}} yt 
ss oo | 4a5 | PSE ight browses | au 52| 40 Paemoerate dm aoe | ays go] 40] PSP ymademtes | ihe | 
348 53 | +18 ESE. snow 348 53 | +11 Maeae ea cea? not || 348.53 | +12 Be a not 


ig ..,_ (a Lh. 30 
348 23 | -+21 SE, light breezes, | 348 39 --12 Calm, clear visible} a.m. | #5 Calm, clear aie 
clear oh Ae ; visible 


Calm, dense 348 55 | --15 Calm, hazy not 


348 54 | +38 atmosphere 


EbS. fresh breezes, 


clouded sky aoe 


348 53 | +18 EbS. fresh breezes, 


dark, cloudy nce 


119 EbS. moderate, dense} 348 55 | +19 


348 55 clouds 


Calm, clouds over- 
a spread the sky 


348 50 | +211 SSE. fleecy clouds || 348 50 348 53 | +10 Calm, hazy not 


DN. light breezes WNW. modt. b. dark 
fleecy clouds Re oh & cloudy, small snow ROE 


NW. light breezes NNW. light breezes a 
348 50 | +-8 ee > || 348 52 | + 5 etek 71) visible 


348 53 | + 2] NW. moderate b. not 
snow 


348 55 | — 7 | NWDN. moderate, | visible 
clear ' 


348 53 | +20 | 


. 9 |WNW, fresh breezes! 949 4g | —10 NW. fresh breezes, || visiple 


348 48 See, cloudy 348 53 | —13 | North, moderate, || visible 


cloudy 
North fresh breezes, 


348 50 | —~ 349 25 | —14 ae | visible |] 348 52 | —19 Cee visible | 
| ath. 10! : 

38 46 | +9 Spanked cleat: || 848 46 | + 2 NBS oP aat 2 +2] SW. strong breezes, | visible | 
gia so | p20) Uy S60) EO) ae clouds |p Tot || BOO |) Calm, summer. cant 
348 35 | + 8 ae eee ee 348 35 | zero Dee eee b aa not ~~~ | + 7 | North, es breezes 

} 318 33| 48 | North, lightairs, |’ 31g 33 | — 6 West, light breezes, |) not || 348.35 | — 8 | WDN. Hight breezes, || visible | 
248 since Gime nonce, ha 30 | zero | NNW, hazy; halo not 
3s 30 | — 6 | NW. Sesh bperes, 348 33] —15 | West moderate, |) not || 348. 40 | 18 | NW. motlerate b. || not 
348.40:) 19 |) N WBN, fresh b. "gas 4g | <2 |North, strong breezes} not || 348 50 | —31 faintly | 


East, light breezes || visible 


579 APPENDIX. [No. 


At 7 A.M. At Noon. At 3 P.M. 


Position Position Position 
end Ther. Winds and Weather | oan Ther. Winds and Weather ce Ther. Winds and Weather 
fe) Oo 7 le) 
April 15 | |) 348 do | 24 p ENE tosh breezes, | ste | —a5 | BNE, fresh breezes, 995 18 | 14 | © Moderate, cleax 
EbS. light airs EbS. light airs 

16 347 40 | —14 Calm, clear 348 15 | — 5 aie ad ? 34825 | — 5 Riek ) 
¥ ENE. fresh breezes Fast ~ | _ 4 |Hast, strong breezes 
17 pats 20" Ep snow * || $48 38 | — 3 strong breezes, oleate Wir ’ cloudy : 
| EDS. light breezes 2 Fast, light breezes East, modt. breezes 
18 348 33. | — 5 very Clear ? |} 348 35 | 11 Y Sow ? 1) 348 45 | + 9 ? dark ? 
19 | 34883} +18] Calm, snow 348 35 | $21 Calm, snow 349 43 | 4. 4 | ENE. light breezes, 


clear 


20 348 15 | — 1 East, light breezes, 348 00 | +7 SbE. light breezes, 419 SbE. light breezes, 


348 10 


very clear very clear very clear 
21 | 349,15. | 445 |. Calm, foggy 348 55 | -£38 | SPW. light breezes, | s4 59 | 498 abe ca egy 


28 348 40 | +128 SSW. light breezes, || 940 35 4.43 South, light breezes, 348 40 


snow Sw -L27 MANY. potent, 
NE. moderate 

+3 cloudy. ‘|| 348.18 

“29 Fast, light breezes, || 349-26 | 


23 |] 347 40) — 2 ae hes 348 5 +5) NE ag 
a ee dee fanaa pole summer clouds 42 ila aonayer ak 
25 [io 20 | 6 | Past Het breezes | suo 20) ran] PRL madertes | ago ap | 80 | PNE: light breezes, 
26 349.20 | +15 | Rast eal Peeee se 348 42 | 197 East, ae or 348 50 | +420 East, strong, horace 
April 27 348 23 | +18 East, Hips Rreeeee? 348 45 | +97 East, pea b. I 349 43 “97 NE. Hight le 
2g || 348 33 | -F15 He es 348 33 | 131 eos 348 43 | p27 |NEE. light breezes, 


NNE. moderate, 


E. moderate b, 
29 Bde 38 | Hig }) ENE moder POR small snow 


snow 


348 46 | +26 | NE constant snow 


or 


+2 


NE. light airs, 


| PINE, light breezes 
30 348 46 | +18 & ? || 348 53 | +132 cloudless 


348 52 
clear 


414 SE. strong breezes, 


clouded +40 | SE. strong gales 


WSW. fresh breezes, 


May 1 346 55 | +24| SSW. light airs, || 347 20 | 348 00 


Ccirro stratus 


Calm 
2 348 15 | +46 dark clouds aaa 


+46 Wsw. ff ie 348 22 | +40 more clear 
ted | SEDS. light breezes, 
3 |/'sas 18 | 404 | West light breezes, || s4s 29 | 436 | SEDE. moderate b. || g4s 26 | —49 clear | 
. ] k p WSW. strong breezes 
4 348 30 | 138 ESR Helbairs, 348 30 | +49 | ESE. ae 348 30 | +35 heavy clouds” 
5 |) 34s 35) 4on| SE: tebhairs, — |[ 848 40 | 40 | SPE moderate De || ats 40 | 1-46 ae 
‘sa7 2 W. ligh SEbS. moderat 
347 26 SW. light airs 0 - moderate, 
: at 8 | 135 very clear i a Cain, dex 348,25, phd? clear 
347. 40 
7 jp 84s. 12 | p34 | ENE. light breezes, || 45 18} 441) EDN. moderate, || 348.90 | 4.30 ae 


436 NE. light breeezes, 


te, |NEDN. light breezes 
cloudy ee 


8 848 15 | +39 | ESE. light breezes, || g49° 95 fleecy clouds 


dark clouds 348 25 


9, || 348.20} +18 | ESE. moderate b. 


III. | DEVIATIONS OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE. 579 
At 5 PM. At 9 PM. Aurora At Midnight. Aurora | 

Position ne ae! Position] a) rie Position | aa Sal 
Needle and Weather Needle and Weather or no Needle e and Weather or not 

ate 33 | {4 | East, modems b. |} 398 42 _34 | East, moderate b. ae 3948 45 | —32 SSW. Beet breezes, waeibla | 
348 93 | — 6 | EDS. Hehe Prepay 

348 46 | + 7 | PNE. moderate b. | 543 42 | —6| NE lghtairs, | 348 45] -— 7 | Calm, clear 

348 46 | + 2 ENE. light breeze, 348 48 |} —12 ANY nears ~~~~~|| 348 45 | —20 Calm, clear visible 
348 18 | + | BNE. light breezes, | s4¢ 35 | +15 | Calm, cloudless || visible || 349 20| +20] Calm, cloudless | visible | 
348 50 | -+22 Calm, clear 34853 / +5) oe ents |] not i sds53} +7) yh not 
348 36 | +120 wR modwote; 348 50 | zero North, foal DEgczess rt + a sc iD fot 
348 92|—2| NE. re b. 348 92 | —l4 nae one, 349 33. | —17 EDN. pe Ns o2e oie 
349 36 | 17 Papi negGr es 349 30 | + 6 West motlerate not || 349 33 | + 8 sae ia ate, 1 not 
349 20 | +22] ENE. moderate |} 349 28 | +13 SD ree not || 349 28 | +13 i eee. not 
118 5/418] seoakRitioaay | 24860 | H10 ENE. etmng Dreezo} noe | sie so] 410 | NBS meezen | gs 
348 40 | +26] ENE. pore b. | ou | 4g | ENE. Lei unig ioe Wsa8'so ae Gt ENE. tent breezes, | vice | 
son JSP HA es] au oo | ass | NOW ago, Paar || gua ah a 
348 43 | L293 anes gd emis 348 40'| +12 ENE dupdo rates thot 348 40 | -+12 NE. moderate visible 
ais 53] +26] ENE: Wacom | sas oo | +o] PNG Dao not |} 34s 53 | + 4 SE. Gear? || visible 
sis 40 | +87 | SE, mackerel sky | gue 33 | +29 | SE: only |f not || sas 53 | +20 | SE strong breezes, \} visinte 
348 26 | Lay | WPS. light breezes, TF sae/ox | P30! tak not || 348 25 | 125 | WbS. cloudless sky || not 
348 25 | +39 | SEDE. moderate b. | 343 95 | +32 | ESE. moderate b. 1 not | 348 28 | -+25 cae treet ore eee te ieible | 
348 32 | ~~ ~~~ |] 348 33 | ~~ not 348 85 | ~~ | ~~~ not 
348 40 | p46 | South, melt airs, sae 40 | +32) South, tight airs, | not || a4 46 | +28 vee | visible 
348 30 | 143 | SEbS. some clouds || 348 26 | +129 |: East, ae yaaa not |} 348 28 4.29 EDS. small snow not 
348 = 436 | EbSs. a Svea 348 26 | 131 EDS. not |} 348 25 | +31. | EDS. Hepparerres, not 
348 25 | +34 | WbS. lighitinbetdet 348 26 | +21 | EDS. Bron aa not || 348 25 | 401 ee b. nde 


4E2 


ON THE AURORA BOREALIS 


AT FORT ENTERPRISE, 


EXTRACTED FROM THE JOURNAL OF LIEUTENANT ROBERT HOOD, R.N. 


Durine the summer of 1820, the Aurora was only once visible before the 
month of August, when the nightly temperature of the air was generally below 
50°. The late continuance of day-light, and the few opportunities which we 
had of making observations at the most favourable hours, render it possible 
that the Aurora may have sometimes appeared, in this long interval, without 
our knowledge. But those opportunities were sufficiently numerous to con- 
vince me, that it is actually very seldom present in these regions during the 
summer, 

The number of Aurora visible in August 1820, was ten; in September six ; 
in October seven; in November eight; in December twenty ; in January 
1821, seventeen; in February twenty-two ; in March twenty-five; in April 
eighteen ; and in May, the brightness of twilight prevented us from seeing 
more than nine. ‘The whole amount is more than double the number of our 
observations at Cumberland-House. It is worthy of remark, that the number 
of Aurore in each month of both the winters, bears some proportion to the 
thermometrical range. The shapes of the Aurora at its entry into the horizon, 
and progress through the sky, may be reduced under two general descriptions. 
In the first, I shall class those which are formed like rainbows or arches, in the 
earliest stage of their appearance. They rise with their centres, sometimes 
in the magnetic meridian, and sometimes several degrees to the eastward or 
westward of it. ‘The number, visible at the same time, seldom exceeds five, 
and is seldom limited to one. The altitude of the lowest, when first seen, is 
never less than 4°. As they advance towards the zenith, their centres (or the 
parts most elevated,) preserve a course nearly in the magnetic meridian, or 
parallel to it. But the eastern and western extremities vary their respective 
distances, and the arches become irregularly broad streams in the zenith, each — 
dividing the sky into two unequal parts, but never crossing one another till . 


No. III. ] LIEUTENANT HOOD ON THE AURORA. 581 


they separate into parts. Those arches, which were bright at the horizon, in- 
crease their brilliancy in the zenith, and discover the beams of which they are 
composed when the interior motion is rapid. This interior motion is a sud- 
den glow, not proceeding from any visible concentration of matter, but burst- 
ing out in several parts.of the arch, as if an ignition of combustible matter had 
taken place, and spreading itself: rapidly towards each extremity. In this 
motion the beams are formed, suchas are described in the last observations 
upon the subject. They have two motions, one at right angles to their length 
or sideways ; and the other, a. tremulous and short vibration, in which they do. 
not exactly preserve their parallelism. to. each other. By the first, they pro- 
ject themselves into wreaths, serpentine forms, or irregular. broken curves. 
The wreaths, when in the zenith, present the appearance of Corone Boreales. 
The second motion is always accompanied with colours ; for. it must be ob- 
served, that beams are often formed without any exhibition of colours; and I 
have not, in that case, perceived the vibratory motion. . The beams, in differ- 
ent Aurore, and sometimes in the same, are of different magnitudes, arising, 
probably, from their various distances. These evolutions, often repeated, 
destroy the shape and coherence of the several arches ; though they, doubtless, 
retain the arched appearance to the eye of a spectator at the southern horizon. 
For it would be absurd to suppose, that these changes occur only in the zenith 
of one particular place. The observations, at different places, in 1820, afford 
satisfactory proof to the contrary. And the number of arches often increased 
or diminished, in their advance to the zenith, by a dismemberment of which, 
from their distance, we could not distinguish the particulars. However, their 
several parts passed gradually to the southward, where I have seen them re- 
assume the form of an arch. They are also sometimes distributed into flashes, 
and other detached portions, which pass to the south eastward. The revolu- 
tion of an arch, from north to south, occupies a space of time, varying from 
_ twenty. minutes. to two hours. At Cumberland-House, the arches were in 
‘many instances almost stationary for several hours; a proof, that if their mo- 
tion was not slower, their distance from the earth was greater than at Fort 
Enterprise. 

The arches which are faint at the horizon, very frequently pass the zenith 
without any increase of brilliancy or apparent internal motion. I conceive 
them to be more elevated than any other description of Aurore. | 


582 APPENDIX. [No. TL 


The second general class of Aurore are those which propagate themselves 
from different. points of the compass, between north and west, towards the 
opposite points ; sometimes also originating in the S. E. quarter, and extend- 
ing themselves towards the N.W. They may be subdivided, like the former, 
into the distant arches, which pass to the southward without much visible 
change in their appearance; and those which discover beams, and separate at 
intervals into wreaths, flashes, and irregular segments, exhibiting all the phe- 
nomena described above. In explaining the mode by which the two general 
classes of Aurorz are conducted into the horizon, I shall call the motion of the 
arches (which is ina plane seldom deviating more than two points from the 
magnetic meridian) the direct motion; and that by which the Aurore propa- 
gate themselves nearly at right angles to the magnetic meridian, the lateral 
motion. Let us suppose a mass of Aurora to be modelled at its birth, in a 
longitudinal form, crossing the meridians at various angles; the whole to be 
impelled with a direct motion towards the magnetic south, but the parts 
having different. velocities, and each extremity continually removing itself, by 
a lateral motion, from the centre, so as to increase the length of the mass. If 
the centre enter the northern horizon, it will appear like an arch, the real ex- 
tremities being invisible; and its direct motion will carry it to the southward 
in that form. But if one extremity first enter the horizon, it will extend itself, 
by its lateral motion, to the opposite point, passing, at the same time, by its 
direct motion to the southward. | 

Of the unequal velocities. of the parts, we had many instances, in the direct 
motion of the arches, by which the centres were often carried from the zenith 
60° or 70° to the southward, while the extremities did not materially alter 
their positions. Nor can this be accounted for by any application of the 
rules of perspective, because arches exactly similar sometimes changed the 
bearings of their extremities in proportion to the advance of their centres - 
and.at Cumberland-House, on two occasions, the extremities of arches arrived’ 
at the east and west points of the compass, while their centres remaitied only 
10° above the northern. horizon. 4 

There are two other forms of the Aurora which cannot be classed in ceiaoy 
of these descriptions, and the occurrence of which is not frequent. 

The first isa small mass, much elevated above the horizon, sometimes ex- 
hibiting brilliant beams, and then disappearing or passing to the southward. 


No. II.] LIEUTENANT HOOD ON THE AURORA. 083 


It has, perhaps, been detached by violent motion from a body below the 
horizon. The second is an arch from north to south. In it the lateral and 
direct motions are in the same direction. The flashes and beams are, in my 
Opinion, generally inclined in the direction of the dipping needle. Their per- 
spective must be considered in determining this; for, near the magnetic 
meridian, they appear perpendicular to the horizon; but when at some distance 
to the eastward or westward, they decline towards the perpendicular at 
different angles. | 

The corone, and other wreaths of the Aurora, sometimes approached so 
near, that the beams appeared under an angle of 10° or 12°. No difference 
was then distinguishable between them and the flashes before described, 
except that the time of their existence was shorter. 

The colours, shown. by the beams when in rapid motion, were pea-green at 
the upper extremities, and purple and violet intermixed at the lower. (It 
will be remembered that these were the three colours which Mr. Morgan 
produced by introducing an electric spark into an exhausted glass bulb.) 
On one occasion, the lower colour was orange, which last was, in every 
instance, the prevailing colour at Cumberland-House. 

On the 8th of March, 1821, at 5h. 30m. p- m., immediately after sunset. 
an arched Aurora was visible, extending from N.W. to S.E.b.8. This was 
the earliest period of the day at which we saw it; for although it might from 
the shortness of the days in December and January, have been seen at 3 p.m., 
if present, it seldom appeared before 7 p.m., and was usually most brilliant 
at midnight. On the llth of February, the clouds formed a regular arch 
extending N.N.W. to E.; and the needle of a compass, fixed in the house, 
for the purpose of making observations, receded 20° from the magnetic 
meridian to the westward. I saw these clouds disperse, and afterwards 
collect in a different form. The disturbance of the compass, is another proof 
of the presence of the Aurora during the day; but, on the whole, there is 
reason to conclude that such is not often the case. On the 13th of November 
the Aurora was. seen, between the clouds and the earth, by Mr. Franklin and 
Dr; Richardson. On the 13th of March, I saw an Aurora, which was ema- 
nating in wreaths from the N.W., pass over the lower surface of a stratum of 
white clouds. The upper edge of the clouds was 80 feet distant from the lower, 
and its Azimuth, $.35° W. The Aurora passed at the altitude of 70° and 


584: APPENDIX. [No. TIL. 


therefore could not have been more than two miles from the earth, supposing 
that the elevation of the clouds was 24 miles. The wind was-W., and the 
temperature of the air 36°. Another circumstance, which twice came under 
my observation, is too remarkable to be omitted. The Aurora was very 
brilliant near the zenith, the sky perfectly clear, and the wind moderate, when 
a discharge took place of small flakes of snow, which continued during several 
minutes. In both instances, showers of snow had fallen about half an hour 
before ; but at the precise periods of these phenomena, no clouds were visible 
10° above the horizon. To account for them on any known principles, we 
must wholly abandon EHuler’s theory of the zodaical light, and Dr. Halley’s 
circulation of magnetic effluvia. 

On the 27th of April, at 10h. 30m. p.m., a single column of Aurora rose 
in the north, and traversed the zenith towards the south; another column 
appearing, N.H.b. E., and taking a parallel direction. The frost was slightly 
agitated, and the beams momentarily visible. It passed to the western 
horizon in ten minutes, and was followed by the other, which became brighter 
as it approached the zenith. Iam now convinced they were borne away by 
the wind, because the columns preserved exactly their distance from each 
other during their evolution ; and some detached wreaths, projected from them, 
retained the same relative situations of all their parts; which never happens 
when the Aurora is carried through the air by its own direct motion. The 
wind was E.b.N., a strong gale, and the temperature of the air 9°. 

It must be admitted that the influence of the wind upon the Aurora, was 
never suspected until the 27th of April. However there are several parti- 
culars connected with the subject, which may have prevented such an influence 
from manifesting itself on former occasions. 1st. When the coruscations 
were rapid and brilliant, they forced themselves against the wind, or in the 
contrary direction, without any perceptible difference of speed; from which 
circumstance, I was led to suppose that they were not in any degree affected’ 
by the wind, and did not afterwards pay sufficient attention to discover my 
error. 2nd. The prevalent winds were from the eastward and westward . 
and the arches usually extending from N.W. to S.E.; the influence of the 
wind might have been mistaken for their lateral maton 3d. The northerly 
winds, acting from the same quarter as the direct motion, were confounded with 
it. Lastly, the southerly winds, which were not common, always filled the 


No. IIT.] LIEUTENANT HOOD ON THE AURORA. 585 


atmosphere with clouds, so that the Aurora was not»visible.- Perhaps, after 
all, the Aurora of the 27th of April was nearer to the earth than any other 
which we saw. 

On the 11th of March, at 10h. p.m., a body of Aurora rose N.N.W., and 
after a mass of it had passed to E.b.S., the remainder broke away, in 
portions consisting each of several beams, which crossed about 40° of the sky 
with great rapidity. We repeatedly heard a hissing noise, like that of a 
musket-bullet passing through the air, and which seemed to proceed from the 
Aurora; but Mr. Wentzel assured us that this noise was occasioned by severe 
cold, succeeding mild weather, and acting upon the surface of the snow, 
previously melted in the sun’s rays. The temperature of the air was then 
— 35°, and on the two preceding days, it had been above zero. The 
next morning, it was — 42°, and we frequently heard a similar noise. Mr, 
Hearne’s description of the noise of the Aurora agrees exactly with Mr 
Wentzel’s, and with that of every other person who has heard it. It would 
be an absurd degree of scepticism to doubt the fact any longer; for our 
observations have rather increased than diminished the probability of it. 

We were informed by the natives, that the Aurora indicated, by peculiar 
appearances, the state of the atmosphere which was to follow on the ensuing 
day. For instance, when it is bright, and the motion rapid, it will be 
succeeded by a strong wind; but when attenuated and expanded over the 
sky, by mild and cloudy weather. A careful examination of the meteorological 
journal does not furnish sufficient foundation for these conclusions. But, 
although the influence of the Aurora upon the weather has been deemed 
insignificant, it is by no means improbable that the latter considerably affects 
the former. ‘To suppose that.a luminous body, floating in the air, and some- 
times situated near the clouds, is within the bounds of the ordinary atmo. 
spherical changes, andmay announce those changes by assuming a form which 
must be in some measure determined by the circumambient pressure, is not, 
I should think, inconsistent with any philosophical principles. If we had 
not, unfortunately, lost the only instrument calculated for the purpose, we 
might at least have ascertained what relation the weight of the air bears to 
this interesting meteor. 

In the month of January, one of Kater’s azimuth compasses was fixed ona 
shelf within the house, near a parchment window, which admitted the air 

4 ¥F 


586 APPENDIX. | (No. III. 


through several holes. Another small compass belonging to the transit instru- 
ment, to the needle of which no card was attached, was placed in a recess at 
the opposite side of the house, in the open air. The variation of the latter 
was inspected by Mr. Franklin, and of the former, by me, at several hours of 
the day and night. Both were very frequently affected by the Aurora, but 
in different degrees ; and they recovered their former positions at different 
times. Upon some occasions they were affected in the day, and upon others, 
one compass alone was affected. Mr. Franklin remarked, that a certain 
position of the Aurora was always attended by a variation of his compass in 
the same direction, and that the motions of the needle were so immediate, as 
to be often visible during his observation. Mine, on the contrary, however 
various the shape and situation of the Aurora, in the course of two or three 
hours, declined gradually to the eastward or westward, without ever retro- 
grading ; and I could not perceive that the increase or decrease of the variation 
depended upon any particular position of the Aurora, for it never was stationary 
for one-fourth of the ahave-mentioned period. However, all the remarkable 
aberrations of both instruments took place during the same nights, and were 
found to be at their maximums on the following mornings, and they generally 
recovered before 8h. p.m. As these maximums were the last result of the 
impulses given by the Aurora, and their duration the longest, they were com- 
pared together, and about half of them found to be in contrary directions from 
the magnetic meridian, but not equal in quantity.. Considering the Aurora’as 
magnetic effluvia, the aberrations of both needles should have been always in 
the same direction with respect to the magnetic meridian ; because all bodies 
which are not ferruginous, are equally conductors of magnetism, and will 
transmit it in the same straight line—whereas, electricity conveys itself through 
‘the channels which are the best conductors, and may act from different quarters 
upon two needles differently situated: and its effect continues, till the charge 
received by the needle is carried off by the pivot supporting it, which, by 
experiment with an excited electric, appears to require not less than 10 or 
12 hours. , | 
The common cork-ball electrometer not having on any occasion given signs 
of a charge, I tried the following experiment, in order to.attain further evidence 
on the subject. A brass needle was attached to a compass card, and balanced 
on a copper pivot ina wooden box. It was about four inches in radius, and a 


No. III] LIEUTENANT HOOD ON THE AURORA. 587 


copper arch of 60° to that radius, was fixed at one end of the box, which was 
closed by a wooden slide, and paper pasted over every crevice to exclude the air 

To give it the same advantages for conducting electricity as the compass boxes 
(which are made of brass,) I introduced an iron wire, eight inches in length, 
perpendicularly through the lid, in such a manner, that its lower extremity was 
in a horizontal plane with the needle ; and a pane of glass at that end of the 
lid, enabled me to see into the interior of the box.. Having previously ascer- 
tained that it contained no magnetism, the instrument was placed, on the 2d 
of May, on a covered shelf, at the outside of the house, in a position nearly 
east and west; the brass needle being 25’ from the conductor, and a small 
glass bubble adjusted on the box, in order to prevent its otherwise unper- 
ceived movement. At 12h. p.m., I examined the needle, and found its position 
unaltered.- No Aurora was then visible, but one was afterwards seen by Mr- 
Franklin ; and at 8h. a.m., May 3d, the needle and conductor were in contact. 
I moved the needle 40’ from the conductor, and it was similarly affected at 
some period on the nights of May 3d, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th, and 11th. The 
thermometer, during this period, ranged in the day between + 26° and + 56°; 
and in the night, between + 10° and + 38°. I did not see the Aurora, except 
on the nights specified above ; and did not perceive any alteration in the 
needle till the succeeding mornings. 

The night of the 12th furnished a more satisfactory proof of the agency of 
the Aurora. At 10h. p.m., the needle was not affected, and no Aurora was 
visible. At Oh. 30° a.m., May the 13th, several arches appeared across the 
sky from N.W. to S.E., and the needle was attracted to the conductor from 
the distance of 1°. The temperature of the air was + 12. I now determined 
to convert the instrument into a kind of electrometer, by insulating the needle 
and conductor. ‘The pivot which supported the former was fixed upon sealing 
wax, and the part of the latter which passed through the lid was covered with 
the same substance. 

_ Paper was pasted on the box as before, and it was re- -placed at 2h. p. m. on 

the 14th, the temperature of the air being 54°. A heavy gale of wind from 

N.N.W. with snow, immediately followed, and the temperature of the air, at 

midnight, was reduced to 19°. At 9h. a.m. May 15th, the needle was removed 

30° from the conductor, and both were still charged, so that I could not bring 

them together till the conductor was accidentally touched. I believe this 
4 F 2 


588 APPENDIX. [No. 1Ik. 


charge to have been received from an Aurora; because the same weather, 
preceding and following it, did not affect the needle in the day, when the 
increased warmth of the air was more favourable to the production of 
electricity in other quarters, and also to its passage. On the 24th of May, 
between 10h. and 12h. p.m. the needle was attracted to the conductor, and 
repelled 25°*, The next morning, Mr. Franklin found the needle of the 
transit instrument (which was then in the meridian) affected 20’. The bright- 
ness of the twilight prevented us from seeing the Aurora, and I therefore 
discontinued my observations. 

That electricity was the cause of the motions which I have described does 
not admit of adoubt. But whether the electricity was received from, or sum- 
moned into action by, the Aurora, my readers will determine for themselves, 
being in possession of the facts upon which I have myself founded my opinion. 


APPEARANCES OF THE AURORA AT FORT ENTERPRISE. 
Extracted from the Journal of Lizutunant Hoop, R.N. 


1821, January 10th, at 8h. p.m. an arched Aurora N.N.W. to N.N.E. At 
11h. p. m. a double arch, much broken, but not bright, from N.W. to S.E, 

llth. At midnight, faint Aurora from west to east. 

14th. At midnight, five arches of Aurora from N.W. to S.E.: a large 
corona borealis. | 

15th. At midnight, an arched Aurora from N.W. to S.E.; beams very 
bright ; colours, violet below, pea-green above. Their motion aa not appear 
to be general in any direction, but proceeding from particular points towards 
the S.E. and N.W. at the same time: weather clear. 

21st. “At midnight, a double arch; extremities N.W. to 8.E., centre S.W. 
12°? high. At lh. a. m., a large body issued from N.W. and pou the sky 
with wreaths and flashes: colour as usual. 

22d. At 9h. p. m., faint arch from N.b. W. to E. 

22d. At 9h. p. m., a double arch, N.W. toS.E., centre S.W. 60° high. 


* The thermometer was then 20°, and at 3h. p.m. it had been 58.° 


No, IIT.] LIEUTENANT HOOD ON THE AURORA. 589 


January 24th. At 9h. p.m., a bright double arch from W. to 8.8.E.; rapid 
motion of beams. 

25th. At 9h. p. m., five parallel arches, abe centre one from N.W, to 8.E, 
The northernmost arch was the brightest, the rest faint. 

27th. At 8h. p. m., faint arch from N.W. to E.S.E., centre N.N.E. 

28th. At 9h. p.m., faint arch from NN.W,. to E.b.S.; at Ilh. it 
advanced to the zenith, and the beams were distinguishable; extremities 
N.W. and 8.E. 

30th. At 2h. a.m., an arch N.W. to S.E. composed of many wreaths 
of beams; bright, with rapid motion; colour as usual. At midnight, Aurora 
similar to that of last night: general motion of wreathes S.E. | 

February Ist, at 2h. a. m., an Aurora similar to that of last night. At mid- 
night , an Aurora similar to that of last night. 

3d, At lh. a.m., an arch N.W. and 8.E., which passed 8.W.,. and was 
followed by another at 2h. a, m.: at midnight, Aurora much broken and_ scat. 
tered over the sky. 

5th. At midnight, several wreaths of beams, some of them Corone Borealis, 
occupying a large space from N.W. to 8.E. | 

6th, At 11h. p.m., a faint arch N.W. to S.E. 

7th. At midnight, Aurora similar to that of last night. 

8th, At midnight, a bright arch N.W. and S.E., centre S.W. 65° high; 
rapid motion of beams: at 2h. a. m., it passed to 8. W. 

9th. Atllh. p.m., Aurora across the zenith, N.W. and 8. E.; at 2h. a. ma, 
it passed to the southward. 

10th. At'7h. p.m., appearance of Aurora N.W. 

11th. At3h.p.m.,anarch of clouds exactly resembling the Aurora, from 
W.N.W. to E.S.E., they were, however, driven away by the wind. 

12th. At 11h. p. m., two arches N.W. toS E. passing quickly S.W. 

14th. At midnight, arched Aurora, W.N.W. and E.S.E.: some exceed- 
ingly bright flashes, which, as usual, appeared and disappeared without 
changing their positions. 

15th. At 10h. p. m., faint arch, W.N.W. and E.S.E. 

19th. At 9h. p.m., an arched Aurora, N.N.W. and E.S.E. at Uh. a. m., 
some segments of arches in the zenith and to the southward; au 8 intesior 
motion: colour ordinary. 


590 APPENDIX. [No. IIL. 


20th. At 10h. p.m., similar Aurora to that of last night. 

21st. At 9h. p.m., four arches, from W.N.W. to E.S.E.; their extre- 
mities close together; beams distinguishable of the ordinary colour. At 2h. 
a.m., one bright waving arch in the zenith, and several flashes in the 8.W. 
quarter. 

22d. At 9h. p. m., three arches from N.W. to 8.E., much atteniated, 

23d. At 8h. p.m., five bright arches, from W.N.W. to E.S.E., across 
the zenith; at 9h. p. m.; their centres bore S.W. 20° high; extremities stil] 
W.N.W. nae K.S.E.: some interior motion visible. 

24th.. At 10h. p.m., two arches from N.W. to 8.E., centre N.E.—at 11h. 
p. m., they were in the zenith. 

26th. At midnight, three indistinct and broken arches from N.W.b.N., to 
S.E. across the zenith. | 

27th. At 9h. p.m., four arches from W.N.W. to S.E.: some interior motion. 
At midnight, they joined in one arch 50° broad, extending from E. to W., 
much attenuated. 

28th. At midnight, many wreaths of Aurora from W. to E., forming corone in 
the zenith, the beams of which were unusually large; faint colours, violet at 
the lower extremities, and pea-green at the upper. 

March Ist. At midnight, a broken and faint arch, centre S.W., which had 
previously crossed the zenith. 

2d. At 10h. p.m., two arches, N.W. and E.S.E. 
no beams. 

3rd, At midnight, an arch faintly visible, E. and Ww. | 

4th. At midnight, two corone, 8.W.b.W. 70° high, and several flashes ; 
no other Aurora visible. 

6th. At lh. 30'a.m., an Aurora N.W., like the stem of a tree, shoot- 
ing out .several branches S.E., which exhibited wreaths of -beams. 
They passed so rapidly to the S.W., that two of them disappeared in that 
quarter in ten minutes. Many flashes visible at intervals ; colours, violet be- 
jow, and pea-green above, very brilliant. 

8th. Just after sunset, with a strong twilight, plainly saw an arched Au- 
rora fromN.W. to S.E.b.S. centre S.W. 70° high. At 9h. p. m., three 
arches NW. and 8.S.E. centre S.W.b. W. 10° high. A wreath in the ze- 
nith. At lh. a. m., Aurora spread over the sky, moving towards the S.E. 


: Some interior motion, but 


No. III.] LIEUTENANT HOOD ON THE AURORA, 591 


9th. - At midnight, three arches passed to the southward. Some quick 
flashes; faint colours, violet and green, situated as before. 

10th. At 9h. p.m., an arch seen through the clouds. 

11th. At 10h. p.m., a bright arch W.N.W. and E.B.S., emanating from 
a large body of Aurora in the N.W. quarter. The arch separated into 
portions of several beams each, which broke away and passed to the S.E. in 
succession, with great rapidity. 

March 12th. At 10h. p.m., a double arch shaped like a sling, with the bend 
N.W. and the ends 8.E. ; faint. 

13th. At 9h. p. m., an arch across the zenith; extremities N.W. and 
S.E.b.S., centre S.W. A wreath from N.W. towards E.S.E., but broken at 
the height of '70° S.W.b.S., was seen distinctly to pass between a stratum 
of white clouds and the 4 The pups border of these clouds was 80°, 
high. 

15th. At Ih. p. m., a faint irregular arch, N.N.W. and E.S.E., centre in the 
zenith. 

17th. At midnight, an arched Aurora N.W. and 8.E. ; faint. 

18th. At 11h. p. m., an Aurora similar to that of the 17th. 

19th. At 1llh. p. m., a broken arch from N.b. W. to S.W.b. W.,. 10° 
high. 

20th. At 9h. p. m., three faint arches N.W. and S. i. extremities close 
together, centres S.W. 

21st. At midnight, many wreaths from N.W. toS.E., bright, but no aes ty 
general motion from 8.E. to N.W. 

22nd. Two arches passed to the southward, before 10h. p. m., when 
another appeared, much broken, from N.W. b.N. to E.S.E. 

23rd. AtlOh. p. m., cloudy; three arches from N.W.b.N. to S.E.b.8: 
beyond clouds. | 

24th. At 10h. p. m., twoarches N.W. and 8.E., faint; slight motion. — 

25th. At midnight, three arches similar to those of last night. 

26th At midnight, an arch N.W.b.W. and 8.E.b.S.; very faint at each 
extremity; beams distinguishable in the middle. | | | 

27th. At Qh. p.m., arch seen faintly N.N.E. and 8.3.W. 

28th. At 8h. p. m., an arch passed the zenith gradually to the south- 
ward. 


592 APPENDIX. _ [No. IE. 


31st. At 11h. p.'m., an attenuated Aurora spread ‘over the sky. At mid- 
night, three faint arches W.N.W. and S.E. 

April Ist. At midnight, two large wreaths from N.W. to 8.E., forming an 
Aurora shaped like an 5 ; motion rapid. 

5th. At 11h. p.m., puiNlicant Aurora, of many half formed wreaths ; colour, 
ordinary. At 2h.a,m., anarch W.N.W. and E.S.E., centre 8.8. W.; ; rapid 
interior motion. | 

7th. At 2h. a.m.,a mass of Aurora, with many flashes in S.E., whither 
it had passed from N.W. in the course of the night. At llh. p. m., Aurora 
much spread ; bright and rapid. At 2h. a. m., three arches to the southward, 
and one N.E.b. N. advancing. 

April 11th, at 1h. a.m., very detached Aurora N.W. and 8.E.; faint, but 
some interior motion visible. 

13th. At 11h. p. m,, several segments of arches N.W. and E.S.E.; little 
motion. 

15th. At 2h. a. m., numerous dispersed flashes in the south. 

16th. At 9h. p. m., two faint arches N.W.b.N. and E.b.S. 

18th. At lh. a. m, a beautiful Aurora emanating in a large wreath 
from W.b.N., and doubling in the E.S.E. quarter; the beams large, and their 
motion exceedingly quick ; colours, violet below, and pea-green above. It 
passed to the southward, and was followed by another. At midnight, scat- 
tered and faint Aurora. 

19th. At midnight, four arches from west to 'S.8.E.; extremities close to- 
gether; beams bright, and in rapid motion. 

20th. At midnight, an arch from W.N.W. to E.S. E.: ; irregular, faint, and 
little motion. , 

2ist. At midnight, appearance of Aurora through a haze. 

22nd. At midnight, two wreaths in the zenith ; rapid mterlor motion. A 
mass of Aurora, S.W., which had passed the zenith. 

23rd. At 11h. 80° p. m.,,an arch from N.W. to S.E. ; quick motion of 
beams, faint violet below ; several flashes. It passed so fast to the southward, 
that at midnight the sky was perfectly clear. | “ 

27th. At 10h..30'p.m., saw an Aurora rising north, in a single column 
towards the south; another N.E.b.E., taking the same direction. The first 
was slightly abtiatod! and the beams momentarily visible. Both passed to the 


No. IIL] LIEUTENANT HOOD ON THE AURORA. 593 


westward in ten minutes ; the second column brightening as it approached. I 
am satisfied that they were carried away by the wind, from the following cir- 
cumstances: that the columns preserved exactly their distance from each other 
during this evolution, and several wreaths which they formed, retained the 
same relative situations of all their parts, which is never the case when the Au- 
rora by its own motion passes from north to south. At midnight, an attenuated 
Aurora stretched from east to west, which, being nearly parallel to the direction 
of the wind, no effect like the former was distinguishable. 
29th. At 9h. p.m., appearance of Aurora through the clouds. 

30th. At 9h. p. m., bright twilight ; an arch visible from N.W. to S.E. 
b.E. Atilh. p.m.,a similar arch, composed of several detached wreaths. 
It had a general motion to the westward, which I attribute to the wind, for the 
reasons detailed above... 

May 2nd. At midnight, an arch formed of several detached masses, which 
fluttered violently, with a serpentine motion from E.S.E. towards W.N.W. 
They were extremely bright. and fringed with violet, as usual below, and 
greenabove. The coruscations were so transitory, that the beams were scarcely 
distinguishable. Though the general motion was to the westward, the whole 
mass faded before it reached the horizon, and disappeared in five minutes. 

3rd. 12h. 30, stron arog epeeteiay: an arch of pte from: N.E. 
toS.W.. | 

5th. At ah kaon arched Aurora, W. N. W. and 8. E b.E. 

6th. At midnight, appearance of Aurora in zenith. 

10th. At midnight, arched Aurora, N.W. to S.E. 

_ Iith. At midnight, several streams of Aurora, from W.N.W. to E. S.E., 
and flashes to the southward. 

12th. At midnight, several flashes and wreaths, S.E. 

13th. At midnight, Aurora beyond the clouds. 


594, APPENDIX. (No. Hk 


= 


TABLE: III. »Extracted fromthe Journal of Lizut. Hoop; RuN.: 


JANUARY 1821. Marcu. 


9 AM. | 1P.M.| 5 P.M. | 9 P.M. | 12 P.M, 


PT) ec [ee | a | | et 


$5. 55/85 45 1-35 491 '.:.. |. 35. 48 
36) 105 136.7186. 0°] 35° 55] '..5 58 
87 54) 35 54135 52 ae ~. 54 
ee 58 eo 58 eo 52 e008 9° ' 48 
37, “V8"|° 386 795 1-86 95 1985 504 3. bd 
35 50] 35 46 | 35 ‘44 reas wien ad 
«- S34]... SO]... 28 |.. 28]... 26f 
EPO SINE 4S | 20 43 hla eos | aiacuae 
cove | oe S2].. 50] .- 50] 34 56 


pened 
SCO OQNOQAEP WY & 


HO fe), SOLS OR ieee 35 53) 35 56] 35. 58 ste, DLO Beles ~ ohh 42a tee eO 

Ty’ SOR We) 99) 40 Peek sole t  5D| oe. . OS 11 «ei D07| w- 55 | eees nee is) 

12' | 36 oO eet Sessa 56 | weiss 12 | 36 -§|85 40]... 28 |., 16] 35 16 
13 36 OR we 447) 0. 52 eee 56 | .. 58 13 39,45 |... 54]... 45 |... 461°36 27 
14 90) [SA w4a 2. SON £56 836) 86 14 | 36 20 etaters hint 28 ie Oe ee tee 4 
15 | 36 41|36 31/36 6]... 56|35 38 WS) (eOGm a. ee OA | toe. ao ls pea meen na 
16 |35 58|35 531835 54].. 58136 0 1G | 85 34] seoe | we 27] 2° 28 

17. SO C2 ees AO-l. es tu dee 54. [eS5 23S 17 ; 

18 ee2OM Meese ISM le OS olheeks 4On| 86 40S 18 

19- 1.36501 |... 43: | «o SL|o., 55.) 35-58 19 
- 20 he PP Be 868 So wR Bae ae) SOR) A 5g 20 


Ls} 
i 


21 Srerais 86. 48 | as S58.) oe SS yl ei) 58 
22 36 46] 36 33|.. 42]... 50]... 52 
93 Sy wee |p SGP Se PGE STN ona ee eyo) 
24 37° 32 | 84 58 ]..° 30] .- 3821] 36. 10 
25 35..46 | 35 80|... 98] .-» 38 | 35 89 
26 We OUR ee Oo Tee In| ee PSS] se oO 
27 SSPE Sills s ap GOulbes » E804 asic ee80 ul SO fi06. 


© 
to 


35 58|35 95134 42|]35 0135 10] 


29 ' ee 40 eo” Q2 eo 29 eG 31 35 31 
BO ee Tae ere sedi sO Te 2-3. =, 0 
31 eo 45 one 29 ee 37 oe 23 ee 20 


FEBRUARY. APRIL, 


385 20 sietytes | G4) FA 0TIE EE te 34 31 
+» 35 | 85 88 | 35 99 eee 35 ~20 
a “BOF. RSSean 7 Goee 1s | t3o) 713 

Og) SRR Ae ON Moa Se an Ie seo Top 
ve Steet POM ley HOON tees a "Omen doe Scans 
27 eo 12 ee 14 | seee 35'° 34 


35 50135 50] 35 58 eratate 35. 54 
SEA SaleeeSile. 401.85 dah gs ese 
we) @8 1..,0 *85 .) 0. 84] 2.6 844 ..- 98 
SOG seen GA ser BOUN ee “FS Hila e 20 
SOR ee. | AOd| ss SOleee seam eas 
eooe LEN) 44 

ee 6 o°e 26 eae) 38 Pie 38 eo 32 

ere 12 Ales AN ey mTS isan Oo | ees 

me 48 ents Me OGa se) (3S. an, eed 
10 ced Anata sien cel Al litrs yy ecesicoael osu Aly emer 
11 eo 45 ee 55 ee 35 
12 36° Sikes § 4S ee BOs es 5 lien ES 
13 35 38 Mater we Boule POS 
14 BO Peal cate AG alee ON ean 
15 85, OL he 47 [ae AQulcee 693). ea 
16 om sss Whee ish ge aieh Pog ew eh aby 
17 Se RW) BRA aa 2 qed ye eek 


WODNOTA & Oo 
ro) 
@ 
69 
S 
i=) 
_ 
SCOONAnuAR ODE 


e 
> 
(=) 
e 
iS 
co 
—_ 
| el 


el oli nell oot 
NYO) a ® & 0 


0) 
30 36 15 |36 94|.. 16135 441.385 44 
21 OME Oreste si BEE A Yio 4 2m 
92 35 48 |35 ao|.. 38 Tae see 2S8R 
a3 ne 5S iis 155i Sou erOmeresGalien cisiaea 
Q4 oe OOM Ault race Ml rn gisele Ia 
95 te) Of se O7 ia, 4041 4. AA 4 AO 
26 16 BOA a AUS I UR moe " 
27 Seen lek) | PA'S ale ed Suelo mun Olnieren A: 
54 


The variation assumed in the above ‘Table, was that observed at ah. p.m, in Aug, 20, 1920, namely, 35° 48’. 


No.III.] _ LIEUTENANT HOOD ON THE AURORA. 595 


The above diurnal variations were obtained by one of. Kater’s Compasses, 
which may be read within a minute by the reflecting microscope. It was 
placed on a shelf in a room of the Expedition-house, at Fort Enterprise, and 
close to a parchment window, which admitted the air, by several holes. No 
ferruginous matter was near enough to affect it; but it was twice accidentally 
moved ; and although the extent of the error thereby occasioned, was ascer- 
tained by comparison with Mr. Franklin’s observations, and those of the pre- 
ceding days, yet their connexion is not to be fully depended on, so as to de- 
rive from them the monthly variations. However, the intermediate periods 
will serve to show the variation for particular days, and also the amount of 
aberration caused by the Aurora. 


A diurnal variation evidently exists ; the maximum of which is at 9h. a. m. 
and the minimum, at 3 or 4h.p.m. The irregularities of the needle may be at- 
tributed to the Aurora; because the appearance of that meteor has been so 
much more frequent here than at Cumberland-House, where the needle was 
not often disturbed. 


Some other opinions were inserted in this part of Mr. Hood’s journal; but 


as they are detailed more at length in his preceding remarks on the Aurora 
Borealis at Fort Enterprise, they are omitted here. 


462 


REMARKS ON THE AURORA BOREALIS, 


EXTRACTED FROM 


Dr. RICHARDSON’S JOURNAL. 


Tse account of the Aurora Borealis, in the following pages, is an exact 
transcript of notes taken at the moment of the appearance of the different 
phenomena. 

To place a connected view of the appearances before the reader, the whole 
of the observations in the month of December, 1820, have been given, to 
which a few remarkable nights in the other months have been added. 

The altitudes and dimensions of the different masses of light were aseer- 
tained merely by the eye, and therefore have no pretensions to accuracy, and 
it is only the apparent shapes that are described, the effect of perspective not 
being taken into account. The bearings given of the Aurora are also to be 
taken with some latitude, but they are more likely to be generally correct 
than the altitudes, as they were ascertained by the different angles of our 
buildings; or, in some cases, when the masses of light were near the horizon, 
by their relations to distant trees, and peaks of hills, whose bearings from 
the spot of observation were known. ‘To reduce the bearings given to mag- 
netic bearings, the easterly mean variation of the compass at Fort Enterprise, 
amounting to 36° 20'is to be applied. The dip of the needle there was 
86° 59°. To shew the condition of the atmosphere with regard to the trans- 
mission of sound, and its capacity for moisture, the state of a rapid about.a 
quarter of a mile from the house, which continued open all the winter, has 
been occasionally mentioned. 

The forms of the Aurora are described in such language as occurred at the 
time, without any regard whatever to theory; but it may be proper to remark, 
that in reference to Mr. Dalton’s opinions, detailed in Rees’s Cyclopedia, — 
which comprised the whole of my limited reading upon the subject up to the 
time of observation. I have been more particular in noting the directions of 
the small slender beams of light, of which the masses were sometimes com- 
posed, than I should otherwise have thought necessary. It will be seen that 


No. III] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 507 


the following observations do not accord with the positions he lays down; that, 
contrary to his statement, the beams would not always meet in a point if 
prolonged upwards; that they do not always converge to the place in the 
heavens to which the south pole of the dipping needle points; and that the 
rainbow-like arches do not invariably cross the magnetic meridian at right 
angles. But, independent of all theory, I think the following notes will at 
least serve to prove that the Aurora is occasionally seated in a region of the 
air, below a species of cloud which is known to possess no great altitude. 
I allude to that modification of cirro-stratus, which, descending low in the 
atmosphere, produces a hazy continuity of cloud over-head, or a fog bank in 
the horizon. Indeed, I am inclined to infer that the Aurora Borealis is con- 
stantly accompanied by, or immediately precedes, the formation of one or 
other of the various forms of cirro-stratus. On the 13th of November, and 
18th of December, its connexion with a cloud intermediate between cirrus and 
cirro-stratus is mentioned; but the most vivid coruscations of the Aurora were 
observed when there were only a few thin attenuated shoots of cirro-stratus 
floating in the air, or when that cloud was so rare that its existence was only 
known by the production of a halo round the moon. The bright moonlight 
of December was peculiarly favourable for observations of this kind. Had 
the nights been dark, many of the attenuated streaks of cloud hereafter men- 
tioned would have been totally invisible. The natives of this country pretend 
to foretel wind by the rapidity of the motions of the Aurora; and say, that 
when it spreads over the sky in an uniform sheet of light, it is followed by 
fine weather, and that the changes thus indicated are more or less speedy, 
according to the appearance of the meteor, early or late in the evening. Our 
observations were not continued long enough to confirm or contradict these 
notions; but it may be perhaps worthy of notice that certain kinds of cirro- 
stratus are also regarded by meteorologists as sure indications of wind and 
rain. In reference to Mr. Dalton’s opinion that the arches of the Aurora 
always cross the magnetic meridian at right angles, it may be observed, that 
there is very often an apparent convergence of the parts of the Aurora 
towards the magnetic east or west, or to some point in their neighbourhood ; 
but the light in its passage across the sky, even when it traversed the zenith, 
_ very seldom appeared to the eye to describe the segment of a circle, but was 
either elliptical, or formed various irregular curves and flexures. 


598 APPENDIX. | [No. IIf. 


I think I have on some occasions discerned a polarity in the masses. of 
cloud belonging to a certain kind of cirro-stratus, which approaches ‘to cirrus, 


- by which their long diameters, having ‘all the same direction, were madé to 


cross the magnetic meridian nearly at right angles. The apparent -conver- 
gence of such masses of cloud towards opposite points of the horizon, which 
has been frequently noticed by meteorologists, is of course an optical decep- 
tion, produced when they lie in a plane parallel to that on which the observer 
stands. These circumstances are here noticed, because if it should be here- 
after proved that the Aurora depends upon the existence of certain clouds, its 
apparent polarity may, perhaps with more propriety, be ascribed to the clouds 
themselves which emit the light; or, in other words, the clouds may assume 
their peculiar arrangement through the operation of one cause, (magnetism for 
instance,) while the emission of light may be produced by another, a ‘change 
in their internal constitution perhaps, connected with a motion ofthe electri- 
cal fluid. ‘These crude opinions are offered with diffidence, and my knowledge 
on these subjects is so limited, that I attach no importance to them; but it 
appears to me that they would be strengthened, were the attempts now making 
to excite magnetism by the electrical or galvanic fluid, to prove successful. 
Generally speaking, the Aurora appeared in small detached masses for some 
time before it assumed that convergency towards opposite parts of the horizon, 
which produced the arched form. An observation that I would connect with 
the previous remarks, by saying that it was necessary for the electric fluid (or the 
Aurora, if they are the same) to operate for some time before the polarity of 
the thin clouds in which it has its. seat is produced. This part of the subject, 
however, is more intimately connected with the interesting observations made 
on the variation of the magnetic needle by Captain Franklin and Mr..Hood. 
The object of my notes was merely to record the optical appearances of the 
meteor. / | | 2 ih 
An electrometer, constructed upon Saussure’s plan, placed in an elevated 
situation out of doors, exhibited no signs of a charge from the atmosphere at any 
time during the winter. The electricity of our bodies, however, at times was so 
great, that the pith balls instantly separated to their full extent upon approach- 
ing the hand to the instrument, and our skins were in the middle of winter so 
dry, that rubbing the hands together considerably increased their electricity, 
and at the same time produced a smell similar to that which is often perceived 


No. III. ] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 599 


when the cushion of an electrifying machine rubs hard against the cylinder. 
The same thing was observed more sensibly in some stuffed quadrupeds that 
hung in our apartments. Their furred skins, whether rubbed or not, often 
accumulated such a charge of the electrical fluid, that when the knuckles were 
presented to them, they gave a smart shock which was felt as far as the 
elbow. } 

The Aurora did not often appear fetvisdenaly after sun-set. It seemed 
that the absence of that luminary, for some hours, was in general required for 
the production of a state of atmosphere favourable to the generation of the 
Aurora.. On one occasion only (March 8th) did \ observe it. distinctly, pre- 
vious to the disappearance of day-light. 

By the way of more perfectly describing one form of the Aurora, rather 
than with the view of drawing any inference, I shall state that the slender 
beams of light which compose the Aurora when its motions are rapid, are ex- 
actly similar to what would be produced by a quick succession of electric 
sparks, elicited from a charged cylinder, by a body studded with a row of points, 
moved rapidly to and fro before it.—Or, supposing a long range of cloud were 
to commence at one end, to impart, from successive points of its surface, its 
charge to a similar parallel mass, a current of light would be produced, appa- 
rently consisting of parallel beams, lying at right angles to its line of direction, 
as described on the night of the 29-30th December, at 2h.a.m. Were the clouds 
supposed to lie in different planes, and to be bounded by curved edges, every: 
variety of form which that species of Aurora assumes might be produced. The 
colour of the. light of the Aurora is not always noted in the following pages, but. 
when faint it was generally steel-grey, or that of the galaxy. When the low 
hazy modification of cirro-stratus appeared in the sky, the light, for the most 
part, was a. gold-yellow colour, more or less deep ; and when the sky was clear, 
or when only a few fine threads or thin shoots of cloud were visible, the colours 
were vivid and prismatic. 

I have. never heard any sound that could be unequivocally considered ag 
originating in the Aurora; but the uniform testimony of the natives, both Crees, 
Copper Indians, and Esquimaux, and of all the older residents in the country, 
induce me to believe that its motions are sometimes audible. These instances 
are, however, rare, as will appear when I state that I have now had an 


600 APPENDIX. [No. HL. 


opportunity of observing thatymeteor for upwards of two —— different 
nights. | 

November 13th, in ‘hs evening the sky was covered by a stratum of flesey 
clouds, their forms generally orbicular and texture rare. They were. Separated 
from each other by intervals of clear-blue sky of various extent, but. in some 
points came in contact. 'The Aurora was observed to move along these clouds, 
strongly illuminating their faces next to the earth, and very seldom passing 
across the blue sky, but spreading from cloud to cloud by their points of con- 
tact, sometimes slowly, more often with considerable rapidity. The light-was 
generally brightest in the centre of the cloud, and it often originated simulta- 
neously in various parts of the heavens, more or less distant from each other. 
At some moments the whole sky was illuminated. No distinct: beams were 
seen, and the light had uniformly a grayish colour, with a light tinge of yel- 
low. Thermometer at noon +10°, in the evening +8°. 

Noy. 24th. A bright moonlight evening, cloudless sky, with a light breeze 
from the W.N.W. An arch-formed Aurora, extending from S.E. toN.W. This 
arch was composed. of several disunited portions of arches, every succeeding 
one having a higher commencement and termination than that which preceded 
it, reckoning from the horizon to the zenith. Their altitude near the centre of 
the imperfect arch which they formed by their arrangement was from 40° 
to 60°. One of these portions presented a smooth edge inferiorly, or towards 
the south, but its northern border was fringed with long falcate pointed 
rays, whose bases appeared to twist together to form the southern edge. 
It had a striking resemblance to a shoot of the moss. called a scopa- 
rium majus. | 

Nov. 26th. ‘Ther. att noon, — 13°,in the evening, —25°. Sky cloudless, and 
of a pretty deep blue. An Aurora appeared in the early part of the night, 
having a general direction from N.W., to E.S.E. It consisted of several 
concentric but irregular arches, all of which, without changing their position, 
occasionally assumed the falcate form observed on the 24th. The upper- 
most. arch nearly reached the zenith. The smaller stars became invisible 
when the brighter parts of the Aurora passed over them. Although the air 
appeared perfectly clear during the time the Aurora was. visible, yet. there 
was a fall of a very small snow. Its particles were so minute as: to. be 


a 


No. IIL] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 601 


scarcely visible to the naked eye, and were most readily detected by their 
melting upon the skin. The same phenomenon, of an almost imperceptible 
snow falling from a clear sky, had been before observed ina bright sun, 
which rendered visible a great number of icy spicule floating in the air. 

1820, December 1st. During the day, the sky kept tolerably clear, a slight 
appearance only of the stratus being visible near the horizon; but a snow, 
whose particles were so minute as to be discerned only in the sunshine, fell 
at intervals during the forenoon. At noon, the snow was more apparent, and 
a bow was produced in the neighbourhood of the sun’s place in the heavens. 
At 8h. p.m. Wind E.N.E., light, with a very clear sky. 

The Aurora commenced by a beam shooting up from the northern horizon : 
afterwards masses of light appeared in various parts of the sky, particularly 
in the eastern quarter; and at length an arch was formed from S.E. to N.W. 
The centre of the arch, when it was first formed, lay to the northward of the 
zenith, but afterwards passed gradually to the southward. When about 60° 


above the southern horizon, it assumed the falcate appearance, described on the 


24th November, the pointed tails directed towards the north. The falci-form 
processes sometimes separated laterally, so as to appear like parallel beams 
crossing the line of direction of the arch obliquely. Their altitude was not 


altered at the moment of their separation. At times the general arch was 


dispersed, and a number of small arches formed, whose ends occasionally 
rolled inwards upon themselves in form of a scroll. The whole body of the 
light ultimately descended below the southern horizon and disappeared ; not a 
cloud’ was visible during the evening. 

December 2nd. Wind in the morning, N.E. , inclining to snow. Ther. —14° 
at Qh. p-m.,—6°, wind N.N.W. Hazy weather, no stars visible. A faint arch 
of the Aurora from N.W. to 8.8.E. 


December 3d, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. e 
A.M.9 -0O N.N.W. Fresh Hazy weather. 


Noon +6 do. do. Small snow. 
Bec Guts Gi ade: do. Cloudy. No mist rising from the rapid. 
9 +40 do. do. do. | cgalal 


Snow during the night. No Aurora observed, 


602 APPENDIX. | [No.III. 


December 4th, 1820. 


Hour. Temp. © Wind. 
A.M. 9 —ll NNW. Fresh clear sky. 
Noon . —10 do. do. do. | 
_ P.M.2h.30m.—14 do. do. do. . A thick cloud of mist hanging 


over the rapid. 
4 —18 | Wind very variable from south by the westward. to N: EK. 
moderate clear. | . 
, 9 —25 do. Clear. ) 
The Aurora forming a broad arch of bright light, its centre about. 45° sounh 
of the zenith, and its extremities bearing S.E. and N.W., respectively. < It 
passed gradually to the southward and disappeared. 


December 5th, 1820. 


Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M.9 —26° N.E. Diane breezes and clear weather. 


Noon sxi20 do. do. | | , 
P.M..4 —22 | do. do. A thick oe rising from the rapid all day.. 
9 —26.. do. do. 


_ The Aurora to-night had its light disposed. in large masses, having indefi- 
nite shapes, situated in.various. parts of the sky, but most crowded in the 
southern quarter. There were several layers of dark clouds near the horizon, 
The Aurora was visible in. various spots. where no’ stars. were to be seen, but 
several of the larger stars were visible through a bright arch, which at one 
time crossed the zenith, having a direction from north to south. 


December 6th, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. 


AM.9 —15 W. Moderate. Hazy with a light fall of snow. 

Noon +2 W.N.W. do. do. | 
4 —6 N.W. Fresh. do. No mist from the rapid... 
9 —14 W. Light.... Clear. 


Aurora, in an arch form; passing from, 8.E. to N.W. over 1 the, cali baad 
towards its middle, but narrow and spirally twisted near the horizon.. Stars 
appeared through it without any perceptible diminution of their brilliancy. 


a —— 


; 


No. LII.] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. - 603 


_ December 7th, 1820. 


Hour. Temp. | Wind. 
A.M.9 | =24. W. Moderate and clear, stratus near the horizon. 
Noon -—14 do. do. 


P.M.2h.30m.—20 N.b.S. do. Mist from the rapid, before the sun rose 
7 and after it set. 
9 —26 W.b.N. do. Clear. 

At 10h. p.m. the Aurora formed an arch, broader towards its ere and 
emitting a denser. light from its. southern edge, but becoming fainter by 
imperceptible degrees towards its northern edge, until it disappeared 
altogether. Its upper or northern edge lay near the zenith. As its limbs 
approached the horizon, they became more slender, and assumed a twisted 
appearance. The stars appeared very dimly through the more dense parts of 
the Aurora. | ! 

December 8th, 1820. 


Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M.9 —29 W.S.W. Moderate, clear.. Dense mist hanging over tae rapid. 


Noon —27 N.N.W. do. do. Mist scarcely visible. 


P.M. 23} —27 N. do. do. Mist reappearing. 
9 —30 N.N.E. do. do. No Aurora visible at nine. 
Midnt. N. Fresh do. Rapid, very noisy. 


At llh. p.m. sky very clear, and the stars brilliant. A well-formed arch of 
light crossed the zenith, extending from N.W. to 8.E. It moved slowly to 
the southward, broke up into several irregular masses of light, and disap- 
peared, At midnight, there was no appearance of Aurora. 


December 9th, 1820. 


Hour. Temp. Wind. civ 
A.M.9. —34 N.b.E. Moderate, clear. \ Temperature of the rapid 32°— 


Noon = 30 do. do. do.. \of the water in the river, ascer- 
4 endo; do. do. |tained by the same thermometer, 
9 -—386 W. Light. very do. ) through a hole in the ice, 31. 3°. 


The Aurora made its first appearance at 9 o’clock p. m., near the horizon in 
the N.W.b.N.,.and shot over to the S.W., forming several concentric arches, 
the uppermost of which passed a little to the southward of the zenith, As 

4H 2 


604. APPENDIX. —ENo. FT.” 


the limbs of these arches approached the horizon, they seemed to be twisted 
together, and terminated on each side in a single, suddenly acuminated point, 
about 7° or 8° high. These extremities emitted a more dense light.than 
the middle parts of the arches, which were rare, and permitted the stars to be 
seen clearly through them. " 

At 93h., p. m., the moon arose, and the Aurora now formed broken irregular 
masses near the eougidle horizon. : 

At 104h., a depressed arch of the Aurora was fivtenist its extremities termi- 
nating in the opposite points of the horizon, or in the N.W. and S.E., and its 
centre scarcely rising 10° above the southern horizon. It was more brillian; 
than the former arch, and completely hid the stars. | alloy 

Half an hour after midnight, there were several large masses of light in 
the eastern and N.E. quarters of the sky. The arch had disappeared, but a 
luminous point remained in the N.W., the quarter from whence it originally 
sprung. 

About lh., (a.m., 10th) several portions of light were arranged, so as to 
form an interrupted arch from the E. to the N.W. The masses of light, 
before noticed in the east and N.E., had now united, and spread -along the 
horizon to the 8.E. 

December 10th, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. 


A.M.9 — 388 W. Light clear. Very dense and copious mist from 
. iu OF) VE, the rapid. 
10 —40 W.S.W.. — do. do. : 
Noon —37 Calm do. 
24 do. do. A heavy cloud of mist over the rapid. 
64 —42 W. Light do. 
9 —43 W. do. Rather hazy. 


- At half past 6 p.m., an arch of the Aurora appeared, having an elevation 
of 30°, and a direction from W.N.W.toS.S.E. It was irregularly elevated 
and depressed in various parts ; and its breadth, which was in general about 
6°, occasionally expanded so as to occupy thrice that space. These dilatations 
were effected with a.slow motion, and were partial, seldom including more 
than 10°. or 15° of the ‘arch at atime. _.The centre of the dilating part was 
more brightly illuminated than the other parts of the arch. ‘The return of the 


No, IIL] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 605 


arch to its former dimensions was equally gradual with its dilatation. The arch 
was occasionally divided into five parallel beams, which, having a direction 
nearly from north to south, traversed it obliquely. These beams had a quick 
lateral motion, and were sometimes gathered into masses that receded so far 
from each other, as to break the arch into several portions, which had pointed 
extremities arising from the obliquity of the beams which composed them. 
The length of the beams was sometimes considerably increased by their 
northern extremities shooting up, whilst their lower ends remained stationary. 
These appearances were but of momentary duration, the beams rapidly 
re-uniting to form a: homogeneous arch. 

After the Aurora had continued for about half an hour to diaseed a succes- 
sion of the above forms, the arch totally disappeared, and a horizontal mass 
of light was. observed in the southern quarter of the sky, having its face 
longitudinally barred by several thin strata of clouds. | 

At 103h., there were various irregular masses of light scattered over the sky, 
but most luminous in the north. The Aurora had appeared early in the night 
in’ the west, afterwards its most luminous parts were collected in the south. 
about nine, it shone most brightly in the eastern quarter of the sky, and now, 
as we have just mentioned, its principal seat was in the north. 


December 11th, 1820, 


Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M. 9 —33 N.E. Fresh. hazy. small snow. 


Noon —25, do. do. do. do. _ Very little mist at the rapid. 
P.M. 9 —31 N.N.E. Moderate. clear. Bright moonlight. 
Midnt.  —31 do. do. do. Rapid very loud. 


At 5h. p.m., several banad arches of rare light appeared, extending from 
N.W. toS.E. At six, they disappeared, no change of the weather having 
occurred in the interim, the sky remaining clear, with a bright moon. At nine, 
an arch was formed in the east, broad, irregular, and rather faint. Its 
extremities bore north and S.E., and were spirally twisted near the horizon. 

At 103h., there was an arch in the southern quarter of the sky, 40° high. 
Its extremities had an equal breadth with its centre, and bore N.W. and S.E. 
respectively. Wind a little more northerly—sky clear. 

At 11h., two bright arches passed near the zenith in a direction from N. W. 


606 APPENDIX. [No. IT 


to'S.E.; oné complete, extending from horizon to horizon: the other reaching 
only half way across the sky, the west end being deficient. The edges of 
both arches were well defined, their apparent acuteness throwing the clear 
blue sky far back. The arches were broadest near the zenith; and. when 
most bright, appeared to’ consist of several streams of light, nearly but not 
exactly parallel to each other, and having the same direction with the arch. | 

These streams receded from each other by a lateral motion, leaving inter- 
stices, sometimes of a fainter light, sometimes of clear blue sky; and they 
were at times gathered together toward one side of the arch, which then shone 
with a very dense light. The 8. E. extremities of the two arches were united 
near the horizon, and bending to an angle, ran horizontally to the northward 
for a considerable distance. | 

After the arches had continued for some time, they moved slowly to the 
southward, became rarer and broader, were blended into each other, and 
finally broke into several irregular masses of light. During the evening, 
many of the meteors termed falling stars were observed. The rapid was 
very loud. 


December 12th, 1820. 


Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M.9 —34 N.N.E. Light. Clear. 
10 —35 W.b.N. do. do. Dense mist over the rapid. 


Noon, —34 do. do. - do. Bright sun. Do. 
P.M.9 —40 58.W. do. do. 
Midnight Moderately clear. . 


At 9h. p.m., there was a broad, faint, irregular arch of light, whose extre- 
mities bore N.N. W, and S8.E.b.S. : 

At 1lh., weather rather hazy. A bur or halo closely encircling the moon. 
A low arch of light from E. to S. E., and a broad horizontal mass in the north. 

At midnight, there were two faint but distinct. arches, whose extremities 
originating and terminating in consort, bore N.N.E, and 8.E. The upper 
arch had of course a greater curvature. It nearly reached the zenith; the 
other was about 70° high. At the.same time, many faint and_irregular masses 
of light existed in other parts of the sky. After the circles had remained sta- 
tionary for a short time, they broke in the middle. The S.E. ends disap. 


No. III.] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 607 


peared; whilst the remainder, separating laterally into several long streaks of 
light, shot quickly up in flashes from the N. W. to S.E., mas the zenith. 
Sky moderately clear. 

About lh. (a.m. 13th,) there were many masses of light in various — of 
the sky, which bore a strong resemblance to assemblages of the clouds deno- 
minated cirro-cumuli. At one time a remarkable body of light appeared in 
the N.N.E., which occasionally split into detached parts by a lateral reces- 
sion, but its general motion was directly to the S.W. It obscured the smaller 
stars, but did not completely hide those of the first magnitude. 


December 13th, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M. 9 —35 S.W. light. Clear. _ Pretty dense mist from the rapid. 
Noon, ~—32 W.b.S. Moderate clear. ye 
9 —34 Nearly calm. Small snow. Bright moon Wight. A. few stars 
visible. 


At lh. (a.m. 14th), a broad arch of faint light, crossing the zenith, extended 
from horizon to horizon, its extremities bearing EK. and W. A meteor, termed 
a falling star, was observed at this time. It remained luminous, until it came 
below the near side of a tree-top at no great distance. When the arch broke 
up, its west end disappeared entirely, but its eastern extremities assumed for 
some time the semblance of a group of cirro-cumulli. 


December 14th, 1820, 


; Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M. 9 —26 S.b.W. Light cloudy. 


11 —19 §8.S.W. Moderate do. | Prevailing cloud a modification of 
* | . stratus or cirro-stratus. 
Noon, —19 do. do. do. Little mist from the rapid. 
P.M. 1 ® Snow. 
8 —16 N. E. Mod. Clear. 


At midnight, a faint arch extended from the horizon in the S. K. b. E. to 
the N. W.b. W., its centre passing to the southward of the zenith. ‘Bright 
moon-light. 


i EE te i ee |! ee le 


608 APPENDIX. [No. III. 


: December 15th, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. | : ponyais iia 
— 9 —382 N.b.E. Light. Clear. Much mist from the rapid: | 
Noon, —28 E.N.E. do. Clouds of low cirro-stratus.. Bright sun-shine 
illuminating multitudes of small icy spicule 
floating in the air. A flight of small birds 
| hovering near the house, (red bel) 
9-16 E. Fresh. Snow. 
Midnight Strong gales. Small snow. 


December 16th, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M. 9 —6 8.E. Moderate. Snow falling in minute flakes. - 


Noon -6 S&S do. do. Sun seen obscurely. 
9-6: N.N.W. do. pe Fikor'et: 
Midnight. - do. Fresh. Hazy. 


. December 17th, 1820. 
» Hour. Temp. Wind. ai j line’ 
A.M 9 -8 N. Wh W. Strong ae Clouds of cirro-stratus ; a few flakes 
of snow falling. 


Noon —21 do. do. Sun obscured. 
P.M. 9 ~—30 N.N.E. do. Dark weather ; much snow drift. 
ll — W.N.W. do. Cleared up. Bright moon-light, 


with dark blue sky. 
At 14h. (a. m. 18th) a number of detached irregular masses of light were So 
arranged as to form an arch 30° high, having a direction from N.W. to S.E. 
Weather clear, strong wind. 


December 18th, 1820. 
Hour Temp. Wind, ‘ 
A.M., 9 —33 N.N.W. Fresh. Clear. Little mist rising from the rapid. 
Noon —3l do. do. do, 
ne 9 —33 do. Mod. do. Very Biwi moon- light. Stars clear- 
ly seen. 
Midnight.—37 Light winds, varying rapidly from S.W. to W. 


CS a ee 


No. IIE] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 609 


At 114h. p.m., the sky, which had previously been clear, was covered by a 
thin stratum of clouds, belonging to that modification of cirrus which forms the 
mackarel sky of sailors, conjoined with small portions of what are termed by 
the same people mares’-tails. Between the bars of the former, and the long 
fringes of the latter, streaks of deep-blue sky appeared. 

These clouds were not dense enough to hide the larger stars completely ; and 
from their first appearance, until they spread entirely over the sky, not more 
than a quarter of an hour elapsed. 

On attentively regarding the sky for some time, the more rounded parts of 
the mackerel sky were observed to send shoots across the blue spaces, to unite 
with similar processes of the neighbouring masses. At the moment of junction, 
a yellowish light, with a slight tinge of red, was emitted, most brightly from 
the centres of the two clouds, but extending, though more faintly, to their 
margins. A longer space of time had not elapsed, than was required to note 
down these appearances, when an arch of light was observed to cross the zenith, 
its extremities bearmg east and west, and terminating about 50° from the 
horizon. It was from 3° to 4° broad, and had a pale gold-yellow colour. When 
it ceased to emit light, its site was seen to be occupied by a range of small 
fleecy clouds, similar to those already described, but more closely aggregated. 
The moon now bore nearly south, and shone brightly, strongly illuminating the 
arch-formed range of clouds just mentioned; but their rarity was such, that 
they showed no dark sides. Winds very variable from 8.W. to W. 

About a quarter of an hour after the last observation, a round mass of 
cloud in the S.E. was: observed to assume, suddenly, an appearance:of greater 
density, at the same time emitting from its centre a yellowish light. Imme- 
diately after which, it shot forth towards the S.E. several bright parallel hori- 
zontal streaks of light, which, crossing the near face of a neighbouring mass of 
clouds, became slightly curved from the south. They were about 8° or 10° 
above the horizon, and were prolonged after passing before the clouds, through 
a portion of clear sky. A few degrees beneath them, there were two or three 
dark layers of cirro-stratus. i 

The clouds, in their general arrangement at this period, had that appearance 
of convergency in opposite points of the horizon, which hag been frequently 
noticed in a sky covered with cirri. In the present instance, these points were 
at right angles to the magnetic north and south. In the zenith, the mackerel 

3 41 


am eS a 7 


610 " APPENDIX. [No, IIL. 


sky prevailed; but in the S.E. and N.W. (true), the clouds were more dense, and 
presented various depending fringes towards the points of the horizon already 
mentioned. The magnitudes of the masses, too, in different parts of the sky, 
diminished so regularly, as they receded from the zenith, as to convey an idea 
that their long sides were seen in the N.E. and 8.W. quarters of the sky, but 
their ends only in N.W. and 8.E. quarters. 

At midnight, several of the cirriform clouds, which were in the Bela me ee 
of the moon’s place, reflected her light strongly, and hence appeared to have a 
pretty dense structure; but, when they passed before the face of that luminary, 


they became néarly invisible, producing only a slight halo or bur, but not sen- 


sibly diminishing the light. 

At 20m. after midnight, the northern quarter of the sky became perfectly 
clear to the height of 35°, the rest of the heavens being overspread by small 
fleecy clouds, separated by narrow intervals. . The edge of cloud border- 
ing on the clear sky was well defined, ran east and west, and was made up of 
the ends of small and rather broad parallel bars, having a direction from north 
to south: a very common modification of cirrus. The moon was at this time 
wading through a collection of small clouds, and was surrounded at the 
distance of 10° by a faint, though distinct, halo. Inthe S.W., in a clear part 
of the sky, there existed a small spot of yellowish white light, which for a few 
seconds gradually increased in brightness, and then sent forth suddenly a lu- 
minous beam, which crossing a portion of the deep blue sky, passed over the 
well marked edge of cloud above described, continued its course in front of 
the clouds, brightly illuminating their faces, and terminated to the southward 
of the zenith near the moon’s place in the heavens. When this beam had.at- 
tained its extreme length, it formed a half-arch concave to the westward. - It 
was scarcely formed, however, before it divided into a number of small parts, 
which being segments of circles, and rising successively one above the other, 
formed a kind of tiled arch. It disappeared altogether in three or four mi- 
nutes, leaving the clouds unaltered in appearance. 

At 12h. 40' the sky had become clear as far as the zenith. The edge of 
the clouds, which was now overhead, was still composed of parallel bars, di- 
rected to the north and south. Under these bars, a few streaks or threads of 
very rare cloud were seen floating, and, at times, emitting a faint .orange-co- 
loured light. The clouds in the southern part of the sky, although they 


No. Til] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA: | 611 


epee pretty dense in the bright moonlight, were yet rare aaa to allow 
the larger stars to appear through them. 

By one o'clock, the whole mass of cloud had seit together towards thee 
south, and disappeared in the horizon; but at the same time a few long and 
very rare threads of cloud, which were at intervals faintly luminous, shot 
athwart from east to west in the deep blue: of the northern part of the sky. 
On former occasions, the Aurora had been observed to illuminate the face of 
the clouds next the earth ; but the present night was remarkably favourable 
for the observance of that phenomenon, the brightness of the moon-light, and 
the clearness of the sky, rendering the clouds very visible and well defined. 


| December 19th, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. 


A.M. 9 -42 W. Mboderate. Clouds of cirro-stratus. Thick mist over 
the Rapid, which was rather silent. 


Noon —41 W.S.W. do. Cloudy, sun obscured. : 
P.M. 9° -—38 N.b.S. do. do. Halo round the moon at the 
| | distance of 12°. 
Midnt. —-38 W. do. Rather hazy, large stars only visible; Rapid 
inaudible. 


At midnight the sky cleared up, a few cirro-strati were seen to the south. 
ward, and there was a slight bur round the moon; the rest of the sky was of 
a grayish blue colour. ‘At this time a broad bank of the Aurora appeared in 
the north, lying horizontally, at an elevation of 25°. There were also a few. 
long parallel streamers to the westward, flashing in the direction of their 
lengths, from W.b.N. toE.b.S: They disappeared suddenly, leaving in 
their site a faint yellowish light. | | 


December 20th, 1820, 
Hour. Temp. Wind. | 
A.M. 9 —43 -S. Light. Foggy. 

10 -—44 do. do. do. A very dense mist rising from the 
Rapid, and a fog hovering over the 


Noon 419 1S.W ee dou) Clears biightisumig ea valley. Rati 
P.M.9 -46 E.N.E. do. Very clear. very loud in the evening, 

102 —46.6 E.N.E. Calm. do. 2 hy 
Midnt. —45.6 E.N.E. do. Slight haze. iv £dOen seer 
A.M.l = E. Light. Foggy. Rapid continuing noisy. 


47,2 


6{2 7 APPENDIX, | [No. EL, 


_ At 10h. 45’, bright moonlight. The sky, which had previously been very 
clear, was suddenly overspread by a thin’ stratum of fleecy clouds. They 
were in general orbicular, but. were much crowded, so as to leave small 
interstices of clear blue sky. A few stars were visible through the rarer 
parts. About 7° or 8° above the northern horizon, there existed a mass of 
cloud rather more dense, which began, soon after its formation, to emit a faint 
yellowish light. In two minutes the light became brighter, and spread towards 
the S.W., by a slow waving motion, like an increasing volume of smoke, 
rolling parallel to the horizon. It. continued sweeping round the sky in this 
manner, until the produced. end bore N.W., and then became. irregularly 
elevated in the middle, assuming an arched form. Atthe instant at which this 
elevation took place, a stream of light issuing from the 8. W. formed an arch 
about 2° higher than the other, and parallel to it. The second arch exhibited 
nearly the colours of the rainbow. 

The red.colour occupied its under edge, and it darted down towards the inferior 
arch a number of light-red fringe-like processes. The two arches were scarcely 
formed when they disappeared, but instantly appeared again, and continued to 
do so in rapid succession for a minute or two, the upper one retaining its 
prismatic tints, and the under one an uniform pale yellow colour. The motion 
of the light by which the arches were re-produced, was sometimes from right 
to left, sometimes in the opposite direction. The upper arch too was occa- 
sionally split into narrow parallel streams, which had not. only a rapid. lateral 
motion in the direction of the arch, but were also lengthened out, both upwards 
and downwards, by sudden flashes. At such moments the coloured tints were 
most vivid ; the red always predominating. . 

About five minutes after the first appearance of the Aurora, a bright mass 
of light was observed bearing N.N.W.; from which a column, possessing 

prismatic tints, shot up as high as the zenith, a similar column at the same 
time springing to meet it, from the site of the two arches. which had now 
disappeared. A brilliant arch was thus formed, whose extremities bore 
W.N.W. and.§.8.E. In an instant thereafter, the whole sky was covered with 
small arcs, and irregular masses of light, mostly composed of short. parallel 
beams. These masses moved rapidly from the horizon towards the zenith, 
and back again. The duration of this phenomenon was about seven or eight. 
minutes, when the light wholly disappeared. 


No. II.] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. | 613 


The colours of the arches, in their general appearance and arrangement, 
resembled those of the rainbow; but the blue-green, or violet, were not 
distinctly visible. The yellow ray. occupied most space, and was the faintest 
whilst the orange was the brightest. The red was nearly as abundant as the 
yellow, and approached it in its hue to lake-red. ‘The moon shone brightly all 
the time. After the disappearance of the Aurora, the sky remained as before, 
covered with a thin stratum of clouds, but their texture had become more rare, 
their edges worse defined, and their masses more blended into each other. 
In short, they answered the description of the’ cirro-stratus, in the first 
stage of its change from the cirrus: The moon had a bur or halo round it ; 
and a candle, both in the open air and the house, was also surrounded by 
a halo. 

At 11h. 30, there was a faint mass of light in the $.S.W., about 20° high, 
occasionally fading away, and allowing a body of dark cloud to appear in its 
site. The light re-appeared first in the centre of the cloud, of a gold yellow 
colour, but became fainter as it spread outwards. 

At midnight, the weather was rather hazy, and there was very little blue sky 
tobeseen. A few minutes before 12, a portion of cloud in the S.H. was faintly 
illuminated ; and at the same instant, a luminous spot made its appearance ina 
clear blue space in the north, about 15° high. From this spot an arch shot up 
which passing to the eastward of the zenith, joined the luminous cloud in the 8. E, 
The arch was scarcely formed when it disappeared, but was as speedily formed 
again by amass of light rising in the 8.E., and rolling to the north like a 
volume of smoke from a chimney, increasing in dimensions as it rose. Imme- 
diately after the second formation of this arch, it assumed the appearance of a 
shoot of the moss, alluded to. in the notes‘on Nov. 24th, and which is termed 
by botanists, falcato-secund. The points of the rays or streams were directed to 
the south. Ina short time the arch separated into smallcurved segments, which 
vanished in their turn, and the attention was next directed to the formation of 
a long range of prismatic light, about 60° high, its extremes bearing west. and 
north. This light had a pale gold-yellow colour, and was attenuated towards 
the north, its southern or upper edge being brightest. When this passed 
away, a number of irregular masses appeared im various parts of the sky. 
At lh., (a. m.) 2lst,) the sky was obscured by a fog. 


614 APPENDIX. [No. TIL 


; December 21st, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. 


A.M.9 -382 © Calm. Clear. Minute particles of snow falling. 

Noon  —28 W.S.W. Light. Sun obscured. Snow falling in small crystals. 

P.M.9 -—386 N. do. Clear. . 

10h.20m. W. ~~ do. do. Slight haze in the S.E, near the horizon. 
1] N. Light. do. 

Midnt. —42 do. do. — Clear. 

1.22d —4I1 do. Cloudless. Slight haze. 


During the early part of the evening, there were a few thin horizontal 


clouds in the N.E., but the sky, in general, had a clear grayish-blue colour. 


Some streaks of cirrus were faintly visible in the east. The moon shone 


brightly, but was surrounded by a bur, as was also the candle. Rapid 


noisy. 
At 10h. 20m. the Aurora rose in the S.S.E., and proceeding across the sky; 


divided into several broad arches, which terminated about 30° from the 


western horizon. The common stem in the 8.S.E. appeared as if formed by 
the twisting of the ends of the different arches together, and had a waving 


irregular motion, sometimes apparently doubling upon itself; and once or twice 


it separated into small parallel portions, having a lateral motion in the direc- 
tion of the arch, but with their ends pointing north and south. The arches 


were three, and at one time four, in number, and gradually diverged more and 


more from each other towards their western ends. The uppermost passed 
a little to the southward of the zenith, and they were each about 4° or 5° 
broad. The spaces between them were sometimes faintly illuminated. After 
they had continued stationary for about ten minutes, the S.S.E. common stem 
moved slowly round the horizon, until it bore south, leaving a streak of light 
behind it, whilst the truncated ends, or those which were directed towards the 
western horizon, approached each other, and were lengthened out to the 
horizon in the W.N.W. by the rolling motion of smoke. Contemporaneously 
with these motions, the centre of the arch moved up and down, so as to 
appear undulated, and even contorted; the moving parts frequently dilating 
considerably, and always becoming brighter in the centre, at the commence- 
ment of their motion. The light had a pale yellow hue, and, when brightest, 


No. IIL] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 615 


was not sufficiently dense to hide the larger stars. Its motions were in 
general slow, and unattended by flashes. | 

At 11h., a bright arch extended across the zenith, from E.b.S..to N. W. b. W, 
The S.W. quarter of the sky being at the time occupied by a homogeneous 
mass of light, which had a crescentic edge turned towards the east, and there 
was a similar mass in the north concave towards the south. The arch 
at first exhibited a vermicular motion from east to west, then split into 
parallel beams, possessing, as usual, a rapid lateral motion; and in a short 
time, the Aurora in every part of the sky began to move with such velocity, 
and to assume such a variety of forms, as to defy description. The central 
arch more than once exhibited two distinct currents, or motions of its parts; 
_ flowing from one end to the other in opposite directions at the same instant; 
and at one time all the detached parts of the Aurora appeared to collect toge- 
ther, to form a beautiful circle or corona, which surrounded the zenith at the 
distance of 45°, and in which the rapid lateral motion of the beams was very 
- apparent, fest a direction from north, round by the south, west and east. 
The beams, in this case, were apparently perpendicular to the earth’s surface 
in every part of the luminous ring which they formed. In a half-arch, which 
rose immediately afterwards from the northern horizon to the zenith, the 
extremities of the beams were directed from east to west, and the ranges of 
beams which formed, in rapid succession, masses of light, of various shapes, 
in every part of the sky, had no certain direction. The general colour of 
the Aurora was a pale yellowish-gray; but when the beams moved with a 
rapidity that could scarcely be followed with the eye, they emitted a pale, 
but bright red light, slightly tinged with purple or violet. These beams 
sometimes lengthened and shortened themselves with extreme rapidity, and 
the prolonged extremities emitted a light equally brilliant, and of the same 
hue with the rest of the beam, In about 15m. the whole of these beautiful 
phenomena vanished, leaving behind only a few faint masses of light. The 
moon was still surrounded by a slight bur, and the wind had changed to the 
west. 

» At midnight, NG canter quarter of the ly. was occupied by a broad hori- 
pana mass of light. At lh.there was no appearance of the Aurora whatever. 
Sky cloudless, but rather hazy ; minute crystals of snow falling. During the 
evening the wind was very variable, but light. | 


616 | APPENDIX.’ | [INo.. TEL. 


December 22nd, 1820. 

Hour. Temp. Wind. . 
A.M.9 —45 W. Light. Clear. A few cirro-strati near the southern hor. 
Noon =48 do. do. do. ) 
2h.30m. —41 do. Mod. do. | 
P.M.9 —43 do. do. do. A bur round the moon and candle. 

Midnt. —43 do. Light. | 

at Calm. Hazy. Halo round the moon distant 20°. 

At 4h. 30m. p.m., dark and rather cloudy. A faint mass of the Aurora in 
the E.S.E. about 20° high. 

At 9h. p.m., the sky being of a pretty deep blue colour, except in the S.E., 
where there was a mass of white clouds near the horizon, the Aurora appeared 
in form of an arch of yellowish gray light, about 70° broad in the centre, 
where it reached fromthe zenith to within 29° of the southern horizon. Its 
limbs were spirally twisted and tapered, touching the horizon in the 8.E.b.S. 
and N.W.b.W. The light ofthis arch was arranged in longitudinal bands, 
having different densities, and varying in length from 20° to80°. These long 
portions of light occasionally receded laterally from each other, and then formed 
a series of arches or parts of arches; the upper ones including those beneath 
them. Whilst the arches were thus separated, some of them exhibited a waving 
lateral motion, the others remaining stationary, and some ‘times one end of 
an arch moving more than the other, it was carried obliquely across the 
general line of direction of the parts of the large arch. The arches approached 
each other by an irregular, slow, lateral motion, occurring simultaneously in 
the different arcs, and again formed a continuous body of light, varying in 
density in different parts. 

At lih., a beam of light rose from the southern horizon to the height of 45°, 
where it terminated, that end then bearing N.W.b.N. It was about 10° 
broad, and gradually attenuated from its centre outwards. | 

At 11h. 30m., there was a long luminous bank in the south nearly of equal 
dimensions throughout. Its centre was slightly elevated, and about 40° high. 
Its extremities faded imperceptibly away in the S.S.E. and western parts of 
the sky, It was about 6° broad, and emitted a greenish-yellow light. The 
sky near its extremities was dark, and completely hid the stars. Five or six 
degrees below this nearly horizontal mass, a smaller but similar one appeared 


No. LITj Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 617 


for a short time. Neither continued above two or three minutes, and they 
exhibited no quick motions, but merely brightened a little, undergoing at the 
same time a slight dilatation. They appeared, however, and disappeared. at 
intervals. until oth, (a.m. 23,) when a haziness overspread the sky. 


December 23, 1820. 
Hour. ie Wind. 5. 


9 —86 W.N.W. Moderate. Hazy. 


10 —8:7 do. do. do. 
Noon —36 do. do. Clearer, bright sun. 
aN WETS 4G W. do. Clear, thick mist over the rapid. 
9 —41 do. do. Hazy in the horizon, clear in the 
| | zenith, rapid rather quiet. 
Midnt. —45 do. do. clear. — 


At 11 p.m., a faint arch of pale greenish light, about 10° broad, rose to the 
height of 30°, one of its limbs, bearing S.E.b.S., sprung from a collection of ’ 
whitish clouds, (cirri,) situated about 10° above the horizon. The other, 
bearing W.b.N., faded away imperceptibly in a dark part of the sky, where 
there were Ries clouds nor stars visible. 7 

The moon was surrounded by a bur, and did not give much light. At 12, 
the arch was still visible, but several strata of pretty dense white clouds 
now occupied the southern part of the sky to the height of 20°, and the extre- 
mities of the arch, which were broader and fainter than before; bore S.b. KE. 
and W.N.W. In the middle of the arch there were several gentle elevations 
and depressions ; but although the light occasionally brightened up in some 
spots, there were no quick motions amongst its parts. 

The state of the atmosphere continued, as before, pretty clear in the zenith, 
but the bur round the moon, of a faint gray colour, with a slight tinge of orange 
on its outer edge, remained. A similar bur was formed round a candle, its dia- 
meter enlarging rapidly as the observer receded from it. 


December 24th, 1820, 
Hour. Temp. Wind. 


A.M. 9 —43 N.W. Light. Clear. Burround the moon. Thin 
, a mist from the rapid. 
Noon. _ —87 8.W.b.S. do. . Hazy. Sun. seen obscurely. Rapid 
4 very great. vy 
P.M. - 9 —40  W. Moderate zenith. _ Clear, horizon hazy. | 
Midnt. —389.8 do. dame ic do! 4K 


618 APPENDIX, [No. III. 


December 25th, 1820. 
Hour. Temp. Wind. & 
A.M. 9. —48 W. Moderate. Clear. Faint‘bur round the moon, con- 
. siderablemist over the rapid. 


Noon. —38 do. do. Cloudless, Haze in the horizon. 
38 —85 58.W. Fresh. do. do. Stratus in the south, rapid 
inaudible, and free from mist. 
9 -—-81 W.S.W. do. do. A little haze. : 
Midnt. —28 Cloudy and dark in the horizon. Stars 


| seen obscurely in the zenith, 

At 1 (a. m, 26th.), the Aurora appeared for the first time this night in form 
of a faint arch, extending from the altitude of 40° in the N.W. to a spot 
near the zenith, bearing 8.E. It was composed of longitudinal bands. or 
streams of light, connected with each other by a faint luminousness. A 


little snow was falling at this time in minute crystals, and there was a slight 
haziness in the sky. 


December 26th, 1820. 
Hour, Temp. Wind. 
9 —24° W.b.S. Fresh. Cloudy. Much snow-drift, very cold. 
Noon —22 §$.W. Moderate. do. Stratus, sun obscured, much 
) mist from the rapid. 
ee aia... MiG, Clear. 
Midnt. oo. 00, Light. do. 

At 10h. 30° an arch-formed Aurora, about 8° broad, appeared a little to the 
southward of the zenith. “Its extremities descended to within 15° degrees of 
the horizon, and terminated in the S.E. and N.W. At one time, the light 
of the arch appeared of uniform density throughout; at other times it was 
most intense along its southern or lower edge, and became gradually fainter 
upwards until it disappeared. 

The stars were seen obscurely through the denser light in other parts of 
the sky they. shone brightly. At the same time, there appeared in the HS. E, 
parallel to the horizon, a mass of bright light with two or three dark horizontal 
streaks across its face, produced apparently by intervening layers of cloud. 
The arch continued for a considerable time without undergoing any material 
alteration in its appearance, except that it occasionally brightened up and 
faded away again. Once, indeed, for a few moments, it separated into por- 


No. IIL] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 619 


tions parallel to each other, but having about 11° of obliquity. with respect to 
the arch. These portions emitted a bright light, and were separated. by faintly 
luminous spaces. 

At 11h., the arch, having nearly the same direction as before, was composed 
throughout the greater part of its length by two parallel portions, each: gra- 
dually fading away towards their edges ; and the S.E. end of the arch was also 
lengthened out, and bent towards -the east, so.as to come in contact with the 
mass of light noticed. above as bearing E.S.E,. This bent portion of the arch 
was composed of several bars nearly of equallength, and arranged so that 
every succeeding one lay to the north of that. which preceded it in their approach 
to the horizon: the whole were connected together by a faint diffused light; 
and from the same body of light in which that end of the arch now terminated, 
a column of faint beams rose perpendicularly to the height of 15°. 

At 11h. 20’ the arch had increased its breadth to 20°, its northern edge being: 
very near the zenith. Its extremities, bearing S.E. and N.W., were composed 
of irregular, and somewhat detached roundish, masges, but its centre consisted 
of five bright longitudinal bands connected’ by a faint. diffused light. - The 
mass of light formerly bearing E.S.E., had now moved round towards the 
south, and still resting in the horizon, formed the S.E. end of the arch. 

‘At midnight, a great number of detached masses of light occupied the sky 
from 20° south to 10° north of the zenith. These masses of light varied’ in 
shape, but the greater number ‘had somewhat- of an oblong form. . They'were 
separated in some places by clear blue sky, in others they were connected by a 
diffused light. They lay in various directions in the zenith, but towards the 
horizon they had an appearance of cohvergency to the N.W. and S.E., and 
thus formed in the aggregate an,arch 80° high in the middle, and tapering 
towards its extremities. 

At lh. 30m. (27th) the centre part of theabove -mentioned arch or aggregated 
masses of light, had dilated so as to occupy the whole sky, except a clear blue 
space of 20 degrees fromthe northern horizon. .'The-shapes, of ‘its component 
parts had undergone a material alteration, and, were now so arranged, and 
blended together as to beara striking semblance to an immense double cur- 
tain with its ends gathered together in the N.W.b. W. and §. 5. at about 10 
degrees above the horizon ; the space beneath being of a clear blue; From the 

4K 2 


620 APPENDIX. [No. IT. 


zenith, to carry on the similitude, the folds of the curtain proceeded in se- 
veral beautiful festoons towards the north and south, and had occasionally 
a slow motion, as if it were folding and unfolding again and again. ‘The 
moon at this time shone with a bright light and illuminated several layers 
of cloud (cirro-stratus) in the N.E., every other part of the sky beg un- 
clouded. 

At 2h. a. m., a large homogeneous aikics of rare light was nes over 
20 degrees on each side of the zenith, and near the horizon there were many 
layers of cirro-stratus, some of them pretty dense, so.as to obscure the 
moon when they passed over its face. The rapid was quite inaudible at 
this time. 


December 27th, 1820. 
Hour. ‘Temp. Wind. 


9 —42 Calm, Slight fog, rapid very loud. 
10 <«—43 - «do. — do. | 
Noon —40 N.E. Light. Zenith cloudless—light grayish blue—stratus 


creeping along the valleys—fine day. 
9 —45 N.E. Light. Clear. 
11 do. Rapid, very loud. 

Midnt.. —45 | 

At 11h. p. m., the sky clear, the moon not yet risen, but many stars visible. 
A beam of light, about 8° broad, rose from 10° above the horizon in the 
S.E.b.S., and gradually becoming fainter upwards, disappeared a little south 
of the zenith. After continuing stationary for some time, it sent forth a beam 
‘of light from its south-east end, which extended 11° more to the northward, 
whilst its fainter end was at the same instant prolonged, so as to form a com- 
plete arch, terminating in the N.W.b. W. horizon. A little haze was visible 
at this time in the southern horizon. 

_ At midnight the Aurora formed a sohnowhar jiecadenie circle round the sky, 
about 15°. high, which sent down from its N.W.b..W.and S.E. points, several 
pointed. processes which nearly touched the: horizon. Some large flexuose 
streaks, and masses of light traversing the zenith, connected the northern with 
the southern part of the circle ; and there were also a few detached irregular 


No. IIl.] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 621 


masses of light in other parts of the sky. ‘The best defined part of the circle 
was in the N.E. quarter, and here a quick lateral motion to. and fro was pro- 
duced, as if by its separation into perpendicular bars. It was about 8° broad 
at this place. During the continuance of this phenomenon, many beams of 
light rose perpendicularly from the upper margin of the circle, but before they 
reached the zenith, their extremities were bent from their course so as to make 
various curves side-ways, or even to appear as if rolled up upon themselves. 

When the Aurora had exhibited itself in this form for a considerable space 
of time, the whole mass of light suddenly appeared in motion, and sweeping 
round on each side, was gathered together to the southward of the zenith. 
Immediately thereafter a large portion of it was seen in the S.E., assuming an 
exact resemblance to a curtain suspended in a circular form in the air, and 
hanging perpendicularly to the earth’s surface. The lower edge of this curtain 
was very luminous, and had a waving motion; and the illusion was. farther 
heightened by the momentary appearance of perpendicular dark lines or 
breaks in the light, in rapid succession round the circle, exactly as the waving 
of a curtain would cause the dark shades of its folds to move along it. This 
beautiful curtain of light was about 40° high, of a pale-yellowish colour, and 
sent forth on the one side a process which approached the S.E. b. E. point of 
the horizon, and. on the other was connected with a long regular arch, termi- 
nating in the N.W. horizon, similarly constructed, and having the same waving » 
motion with the curtain itself. All this time the sky was perfectly clear ex- 
cept in the southern quarter, which to the height of 4° or 5° was occupied by 
dark clouds, apparently intermediate between stratus and cirro-stratus. 

Half an hour after its first appearance, this curtain-formed Aurora was re- 
solved into a number of detached irregular portions, which sometimes increased 
rapidly in every direction until they met with other masses, either before ex- 
isting or appearing at the instant, and formed an uniform sheet of light which 
covered the whole sky. The formation of this great sheet of light was so rapid, 
that the eye could only trace its progress partially, and its dissolution and re- 
appearance were equally sudden. 

At 2h. p. m., the moon arose. A clear sky. The Aurora fainter and farther 
to the southward than before. 


622 APPENDIX. | (No. ILI. 


December aa 1820. 

Hour. Temp. Wind. 

A.M. 9 —48 ~~ Calm. Very Pires Thick mist over the api ed stra- 
| tus or mist in the low grounds. 

10 —48.4 S.W. Light. 

It —47"° Wb. N: do. Clear. 
TNison: 47 TW, d'art Thermometer on the snc of 
PM 2 —47 | Gonos the river under the ice 32°. At the 

depth of two fathoms 42°. 


6° —50.5 N.N.W. Light. do. 
9 —5l1 Calm. do. 
10h. 30m. —49 N. Light. do. Hazy in the horizon. 
Midnight —49 dost done de! | 
29th, a.m. 1 N.N.E. do. do. Fog bank in the south. Rapid 


| pretty loud. 

At 6h. p. m., the Aurora, in an arched form, extended from the S.E. horizon 
to the N.W., across the zenith. This arch was at one time composed of a 
bright homogeneous stream of light about 8° broad ; at other times, it split into 
parallel beams, their ends directed to the east and west. These beams receded 
from each other laterally, until they were separated by a space of clear blue 
sky, more than twice their breadths, speedily re-uniting again, however, to 
form the uninterrupted arch. A fainter arch appeared to the northward of the 
other, springing from, and terminating at, the same points in the horizon, but 
having an apparent curvature so much greater as to ae their centres 5 or 
6° apart. 

At 8h. ‘The low fog to the southward had increased, and minute erystals of 
snow were falling, but the zenith remained clear. 

At this time ‘there ‘existed a zone of light in the north, about 20° high, whose 
extremities, uniting with those of a similar zone in the south, dipped suddenly 
down to the horizon in the S.E. and NW. points. 

At 9h. In a calm and clear atmosphere, there were five arches, eae about 
4° broad : one crossed thé zenith, another was elevated about 60° above the 
northern horizon ; and there were three in the southern half of the sky, at ele- 
vations of 45°, 6°, and 80°. Their light was faint, and their extremities con- 
verged, so as to terminate conjointly in the N.W.b. N. and S.E. b. S. points. 


No. III] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 623 


At 10h. 30°. . Columns of faint light rose perpendicularly from the horizon 
in the N.; S.E., and S.W. points, to the height of 20°. 

At midnight there was an arch of light in the south about 15° high, having 
its lower edge throughout its whole length, resting upon a fog bank ; and there 
were also two or three faint beams rising from the horizon in the S.E., across 
a portion of clear sky; and a beam lying midway between the zenith and 
horizon, about 20° long, and pointing north and south. 

At lh. The sky in the zenith was clear, and was boenigind by an arch tend- 
ing from N.W. to 8.E. : 


December 29th, 1820. 


Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M. 9 —52 West. Light. Clear. Low stratus in the valleys. 


10 —53 ~ do. do. do. do. 
Noon. —52 North. do. ~- do. do. 
2 5) N.W. do. do. do. 

6 —d7 Calm. do. 

9 —53 East Light. — do. 

Midnight. 52.8 do. do. do. 


9 52 do. do. Very clear. 

At 6h. p. m., there appeared an arch of yellowish-grey and _ pretty dense 
light, about 10° broad and 25° high, which in a few minutes began to increase 
in breadth, and at length separated into two parallel arches, whilst at the same 
time a fainter beam sprung from its northern end, taking a direction towards 
the S.b.E., but becoming more diffuse ; as it rose it disappeared in the zenith, 
The brighter part of the light obscured the stars. The united limbs of the two 
arches in the N.b. W., were divided by perpendicular dark spaces, so as to 
appear to be composed of oblique bars. 

About 10m. after these appearances were noted down, the sky was occupied 
for about 70° to the northward of the zenith by large masses of light, arranged. 
so as to converge towards the N.W.b.N. and 8.E.b.S. points of the horizon, 
Near these points long slender processes of light descended, and united so as 
to form a common stem on each side, similar to the limbs of an arch of the 
common dimensions of 2° or 3° in breadth. The internal movements of ‘the 


624. APPENDIX. [No. III. 


Aurora at this time were sluggish, but lage masses of light were frequently 
generated almost instantaneously. 

At 7h. 30’, a number of arches sprung from the horizon in the N. W.b.N., 
and sweeping across the sky in various directions suddenly curved in, to ter- 
minate in the S.E.b.S. The arches were in general about 6° broad, and their 
middles were distant enough from each other to spread on each side of the 
zenith to the distance of 50°. 

From 9h. to midnight, the Aurora formed many arches of light, very various 
in breadth and density, all having a common origin and termination in the 
N.W. and S.E., but crossing the heavens in a variety of directions, so as to 
occupy about three-fourths of the space on each side of the zenith. 

The middle portions of some of these arches ran horizontally across the sky, 
whilst their extremities, making sudden curves, arrived at the common origin 
and termination of all the arches, which were seated for the greater. part of the 
night about 4° above each horizon. At one time the light was arranged in a 
series of curves, including each other, and having their convexities turned to- 
wards the north on both sides of the zenith. In short, their arrangement was 
continually varying, but the breadth of the arches at all times was greater in 
the zenith. Large and diffuse columns of light sometimes shot up at right 
angles from the convex side of the arches, and portions of broken arches were 
occasionally seen in various parts of the sky, lying obliquely across the gene- 
ral line of direction. The changes of form were not produced by a quick flash- 
ing motion, but by the different parts of a new arch appearing simultaneously 
but faintly, then gradually brightening up in a manner that could be traced only 
by keeping the eye steadfastly fixed on a clear part of the sky, and watching 
the evolution of the light there. 

_ At midnight a clear blue sky surrounded the zenith to the hans of about 
20°, the rest of the sky had a light-grayish appearance, resembling the. light of 
the milky-way, many stars shining brightly at the time. In some spots this 
diffuse light brightened up for a moment or two, assuming at the same time a 
yellowish hue. 

At 12h. 30’, there was an arch in the south about 15° high, and various irre- 
gular masses of light in the north, the rest of the sky being of a deep blue.. 

At 2h. the sky very clear. At this time the Aurora was very brilliant, and 


No. III.] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 625 


its motions so rapid'that it was impossible to record them in the order of their 
occurrence with any thing like accuracy. 

At one period the S.W. part of the sky was occupied by a mass of dense 
light, which was connected with a similar mass in the east by a current of light 
about 4° broad, moving with extreme velocity from W. to E. This stream of 
light bore a stronger resemblance to a cascade of water, than to any thing else 
T can liken it to; and it in general flowed from the one mass of light to the other, 
but sometimes its eastern extremity curled back in various directions, forming 
as it were beautiful eddies. The dark lines or Spaces, whose instantaneous 
appearance and disappearance evinced the motion of the light, lay perpendi- 
cular to its line of direction, or pointing to the north and south. 

For an instant, when the motions were most rapid, the light became very 
vivid, and assumed a reddish hue. At this moment, a loud crash was heard, 
similar to what is produced by a large piece of ice floating down a river, and 
crushing against a stone. 

This noise was not repeated, and as it appeared to come from the river, 
would not have been noticed unless for its cotemporaneous occurrence with the 
brightening of the Aurora. ‘The air at this time was rather favourable for the 
transmission of sound, the rapid being distinctly heard. 


December 30th, 1820. 
- Hour. Temp. Wind. 
A.M. 9 — 53 N.W. Light. Clear. Much mist over the rapid. Low 


fog in the valleys. 


Nooniiie 3242 do: do. Low fog inereasing. 
3 — 50 nea calm. Hazy in the horizon. Rapid metic 
loud. | 


9 — 48 W. Moderate. Clear, but a bur round the candle. 
Midnight, — 47.9 W.S.W. do. do. 


At 5h. p.m., an arch-formed Aurora extended palatal across the sky 
from the N.W.b.N. to the S.E.b.E. From the N. W. end of this arch a 
pencil of light rose perpendicularly, and terminated at the zenith. Its hue and 
brightness were equal to that of the milky way, which was distinctly visible at the 
time. At 8h. p.m., two columns of light rose perpendicularly from the horizon 
inthe N. W. and 8. E. to the height of 10°. Their summits being connected by 

41 


626 APPENDIX. [No. IIL. 


a nearly horizontal beam of light, a depressed arch was formed to the northward 
of the zenith, from various parts of which peneils of light shot wp directly towards 
the south, and rising 40° or 50°. Portions of two,smaller and coulesnttie, paghes 
were occasionally. seen under the, other. ! 

At.9h. the Aurora continued to. exhibit modifications of the appearances 
above-described. 

At midnight, an irregular mass of light, having a spirally twisted form, rose 
in the horizon in the N. W. b..N. to.the height of 60° apparently perpendicularly. 
Then turning to the northward, it continued its course horizontally across the sky; 
and, lastly, bent suddenly and obliquely to terminate in the S. E. horizon. 


December 31st, 1820. | 
| Hour. Temp. | Wind. 
A, M. 9h. Om. —40 Calm. Clear. Rapid pretty loud. No 
mist from. it. 
. Lh. Om. —40.S.E.b.S. Light. do. 
Noon, im 36 JN Wika dos do. A few cirro-strati. Thin 
7 mist from the rapid. 
12h. 30m. —35.S.S.W. | do. do. 3 
9h. 30m. —36 N.N.W. do. do. No mist from the rapid, 
which was pretty quiet. 
- Bur round the candle. 


6h. 35m. | Calm: do. 
9h, Om. —40 N. Light. do. 
Nae —42. W. do. do. 


. At 6h. 35m. p.m., an arch-formed Aurora, 15° high, extremities bearing 
N.b.W. and E.b.S, From its north end several rays Tose to the height of 
10° or 12°, having a direction, to. the south. | 

At 9h. a zone of light, rising from the horizon, in the N.E., swept round the 
sky. to the eastward and southward, with a gradual ascent, until it bore 8, W., 
and. had: an elevation of 35°; from thence it gradually descended; and: finally 
terminated i in the. N. W. b, N. point.of the horizon. Near the eastern horizon, 
this zone was continuous, but, towards the south it was composed of thin and 
parallel layers. | | 
. At midnight, the Aurora cov a the: a in re masses, ae the. same 


No. IIL] Dr. RICHARDSON ON THE AURORA. 627 


apparent convergence to the N. W. and 8. E. points that has been described on 
former ‘occasions. | 

Febuary 18th, 1821. At midnight, several layers of cirro-stratus in the 
northern half of the sky, with clear blue intervals. A zone of light existed in 
the north, its extremities bearing N.W. and E.N.E. It was composed of 
parallel beams pointing to the southward, and having a quick lateral motion. 
The eastern extremity of the zone was the most brilliant, and it sometimes rolled 
back upon itself, producing various curtain-like appearances, during which mo- 
tions it passed in front of the neighbouring clouds, and completely hid them. The 
southern half of the sky was overspread with thin white clouds, through which 
a few stars appeared. When these clouds passed over the face of the moon, 
they produced a bur immediately around it, and a halo at the distance of 15°. 
The northern edge of the halo was occasionally illuminated with the yellowish 
red light of the Aurora, which gradually faded away into the white moon-light 
reflected from the cloud. The zone ina short time broke up, and its parts 
approached the zenith, often in their course whirling into a cireular form, with 
an extremely rapid motion. At those times the beams of light appeared to be 
perpendicular to the horizon, and emitted various prismatic rays, of which 
yellow and pale violet were the most conspicuous. Sometimes the violet 
merely tipped the beams, at other times it appeared throughout their whole 
length. When these beams were atrayed in the circular form, so as to form 
ating, their length varied from 2° to 4°. The light appeared this evening to 
the eye to be near the earth, a thin white haze evidently floating behind or 
above it, in some places near the moon’s situation in the sky. The needle, 
by Mr. Franklin’s observations, diverged very much to-night. 

A-very short time after these observations were made, the whole sky was 
overspread by a tolerably dense, uniform, hazy, white cloud, which hid the 
stars, and considerably obseured the moon. The Aurora shot across this 
cloud from N.N.W. to 8.8.E., in the form of parallel arches, which emitted a 
bright yellowish-white light. The arches were of short duration, and when 
they disappeared, their site was observed to be occupied by the urtaltesca 
stratum of cloud. 

March 8, 1821. At 6 p.m., before the daylight was gone, the Aurora appeared 
in the 8.E., stretching up towards the zenith. At seven, two faint arches crossed 
the zenith— Twilight. The Aurora was bright and copious all the evening. 

412 


628 APPENDIX. [No. IIT. 


» At Ih. (a.m. 9th,) it was extremely beautiful and brilliant, but its changes 
were too various and rapid to be described. Its intestine motions were 
curved, waved, and serpentine. Sometimes it appeared in large masses like 
the modification of cloud, termed the cumulus ; at other times it assumed the 
curtain-like appearance formerly described; and occasionally it split into beams 
varying much in altitude, but generally perpendicular to the horizon. One of 
its forms was very remarkable. It was a hollow truncated cone of light, formed 
of rays originating about 20° about the horizon, on every side, and terminating 
about 3° or 4° from the zenith. These rays had much lateral motion, and 
emitted a most brilliant green light, intermixed with a bright purple. Their 
convergence was very regular, and had they been prolonged, they would have 
terminated in the zenith. The cone was, in fact, the phenomenon we note 
termed Corona Borealis, with beams longer than usual. 

‘March 11th, 1821. At midnight, a zone of light was observed extending from 
the E: to the N. W., lying about 20° above the horizon, and emitting a yellowish- 
grey light. This zone exhibited some intestine motion, but it was faint, and 
consisted rather of a brightening up and fading away again of the light, than. of 
flashes. At this time sounds were heard at intervals of from 5 to 10 minutes to 
a few seconds, resembling the noise of a wand waved smartly through the air. 
The sounds appeared to issue from various parts of the sky, and as they were 
frequently simultaneous with a brightening of the Aurora, I was at first 
inclined to regard them as reports of its motions, but Mr. Wentzel stated them 
to arise from the contracting of the snow upon the sudden increase of cold, 
and his opinion was further supported by the same sounds being heard next 
morning. We heard in the evening from 50 to 100 of the reports, and they 
continued nearly as frequent after the Aurora had almost faded away, as when 
it was brightest. 

The air was not very favourable for the transmission of sound, as the rapid 


was scarcely audible. 


End of Dr. Richardson’s Observations on the Aurora. 


No. IV. 


REMARKS AND TABLES CONNECTED WITH ASTRONO- 
MICAL OBSERVATIONS. 


DIURNAL VARIATION OF THE MAGNETIC-NEEDLE. 


Tue Tables Nos. [V., V., VI., contain the monthly averages of a series of mean 
diurnal variations ; the two first have been deduced from the preceding Tables, Nos. 
I. and IL., and the third from observations on the position of the needle at Slave 
Lake, which, in consequence of their length, are not inserted in this work. Table IV. 
was extracted from Mr. Hood’s Journal, where it is accompanied with these remarks : 
«* The following table contains the mean diurnal variations of the compass for four 
months, at Cumberland-House. Many unavoidable interruptions prevented the 
number of days in each month from being complete, and some irregularities have 
been caused by the motion of the compass box. Those days are not included on 
which the needle was affected by the Aurora. As in other places, the diurnal varia- 
tion increases with the advance of summer, and the needle reaches the extremes 
of variation at nearly the same hours. But the maximum is at the coldest period, 
and the minimum at the warmest, which is the reverse, I believe, of the observations 
which have been made in Europe and in the East Indies.” | 

Table V. is an abstract of my observations on the positions of the needle at Fort 
Enterprise (contained in Table II.) which have been reduced to the variation shewn 
by the same needle, on September 4, 1820. | 

In Table VI. the positions of the needle observed at Moose-Deer Island, in 1822, 
have been reduced to the mean variation obtained at that place in J uly, 1820. 

It should be remarked, that the whole of the observations made on the positions 
of the needle at Fort Enterprise and Moose-Deer Island, have been used in forming 
the Tables V. and VI. 

The appearance of the Aurora, and the disturbance it occasioned on the motion 
of the needle at Fort Enterprise, were so frequent, that the mean monthly variation 
must have been deduced from but few observations, if they had been rejected. 

The cireumstance of the mean variation being least at midnight there, and at 
Moose-Deer Island, was evidently caused by the frequent disturbance in the motion 
of the needle which the Aurora occasioned ; for on those days when it was not visible, 
the mean diurnal variation followed the course Mr. Hood had observed it to do at 
Cumberland-House, being most easterly at the time of the first observation in the 
morning, and least between three and four in the afternoon. The change in the 
diurnal variation in these parts of North America seems to be governed by the same 
law as that in England, as the decrease in easterly variation between 3 


at the morning and — 
afternoon, is in fact a motion of the needle to the westward. 


630 APPENDIX. [No. IV. 


| TABLE IV.—The mean Diurnal Variation of the Compass forfour Months, were observed at Cumberland 
House by Lieutenant Hood, RN., lat. 53° 56’ 40" N., long. 102° 16’ 4" W. Dip $3° 12’ 50". 


Months. 8 A.M. 9 A.M. 


1820 a Ao be oo 
| February recente) E716) 0 


eres we Jo 


| March s Truesiyte Pheer la Pe 


| April 17.15. 7E 


. 


| May lair ie 9 


| TABLE V. — Monthly Abstract of Diurnal Waa oneeaeae at Fort nae Lat. 640 28 24 N., 
Long. I3]° 6°00" W. Dip. 86° 58’ 42”. 


‘Wariation East] Variation East] Var lation Ea st Variation East Rata tion Fast] Variation East} Variation East 


| 1sa1 |At 10 a.m. “Noon” | Sem.’ | 3 pan’ loand Se.) 9 Pom. Midnight 
| January | 36 27 57 | 36 22 09 | 36 12 39} 86 12 08 | 36 18 57 | 36 16 09 | 36 09 09 
| 9 A.M, Sand 4P.M. 
| February | 86 31 45 | 86 21 57 | 36 17 27} 86 15 51 | 36 13 03 | 36°13 51 | 36 11 57 
a et $ A.M. , 4 P.M. 
| March 386 29 36 | 86 17 21 | 86 21 09 | 36 10 45 | 86 06 15 | 86 06 87 | 36 12 83 
7 A.M. ; 5 P.M. 

April 3607 45 | 36 06 O38 | . . 36 02 51 | 386 00 15 | 35 535 15 | 85 40 03 

vecttl 7 AM. . 

| May 86 42 03 | 836 29 45 | . . . | 36 21 09] 36 14 57 | 36 12 09 | 36 11 33 


J $$$ 
| Mean Variation observed with the Needle attached to the Transit Instrument, placed at a greater distance 
| from the Buildings at Fort Enterprise. 


8 and 9 A.M. Noon 4 and.5 Pim. |9 and 10 p.m.| Midnight 


| Between May 12 and 
| June 13, 1821 


fe) v7 w OL a ad Ui ie} t 1) 1 M °. ie 8 AL 
37 25 5E] 87 24 1 37 26 37 22 8 54 23 (Orr, 


TABLE VI.—Monthly. Abstract. of Diurnal Variation, observed at Moose-Deer Island, Slave Lake, 
lat. 61° ll 8" N,, long. 113° 51 37" W. 


Variation East Variation East|Variation East} Variation East} VariationEast Variation Eas 


——— 


from 7 A.M. i : ey ; phy He tet : H , : a is 4 

1822 ke 50K 16 wag hoo Nook 3 P.M. 5 P.M. 9 p.m. | Midnight 
January. . . 25 42 62 | 25 42 23 | 25 4112]... . | 25 40 42 | 25 39 55 
February . . | 25 40 10 | 25 88 56 | 25 38 09 | 25 39 27 | 25 39 07 | 25 37 26 
| March . . . | 25 40 52 | 25 89 06 | 25 87 50 | 25 37 16 | 25 37 47 | 25 35 02 


_ April . VON DUE 25 aae 16 25 40 23 | 25 38 21 125 38 10 25 38 49 | 25 38 15 


ee | es na | en 


Mean o of the three complete 


te Feb. March, mf 25 41 06 | 25 39 28 | 25 88 07 | 25 38 18 | 25 38 34] 25 37 14 


_ No. IV3 631 


REMARKS ON TABLE No. VII. 


Tue following Table, No. VII., contains the results of the observations made 
during the progress of our journey in America, and along the Arctic Sea, which have 
been used in the construction of the maps. The intermediate parts were laid down 
by the courses corrected for variation and the estimated distances. The observations 
for latitude and longitude were made by myself, except. those to which a name. is 
affixed. The sun’s azimuth, from whence the variations were. deduced, were gene- 
rally observed either by Mr. Back or Mr. Hood, whilst. 1 took the corresponding 
altitudes with the artificial horizon. The letters B., H., and F., denote by whom the 
observations were taken, ; 

The chronometers. were either worn in our pockets, or, in the colder weather, sus- 
pended round our necks, inside of our dresses; and were necessarily much shaken 
from our mode of travelling; but, on the whole, they preserved their rates more 
steadily than might: have been expected, especially that of Baird’s, No. 1733. We 
ascertained their rates. as often as an opportunity offered, and those assigned to 
them, on leaving Cumberland-House, Fort Chipewyan, and Fort, Enterprise, were 
fixed. bya series of observations. Previous to the commencement of our journey from. 
the latter place in particular, care was taken to render them as correct as possible. 
Several observations of the transit of the sun and the star Arcturus. over the meridian, 
as well as equal altitudes and separate observations of the sun’s lower and upper 
limbs were observed. The longitudes, from whence their errors. for mean. Greenwich 
time were deduced at each of the different stations, were procured in.the following 
manner: That of Cumberland-House was ascertained by the mean, of thechronometers, 
shewn by an observation on the day of our arrival. The longitude. of Fort. Chipe- 
-wyan was determined by several lunar observations.on each side. of the-moon, the mean 
of those of ©. E. : being 111° 17’ 38” W.,.and of those of o W. ) E11? 20°12” W. 
The longitude of Fort Enterprise was obtained in the following manner: The mean 
of the chronometers gave 113° 2’ 37” W., at the time of our arrival in August, 1820; 
but that of 1733, which was found by subsequent observations to have preserved its 
rate more steadily than the others, was 113° 4’ 26” W. The mean of several sets of 
lunars in this month gave © E. » 113° 3’ 56” W., but the corresponding observations 
© W. » could not then be obtained. 

In the month of May, 1821, several sets of lunars were observed, on each side of 
the moon, which gave a result of 113° 812” W. The mean between this longitude, 
and that shewn by all the chronometers, is 113° 5' 24” W., and between it and the 
result of 1783 is, 113° 6’ 19". Fort Enterprise was therefore placed in 113°6' 00” W. 


632 APPENDIX. [No. IV. 


It has already been remarked, in the narrative of occurrences at Fort Enterprise, 
that we found the errors of the sextant materially changed, that the glasses had lost 
their parallelism, and the graduated arches of the sextants were warped, owing to 
the contraction of the brass during the intense frosts of the winter; and it is to the 
error produced by this cause alone, that I attribute the very great difference between 
the results of our observations on each side of the moon, in the spring of 1821. This 
difference exceeded two degrees with each of the sextants. The observations of 
© E. D being 112° 3’ 49” W., and of those of © W. jy, 114° 12 35” W. From this 
circumstance, it is obvious that the observations then obtained, of O W. ), could 
not, with any regard to accuracy, be used with those procured on the opposite side 
in the autumn of 1820. ; 

Advantage was taken of every opportunity to ascertain the rates of the chronome- 
ters, during the descent of the Copper-Mine River, and in the subsequent journey 
along the coast ; and whenever we were assured, by good observations, of their hav- 
ing altered; a cofrection was then made. At other times, their rate of going was 
usually seen by comparison with 1733. , 

On the return of the Expedition to Wilberforce Falls, the chronometers were found 
to have altered their rates so much, as to give the longitude of the first cascade in 
Hood’s River forty miles westward of what they had done twenty-four days before. 
Other rates having been procured during our stay near these Falls, a proportional 
allowance was made, to be applied to the results of all the observations by the chro- 
nometers, between Goulburn’s Islands and Point Turnagain. The book, containing 
the longitudes thus corrected, having been lost by the accident of September 14th, 
as detailed in the Narrative, we could not use them in constructing the map; but as 
the latitudes observed between these parts agreed so nearly with what the reckoning 
cave, as deduced from the bearings of the different points and estimated distances, I 
thought it best to lay down that part of the coast from dead reckoning corrected by 
latitudes, rather than by the uncorrected longitudes, as we perceived the shape of the 
land would have been much distorted by using them. Point Turnagain is, therefore, 
placed in 109° 25’ W., instead of 110° 5’ 15° W., its longitude by the chronometers. 


No. IV. REMARKS ON TABLE, No, VII. 633 


General Remarks on the Variation of the Compass, observed during our Journey in North 
America, and along the Arctic Sea.—The Compasses used were of Captain 
Kater’s improved Construction. 


The results of the observations obtained in Hayes, Steel, and Hill Rivers, (lying 
between the latitudes 57° 00’ N., and 55° 14’ N., and longitudes 92° 26’ W., and 
94° 22’ W.,) were so very variable, that no inferences can be drawn from them as to 
any proportionable increase or decrease of variation in advancing to the westward ; 
and it would be difficult to assign any cause for these irregularities in the two lower 
rivers, whose banks are entirely composed of alluvial soil. The rocks in Hill River 
occasionally contained magnetic iron ore. 

As we advanced to the westward from Hill River to Carlton, (latitude 52° 51' N., 
and longitude 106° 3’ W.,) we found the easterly variation to increase in the mean 
ratio of fifty-two minutes for each degree of longitude. I am of opinion, that this 
augmentation of the variation was not owing to the small angle which our route 
made to the southward. From Carlton we advanced to the northward, by Isle a la 
Crosse te the Methye Lake, and found that the -variation did not increase with the 
latitude; which confirmed me in the opinion just stated, that in these parallels the 
variation was not affected by a change of latitude; or in other words, that the lines 
of variation run nearly north and. south.in that quarter. In proceeding from the 
Methye Lake down the Clearwater River, which runs from east to west, an increase 
of variation was observed, nearly equal to what occurred in a similar change of lon- 
gitude, farther to the southward; but in descending the Athabasca River, upon 
nearly a north course, the variation decreased a degree and half, notwithstanding. a a 
small increase of westerly longitude. 

We had not an opportunity, during the descent ‘of Slave River, of making a suffi. 
cient number of observations to ascertain whether the variation increased regularly 
with the longitude; but at Moose Deer Island, (bearing N. 26° W., 168 miles from 
Fort Chipewyan,) the variation was found to be 2° 51' greater than at the latter 
place.. ; 

- After leaving Moose Deer Island, and proceeding to the northwards across Slave 
Lake,’ the variation, contrary to the law it had hitherto followed, increased with an 
increase of latitude. - At an island adjoining to Isle la Cache of Mackenzie, (bear- 
‘ing N. 20°.E, forty-two miles of Moose Deer Island,) the variation was 5° 20’ 
ereater ; and at Fort. Providence,.bearing N. 40° W., and.thirty-five miles from the 
latter place, a farther increase of 2° 33' was observed; making, at that place, a total 
of 7°55’ KE. The fishermen.at Fort Providence occasionally. collect pieces of magnetic 
iron ore in their nets, and it is probable that the same ore may occur among the 
4M 


634 APPENDIX, [No. IY. 


Rein-deer and other islands on the northern side of the lake, and cause the increase 
of variation which we have observed. 

Departing from Fort Providence, no material change in the variation took place 
for the distance of seventy-six miles on N. 3° E, course; but on advancing sixteen 
miles further on a N. 27° E. course to Upper Carp Lake, the variation increased 
4°15’. It continued stationary until we reached the portage next beyond Grizzle 
Bear Lake, a distance of thirty miles, but decreased a degree between that place and 
Fort Enterprise, a distance of thirteen miles N. 8 Ww. true. 


It may be remarked, that from the time we left Fort Providence, we travelled 
through a country composed of primitive rocks. al 

The proportional increase of variation in a degree of longitude, were in different 
quarters as follows:—Between York Factory and the Long Portage in Jack River, 
2°37 ; between Jack River and Hill Gates, 553 minutes; between Hill Gates and 
Norway House, 544 minutes ; between Norway House and Cumberland, 413 minutes ; 
between Cumberland and Carlton House, 541 minutes; between Carlton and Green 
Lake, 58 minutes; and between the Methye Lake and the Forks of the Athabasca 
River, 50 minutes. | 

We found a considerable increase in the amount of variation between the obser- 
vations made at Fort Enterprise in the autumn of 1820 and the spring of 1821, as 
shewn both by Kater’s compass and the needle attached to the transit instrument. 
Being at a loss to assign any other cause for these differences than a change in the 
poles of the needles during the interval, I shall state the particulars to enable others 
more conversant in these matters, to judge for themselves. 

On August 21st, 1820, the variation shewn by Kater’s compass, No. 2, which then 
agreed with No. 1, was 35° 48’ 21” E. at four P.M. In the months of May 
and June 1821, it was ascertained to be 36° 24’ 7’ E. by means of several obser- 
vations obtained between four and six P.M. with Kater’s compass, No. 1, ‘being 
an increase of 35’ 46’. On the 4th September 1820, the variation was 36° 15’ E., 
as shewn at noon by the needle of the transit instrument ; and in the months of May 
and June, it was ascertained to be 37° 24’ E., by the means of several observa- 
tions with the latter needle, making an increase of 1° 9° from last observation. 
It should be observed that the compass No. 2, received some injury in the course 
of the winter, which was the cause of its not having been used in the spring of 1821. 

The results of the azimuths procured, during the descent of the Copper-Mine 
River, follow the course which we had previously observed them to take, by shewing 
an increased easterly variation, as we proceeded to the north and westward. © There 
was not, however, such regularity in the increase as to enable us to form any judg- 
ment as to the curves which the lines of variation make in these latitudes; and I 
deem it unfortunate that a continuation of cloudy. weather prevented. us from: ob- 


No. IV.]. REMARKS ON TABLE, No. VII. 635 


taining any observations for variation in crossing the Barren Grounds, when the 
expedition, on its return from the sea-coast, was passing over the same parallels of 
latitude, and much to the eastward of the Copper-Mine River, because azimuths 
obtained on that journey would have materially assisted in forming an estimate 
respecting these curves. I apprehend much of the irregularity in the results of the 
observations for the variation along the Copper-Mine River is to be attributed to 
local causes of attraction, and particularly to the existence of iron ore among the 
rocks, which is very general. 

As we proceeded along the sea-coast to the eastward from the mouth of the 
Copper-Mine River to Bathurst’s Inlet, the easterly variation decreased considerably, 
though there was not a material change in the latitude; but, in advancing to the 
north and westward from Bathurst’s Inlet to Point Turnagain, the easterly variation 
increased again. 

A greater intermixture of iron ore was perceived in the rocks on the sea-coast, 
than on the banks of the Copper-Mine River. 

_ It should be observed that when we were at the first cascade in Hood’s River on 
July 31st, we perceived the needles to traverse so sluggishly that it became neces- 
sary to retouch them with the magnets. 

The remarks on the dip of the magnetic needle will accompany the Table which 
contains those observations. 


££ 2 


636 


Date 
1819 


Sept. 
la.m. 12 


ip. 23 


sj Oo 


APPENDIX. 


TABLE VII. 


Results of the Observations for Latitude, Longitude and Variation. 


54 12 30 }~~~~~~| 15 0 0*|Sea River Portage. 
53 41 38| 98 124] 14 26 6 |Norway House. 
| H. & F. 


17 |I~~~———111 8 2 


* Estimated by the Sun’s bearings noon. 


Latitude. | Longitude | Variation Date Latitude | Longitude | Variation 
‘ by Place of Observation y Place of Observation 
North {Chronometer Hast : 1819 North {Chronometer East 
On ‘ (e) if le) fe) ’ ie) toll ‘ 
57 60 03 | 92 26 W.| 6 60 21 |York Factory. Oct. 8 L-| 98 49 58 LO The bottom of Limestone 
ay Lake Winnipeg. 
~—~| 93 137 | 9 5 5 |At the entrance into Steel 
.| River. 8 | 53 45 58 . 

56 20 59 ~~ —~ Steel River. 12 | 53 8 25 | 99 28 2 U perend of the Grand; 

apid Portage. 

56 4 47 I~ ~~ Steel River. 

13 ~~| 99 36 37 |~ East side of Cross Lake. } 
93 29 40 | 9 27 41 |Steel River. 
13 | 538 10 11 /~~~~—~~|__-_—~-—-— West side of Cross Lake. 
~~~ 93 51 38 | 7 48 24 |Northend of Brassa Port- | 
age in Hill River. P.M. 13 ~~| 99 44 49 bask lh ee tg Lake Portage. 

55 28 32 ~~ ~—~'Between Lower Burnt 14 |~~----_|100 10 49 An Island in Cedar Lake.| 
Wood and Brassa Port- | 
ages. 14 | 53 12 59 |~ Toy ete Lake. 

55 27 9 ~~~ 8 30 _0* Lower swampy Portage, 16 100 36 44 |~-~--- Entrance of the Saskatch-+ 

| H. | Hill River. awan River. 

55 20 12 ~~ Sail Island. 16 | 53 27 29 I~! 15 20 0 \Saskatchawan. 

$421 07 | § 40 0* Lower Portage in Lower 18 |°53 45 38 ~~\Saskatchawan, 
,| Jack River. 
Nov. | 53 56 40 |102 16 41 | 17 17 29 [Cumberland House. 
55 14 2 | 94 21 54 Dan ee woretee in Lower B.H.& F. 
: .| Jack River. 1820 
ee Jan. 20 | 53 51 41 ~~ Entrance Sturgeon River, | 
~~ 94 26 48 Lee tippers aie in Lower Saskatchawan. 
; .| Jack River. 
92 | 53 36 O1 j-~ H—~~~~~~|Saskatchawan River. 

54 59 4 11 50 0*|Near the Magnetic Island) 
in Knee Lake. 24|53 19 5 ~~/Saskatchawan River. 

95 21 9 ager Portage. P.M. 24 |~—~~~-~—-~~104_ 4 52 |~~~-~_|Near ae sated Nippi- 
wan, Saskatchawan Ri-} 

54 50 48 |~ 12 40 0* Second Portage in Trout ver. 

River. 
27 | 53 17 568 (~~~ Saskatchawan. 
~~! 95 27 59 Oxford House. 
; 31 | 52 50 47 {106 12 41 | 20 44 47 |Carlton House, 

54 39 47 12 45 0 roe Spee Weepan- B. F. | Saskatchawan River. 
nah-pa-ness River. 

Feb. 13 | 53 21 30 ~~ ~—~|Near Stinking Lake. 

54 29 7 |---| 13 20 0*|Between the first and se- 4 
cond Portages in Hill’s 13 |}~~~-~-~~|107 17 04 | 20 21 22 |Stinking Lake. 
Gates. . 

~~~, 96 15 36 | 12 47 03 |Lower Portage in Hill’s: 17 | 54 16 10 {107 29 52 | 22 6 36 |Green Lake. 
Gates. B.& F. 

~~~! 96 81 1 |~ North end of the White 55 26 45 |107 52 55 | 22 15 48 |Isle ala Crosse. 
Fall. B.& F 

54 23 29 South end of the White] Mar. 8 | 55 53 00 |108 51 10 | 22 33 22 jAt N. W. Company’s For 

Fall. B. | in Buffalo Lake. 
~~ 97 42 6 |~ Carpenter’s Lake. 12 | 56 24 20 (109 23 4 |} 22 50 28 |At H. B. Company’s Fort! 
p 
B. | in Methye Lake. 


24 18 20 |Near the Forks of the 
B, | Elk River. 


No. IV.] 


24 


Results of the Observations for Latitude, Longitude, and Variation, continued. 


Slave River. 


60 54 52 |---| 96 45 0 |Slave River. 


LATITUDE, LONGITUDE, AND VARIATION. 


Date Latitude Longitude | Variation Date 
by Place of Observation 
1820 North aut wi gies East 1820 
iMar. 19 BT 24 07 Be ohecsattn ts Pierre au Calumet. July 25 
58 42 37 |111 18 20 | 22 49 32 |Fort Chipewyan. 
By Lunars, B. & F. 
east and west 98 
of the moou 
June 
A.M, 14 ~___--|I01 53 31 |.-_____ Sturgeon River. & 
14 | 54 20 10 |) ~~~ Sturgeon River. 
Is 15 | 102 13 0 Ridge River. Aug. 3 
}S 
Ls 15 | 54 39 49 |-~——-— ae River. ‘ 
E 16 |~~~-_|102 41 13 ~~|Pine Portage. 
|< 4 
E V7 ea 0B NS. 15: ote bel th Portage. 
| E 17 | 55 25 44 |—~~~—~ lei River. 4 
& 22 | 55 39 44 [~~~ |-—~~~~--__ English River 5 
i 
fe 24 [~~ ~~~~/105 55 55 | 2017 0 [Pin Portage, English 7 
1S iver 
[E 
fe, 24 | 65 44 55 |—~——~ ~iThree miles from the Eas- 
Le . tern entrance of Lake, 
be 9 
|S 25 | 55 42 46 |-~~--~-|--~---__ Entrance of Sandy Lake, 
2, English River. 9 
oS 
}2 26 |~—~106 46 22 In Knee Lake, English 11 
| River. 
2 
28 | 55 26 45 (~~~ |~--~~--__ Isle a la Crosse. 11 
iS July 
ep 6CSoL j~~~--~~|108 16 45 |—--.-.-_|Near the South entrance 
is of Clear Lake. 12 
S 1 | 55 47 26 |-~-~~---~ West side of Clear Lake. i 
4 oS e 
}8 0 Pee ~~ 21 15 10 [Entrance into Buffalo 
he Lake. 
|S 14 
if 2) 56 7 37 |j~~—~~~|~ Buffalo Lake. 
lS 3 |~ 109 6 15 |~~~---~In the Methye River. 14 
lao . 
& 3 | 56 18 58 ~~|~-~-—~~—~In the Methye River. ; 
5 
[3 7 | 56 43 20 |109.52 00 | 25 2 30 [North side of Methye 
= Portage. 
KS 1 J 110 49 20 | 25 40 30 |Clear Water River. 
E 
IF 11: | 56 39 43 |__| Half a mile S.E. of the, 19 
2 Elk River. 
i; oS 
12 12 |~-~~—~|L11 11 00 | 27 20 10 |Elk River, 
| © 
& 12] 58 15 25 ~~ tn the Elk River. 
July 5 | 58 57 62 |111 26 12 in Stony River. 
19 | 59 52 16 ~~|Entrance of Dog River. 
|A.M. 24 |-~~]113 25 36 | 27 25 14 |Just above the bend in 


637 


Latitude Longitude | Variation 


Place of Observation 
East 


Yi 
North Chronometer 


Oo “ 
25 40 47 |The N.W. Company’sFort: 
H.& F.| at Moose-deer Island, 
Slave Lake. 


(Oy ety eH? Or oh Al 
61 11 08 |113 51 35 


31 2 06 (On an island near Isle la} 


113 21 41 
H.:| Cache, in Slave Lake. 


60 50 18 


62 17 19 


114 9 28 | 33 35 55 Fort Providence. 


Bo& &. 


33 8 6/On an Island in Lake} 
Prosperous. 


114 13 39 


~~! Yellow Knife River. 


62 40 21 


~|Rocky Point below the; 
Double Fall Portage. 


62 51 2 


114 95 28 |e srassy Portage. 
~~ Island Portage. 


c 58 2 |}~—~~~-~—~ 


At the second Portage off 
the Nine Lakes. 


~~ 


~~/On the River Portage. 


63 30 56 
~~—~~~~114 2 2 | 32 30 40 |First Carp Portage. 
B. 


Near the lower point off 


63 40 26 -~~~~~—~ 
| Upper Carp Lake. 


~~~~~~~/113 46 35 | 36 45 30 |The north end of Upper! 
Carp Lake. Pe 


Near the north end off 


63 56 52 |—~ 
Rein-deer Lake. 
64 2 19 |~~.~_| 37 19 00 |On the Portage next be-l 
H. | low Porphyry Lake. 
64 6 47 |113 25 00 North end of Hunter’s! 


Portage. 


age, and Orkney Lake. . 


~~|Portage between Orkney 
and Sandy Lakes. 


64 27 6) ; Paya 
small river flowing into 


Winter Lake. 


35 48 2 Kater’s Compass in| 


2 | August, 1820, 
64 28 24 1118 6 00 | 36 15 00 e Trausit Instrument in} ' 
Mean of =} August, 1820. 
Lunars and sg 2 
Chronometers =] ( ; 
36 24 7 |e Kater’s Compass in 
B.H. F; Se May and June, 1821.}: 
4 


av 21 6 Transit Instrument in}. 


June, 1821. 


12 


1821 
‘June 21 


30 


July 2 


19 & 21 


APPENDIX. 


Variation 


Latitude Longitude 


Place of Observation 


by 
North |Chronometer East 


fe) 


een ee eee eet 


° 1 


“ 


Oren ti 
64 34 52 


oe Near the Dog Rib Rock. 
64 45 20 

eee 1138 5 46 
64 57 7 


65 9 6 WWWH~~~~~~~~-~—-_/On the S.E. border of an 
arm of Point Lake. 


e112 57 25 


~~|Among some Pines S. 14, 
W. 34, from the main 
channel of Point Lake. 

~~~ 1138 8 25 | 43 4 20 {At the part of Point Lake 

H. | from whence the Expe- 
dition commenced their 

Journey in 1821. 


65 31 30 |114 30 00 | 39 42 36 ‘Red Rock Lake. 
D. R. D. B. B. 


65 43 28 |114 26 45 | 42 17 22 \Copper Mine River. 
H. 


42 58 34 |At the junction of the 


66 5 00 {114 25 15 
H.| White Sandy River with 


the Copper Mine River. ||Sept. 4 


44 00 50 
H. 


Compass 
shaken by the 
wind 


48 00 34 |At the base of a range of 
H. | Granitic Mountains,Cop- 
per-Mine River. 


a5 25 48 


66 45 11 |115 42 23 | 47 7 80 |Hook’s encampment, 
H. | Copper Mine River. 

67 110 |116 27 28 | 44 11 43 |About three miles below 

H, | the Rocky Defile Rapid. 

67 23 14 {116 6 51 | 49 46 06 [Between the Musk Ox 
H. | and Sand-Stone Rapids. 


RPP PPAIERSS 


67 39 35 ~~|Copper-Mine River. 


67 42 35 {115 49 33 | 50 20 14 [Bloody Fall of Hearne. 


e 


46 25 52 |Mouth of the Copper- 
B. | Mine-River. 


Port Epworth.. 


67 47 50 \115°36 49 


AY 37 42 


e 


40 49 00 


67 42 15 |112 30 00 


67 53 45 {110 41 20 Detention Harbour. 


Galena Point. 


67 30 12 Wiel bey On the west side of Arc- 


Latitude Variation 


North 


Date Longitude 


1821 


Place of Observation 


Mi 
Chronometer East 


te) wt ie) 1 


fo) 7] 
Aug, 3 |108 38 00 ~~|Near a remarkable white 
Cliff on the west side of, 
Bathurst’s Inlet. 
10 | 67 40 30 }~~~~~~| 41 9 40 |Near the eastern entrance 
D.R. H-| of Bathurst’s Inlet. 
11 | 67 45 54 }~~~~~~~ About three miles from 
f Point Everitt. 
12 | 68 1 20 |}~~~--~ —~|Melville Sound. 
13 | 68 6 10 }~~~~~~-|}~~~~—|Hope’s Bay, Melville 
Sound. 
17 | 68 18 50 |110 5 15*| 44 15 46 |A point near to Point 
The Chrono: H.| Turnagain, 
meters having 
a7 | 67 12,14 | bern fom 
109.25, was. 
used in con- 
structing the 
map 
29 | 67 7 4 jL09 48 15 | 40 37 42 |About 3 of a mile below, 
H.| the falls of Wilberforce. 
66 40 42 
~ 9 | 66 13 51 j111 26 15 ~|Congecatha-wha-chaga 
of Hearne, 
14] 65 57 43 |About 22 miles south of] 
Belanger’s Rapid. 
21|65 7 6 
22 |~~~~—|111 59 48 On the borders of an arm} 
of Point Lake. 
26 | 65 00 00 |J~~~~~~— |~ Obstruction Rapid. 


* On the return to Hood’s River, the Chronometers were 
found to have altered their rates considerably after our 
departure from Arctic Sound, giving the longitude too far 
west ; and in consequence of this change the coast from 
Bathurst’s Inlet to Point Turnagain by the course and 
distance daily given, and the spot, is placed in Longitude 
109° 25/ 00". 


tic Sound. 
67 19 23 |109 44 80 | 41 43 22 |Lower’ Rapid in Hood’s| . 
Pre H. | River. 
67 20 12 Bathurst’s Inlet 


No. IV.] 639 


REMARKS ON THE DIP OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE. 


Previous to our departure from London the instrument was compared, and found 
toagree with an excellent dipping-needle belonging to Henry Browne, Esq., of Portland 
Place, which was afterwards used on Captain Parry’s late Expedition to the Polar Sea. 
One of the sides of our needle was marked with a +, and it was balanced with that 
mark towards the observer, in which position it hung when the single observations 
given in the subsequent Table were made; but, whenever two results are put down, 
the needle was inverted, and it is to be remembered the upper one is the dip shewn 
with the marked side towards the observer. The initials B.,H., F., indicate by whom 
the observations were made, and the mean result is given. 

The observations made at York Factory, Norway House, and Cumberland House, 
shew an increase of dip in proceeding to the south-west. Mr. Hood’s observation 
made in the spring at Cumberland House, compared with mine of the preceding 
autumn, shew an increase of 1° 32’ 48’ in that interval. At Isle a la Crosse, bearing 
about W.N.W. from Cumberland House, the dip was found by Mr. Hood to be less 
than at Cumberland House ; but beyond that place we found that the dip increased 
with the latitude, whether our course laid to the eastward or westward of the 
meridian. It is to be observed, however, that the places where observations were 
made, were perhaps too distant to enable us to deduce any general law. The great 
dip observed at Point Turnagain, would appear to evince the proximity of that station 
to the magnetic pole., 

The column of differences produced by changing the face of the instrument 
exhibits a remarkable variation in these differences connected in some manner with 
the place of observation, and which have not been noticed I believe by any previous 
observer. [leave to others better informed on these matters than myself, to deter- 
mine whether they ought to be ascribed to local causes, to some defect in the instru- 
ment, or to a general law of magnetism. 

‘The dip was always greatest when the face of the instrument’ being to the west, 
the needle hung with the marked side to the observer; and least when the marked 
side was from the observer, the instrument still facing to the west. ‘The dips, when: 
the instrument was faced east, were intermediate between these extremes; but in 
this case, when the marked side was turned to the observer, it was less than when 
turned from him, which is contrary to what is stated above, as taking place when 


the instrument was faced west. These facts may, perhaps, be deemed to indicate 


some defect in the balancing of the needle, or in the correctness.of the pivots-upon 
which it turned. 


640 


Date 
1819 


| Sept. 4 

26 
Oct. 7 
Nov. 24 


Dec. 1 


1820 
June Sh 


July 9 


| Aug. 1 


1821 
June 9 


To 
21 
31 


Aug. 20 


Difference 
produced by Direction of Winds, 
Latitude Longitude Amount of changing ‘the | Variation _| Ther. and Place of Observation | Observer 
North West Dip Face of the East State of Atmosphere 
Instrument 
© yi te OTE 2am ORS San 877) O> wm i O .1 it fo) d 
57 00 03 |. 922600 | 7929-7 | 11-340 |. 60021 | +43 | ESE. mt cae and \yvork Factory B.ELF. 
SE. moderate, very |Magnetic Island, 
5457 4] 9456 30 | 80 37 50 345 20 | 1150 0 | +56 ee lice eae e F. 
53 41 38 |, 98.00 52_| 834010 | 73900 | 14 a1 41 | +44 |North, moderate and Norway House F, 
53 56 40| 102 16 31 | 83 945 | 13 3 6 g {In de romlN th, light b [In a room at Cum) » 
| Wi 2 415" fo)? atiar- 7. | _berland, House 
In the air 
53 56 40 | 102 16 381 83 12 40 12 50 55 17 17 29 | +29 | North, light airs, {In the air atC. House] H F. 
y Marked |side of the needle 
Aeseiieel, coat 5 84 45 48 {" 48 nt - RE AY ce a Cumberland House H. 
84 24 40 19 17 40 §|~~. | Needle jinverted 
84 5 25] 16 29 30 4 
55 26 45 | 107 52 45 aa x s oa af, 25 15 48 +68 {ENE. moderate, clear|Isle ala Crosse Hi. 
85 9 30 6 39 40 
North side of Me‘hye 
56 43 0 | 109 53 O 5G Seinaleariy at +62 | NE. fresh, cloudy Portage H. 
58 42 38111 18.55 | 85 2342 | 6 210 | 224734 | +468 | Bast ee ge Fort Chipewyan |B.ELF. | 
SE. light airs, very |Fort Providence, N. 
62 1719 | 114 934 | 863802 | 64957 | 333555 | +72 oleae side of Slave Lakel>-H-E- 
63 47 49 | 113 46 35 | 871148 | 7 4 3 | 364530 | +56 [Pact Heh airs, very je Carp Lake |B.HLF. 
Portage at the North 
64 15 17 | 113 2 39 87 20 35 7 13 37 36 50 47 17 South, light airs end of Grizzle Bear,B.H.F. 
+ ’ 
clear Lake 
jak 35 45 28 Bilas 
64 28 24] 113 6 00 5 57 6 44 54 |- apne y “155 NNW ent airs, lport Enterprise F. 
sy 313 | 155603 | ; 
64 28 24/113 6 60 i pea 473 SE. light reece Fort Enterprise F, 
(86 5412 | 19 45 54 | 37 240)| - pense clouds 
7 87 28 12 | 16 39 24) Below the Rocky De-|_ 
67° 2 20 | 116 28.00 - 1 | t 24 N49 lta ota, file Rapid, Copper! ~* 
87 34 24 15 34 36 Mine River 
88 3 27 6 28 54 h of the 
67 47 50 | 115 36 49 | saad lard i 46 25 52 | +49 |NNE. lightb. foggy spubine ver F, 
88 54 57 5 20 42 i 
WSW. moderate b. |The first Cascade in 
GE Pa. | LOR Aas) . 2 30 1 4 ees +63 streaked clouds Hood’s River FP. 
109 25 D.R.| (89 56 3 2 42 30 
SW. fresh breezes F ae 
68 18 50 Fairs oh, . Fe ei oJ 44 15 46 +33 Herk clouds.” Point Turnagain F. 


APPENDIX. 


TABLE VIIL. 


An Abstract of the Observations made on the Dip of the Magnetic Needle, between — Factory 
and Point Turnagain. 


[No. IV. 


——EeE——EeE———————— 


641 


MAGNETIC FORCE. 


No. IV.] 


ee* Tasty S,Poozy | V'68 OSL | 196 | 02 88 


Ul apeaseg ysinq OTP vel | 98 8 | OF 63) HIP SIL | 8h £| S998} 08 PH GOlles GL ZOlTe Aine | 


SPV Pel |SIL6| SP 26 é 
en + eslidiojUy 4.10.7 Ynosg} juoutnays|Uy ey} (Jo eoxq|, OGp | V6 -|FOr9| OF 96]| EGP S¢E | SP 8 | 0S LL 6 oun; 
Lép OOL | It 4} OL 18 Iést | 


E41 | OI ZI! $0 o6|| 
oot | cp Ir og esi] Th | ee | 9p 6 | SI es] 009 ettlsz gz Tole 


0°07 O61 .| 6 ZI! OL 68|| ¢'9F SSL | LG TI] 0G $8| FE 6 PLI6E zl Z9lL ‘sny 


cg + estidiauy 410.7 6'6E COL | LE OL OF S6i| TV 
ZL + | s0uepraorg 110.5 6'6S 002 


89 -+ uekmodiyy 0,4 8°8§ OST 


Poor “ATA 
69 kq ‘aseyog 9AqyoqAt]|~~—~|~~~~ 


Lev OSL | S86 | SE L8] BLP OFT | SP G| SG GSI, SG ST ILLS ZY gg PL 


Sop | 69l |FS9Tl sh 88) Teh | Ost | 9% Zi} 4h 08! 0 €9 Gor|O sh 996 Aine | 


89 + ka ¢ POOH IN. ' . : 
q ‘assoig BI & IST Se ie ee ee €' OF: : 6F1 OF OL] S¢ L281 OSP 881 GI €i} 80 LL} Sh GE LOIS 9% Siz oung | 


6z + ashoy-pury OZSE | 
-LequIny 4 We oy} Uy|]~—~--~|~ Rema ae ently OFL ‘| OS 6 | SP GS|| ges Srl | 62 6} SV 9L)——~——~—~~—~|>~~——1_ “900 5 
‘ie G[—| esnoxy-pueyioq LOF 9st | 706] 09 Fell SOF oet | 268 | 09 68]| 962 OPE | GL 6 | OF 22 Fern 
wloor FZ--]-wND ye Wool v Uy] O'6F Ost | OF 8 | 0% g8i| SOF ost | 278 | 09 68]| 9728 OFE | és] Co. gull Ee Si CON Ons eae al 
W i || oll Say i MN Oe y! m E14 Ol fs 7 solu + © | GIST | 
, iy 
smonerqt, SUONPIGIA SUOTIRAqT A| oo ee, 
OL JO jsuotjyerqrA) [eA So1V OT JO jSUOTeIqIA; [RA §| sor1y OT JO |suotjesqrA| yea Soy Isa | TION 
ITY 24} Jo WONVAISYO Jo vorjq [eArejuy | Joon | -saquy jeasaquy | Joon | -saquUT jeAtejuy | Jo*on | -rojuyz aVg 


epujzisuo7y | opuney 


ainjesod ura, aS 
i 489 MA JUSUIN.IYSUT OY} JO 99¥,J || JSoAA JWOUINI\SUT OY} Jo 99eq || ysey yuoWNNSUT oY) Jo org 


Ee ee eee eee eee 


‘9010, SJOUSRTT SY} UO SUOTeAIESgG JO pBASqy UV 


“XI WIV 


™ 


"YIN} oY} 0} suorjeurxosdde Ajuo se peiepisuo0s 


oq ‘sdeysed ‘Keur syjnsor ano pue ‘suorjRAtosqo ozeorTep yous Aoemooe yt SUIYeU OJ PULY }S9q Oy} JO JOU SBA JUOUNISUT oY T, 


“SUOT}BAGIA JO LOQUNU Of} UUINTO Jx9U oY} pu ‘aPBAQIA PIP JI yey} OWT OY} SMOYS TeAJoUI OL, 


4N 


‘aqqey OU} UL OLY oy} poT[ed St Yor “sport poyenpess oy} UO serSap v oy poyutod pue pajsex yt [HUN pojou ou oy} pute “pazunod 


O19M SUOIBIGIA Jo Joqunu oq} ‘K[ood} SULMS 0} po}jiuIed wey} Suteq pue youseut e <q wontsod yejuoziioy v 0} 14Sn01q seA aTpoou 


OUT, “Y}sue] Ur soyour xis SBAL Wry ‘oppoony surddiqg: oy} yy Opell 19M JdL0,7 IOUS ou SUIUIG}.10088 Joy SUOTPRAIOSgO OY, 


‘AOUOM OLLANDVIN 


642 7 APPENDIX. [No. IV. 


TEMPERATURES. 


To prevent too great an extension of the Appendix, I have compressed the Tables 
of Weather as much as possible. The temperatures, &c., are given at length for 
five months of the coldest season we passed at Fort Enterprise in the account of the 
Aurora ; and Tables 10 and 11, contain monthly abstracts for two years, from obser- 
vations made at Cumberland-House, at Fort Enterprise, and the intermediate country. 
In Table 12, there is an abstract of the wind and weather for 1820-1821, the year 
in which, from our being so long stationary at Fort Enterprise, observations of that 
kind were of more value than they could be during our journeys from one part of 
the country to another. | 

These different tables, then, contain pretty full accounts of the state of the ther- 
mometer, winds, and weather, at Fort Enterprise ; and I have been the less anxious 
to add those observations made in more southerly districts, because the traders at 
many posts keep registers of the weather, some of which have been published. The 
tables are so simple as to be easily understood, and it is unnecessary for me to 
describe at length, the manner in which they were constructed. Copies of the whole 

of the Meteorological Observations have been lodged at the Admiralty. 


—— 


643 


TEMPERATURES. 


No. IV.] 


‘oz | 2ceet+ | octet | cost | voc | oset+ | o'Te+ | soct | Sept | Aen 
orcstiguztieztisut|/votiesti]ort+)ts4— {rot | tmdy 
‘egal | @°SI— | O'LI— | S'II— | O'FI— | 6°6E— | 9°II— | s'es— | 6°O — | GoueHL 


Gh | Bit | srt | oct | set | cet | oct | sti sot | Kem 
TL | Ve— | 6I— | OS— | ost | st+ | HI— | ze— | or | Tdy 
ro | 98— | I--| oF [ort |e + | o— | or— | vet | worer 


‘619 | es2— | o:uz— | 9 Pe— | G9s— | A°8Z— | S'ss— | OTS | T'6I— | “dea 
“799 | 9°SI— | 8'HI— | 9 SI— | 2’SI— | e°L4I— | 9°ST— | S"1Z—- |89°6 — au ep | sh— | eit | op | ert |e + | op— | or— | oe | -wee 

A ga ‘e "99 : | , | 1281 
‘oze_ | o0e— | z1e— | T-6z— | 6'Ts— | s0s— | 9°6s— | G'es— | S*sz— | “99 ee: |oze— | + | 2e— | oraz | oxaz | ze—lerze—lo +] “Soa 


we |o1—loz—|so-|91—|e83—|20-|sb—| sot] ‘Aon 
‘ogg | geek | ocizt | pr pet | ote-+ | 6:0e+ |. 7'ezt | s’8I+ | 62+ | 290 
‘ogg | geet | tiet | ore+ | pzet | sect | s'est | eset | eet | “dog 
‘cog |. e°zet | eze+ | eroct | rect | ost | cost | 2'6F-F | ozo snsny 
~~ | a tot | soe | stot | ovoot | ses | sig | ssst | crort | Apur 
‘egg |. g-get lope | sect | oust [21st |. 8’sst | 21st | soot | ounc 
‘oot | sort | s-te-E | o-ogt | br— | 91+ | O'0S+ | oOF+ | weet | Ae 
"616 ore woet | reset | sest | s9z+ | ovce+ | s'oz+ | sett | tdy 
“6ST | SI Poke + o'et-+ ooI+ | Sh +} Lett | #°S + | 8° 1Z4- | yore 
"69 | ST oF - eo —l|oe—|es9—-|TI-|/o2—-[oe+] ‘qed 


€% | 9— | SI | 18 Poet ['st+- | oz— | Te— | sz | -son 
og | Tir | cek lob lpet [pet | ert] oF] set | 200 
ob | OI | GFE | zT+ | ort | o¢t | tet | ott | ect | “ado 
69 | eet | sot | est | cot | to-+ w+ | eet | gut pensny 
e9 | OSPF | ark | srt | sot | cot | oct | set last | Aime 
OL | SFr | ont | art | rot | tot | ect | cet | ust | ung 
zo. | set | 69+ | ozt | o9+ | 09+ | ozt | ozt | ret | sen 
69 | V+ | vet | et— | ort | ort | ort | et— | at | mdy 
Ig | SI— | get | 2— | ct | ezt] ¢ — ee pe | yore 
eg | $— | att | Fe—- | 8+} s+] or | re— | ost] “da 
gg | O&— | oF | H—}o+124+1 o- | w- | ort] ‘we 
oy | 8e— | ort | Te— | e+ | te+ | zz— | te— | opt Sed 
ce | 9I— | set | O2— | e+ | oct |e — | os— | ert | “sont 
ep | Oct | zo-+ 6 OFF | oF | ze | ot | got | 390 


dag 
6181 


“sig | 2'st— | s'9I— | 6’eI— | S°sI— | ¢6I— | set— | V6I- je 2—) wer 
"1S9 eet OT+t gzetiez+tico—|setl(sr1- ios] 900 
"ogg gett L°st-F | Sort | v°vtt | Ost | 9ST | OTT | Z0et | “AON 
‘99 jorge | 2'eet+ | groet- | sset | o'let | oe | Tist | a+ | 0 
“za vat oot eur 029+ bert 00°2F LL'GrP jos" tet+ | “3deg 


a 
@ 
+ 
of 
+ 
® 
i 
S 
+. 
2 


fe) 
te) 


LE 
fe) 


fe) 
fe) 
ie) 
fe} 


peers | ements | eee | SR | ES | | eS 


me real qQ|°C jo) 2} je} 
i=} = io” ion - > or 
2 < ¢ ae | oe | 2 $ 8 2 a3 g] oe le ehe ele S| est EF Fie |e 
a 5 5 is oO 
e Sowat, & oe Ze gi} 2s = Boe B i | syjuo B&,)/Ss/28]/4e8/2S}48 1851/8 212 en] 8 a 
es PSP pre | te | fe | $s | gs | ee jae PUNT Tee RSI EEIES| SELES aa lee | ee 
oO 2k © ga 2 <5 “063 wa @ o> on Or =o =n =o = eis om cg st o%. 
a ley ee) a fe! ep + LS © a © ma ae) os Oo 7 Oo 0 Oo oF o 7m 5) ee oa ad 
@ = < 2 5 a BS so & js 8 pp Oo 3 = 8 5 5 iS; a oO my SO 
E E 3° aye aS or So 08 Z gz aa 0 a ee a a a D » 5 Be z 4 2 4 
" B = © = = 
‘ az I s @ i a x % a = | oso HsoysTF{ 18907] WsAysTET < sac eae @ 
a & ~ : 
po 


AHL AO SNVAIN AHL dO SAWAULXa 


TX ATaAVi 


‘X TIAVL 


4N2 


64d APPENDIX. [No. IV. 


TABLE XII. 
General View of the Winds and Weather for One Year, 1890-1821. 


Months Clear days OND 


ans REMARKS 
' Sept. 1820 212 |/Rain on 8 days, snow on 15—Total 16. 
| October . 244. Rain on 3, snow 9, hail 1=13. 
November . 19 - |'Snowy days 9 
AUTUMN 65 
| Dec. 1820 11 |\Snowy days 8. 
| Jan. . 1821 20% |Snowy days 10. 
{ Feb. . 133 ||Snowy days 9 
WINTER AS 


| March, 1821 


123 ee days 9. 
| April. 17 pa days 11. 
| May. 202 |\Snowy 6, rainy 1, foggy 4. 
SPRING 50 
| June, 1821 16 eee 4, rainy 9, foggy 4, hail 1=9. 
July... 15 le ee? (three days omitted), 
August. . 17 | Rainy 9. 
SUMMER 48 
iTotal for the Year] 2103 208 | 


The easterly winds predominate in the country to the northward of Great Slave Lake, as 
appears on areference to the Table ; and whilst they continue to blow, the weather is milder than 
during the westerly winds. In December and January, the coldest months, the latter prevailed. 
The coldest, and I may add, the strongest, wind in every season in this country, is the NW. 
The easterly, southerly, and westerly winds were almost invariably accompanied by clouds and 
snow, especially the two former. The thermometer was generally lowest on clear nights, when 
the sky was of a deep blue; and the blue sky invariably appeared at Fort Enterprise, when the 
temperature was below — 40°. A strong wind always raised the thermometer, though it blew 
from the coldest quarter, and clouds, though unaccompanied by wind, had the same effect. 

During our residence in the country, we had many opportunities of confirming the remarks in 
Captain Parry’s Voyage, (page 143,) respecting the distance which sound is conveyed in intense 
cold weather. 


645 


OBSERVATIONS. 


No. IV.] 


sed 
*£10}08, YIOR | 1Z 00 9 00 96 6 
“Sie YOK puv 
weujey, ode usasjog] Of &Z% ¢ ARTE RS) 


{ sjeunyT | St LG 06 
‘meujey ade 
‘UOT | 9E OS 06 
‘Aeq suospnyy] so zT ¢¢ |was &8 
Go 0€ O08 
“i. 5 "19d 99g 189M 
yeolyy 34} Jo oajuag) ~~ Sl ve O8 
*LOpeiqe'yT JO 4svoo eto OS 
SoM 3y) UO d 
i 4} uo GyUIg ede ‘uoIy | €3 LS 6L 
*Spurysy 
sessiq jo odnos 
24} jo yutod uisjsoyy| ~ eS 9T 8k 
-puysy |§ PAPE | 68 FT be 
SoTIe oO pu ‘ 
[rey JO pus 4s9 voy | 20 8 FL 
*purysy lagee i 62 99 &L 
Sore 0 pus nee 
Evdo Jo pue sed) “ge Lol og gh ex 
*spuvysy] osevavg soddq 
oy} pues sajreyg odeg 
ueeMjoq [oUULeyD PI] Sh SI 8s ania pean re 
“puelsy SoTe AA } eg Re a i alee Os 
0 90ULIG jo a 
J Hq Jo etjuep ‘uoly | GS bP ZL 
“pueysy } sieuny | 9 O02 OL 
asBaAeg 1oddy Jo a. 
S$ ede () Jo aryu9D u0lyg | £6 SL OL 
Wy ji (e) Ile 7 (e) 
peonpar aie SUOTIVAIISYGO 4SO MA JOJOULOMOIYD 
OT} YOY A 0} soov[q MONeIe A ‘apnyisu0ry 


60 00 L9 
“ad Se Lg 
6b GL Lg 
‘ad PE Lg 
8 GP 65 
Tg LV 09 
LAL 98 2 
ZL Sh 29 
8L Lb 2 
“Td s& 9 
gg 2g 19 
7 18 @ 
opnyyey 


6¢ 


&6 


IZ 


81 


91 


las 


SI ‘Sny| 


6181 
‘91eq 


"SoTeM 


JO 9OULIg 84} prvog uc) 


*900}S 
-Appa ey) preoq uO 


*sjreayg Ss mospnyy 


“syleIg suospnyy 
yOouLUIN ET yoeq-ayppes 


DUE sey 
JO 90 “A sg °S sur] 
Ssyooy Sholesuep oulug 


§,Jeun'y 
‘UOTIN[OSoy ade_d 


eres ‘uy 
uolnjosey “nig weg jos a “INQ 
248 Ve VS 
‘ZY IP GG 
8S & 
‘ZY Gy GS 
puelsy ueuueyy us0}seq ae 
“ele g Jo yUIOg "M'N| ~~~ 
“BITe JO aryuey) ~~~ 
“ERO FO MNO ds aN] pe 6S Gh 
“BUOY JO JUIOg “AA *S]| ~~~~~~-~~ ~~ Sp L 69 81 


"Yooy 3oVg ou, 


peonper vie suovAsresqg 


8} PTAA 07 Saou 


' “AVG S.,NOSGOF, 0} asRsseg 94} UO SNOILVAUASAOQ ‘JTITX WIAVL 


00 8g 


€8 8g 
opnyyday 
Z8 88 8g 


ZLoune 


489A. *Ja}aWLONOIGD 


6181 
°eq 


opnyynery 


‘OyeLe A. ‘apnyisuory 


anon 


barrens 


Bist a c H ; 
| ae f ; 
i : 
: ity t 
‘ y K : 
a n i i 3 3 ee se 7 
q i oe ae / > 
ie = on . [ ; 
re : : + 
. a & iy r 
: % 
i : i . t 
. ? ; 
i a t ‘ ie 
“ P fs Ni 
a 
» Oe , : HOt we 3 f fe ; ‘ 
¥ ¢ ’ ‘ F: ‘ « ; 
As - ‘ Oe 7 & “ 
Pa ; , i s ss . ‘ : 
= 4 + 7 * cE P 
: é 5 } bat Mee : 
5 af bs me ‘ / 
© 4 er os c row P a ‘ 
2 Bs = y 4 
. i » Z & ¥ 
' 
4 A Fac f a t 3 r 
5 at P . : % = \ 
- ‘ a> : pa - 2 
ij i ape k i Wied > 
ap ke ; fe Pe ‘ chant 
‘ ; ‘ r aa ) iv ab ms 
¢ } be - j 


os 
“ety 
ce 


Groner es 


eee. 
ee ht mage Seino ne Get gn eo pirual ng eam 
Pola . ; 


No. V. 


ZOOLOGICAL APPENDIX. 


BY 


JOSEPH SABINE, ESQ. 


Tux information supplied to Zoologists, from the discoveries and observations made 
by Captain Franklin and his companions, is not less relatively advantageous, than the 
benefits which have accrued to natural philosophy and geography, from the result of 
their labours and exertions in the more important objects of their mission. To Dr. 
Richardson, under whose care the departments of natural history were more especially 
placed, all who feel interested in or derive gratification from the advancement of that 
science, are particularly indebted. Neither privations, fatigue, nor the inclemency of 
the Arctic winters retarded his exertions, which have been peculiarly marked by the 
extent of the collections of specimens which have been received from, or brought 
home by, him. Though the value of notes and descriptions of natural objects, made 
carefully on the spot in distant countries is great, yet the confirmation of their 
correctness by a comparison with actual specimens, is so much more beneficial, that 
the highest acknowledgments are due to those who afford such additional aids to 
Science, and in this important point, Dr. Richardson’s labours have been eminently 
successful. 


QUADRUPEDS. 


NotwitusTanpine the long and intimate intercourse which has subsisted between 
Europe and the northern parts of the New World, our scientific knowledge of the 
Quadrupeds found in the latter has hitherto been very limited. It might have been 
expected, that the great demand for the furs of North America, would have originated 
some careful inquiries respecting the animals from which they were obtained ; little,, 
however, has hitherto resulted either from the observations of travellers, or of 
those persons who have been successively engaged in the traffic in skins. The most 
useful descriptions which have appeared were those of Forster, published in the 
Philosophical Transactions, from a collection of specimens sent from Hudson’s Bay 
to the Royal Society in 1771, by Mr. Graham: Hearne added to: his account of his 


648 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


journey, some notices relative to the Zoology of Hudson’s Bay: these, and the infor- 
mation collected by Pennant in his Arctic Zoology, are the only general authorities on 
the subject. 

The descriptions of the present collections with the notices of these animals, speci- 
mens of which it would have been impossible, on account of their size, to have procured 
and brought home, will include all the important quadrupeds of the northern part of 
the American continent. It will introduce some novelties to the notice of the Zoologist ; 
rectify, several points respecting species hitherto imperfectly known, or erroneously 
placed ; and will add some information as to others, whose specific names and characters 
have been already correctly established. 

As the specimens of most of the animals which supply the furs imported by the 
Hudson’s Bay Company formed part of the collection, it appeared very desirable that 
these should be referred to and compared with samples of the skins imported. A 
request was accordingly addressed to the Governor and Committee, for permission to 
have the temporary use of a collection of these skins for such purpose, which was 
promptly and obligingly complied with: in consequence, there will be found, under the 
different subjects described, some notice of every kind of skin which is usually 
imported by the company. : 

The arrangement of Cuvier, as well as the generic names used by him in the Reéegne 
Animal, have been adopted and followed in every instance in the account of the 
Quadrupeds. 


Ursus Maritimus, Polar Bear, 


Was met with on the shores of Hudson’s Bay. It is distinguished from other 
species of the same genus, by its superior size, its smaller head and elongated neck | 
its thick and powerful limbs, and its uniform yellowish-white colour. It is rarely 
and only accidentally seen inland, as it supports itself by preying on animals which 
live in the sea or on the shores; it appears to pass a great portion of its existence 
in the water, reposing occasionally on land, but more frequently on the ice. 


Ursus Americanus. Black Bear. 


This is the Common. Bear of America, and has been distinguished and separated 
by Pallas, from the European Bear, (Ursus Arctos,) from which it differs in several 
points, and especially in having a greater number of teeth; individuals vary in 
colour from black to different shades of brown, and are known to the traders under 
the different names of Black, Brown, Cinnamon, and Grey Bears. They live chiefly 
on fruits and vegetables, and their flesh is.much esteemed as food. ©The Hudson’s 
Bay Company imported, in 1822, near 3000 skins of these animals. They are met 
with over the whole country through which the Expedition passed, and even far to the 


No.V.] “ZOOLOGY. 649 


northward, two having been killed by the party on the shores of the Arctic Sea. The 
first was an old male, much out. of condition and apparently in bad health.;, it 
* measured five feet eight: inches long, exclusive of the tail, which was six inches’; its 
height to the tip of the fore shoulders was two feet. nine inches ; hair yellowish 
brown, a little hoary om the back and head, long and somewhat woolly, it was 
. falling off and discovering a very thin sleek black coat underneath. ~The other was 
a female and proved very fat; the head of this was smaller than that of the male, 
and its forehead was almost flat, the other being slightly convex; some differences 
were noted in the teeth of the lower jaws ; in the female five molares were observed, 
only four were discovered in the male, and the space intervening between the canine 
teeth and the molares,; was smaller in-the female than in the male. 


_ Ursus Cinereus. Grizzly Bear. 


- Hunters’ skins were seen of the Grizzly Bear. This inhabits the country at the 
foot. of the Rocky Mountains, and is decidedly different in its habits, manners, and 
appearance, from the Common Bear; it has not the power of climbing trees, which 
the Black and Polar Bears, (according to the information given to Dr. Richardson 
‘by the natives) do with facility. It is to be remarked, however, that the traders in 
their common discourse often confound the Cinnamon Bear, or lighter variety of the 
Black Bear, with the Grizzly Bear, terming them indiscriminately Les Ours Blancs. 
This animal has been brought into. notice by the American travellers, who have visited 
the countries west of the Mississippi. Lewis and Clarke met with it in the Missouri 
country, and called it the White-brown or Grizzly Bear: it has been named Ursus 
Cinereus; by M. Desmerest. It is a beast of wonderful strength and great 
ferocity. In the introductory discourse of Mr. De-Witt Clinton, printed in the 
Transactions of the Literary and Philosophical Society of New York, some further 
particulars are communicated relative to it; and a full specific description of it,.under 
the name of Ursus Horribilis, has been recently published in the account of Major 
Long’s Expedition to the Rocky Mountains. 


Procyon Lotor. Racoon, 

The Racoon does not appear to have been met with by the travellers, its natural 
abode being to the southward of their route: it is introduced here because a small 
number of its skins is annually imported by the Hudson’s Bay Company, and it is 
desirable that all the animals whose skins are thus introduced should be noticed, . 


| . Meles Labradoria. American Badger. 
. The specimen received of this animal may be considered to settle the disputed 
question amongst naturalists, in separating the American from the European Badger. 
| 40 


650 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


Pennant, in his Arctic Soology, believed them to be identical, but in the History of 
Quadrupeds, they are treated of as varieties of the same species; in this also 
Buffon agreed, describing the American animal under the name of Carcajou. They 
were first considered as distinct by Schreiber, whose opinion was adopted by Gimelin. 
In Buffon’s ‘account ‘of ‘the animal, ‘it is represented as having four toes only on its 
foré ‘feet, whence originated the erroneous specific character given by Gmelin of 
‘¢Palmis tetradactylis.” The descriptions of the several authors are very incorrect. 
The best method of making the American Badger more properly known as a separate 
species, will be by an:enumeration of the differences between the two. 

The Américan Badger is generally less in size and of lighter make; the head, 
though equally long, is not’so sharp towards the nose, and themarkings are remarkably 
different ; a narrow white line runs from between the eyes towards the back, the rest 
of the upper part of the head is brown, the throat and whole under jaw are white, 
the cheeks are partly so; a semicircular brown spot is placed between the light part 
of ‘the cheeks and the ears ; the white marking extends in a triangular form a little 
above the eyes, and ‘below the eyes in a line towards the fore part of the mouth, but 
the whole eye lies within the dark colour of the upper part of the head, which colour 
runs with asharp angle at'the corner of thé eye into the white. The European Badger 
has three broad white marks; one on the top of 'the head and one on each side, and 
between them are two broad black lines which include the eyes and ears ; and the whole 
under parts of the throat and jaw are black. ‘The upper parts ofthe body and sides 
in the Ameri¢an animal are covered with rather long fine greyish hairs, which in the 
other are darker, coarser and longer; the under parts in the formeriare lighter than the 
upper, in the latter they are darker; the legs in the first are dark brown and in the 
other quite black ; and though the animal is of larger size generally, its nails, which 
aie dark) are smaller than thé light horn-coloured nails of the American species, and 
finally, the’ tail of the European Badger is longer than that of the American. The 
specimen received measures two feet five inches in length, ineluding the tail, which is 
three inches long. The animal is abundant in parts of the interior of North America, 
inhabiting holes in the earth, and having similar habits to its European congener. 

A few skins of it are annually imported from Hudson’s Bay. 


ey Gulo Luscus.. Wolverene. . 
The Wolveréne, or Quick-Hatch, is a general inhabitant of the northern parts of 
America, as far as the Arétic Sea, and from a skull found in Melville Island, appears 
to extend its visits beyond the continent towards. the pole. Its skin is an object of 
trade, and forms part of the annual consignments from Hudson’s Bay. The animal 
is well known to naturalists, who first became acquainted with it from the figure and 
description of Edwards. Two specimens were sent home by the Expedition; one 


No. Vi] ZOOLOGY. 65] 


being much darker than the other, the band of lighter hairs. which passes alone the 
sides and on the back of the animal near its tail, being very obscure; the other 
specimen, in which this marking is distinct, accords with the skin received: from. the 
Hudson’s Bay Company. 


Mustela Martes. Pine Marten. 


The Pine Marten is every where abundant in the pine forests. Numbers of the 
skins (in the last year near 90,000) are annually imported by the Hudson’s Bay. 
Company, the fur being held in much estimation. The animal is sufficiently described 
by all the writers on Natural History, being distinguished by the yellow or orange 
colour of its throat from the Common Marten, (Mustela Foina) which is marked 
similarly with white. The Common Marten inhabits the more temperate parts of 
Europe, whilst the Pine Marten is confined to the northern regions, though it is equally 
found in Europe and Asia as well as America. The two animals are very similar, 
and it may be reasonably doubted whether they be not the same species. Considerable 
difference is observable in the sizes of the two sexes of the Pine Marten, the male 
being largest by full one third. ‘The winter state of the animal is that in which it 
is most known both to naturalists and traders; in the summer, in'common with the 
other quadrupeds of ludson’s Bay, it loses the’ delicate fineness and brilliancy of: its 
fur, which becomes generally paler, especially about the head, and the yellow marks 
on the throat ceasing to be distinct from the rest of the body, become’ a: dingy white, 
running into. and blended with the lighter brown of the neighbouring parts. 


Musiela Pennantt: _ Fisher. 


Strange confusion has existed both as to the name and habits of the Fisher. It igs 
said by Pennant, to be called Wejack; Hearne notices the animal of that name and 
the Shunk together, rather confusedly. Gmelin referred the Fisher of Pennant, the 
first writer by whom it was described, to the Sable, (Mustela Zibellina) from which it 
is distinguished, however, by its longer tapering tail, and by having its chin equally 
dark with the rest of its body, neither white nor cinereous.. Erxleben called. it 
M. Pennanti, and as this was its first specific appellation, it ought to be adopted 
generally, in preference to M. Piscator, which though corresponding with its English 
name, is not appropriate, since it does not feed on fish, but pursues the same 
prey as the Pine Marten. The following description is from two specimens, one 
sent home by Captain Franklin, the other belonging to the Hudson’s Bay. Company ; 
both are imperfect, the former: being without feet, and the latter, like all hunter’s 
skins, mutilated in the legs and face. Length varying from twenty-four to thirty 
inches, exclusive of the tail, which is from thirteen to fifteen inches long. The nose 
is sharp, and the fur near'it brown ; the whole of the fur on the upper part of the 

4 0 2 


652 APPENDIX: [No. V. 


body is dark at the base, yellowish above, and tipped with black, shortion the head. 
and gradually lengthening towards the tail where it loses much of the yellow hue, 
taking'a chestnut colour instead ; the tail is black and shining, the throat brown; with 
a few white tipped hairs, the belly and legs dark brown ; the ears are short, broa dl 
and round, appearing lighter on the tips. Captain Franklin’s specimen was killed at 
Cumberland-House, in November 1819, but the animal was seen at various places. 
during the Expedition, even as far to the northward as the Great Slave Lake. Fishers 
are killed by the fur hunters, and purchased by the Hudson’s Bay Company, whose » 
importation in the last year amounted to 1800. 


Mustela Lutreola. Mink. 


No specimen of this animal was sent home, although it was met with by the 
travellers on their journey, and a drawing of one was made by Lieutenant Hood; a 
skin was received, with those supplied by the Hudson’s Bay Company for the purpose 
of elucidating these notices, and as the name ‘‘ Mink,” has been applied by some. 
writers to other animals than the present, it is very satisfactory that the authority of 
its application here is unquestionable. The Mink is well described by Forster, in the 
Philosophical Transactions, in his account of the animals received in 1771, from Hud- 
son’s Bay, as the Lesser Otter, or Jackash, as it is called by the natives ; it is considered 
by him to be the same as M. Lutreola, which is found in parts of Europe and Asia. 
Hearne also notices it. It is of slender make, with more of the general appearance of 
a small Otter than of a Marten. The fur, apparently of excellent quality, is short and 
thick, of an uniform dark brown, glossy at the tip, that of the tail rather longer and 
darker. The specimen, including the tail, which is six inches long, is nearly two feet 
in length. The number of skins of this species, imported by the Hudson’s Bay Com- 
pany in 1822, exceeded 4600. ‘The habits and prey of the Mink are those which have 
been erroneously ascribed tothe Fisher, and it is probable that the Mustela which feeds 
on fish, mentioned in the communications from the northern parts of America, is really 
the: animal now described: it is a true Fisher, haunting small streams and rapids in 
the summer, and preying upon the fish that come there to spawn. 


Mustela Erminea. Stoat Ermine. 


An universal inhabitant of the northern countries, both in the Old and New World. 
Itis known as the Stoat in the summer season, when the whole upper parts of the 
body are brown ; in the winter it becomes beautifully white, with the exception of 
the tip of its tail, which is black. It has not been observed by writers that the fur of 
the Ermine becomes thicker and elongated in winter, but this is a general effect of cold 
in all Quadrupeds, whether they alter the colour of their coats or remain unchanged. 
In the vicinity of Hudson’s Bay and in the interior, the Ermine frequents the houses 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 653, 


of the. settlers in search of mice, which constitute its principal food. The skins, 
though elsewhere an article of commerce, do not appear to have been imported in dike 
last year by the Hudson’s Bay Company. 


Mephitis Americana. Skunk. 


These animals corresponding in general character and appearance, but with great 
diversity of the arrangement of their white and black markings, are found in all parts 
of the New World. Several of these, heretofore separated, have recently been con- 
sidered by M. Cuvier as referable to one species, and the whole have been removed by 
him from Viverra, where they have hitherto been arranged, and made a distant genus. 
The animals, now under examination, are the particular sort designated as the Viverra 
Mephitis of Gmelin, the Skunk of Pennant and Hearne, and Le Chiche of Buffon. 
They are well known on account of the intolerably disagreeable odour which they emit 
when irritated, whence they obtained, amongst the French settlers in North America, 
the name of Béte puante and Enfant de diable. Two specimens were received from the 
Expedition, they were only seen in the first period of the journey, for though the 
animal is frequent in the places which it inhabits, it was not found north of the 
Slave Lake. The specimens differ slightly, one having rather broader stripes of white 
than the other, the variations in this Rorbcular have heretofore been considered to 
constitute distinct species. : 


Lutra Canadensis. American Otter. 


The Otter of America has hitherto been identified with that of Europe, from which 
it was considered to differ in size only ; but independent of that circumstance, there 
appear to be other points which will support its separation from the European Otter, 
and the specimen supplied by Captain Franklin being quite perfect, a complete com- 
parison of the two animals can be now instituted. The chin and throat are dusky 
white and all the rest of the body is a glossy brown, finer and thicker than that of the 
European Otter. The neck is elongated, not short, and the head narrow and long, in 
comparison with the short broad visage of the other animal ; the ears are consequently 
much closer together. The tail is more pointed and shorter, being considerably Jess 
than one half of the length of the body, whilst the tail of the European Otter is more 
than half the length of its body. These differences are probably decisive as to their 
specific difference. The whole animal is five feet long, of which the tail is eighteen 
inches. A fine specimen of the European Otter measures forty inches including its tail, 
which is fourteen. The American Otter is an inhabitant of the waters of the whole 
northern parts of America, and is found as far north as the Copper-Mine River. 
The skins are articles of considerable commerce, the imports of last year from 
Hudson’s Bay having amounted to 7300.. M. Cuvier unites the Lutra Brasiliensis of 


654 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


Gmelin with the North American Otter, probably correctly, though that animal has 
usually been considered only an inhabitant of the warmer parts of the New Continent. 


Canis Lupus. Wolf. 


There is so much diversity, both in the size and colour of the Wolves found in the 
interior of North America, that it is but reasonable to doubt, whether some may not 
belong to species distinct from that which is well known as the Common Wolf, Canis 
Lupus, of the northern portion of the globe; the usual colour of which is reddish 
brown varying occasionally to black. Besides the two animals which fell into the hands 
of the Expedition, and which will be successively particularly noticed, Dr. Richardson 
mentions a Wolf smaller than the Fox, which was not uncommon in the plains in 
the southern parts of the country visited by Captain Franklin; and neither of these 
accord with the Wolves seen at Melville Island, and which are much smaller than the 
White Wolf taken by Captain Franklin’s party at Fort Enterprise. Thus we appear 
to have knowledge of four kinds, all to be met within the districts visited by the 
Expedition. During the stay of the travellers at Cumberland-House in the first 
winter of the journey, very satisfactory information was obtained, confirming the 
observations made during Captain Parry’s residence on Melville Island, of the 
readiness which Wolves shewed to have intercourse with domestic Dogs. This 
circumstance was fully known to the settlers, as well as that the produce of such 
intercourse possessed all the character of perfect animals, and was not considered as 
the production of two species. If such confirmation of what was before known had 
been required, the present information would fully establish the point of the specific 


. identity of the Wolf and Dog, and does away the possibility of specific differences 


between the kind of Wolves, which thus are known to connect themselves with 
the domestic Dogs. A few skins of Wolves are annually included in the importation 
of the Hudson’s Bay Company. 


Cams Lupus—Griseus. Grey Wolf. 


Grey Wolves are common in theneighbourhood of Cumberland-House, a magnificent 
specimen of one was caught in a trap, during the residence’ of the Expedition at that 
place in January 1820. The skin was preserved and reached England safe. It is 
very dissimilar in colour to the usual state of the Wolf, and is of much greater size. 
Its dimensions are as follows: length to the setting on of the tail, four feet ; tail 
fourteen inches ; height to the top of the shoulders two feet. The teeth are remark- 
ably strong and large; the ears sharp and erect, thickly clothed with dark-brown 
hair tipped with grey ; above and below on the neck, the hair is thick and bushy ; 
the whole.of the body is eovered with a mixture of long, grey, and thick hairs, having 
some few white ones intermixed on the back: the sides and belly are dark grey ; the 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY: 655 


tail is bushy, grey tipped with brown ; the legs are strong, covered with dark-brown 
hair; nails of both fore and back feet strong, short, and arched. 


Canis Lupus—Albus. White Wolf. 


However great the dimensions of the preceding animal may appear, they are surpassed 
by that of a Wolf entirely white, which waskilled at Fort Enterprise during the second 
winter that the Expedition remained inthe interior. A plate of it has beenengraved to 
accompany the narrative. Its length was four feet four inches, its height two feet ten 
inches, and the length of the tail was nineteen inches. The specimen was preserved, 
but proving too bulky was left behind. It was previously known that white Wolves 
existed in the vicinity of the Arctic Seas, and it is probable that the loss of colour is 
effected by the severity of the winter season ; though this change does not appear to 
occur in all cases, because the Wolves, seen at Melville Island. during the winter of 
1819-20, though lighter than usual, were not white, nor were they of such large size 
as that killed at Fort Enterprise. 


Canis Vulpes. Fox. 


Foxes are met with over the whole wooded part of the country. The different 
kinds, which are well known to and distinguished by the huntsmen, are all objects of 
commerce, above 8000 skins having been imported by the Hudsen’s Bay Company in 
1822. The different Foxes (with the exception of the Arctic) which have been known 
to exist in the northern parts of North America, have until lately been referred by 
naturalists to the species at the head of this article, and were considered as varie- 
ties of it: the same opinion seems to have existed amongst the inhabitants of that 
country, for both the Indians as well as European Americans have traditions that they 
originated from Europe. The former suppose them to have passed from the Old 
World over the~Arctic ice; the latter, that they were imported for the purpose of 
affording amusement to hunters. Theformer opinion is correct, so far, as that the same 
animals appear to be found in the northern parts of Europe and Asia; but it is more 
probable that the whole of the Arctic regions may be. considered as their natural 
habitat, than that any one portion of it has supplied the others with the animal. The 
opinion of the specific identity with the common European Fox (Canis Vulpes) appears 
new with propriety to be abandoned ; whether there are sufficient grounds to separate 
the whole from each other may be doubted, but as they have all been lately described 
as distinct species by M. Desmerest, his-arrangement has been adopted, as affording 
more perspicuity in the elucidation of their differences. The skins of these animals, 
received by the Hudson’s Bay Company, are well known in trade as those of the 
red, cross, silver, blue, kitt, and white foxes; and the animals from whence these are 
obtained, all, in some degree, fell under the observation of the Expedition. 


ee - 
ee + 


656 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


Canis Fulvus. Red Fox. 


The Red Fox is the most frequently met with, and approaches nearest to the European 
though differing much from it. It is of slighter make and taller on the legs; the 
visage 1s long and sharp; the ears erect and pointed, their outside black, and inside 
white ; its general colour is bright ferruginous on the head, back and sides, but less 
brilliant towards the tail; under the chin it is white; the throat and neck dark 


grey; and this colour is continued along the first part of the belly in a stripe of 


less width than on the breast ; the under parts towards the tail are very pale red ; the 
fronts of the fore legs and the feet are black, and the fronts of the lower parts of the 
hind legs are also black ; the tail is very bushy, but less ferruginous than the body, the 
hairs mostly terminated with black, and more so towards the extremity than near the 
root, giving the whole a dark appearance ; a few of the hairs at the end are lighter, 
but it is not tipped with white. The above description of the colour of the body 
and tail is from a skin belonging to the Hudson’s Bay Company, which may be con- 
sidered as in its best state ; in the specimen sent home by the Expedition, and which 
was probably killed in the latter part of the winter, the fur on the body is longer, 
and has lost all its brilliancy of colour; the whole appears to be in preparation for 
change, the upper parts of the legs having already lost the long hairs and exhibiting 
a short red coat, which is of course only beginning to grow. The fur of the skin 
which has been described is long, though not so extended as in the winter specimen ; 
from the appearance of which it may be concluded, that the animal, when it loses its 
winter covering, does not, till after some interval, obtain the length of fur which is 
requisite to the skin in a commercial view. The specimen, having been set up, stands 
eighteen inches high; it is near two feet in length, and the tail measures sixteen 
inches. . 


Canis Decussatus. Cross Fox. 


The specimen received from Captain Franklin and that from the Hudson’s Bay 
Company, nearly correspond ; the colours of the latter are rather more brilliant and 
darker; it also appears to have been taken from a somewhat larger animal. The 
Cross Fox, in comparison with the Red, is shorter on its legs, and has a larger and 
longer body, being altogether a stronger animal. The front of the head is grey, com- 
posed of black and white hairs, the latter predominating on the forehead ; the ears 
are large, covered with short soft black fur behind, and within with long yellowish 
hairs; the back of the neck and shoulders are pale ferruginous, crossed with dark 
stripes, one extending from the head to the back, the other passing the first at right 
angles over the shoulders ; the rest of the back is grey composed of black fur tipped 
with white ; the sides are pale ferruginous, running into the grey of the back ; the chin 
and all the under parts, as well as the legs are black, a few of the hairs being tipped 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 657. 


with white; the bottom of the feet are white; the under part of the tail, and the 
parts of the body adjacent, are pale yellow ; the grey character of the back extends to 


the upper part of the tail, at the commencement; the. rest of the tail is dark above, 


and lighter beneath, being tipped with white. ‘The character of the fur is thick and 
long. The specimen, when set_up, will stand about fourteen inches high ; it is two 
feet four inches in length, and the tail, which is thick and bushy, is sixteen inches 
long. The colours of the coat of the Cross Foxes are said to vary considerably ;\in 
some the red preponderates, so much as to approach the Red Fox, and then to: be 
mistaken for it, in others so much dark fur prevails, that.they resemble the Silver 
Fox. Without specimens in these. different states, it is impossible to arrive at 
certainty on the subjeet, but the circumstance induces a doubt whether these three 
kinds are specifically distinct. 


‘Canis Argentatus. Black or Silver Fox. 


Captain Franklin’s specimen was obtained from a hunter, and has, consequently, 
undergone the usual mutilation. Theskin from the Hudson’s Bay Company is in a better 
condition, and will therefore be the one described. The animal-is smaller than either 
of the preceding, about two feet long, and probably of inferior stature; the tail is 
fourteen inches long. The head is short, with strong black whiskers ; the fore part 
dark grey, having short black hairs tipped with: white ;.the ears are narrow and 
pointed, black both within and without ; the back of the neck and shoulders quite 
black, and a black line extends along the back ; the-rest of the back is silvery grey ; 
the whole under-part. and sides are black, the chin and. breast darkest; the legs are 
also black; the tail is black, with a conspicuous white tip.. The fur is soft, but-not 
long; the tail is less bushy than that of the Foxes before described. The sking of 
the Black Foxes are especially valuable, and the animals are of rare occurrence ; they 
are sometimes obtained entirely black, without any silvery markings. 


Canis Virginianus. ‘Grey. Fox. 

This animal lives in the parts of America more to the anithoraitd than. those visited 
by the travellers, and was not met with alive ; but its skin was seen in the hands of the 
traders. This notice of it is, therefore given from a skin belonging to the Hudson’s 
Bay.Company, by whom they are imported under the name of Blue Foxes. The ani- 
mal is about twenty-nine inches long, its tail not exceeding nine inches, in addition to 
the length of the body. The fur, in colour, is nearly uniform over the whole animal, 
loose and long, next the body pale lead-colour, and tipped with brown; the tail is very 
thick and bushy, and differs in having a very slight rufous tinge, which ‘is not PebeEp 
tible, on any other part of the animal. 

4P 


658 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


Canis Cinereo-argenteus. Grizzled Fox. 


A hunter’s specimen of this pretty quadruped was obtained at Carlton-House. It is 
common on the sandy plains between the north and south branches of the Saskat- 
chawan. The skins of this species are imported by the Hudson’s Bay Company, under 
the name of Kitt Foxes. It is the smallest kind which inhabits North America, and 
though not unknown to naturalists, is but very imperfectly described. Its Latin spe- 
cific name was applied by Gmelin. Dr. Shaw has called it the Fulvous-necked Fox, 
but the name is so inapplicable as to render a new English appellation absolutely 
necessary. It is the Prairie Dog of the French settlers in America. The length 
of the head and body is about twenty-four, and of the tail, eleven inches. The 
upper parts of the head are grizzled, consisting of white, brown, and fulvous hairs; 
over the shoulders, on the back and sides, towards the tail, the fur is short and sriz- 
zled, having black and whitish hairs intermixed; the sides next the shoulders have 
longer fur, which is ferruginous; the throat and belly are white; the tail is thick 
and bushy, the fur of the upper'side is pale, slightly tipped with black, the under part 
is ferruginous, and the end entirely black. It is not impossible that the animal de - 
scribed in the History of Quadrupeds, which was received by Mr. Brooks, from Pennsyl- 
vania, under the name of Brant Fox, and referred by Pennant to the animal of that 
name, described by Gesner and Linneus, may belong to this species; in size, it ac- 
cords, but the colours do not exactly agree with that of the present specimen. 


Canis Lagopus. Arctic Fox. 


The Arctic Foxes were found breeding at Point Turnagain on the Arctic Sea, they 
generally continue on the sea-coast, and seldom visit the interior except in severe 
winters ; a few breed near York Factory. They were seen by the Expedition under 
Captain -Parry, on all the North Georgian Islands, where they remain during the win- 
ter. The animal is the lsatis of Buffon, and, in its summer coat, has ‘been errone- 
ously called the Blue Fox. In its winter state, it is the White Fox of commerce. 
Specimens were brought home of the animal, as it is found in both seasons; the White 
‘Foxes are‘'so well known, that a description of them is unnecessary, but naturalists are 
less acquainted with ‘the species in its summer state; when the specimens are together, 
‘a ‘person unacquainted with the circumstance, would, with difficulty, be persuaded to 
bélieve them to belong ‘to the same animal; the abundance and length of the winter 
coat gives'ita very enlarged appearance, whilst, on the contrary, the short.condition of 
its summer fur, causes it'to seem peculiarlysmall. In this state, the head and the chin 
are brown, havingsome fine white hairs scattered through the fur; the ears, externally, 
are covered like the head, within they are white ; a similar brown colour extends along 
the back to the tail, and from the back is continued down the outsides of ‘all the legs, 


— 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 659° 


but on the latter, a few white hairs are intermixed ; the whole under-parts, and the 
insides of the legs, are a dingy white; the tail is brownish above, becoming whiter 
at the end, and is entirely white beneath. 


Felis Canadensis. Canadian Lynx. 


A very fine specimen of this beautiful but rapacious animal, which is usually called 
in the British settlements and amongst the hunters of America, the Wild Cat, was 
sent from Cumberland-House, It is a timid animal, offers little resistance when 
attacked, and ‘is easily despatched by a blow on the back. The remarkable points 
of its character are, its sharp ears, tipped with a tuft of black hair; long 
bunches of hair on each side at the back of its under jaw; its thick and furry 
legs and feet, and its short tail tipped with black. The specimen stands about 
sixteen inches high, and measures three feet from the top of its nose to the end of 
the tail, which latter is only four inches long; the mass of hair on its back and 
sides is short and thick, that on the back is dark below tipped with white, on the 
sides reddish below and tipped also with white, the whole having a reddish grey 
mottled appearance, but not spotted ; the hair of the belly is light and long; that of 
the head is grey, as on the back, but shorter; the head is thick and short, the eyes 
placed forward, whiskers white and turned back; nails white, short, and sharp, 
slightly curved. M. Geoffrey St. Hilare separated this animal from the European 
Lynx, considering it a distinct species. The skins, which are imported from America, 
make a beautiful fur, and are in high estimation, near nine thousand being the 
amount imported last year by the Hudson’s Bay Company. The flesh is good as food, 
it is white, and has some resemblance to a rabbit in flavour. It preys chiefly on the 
common Hares (Lepus Americanus) of the country. 


Castor Fiber. Beaver. 


_ Beavers are found to the northward as far as the wooded countries extend, but there 

were none in the Barren Grounds to the eastward of the Copper-Mine River. The 
import of Beaver skins last year by the Hudson’s Bay Company, amounted to 
sixty thousand. A black variety is sometimes taken, and is considered a valuable 
rarity. Dr. Richardson also states that a white variety is of occasional occurrence. 


Fiber Sibethicus. Musk Rat: 


The Musk Rats, or Musquashes, as they were called, were abundantly found almost 
during the whole journey, even far north. It is surprising that those industrious animalg 
(whose habits, so similar to those of the Beaver, are well known, and have often been 
described) do not give way to the annual destruction of their race for the supply of 
commerce ; very nearly 150,000 of the skins were imported last year by the Hudgon’s 

4 P 2 


660 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


Bay Company, and even more are annually killed and carried into Canada. They 
destroy each other frequently, and the loss in severe winters from this cause is greater 
than what arises by the spears of the hunters. » They are, however, very prolific. A. 
variety with black fur is occasionally met with. 


Fiber Ztbethicus—albus. White Musk Rat. 


A specimen of a singular variety of the Musk Rat accompanied that just described. 
It was killed near Cumberland-House, and presented by Mr. Holmes, chief of that 
station, to the travellers. Except in size and colour of its hair, it differs in no respect 
from the common Musk Rat; its teeth, which are correspondent to its proportional 
smaller dimension, are not those of a young animal. The body is eleven inches long 
only; and the tail six inches. The hair both above and below is an uniform dingy 
white. : iteta . 

onli Armcola Xanthognatha. - . Hudson’s. Bay Campagnol. 

A mouse, belonging to the division of the Linnean genus Mus, now separated, and 
ealled Arvicola and Campagnol by M. Cuvier, is abundant in the settlements round 
Hudson’s Bay. It shows a strong inclination to domesticate itself, by frequenting the 
houses. These animals are preyed upon by the Ermine, and form its chief support. 
They steal fat, and make hoards of it in the manner of the Economic Mouse of Pallas, 
to which they are allied: Specimens were sent home from Hudson’s Bay, but were 
not found: among the collection: The following description has been supplied by 
Dr: Richardson :—“ In. general, shape and appearance it strongly resembles the 
European Domestic Mouse ; but it is a little larger, and has a broader back: The 
colour of the fur on the back is light chestnut-brown, with a few black tips to the 
hairs; the sides are pale yellowish brown, and the belly ash-grey ; the fur in winter 
is long, and when blown aside exhibits a shining blackish-grey colour towards its 
roots; the ears are large, but having nearly an-orbicular form, do not stand high ; 
they are thinly covered with hairs, and have a membranous appearance ; the eyes 
situated about half way between the ear and the tip of the nose, are small; the 
vibrissee on the cheek are longer than the head; the upper lip is but slightly cleft; 
and the nose projects but little beyond the mouth ;> within the mouth, on each side, is 
a small orbicular tuft of hairs seated over a collection of glands which lie beneath the 
cuticle ; the tail is round and hairy, about one inch long, its upper surface corresponds 
in colour with the back, its under one withthe belly; the posterior extremities are 
longer than the anterior ones, but the difference is not remarkable; the broadness and 
fleshiness of the body almost conceal the legs; there are five toes on the hind-foot, the 
three middle ones are nearly equal in length, the extreme arises higher up; the nails 
are curved, pointed, and canaliculate below, and each of them is inserted into the 
callous tuberculated extremity of the toe; there are six similar tubercles on the sole, 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 661 


disposed by threes; the toes are hairy above, and the hairs project beyond the 
nails, underneath they are naked like the soles, and each is divided by five or six 
transverse grooves into as many dark callous ridges ; the fore-feet want the thumb, but 
in nails and all other respects are like the hind ones, being however a little smaller 
and more slender.” .The animal, now-under consideration, seems nearly to corre- 
spond with the short account of a Campagnol received from Hudson’s Bay by Mr. 
Bullock, and described and figured by Dr. Leach, in the Zoological Miscellany, under 
the name of Avicola Xanthognatha; but the description of it in that work is scarcely 
sufficient for identification. 


Lemmus Hudsonius. Hudson’s Bay Lemming. 


These Lemmings are spread over the whole country of North. America, and extend 
themselves even to the islands of the Polar Sea, in which they were found abun- 
dantly, by the Expedition under Captain Parry, and have been described by Captain 
Sabine, in his account of the Zoology observed in that voyage. They vary much in 
size, some approaching that. of a rat, the females are always the smallest. In 
winter their coat undergoes a change to a dingy white, in summer it is dark grey, with 
more or less of ferruginous on the sides. Hearne calls.it the Hair-tailed Mouse. The 
middle toes of the fore feet, in this species, are remarkable in having a callus’ 
beneath the claw, projecting below it. It is the Mus Hudsonius of Pallas, and-is 
an animal so well known to naturalists, as to render a more detailed description 
of it unnecessary. 


Mus Labradorius. Labrador Mouse. 


This animal which is noticed by Pennant, has escaped the observation of most 
other naturalists, and is now described from a specimen sent home from Cumberland 
House. In the length of its hind legs it differs from others of the genus Mus, with 
which notwithstanding it seems proper to arrange it. The body is near four inches 
long ; the forehead arched and projecting, so as to turn the nose towards the earth : 
mouth placed far below, small, and with the upper lip slit; ears large, round, and 
placed far back; whiskers long, black and projecting, forming two tufts:; whole 
upper part dark brown, under parts white without a dividing line; hind legs one » 
inch and a half long, covered with short hair, having five toes, four long ones and 
one shorter placed on the inside ; fore feet short, with four toes ; tail two inches and 
a half long, with dark hair above, and white below, shewing the joints of the bone. 


662 APPENDIX, | [No..V. 


ARCTOMYS. 


In the collection which arrived at the end of the year 1820, from Captain Franklin, 
specimens of three new species of this genus were received. An account of them 
with figures of each was presented to the Linnean Society, and subsequently pub- 
lished in the thirteenth volume of its Transactions, to which a reference for the 
specific characters and detailed descriptions may be made. We are very imperfectly 
acquainted with the other species of this genus, which are natives of America, 
although described in the publications of naturalists; and there is good reason to 
expect that several other undescribed Marmots are still to be found in the plains of 
that extended country. The Marmots are generally called Ground Squirrels, by the 
inhabitants of the districts where they are native. 


Arctomys Empeira. Quebec Marmot. 


A hunter’s skin only of this animal was received, but is a very interesting specimen, 
because it exactly agrees with that described by Forster in the Philosophical Trans- 
actions in 1772, except that it is about two inches longer in the body and with some- 
what a longer tail. The accounts of all the writers, who have mentioned the Quebec 
Marmot, vary much from each other, and it is probable that more than one species 
will be found to be at present ranged under the head of Arctomys Empetra. Four 
different specimens have been noticed and examined by naturalists. The first, by 
Pennant, was a living animal; the second, by Forster as above mentioned; the 
third, by Pallas, from a specimen in the Leyden Museum, and the last in the paper 
on the genus in the thirteenth Volume of the Transactions of the Linnean Society, 
from a specimen presented to the British Museum by the Hudson’s Bay Company. 


_Arctomys Franklinit. Grey American Marmot. 


This animal, rather larger than a rat, was obtained in the neighbourhood of 
Cumberland-House, and was afterwards seen at Fort Enterprise. Its general colours 
are dark variegated yellowish grey on the upper parts, and dingy white below ; the 
tail is four inches long, banded with black and white, appearing indistinctly striped. 
The name was given to the specimen in compliment to the commander of the Expedition. 


Arctomys Richardson. Tawny American Marmot. 


This animal is somewhat smaller than the preceding, and more slender, tawny 
light brown above, and pale underneath, with a tail three inches anda half long 
thickly covered with hairs. ‘The specimen was obtained at Carlton-House, where, 
like others of its genus, it inhabited holes in the ground ; it was subsequently found 


No, V.] ZOOLOGY. 663 


even on the shores of the Arctic Sea. The specific name is a tribute to the exertions 
and to the success of Dr. Richardson. 


Arctomys Hood. Striped American Marmot. 


The beauty of this elegant and interesting little animal can be but indifferently un- 
derstood by description: it is only seven inches and a half long; the upper part 
of the body is marked with numerous longitudinal stripes of brown and dingy white; 
the brown stripes are dotted the whole length with little spots of light colour, 
the same as that of the paler alternate lines; the under parts of the body are 
pale brown. It was observed living like its congener, in holes in the ground, in 
the level country round Carlton-House. i 

When the specific name of Hoodii was attached to this animal, the untimely fate 
of the deserving individual, in compliment to whom it was named, was unknown in 
England: it may be, therefore, permitted now to observe on the part of Natural 
History, that his many careful and accurate drawings of subjects connected therewith, 
bear ample testimony to the loss which that science, in common with his country 
and his immediate profession, have sustained by the premature termination of his life. 


Sciurus Hudsonius. Hudson’s Bay Squirrel. 


Both Forster and Hearne, in their notices of this animal, appear to have taken it 
for the common European squirrel, whereas its native country is solely that in the 
vicinity, and westward of, Hudsen’s Bay. Two specimens were received, a male and 
female, which had been caught at Cumberland-House, in October, 1819. The 
following description is taken from the male :—length two inches; whole upper parts 
brownish grey, with a slight ferruginous tinge on the back and head, but not on the 
sides. The speckling is formed by very minute markings on the hair, and is very 
beautiful: under parts entirely cinereous grey; the tail is six inches long, the hair 
longer than that of the body; the upper part ferruginous grey, brighter than the 
back, and tipped with black ; the under part, which is shewn when the tail is set up, 
is darker than elsewhere, there being more of black mixed with the ferruginous grey 
hairs. Though a constant inhabitant of the northern continent, it does not change 
the colour of its coat in winter. The tail is erroneously said by Pennant to be barred 
with black ; itisnotso. These animalsinhabit the Pine forests, and are found where- 
ever the White Spruce Fir grows, living upon its seeds, and passing the winter in 
holes at the roots of trees, coming out occasionally for food, and to sport in fine 
weather among the branches. The flesh of the females is good ; that of the males 
tastes strong, particularly in the spring season. 


664 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


Hysiriz Dorsata. Canada Porcupine. 


This singular and uncouthly-looking animal has been known to naturalists since 
the time of Edwards ; it is not, however, of frequent occurrence, which may be’ partly 
caused by its increasing slowly by breeding, (for’ they are said to produce only a 
single young one at a birth), and partly by the facility with which they are dis- 
covered and taken by the Indians; for their flesh being esteemed a delicacy, they are 
eagerly sought after. The Porcupine is found as far north as the forks of Mackenzie's 
River, almost exclusively in woods, consisting of the Pinus Banksiana, upon the bark 
of which it lives. It is much troubled with intestinal worms of a large size. It is 
well described by Pennant, as well as noticed by Forster and Hearne. It appears to 
be a stupid, inoffensive animal, scarcely capable of protecting itself against any 
attack, the arms with which nature has furnished it being very weak defences 


against any force. 


Lepus Glacialis. Polar Hare. 


Was long confounded with the Alpine Hare, (Lepus Variabilis), a specimen which 
was brought home by the first Arctic Expedition was noted as a new species by Dr. 
Leach, in the published account of that voyage. Captain Sabine, who found them 
plentifully at Melville Island, has fully elucidated the difference between the two 
species, in his Zoological Appendix to Captain Parry’s last voyage. There are three 
known species of Lepus, which uniformly put on a new covering of white fur in the 
winter, the two above mentioned, and the American Hare, which is the subject of the 
next article: The Polar Hare appears to vary much in size, and consequently in 
weight ; this perhaps may be caused by the quantity and quality of the food it can 
command. Dr. Richardson observed that the Polar Hare is never seen in woods, it 
frequents the Barren Grounds, living chiefly on the berries of the Arbutus Alpina, and 
the bark of Dwarf Birch. It sits like the Common Hare, on the whole length of the 
tarsal bones, but in running its hind feet make a round print in the snow, similar to 
that made by the fore ones. 


Lepus Americanus. American Hare. 


These animals, which are generally called Rabbits about Hudson’s Bay, extend 
themselves over the whole of America, and are much used as food ; their flesh is brown, 
like that of the Common’Hare. They are not found more northward than Carlton 
‘House, and they retire from thence southwards in the winter season ; those which are 
exposed to the severity of cold, put forth a clothing of fur double the length of their 
summer dress, the lower part of which is brown, then red, and the entire upper part 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. | 665 


is a beautiful soft white fur, which makes the skin of the animal in that state an 
object of commerce; near 10,000 of these were imported from Hudson’s Bay, last 
season. The animal is very rarely sent to’England in its summer state, from these 
northern regions, but a specimen was received from Dr. Richardson, from Cum- 
berland House, in the spring of 1820, of: which the following is. a description: 

—length, one foot four inches; hind legs, ten inches long; head, narrow, dark 
above, lighter brown on the. sides, and ash-coloured below ; ears wide, edged with 
white, on back and tips brown; back very dark; sides inclining to ash colour; inside 
part of the neck slightly ferruginous ; belly white; tail small, dark above, white below, 
the under part turned up; legs having a greater quantity of white hairs than dark 
ones ; nails on hind and fore feet, sharp- pointed, narrow and nearly straight. . Has 
much greater resemblance, both in size and colour, to the Common Rabbit, than to the 
Common Hare, but its long hind legs differ from those of the Common Rabbit. 


“CERVUS. STAG AND DEER. 


The various Cervi, which are found i in North Ametica, are ot present very inaccu- 
rately known; the information acquired by the Expedition, has added to the stock of 
knowledge, respecting them, yet not sufficiently to enable us at present to place them 
under distinct names, with positive reference to separate species... An enumeration 
of all the different kinds mentioned by writers or travellers, will probably contribute 
to the attainment of greater certainty respecting them hereafter. - First, the Moose 
Deer of the English settlers, the Orignal of the French Americans, and the Black 
Moose of the United States, has been correctly referred ot the Cervus Alces, the Elk 
of Europe; it, however, is not the animal which is commonly called the American Elk 
but it is the Flat-horned Elk, of some Trans- atlantic writers, and is called Mongsoa by 
the Cree Indians. Second, the Rein- deer, (Cervus Tarandas,) the Caribou of the French 
settlers. Dr. Richardson thinks there are three varieties of this species: Ist. the 
Rein-deer of the woods, which confines itself to parts where trees abound. 2nd. A. large 
kind, living on the Rocky Mountains, possibly the Mule Deer of Lewis and Clarke 
mentioned below. 3rd. Asmaller kind, which supports itself, on the barren grounds, 
and migrates in summer to the Islands of the Polar Sea. It is this last animal from 
which the descriptions of the Rein-deer have usually been made by naturalists; it j is 
known to the Cree nation by the name of Attehk. Third, the Stag, or Red-deer of North: 
America, which is also ealled the Grey Moose, i inthe United States, has been taken foy 
the Red-deer (Cervus Elephas) of Europe, but that species is smaller in size, and seems 
not to be native in the new world. Gmelin made. the American stag. a variety of 
Cervus Elephas, with the sub- denomination of Canadensis, which has been adopted 


49 


666 APPENDIX. _ [No. V. 


by M. Cuvier as a specific name. It has occasionally been called Cervus Major, which 
appellation it received from Catesby. This deer is called Le Biche by the Canadian 
voyagers, it is the ‘We-was-keesh of Hearne, and the Wa-was-keeshoo of the Cree 
Indians. It is also sometimes called by the Americans, the Elk, and is the American 
Elk of some, and the Round-horned Elk of others; of their writers. Fourth, the 
Wapiti Deer, (Cervus Wapiti,) come from the Rocky Mountains, and the valleys ad- 
Joining, but not from the eastern side of that ridge ; they are inhabitants of mountain- 
ous distrcts, not living either in the plains or in woods; andabound on the Multnomah 
fork of the Columbia River. The Wapiti have within these few years become well 
known in England, having been imported at different times for exhibition. Some of 
those first introduced have been domesticated, they have succeeded well in the 
paddock of the proprietor, and increased in number, breeding readily. It has been 
supposed that the Red-deer of the northern parts of America, and the Wapiti are 
identical, but this opinion certainly requires confirmation. The appellation of 
Wapiti isderived from a tribe of Indians, who inhabit the western side of the 
Rocky Mountains, but were erroneously supposed to be settled on the Missouri. All 
the other names given to the Wapiti Deer, have led to much confusion respecting 
them. Bewick, who figured one at a very early period, called it the American Elk, 
and even at the present time this same error has been committed by M. Desmerest. 
Mr. Ord (and, after him, M.Desmerest) called the animal Cervus Major, which has 
been before applied by Catesby, to what has been above noticed as Cervus Canaden- 
sis. Fifth, a deer hitherto imperfectly known, has been recently distinguished in 
the account of Major Long’s Expedition to the Rocky Mountains; itis the Black-tailed 
Deer of Lewis and Clarke, and has been called Cervus Macrotis by Mr. Say, who ac- 
éompanied Major Long as a naturalist. Sizth, a Deer with a large tail, and which is 
known, in its native country, as the Black-tailed Deer, (Cervus Macrourus,) has been 
spoken of as inhabiting the countries watéred by the Missouri. It is peculiar, from 
the size and contrasted colours of its tail, which it shews conspicuously in running. 
Seventh, the Cervus Virginianus is well known as the Fallow Deer of North America, 
put does not extend itself so far as the Arctic Circle; M. Cuvier refers to it the 
Mazame of the Mexicans, and the Cariacou of Daubenton. Highth, the American 
Roe of Buffon has been referred to the Cervus Mexicanus of Linnzus, which is also 
conjectiired by Pennant to be the Squinaton of Dobbs; the Jumping Deer of the 
Canadian Voyagers is probably the same animal. Dr. Richardson states that in the 
neighbourhood of Carlton-House, two deer are frequent, which differ much from each 
other in appearance, that they are indiscriminately called Apeesce-Mongsoos, or, Little 
Moose ; but ‘are’ occasionally distinguished, as,—1st., The Athee-Neettoo Apeesce- 
Mongsoos, or, Real Little Moose; and,—2d, Kinwaithoos or Kinwaithoo-wayo Apeesce- 
Mongsoos, or Long-tailed Little Moose. 


No. Wi] ZOOLOGY. 667 


From the above sketch, the following may be taken, as the species of Cerous, natives 
of North America, at present known. Ist., C. Alces, the Moose Deer. 2d., C. Ta- 
randas, the Rein Deer. 3d., C. Canadensis, the American Stag. 4th., C. Wapiti; 
the Wapiti Deer. 5th., C. Macrotis, the Mule Deer. 6th, C. Macrourus, the Black- 
tailed Deer. 7th. C. Virginianus, the American Fallow Deer. 8th., C. Mexicanus; 
the American Roe. 4 bya oe 

Itis probable that all the other names of writers and travellers, whether taken as 
varieties or species, will be found referable to one of the above ; some of the specific 
names are objectionable, especially that of Canadensis. Much information on the 
subject of these animals, especially those of the western territories, has been devived 
from Mr, John Dunn Hunter, a gentleman recently arrived in this country from Ame- 


rica, who has passed a great portion of his life among the native inhabitants of the 
countries west of the Mississippi. 


Antelope Furcifer. Prong-horned Antelope. 


This animal, which is generally called a Goat by the Canadians, resorts to the 
neighbourhood of Carlton-House, during the summer, to’ bring forth its young, and 
returns to the southward in the winter. The Cree name is Apeestatchcekoos. They 
go in small herds, and are not shy, approaching near to the persons they meet, through 
curiosity; their form is elegant, and they are said to be the fleetest quadrupeds on the 
plains. A male and female were seen, and fortunately killed, so as to enable Dr. 
Richardson to take the following descriptions. The male is furnished with short black 
roundish tapering horns, arched inwards, turning towards each other, but with their 
points directed backwards; each horn having a single short branchlet projecting an- 
teriorily from the middle. The winter coat consists of coarse round hollow hairs, like 
those of the Moose; neck, back, and legs, yellowish brown ; sides reddish white ; belly — 
and chest white, with three white bands across the throat, the hairs on the occiput 
and back of the neck, are long, and tipped with black, they form a short erect mane; - 
there is a black spot behind each cheek, which exhales a strong hircine odour; the 
tail is short, with a large spot of pure white on the rump. The dimensions were as 
follows ;—from the nose to the root of the tail, four feet; height of the fore shoulder, 
three feet; that of the hind quarter the same ; girth behind the fore legs, three feet : 
girth before the fore legs, two feet ten inches. The females are like the males, but 
have no horns; they produce two young at a time. . 

The head, with the horns, was sent home. A specimen of this animal was obtained 
in the exploratory travels of Lewis and Clarke, which is deposited in the museum 
of Mr. Peale, at Philadelphia, from whence a drawing was made by Mr. Hamilton 
Smith, which has been copied and published, with a description, in the thirteenth 
volume of the Transactions of the Linnean Society ; the specimen of that animal mea- 


4Q2 


668 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


sures twenty inches longer than the one examined by Dr. Richardson, and it appears 
to have been altogether larger, though not’ much higher. Mr. Smith, in the same 
place, has given a figure of a pair of horns, which are preserved in the Museum of the 
College of Surgeons, in Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields, and which he was induced to consider 
as belonging to a different animal,'which he has called Antelope Palmata. . The horns 
sent home by Dr. Richardson, have been compared with those in the College of Sur- 
geons, and found to correspond exactly with them, and confirm Mr. Smith’s conjec- 
ture that the curvature of the extremities are naturally directed inwards. The ac- 
quisition of these is particularly useful, because it authorizes the union of the A. Fur- 
cifer,and A. Palmata, of Mr. Smith ; they are evidently but one animal. 

_ This is the only instance of an Antelope not having perfectly simple horns ; and the 
deviation from that character has suggested the propriety of establishing a new genus 
in which this animal may be placed, and which has been proposed by Mr. Ord to be 
named Antelocapra. 


| Bos. Americanus. _American Buffalo. 

| The American Buffalo, or; Bison, though: separated by Linneus, has been con- 
founded-with the Buffalo of the ancient world.: An: individual living specimen has, 
for a few. years .past, been exhibited, under this:mistake; to the inhabitants of the 
British metropolis, :as the Bonassus of Aristotle and Pliny. The:Buffaloes are abundant 
in all parts of North America, wherever the progress of cultivation has not interfered 
with their range; they are extremely numerous on the plains of the Sashatchawan, 
and are also found, though less plentifully, in the woods, as far north as Great Slave 
Lake; afew frequent Slave Point, on the north side of the- Lake, but this.is the most 
northern situation in. which they were observed by Captain Franklin’s party. The 
natives say that the wood Buffaloes are larger than those of the plains, but the differ- 
ence,is not material ; they are called Moostoosh by the Cree Indians. 


Bos Moschatus. =; _ Musk Ox. f 


"Musk Oxen are only found in the most northern parts; they were not seen farther 
south than latitude 66° in the line of country examined by the Expedition; but pur- 
suing the course of the shores of Hudson’s Bay, they occasionally came in that direc- 
tion as low as 61°. They. support themselves on the same food as the Rein Deer. 
Their flesh used formerly to be brought to Fort Churchill by the hunters. The late 
Arctic Voyage of Captain Parry, has brought us more acquainted with the habits of 
these animals; in summer they migrate in considerable numbers from the continent, 
over the ice, to the various islands which exist in the Polar Sea. .M. Blainville has 
proposed to place this animal in a new genus, to be named Ovibos. The Crees 
call the Musk-Ox, Mathek-mongsoo, or Ugly Moose. 


BIRDS. 


Tue Ornithology of North America has hitherto had a full share of attention. 
Forster, in the Philosophical Transactions for 1772, and Hearne, in his account of his 
journeys, are original authorities, relative to many of the native birds of Hudson’s 
Bay ; the scientific compilations of Latham and Pennant record all that was known 
up to the dates of their respective works. Since their time we have the assistance 
of the splendid publication of Vieillot on the Birds of North America, whilst the 
‘accounts given by Captain Sabine, of the Zoology collected in the two voyages which 
he made to the Polar Seas, have made the feathered tribes of the Arctic regions 
familiar tous. The description of the birds collected in the voyage with Captain 
Ross to Baffin’s Bay, will be found in the twelfth volume of the Transactions of the 
Linnean Society ; the account of the Zoology seen during the expedition to Melville 
Island has been’ published as a PUD RIM aren Appendix to Captain Parry’s account of » 
that voyage. 

There would, however, with all these, have been much wanting, but for the pub- 
lication of Wilson’s American Ornithology. Untaught, and without the aid of 
scientific books, he has produced a work which, for correctness of description, accu- 
racy of observation, and acuteness of distinction, will compete with every publication 
of natural history yet extant : nor is it alone on these excellencies that the character 
of his book stands so high ; the beauty of the style, and perspicuity of the narrative, 
add unrivalled ‘charms to its scientific merits. The information contained in his 
volumes, has made the composition of the following notices a work of comparative 
ease. It is hoped, however, that, notwithstanding the greater part of the birds have 
been previously well known, some additional lights have been afforded, and it is very 
agreeable to add, that a few subjects are entirely new. 

The general arrangement of Genera } proposed by M. Temminck, in the introduction 
to the second edition of the Manuel d Ornithologie, has been exactly followed, and i in 
every case the birds have received his generic names. 

Considering the length of time passed in the jour ney from York Factory to Point 
-Turnagain, and in the return, and the different tracts of country passed through, it 
will be obvious; that nearly all the birds which are inhabitants of the upper portions 
of America must have occurred to the observation of the travellers; and, conse- 
quently, that the account might include the whole Ornithology of northern America. 


670 APPENDIX. [No. V 


° 


It is, however, proposed to extend the notices to those birds only, of which actual 


specimens have been received from the Expedition ; this will account for the omission 
of many species well known as natives of the districts visited, and which probably 
did not appear to be objects of sufficient curiosity to make it desirable to obtain 
them. 

The specimens collected on the first arrival of the travellers at York Factory were 
sent, as soon as received in England, to the British Museum, where they became 
mixed with those of other collections from Hudson’s Bay and Baffin’s Bay, and the 
vicinities of those seas ; it being impossible to separate them, these have been entirely 
excluded from this account, which consequently contains a much less number of sea- 
birds than would otherwise have appeared in it. 

The principal supply of specimens was obtained at Cumberland House, in the 
winter and spring passed there on the journey outwards; some of these have peculiar 
interest, because, being only summer visitors in the United States, and passing their 
winters more southward, that station will be recorded as within the migration of 
these wanderers. Others, and a considerable portion, of the specimens, were collected 
in the route to the Great Slave Lake and on its borders. 


Falco Palumbarvus. Goshawk. 


The Goshawk is common to the Old and New Continents, living chiefly in moun- 
tainous countries; it is a bird of ordinary occurrence, though, in its states.of youth 
and adolescence, it was formerly very inaccurately known. Wilson published it as 


the Ash-coloured or Black-cap Hawk, not having seen an European specimen to enable. 


him to ascertain its identity; but, with his usual acuteness and correct judgment, he 
gives his opinion, that his bird is the Goshawk of the European writers. The speci- 
men received was that of a male in perfectly mature plumage. 


Falco Borealis. Red-tailed Falcon. 


This bird is a native of North America only ; it was received by Sir Ashton Lever 
from Carolina, and has consequently been described by Latham, Pennant, and Gme- 
lin ; it is the American Buzzard of the first of these writers. Wilson, who calls it 
the Red-tailed Hawk, has given a figure of it, and described its habits and character. 
It is not very common in the United States, but is more frequent in winter than in 
summer. The specimen now under view accords with the description of Wilson, 
except that its breast is nearly white, and not ferruginous. It is twenty three 
inches long, exceeding the length of Wilson’s bird by three inches ; but, as if is pro- 
bably a female, the difference may be so accounted for. This bird is remarkably dis- 
tinguished by the colour of its tail-feathers, which extend three inches beyond the 
end of the wings, and on the upper side are almost entirely bright ferruginous, with 
a very narrow brown bar nearly at the end. 


— = — 1d ec" S& 


No. V.] | ZOOLOGY. 671 


Falco Uliginosus. Marsh Hawk. 


The bird is well described and figured by Wilson, who conjectured it might be the 
same as the Ringtail of Pennant and Latham ; the latter of which writers has made 
the Marsh Hawk a variety of the Ringtail ; but neither of them seem to have known 
the Marsh Hawk, except from Edwards’s very incorrect figure, which led the former 
to make short thick legs the characteristic of the bird. The legs of the Marsh Hawk 
are remarkably long and slender, in which point the birds of the division of the genus 
Falcon, to which it belongs, all agree. It is now well known, that the Ringtail is 
the female bird of the F’. Cyaneus, or Hen-harrier of British Ornithologists, which, 
when mature, is an uniform bluish-grey colour; if, therefore, the Marsh Hawk and 
the Ringtail were the same, a male of corresponding plumage would have been 
known to Wilson. On comparison of the specimen of the Marsh Hawk with that of 
a Ringtail now before us, the differences are strikingly obvious. The ferruginous 
colour of the under parts of the Marsh Hawk bring it nearer to some states of the 
Ash-coloured Falcon of Montagu; but in this case, the different colour of the male 
affords also an obstacle to their identity. The Marsh Hawk is probably peculiar to 
America ; ‘and it is not impossible that the F. Hudsonius, or Hudson’s Bay Ringtail, 
which is also founded on a figure of Edwards, may hereafter prove to be the same 
bird in a younger state. 


Striz Funerea. Hawk Owl. 


This bird is the only one of the genus received from the Expedition, but several 
other species are usually found in the countries visited. The Hawk Owl is well 
known, and has often been described : it inhabits all the Arctic countries, and very 
rarely goes beyond them. Wilson, who figured it, had only seen two specimens. It 
is one of the most beautiful of the genus, from the generality of which it differs in 
flying, and taking its prey by day. The specimen received has much more black than 
accords with the deseriptions or the figures which have been published of it. Writers’ 
do not agree as to the differences between the sexes, some represent the male, and 
some the female as the darkest. 


Corvus Coraz. Raven. 


This is one of those birds which inhabit all parts of the globe; it seems to be 
rather abundant in the northern parts of America; several were seen at Melville 
Island. A single fine specimen is in the collection. 


Corvus Hudsonius. Hudson’s Bay Magpie. 


A new and hitherto undescribed species. The writer of this notice was acquainted 
with its existence previous to the departure of the Expedition, havi ing been some 


ee Oe 


672 APPENDIX. [No. ¥. 


time before in possession of'a specimen from Hudson’s Bay. It has no doubt been 
confounded with the Common Magpie (Corvus Pica,) to which it. bears much resem- . 
blance. Pennant in the Arctic Zoology mentions the Magpie as occasionally visiting 
Hudson’s Bay, where it is called by, the natives the Heart Bird, but he does not 
notice any difference in its appearance. Forster, in the Philosophical Transac- 
tions in 1772, also says that the Magpie, then received from Hudson’s Bay,-did not 
differ from, the European one. The Common Magpie is described and figured in 
Wilson's American Ornithology, as a rare bird in the United States; and only lately 
discovered in the Missouri country; but as specimens of it have also. been received 
from Hudson’s Bay, there is little doubt that both species are inhabitants of the 
New World. . The Hudson’s Bay Magpie is of less size in all its parts than the 
Common Magpie, except in its tail, which exceeds that of its congener in length; but 
the most remarkable and obvious difference is, in a loose tuft of greyish and white 
feathers on the back. The following is a description of the bird under notice: 

—length, exclusive of the tail, seven inches;. head, neck, breast, and upper part of the 
back pure black ; belly and scapulars white ; the primaries brownish black, partly 
white on the inner web ; secondaries and greater coverts dark glossy blue; across 
the back is a tuft of long soft loose feathers projecting above the others, dark grey 

below, and tipped with white ; thighs, vent, and tail coverts black like the upper | 
parts ; tail truly wedge-shaped (étagée,) from eleven and a half to twelve inches long, 
(that of the Common Magpie being from nine to ten inches,) richly glossed with 
blue, green, and purple, the two exterior feathers half the length of the two middle 
ones, which are two inches longer than those next to them; bill, legs, and claws 
black. Two specimens were received, both killed on the 10th of November 1819, at 
Cumberland House, being caught in traps; they were male and female, but there is 


no difference i in the sexes, except that one rather exceeds the other in length, the 


one marked as female, being the largest. 


Corvus Cristatus. Blue Jay. 


A well-known bird inhabiting all parts of North America, but confined solely to 
that country. Linnaeus adopted the bird from Catesby into the Systema Nature ; but 
it was not well described until Wilson’s publication, when he corrected the errors of 
former writers, and described its habits and manners in the beautiful and delightful 
style so peculiarly his own. 


Corvus Canadensis. Canada Jay. 


The Canada Jay is confined to the northern parts of America, visiting the southern 
parts only in very severe weather, as it does not regularly migrate. Wilson only once 
saw a few. of them together i in the United States. His figure of the bird is too highly: | 


coloured. In Canada, these birds are abundant, and well known, being of familiar 


ee oe 


No. V.] ‘ZOOLOGY. 673 


manners, approaching the habitations of men, and’attending the hunters, to whom 


they are troublesome, in taking the baits from their traps. They are named by the na- 
tives Whiskey-Jonish which has been changed by the English into Whiskey-Jack. 
The bird is small, in comparison of its congeners, and is without the brilliancy of 
plumage belonging to other Jays, being particularly plain; the looseness of its 
feathers is further injurious to its appearance, 


Oriolus Pheniceus. - Red-winged Oriole. 

' A common bird in Virginia, and in the contiguous parts of the United States, and 
well known from the depredations it commits on the crops of Indian corn. These birds 
migrate into Louisiana, and the southern districts in the winter, and extend their 
progress northward, in the summer, even to the remote parts of Canada. It was 
formerly called the Red-winged Starling, and Wilson, from its similarity of manners 
to the Common Starling, has placed it in the genus Sturnus. The brilliant scarlet 


-patch on the shoulder of the wings of the males, contrasted with the general black 


of the remainder of its plumage, makes it very remarkable when in flight, The spe- - 
cimen received is that of a male. 


Oriolus Baltimore. Baltimore Oriole. 


A male specimen of this pretty and interesting species was taken. The Orni- 
thological writers of Europe have described a bird of another species (O. Spurius) as 
the female, but the error has been corrected by Wilson, whose account of the Balti- 
more Oriole is excellent. The male is remarkable for the fine black and brilliant 
orange which diversify its plumage, which, in the female, is less splendid, being yel- 
low, rather than orange, and having less of black than the male. These birds 0 
southward in the winter, and return to breed in the spring in the more temperate 
parts of North America, fixing their abodes for that purpose in orchards and gardens, 
contiguous to houses, where they make themselves acceptable by their agreeable song; 
their food is principally insects, consequently they are not such troublesome neigh- 
bours as others of the same genus; the splendour of the males must be a very orna- 
mental addition to the beauties of an American garden. 


v 


Icterus Quiscala. Purple Grackle. 


The Purple Grackle, known to the American farmers as the Crow Blackbird, 
resides during the winter in the southern provinces of the United States, and moves 
northward in the spring even beyond Canada, for the purposes of breeding. The 
specimen received, which is that of a male, exhibits beautifully the glossy splendour 
of its dark plumage. The Purple Grackles are very injurious to the corn crops in the 
United States ; in company with the Red-winged Orioles they attack the fields of 


4 R 


3 ——_— 


O74 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


maize, and destroy often a great part of the crop. It has been removed by M. Tem- 
minck from Gracula, tothe genus in which it is now placed. 


Sturnus Ludovicianus. Meadow Lark. 


The Meadow Lark was described by Linnzeus both as an Alauda, and asa Sturnus, 
and even the careful and accurate Brisson, fell into the same error : they considered 
that they were describing different birds. The two were brought together as varieties 
of one species, by Dr. Latham, the one being placed as a native of Carolina, and the 
other of Louisiana ; but these are probably not varieties, but the same bird in differ- 
ent states of plumage. The manners and habits of the species have some accordance 
with those of the genus Alauda, and as it usually frequents low grassy fields, it has 
acquired the name of Meadow Lark in America. These birds migrate partially, for 
some remain in the same parts of the United States the whole year. Two specimens 
were received, apparently male and female, one being less brilliant in colour than the 
other. The bird is larger than the Common Starling, mottled over the whole upper 
parts with dark and light brown, having a white stripe along the middle of the head ; 
the under parts are bright yellow crossed on the neck with a crescent of black, whence 
it has been called the Crescent Stare. 


Turdus Migratorius. Red-breasted Thrush. 

This bird is noticed both by Hearne and Forster ; it is well known in the United 
States as the Robin. In its notes, manners, and habits, it bears a strong resemblance 
to our Common Thrush, supplying the place of that delightful songster to the inhabit- 
ants of North America, in every part of which it is known at various periods of the 
year. The specimen received is not so brilliant as that figured by Wilson, and is 


probably therefore that of a female. 


Lanius Excubitor. Great Cinereous Shrike. 

This butcher bird is an inhabitant, though not particularly abundant, of the 
northern parts of Europe, Asia, and America. Wilson doubted whether the Ame- 
rican bird was the same species as is known and described under the above name 
by European naturalists ; but a comparison of specimens, which he had not the 
opportunity of instituting, is decisive of their identity. From its bearing a general 
resemblance in its plumage to the Canada Jay, it has obtained among the settlers 
round Hudson’s Bay the name of White Whisky-john. : 


Sylvia Aistiva. Yellow-polled Warbler. 


The yellow colour of this little bird is not confined to its head alone, but extends 


Ts eee - -——~- = = — ee OO 


No.V.] ZOOLOGY. | 675 


conspicuously over the whole lower part of the body, the breast being prettily dashed 
with touches of red. It is avery small species, corresponding in size, and resem- 
bling in manners, the Yellow Wren (S. Trochilus,) of Europe. Though found in the 
northern parts of America inthe summer, itis said not to breed there ; this, how- 
ever, seems very questionable, for all the regular migrants at that season which 
proceed northwards, probably rear their brood during the interval after such move- 
ment. Wilson has called the bird 8. Citrinella, Blue-eyed Yellow Warbler, and has 
very properly corrected an error of Buffon, who described a different species as the 
female. 


Emberiza Nivalis. Snow Bunting. 


Two specimens in their winter plumage were received. Snow buntings are found 
in all places near the Arctic Circle, proceeding towards the most northern lands with 
the first appearance of spring in those dreary regions, and leaving them only when 
no longer habitable to any of the feathered race. 


Pyrrhula Enucleator. Pine Grosbeak. 


A single specimen of a young bird was received. It appears from Hearne, that this 
species is well known in Hudson’s Bay. It is also described by Foster, and by 
Ornithological writers generally, as an inhabitant of the Arctic countries where- 
soever it can find trees and shrubs, on the buds of which it subsists. It does not 
go far south, and is noticed by Wilson as rare in Pennsylvania. The Pine Gros- 
beak, as well as two species of Cross-bills, all natives of cold countries, have much red 
in their plumage when young, which turns to orange as they advance in age; such 
alteration from bright to less splendid plumage, in the progress from youth to maturity, 
is contrary to the usual course of nature in birds. M. 'Temminck has transferred the 
Pine and other Grosbeaks to his Genus Pyrrhula, confining Loxia to the Cross-bills. 


Pyrrhula Ludoviciana. Red-breasted Grosbeak. 


Wilson, who describes this bird under the name of Loxia Rosea, Rose-breasted 
Grosbeak, does not trace it into the southern states; it is found in the fall of the year 
in New-York and New England, and from the specimen before us appears to migrate 
into the more northern parts where it probably breeds, retiring towards Louisiana 
for the winter. It is the Rose-gorge and the Gros-bec de la Louisiane of Buffon, and 
has been described by Latham and Pennant, as well as by Gmelin, as one species 
under the names of Loxia Ludoviciana or Red-breasted Grosbeak, and as another spe- 
cies which they have called Fringilla Punicea or Red-breasted Finch. The specimen 
received is that of a young male, the back of which is mottled with black, ash-colour, 
and some little white; the crimson feathers of the breast extend nearly to the lower 


4 R 2 


676 APPENDIX. | [No. V 


mandible; in the mature bird the whole back as well as the head is black, and the« 
bright colour on the breast is separated from the bill by the black which passes 

under the chin. It is a beautiful and elegant bird. The Cree Indians distinguish it 

by a name indicative of the strength of ‘its bill. 


Fringilla Pecoris. Cowpen-bird. 


Very little more than the name and general appearance of this extraordinary 
bird was known until the publication of Wilson, and that little seems to have been 
derived from Catesby’s meagre account. Wilson, most correctly observing that it 
ought not to be ranked as a Fringilla, has called it an Emberiza, but it seems to have 
greater affinity to Oriolus, though not exactly according with that genus. It passes 
the winter in the lower provinces of the United States, moving northward in the 
spring, associating with the Red-winged Orioles and Purple Grackles, and lives more 
on insect food than on grain, collecting its nourishment among the herds of cattle, 
whence its common name. A male specimen alone was received ; it is eight inches 
long, the whole head is dark-brown, and the entire remainder of the plumage 
glossy black. The female is said to be brown and not black, with the head propor- 
tionably lighter. The great peculiarity of this bird, first brought into notice by 
Wilson, is that, like the Common Cuckoo, it deposits its eggs in the nests of other. 
and smaller birds, who hatch, feed, and rear the obtruded offspring of the interloper. 
Wilson’s account of this circumstance and narrative of the discovery, is particularly 
clear and interesting. 


Picus Auratus. Golden-winged Woodpecker. 


America abounds in Woodpeckers, but this species seems to extend over a greater 
portion of it, than any other. Hearne states that it is the only one which is found 
in the northern parts of Hudson’s Bay. It spreads far to the south in the United 
States, and was observed by Captain Cook at Nootka Sound. It migrates to the more 
southern parts of its range in the winter, though Hearne states that they are 
found in Hudson’s Bay during that season; whilst Forster says that they come to 
Albany in April, and depart in September. These birds are dressed for the table 
by the Americans, and are occasionally sold in the markets for such purpose. 
Linnzeus first described the species in the tenth edition of the Systema Nature from 
Catesby, and misled by the shape of the bill, which is more curved and pointed than 
in others of the genus Picus, made it a Cuculus ; he subsequently, however, changed 
its position. There seem to have been other errors respecting this bird; it was 
considered not to be a climber, nor to take any part of its food from under the bark 
of trees, but. Wilson, from personal observation, has contradicted both these sup- 
positions. ‘The specimen is that of a female, as it wants the black stripe on 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 677 


the sides of the throat, which distinguish the male bird. Wilson’s description is 
full and perfect ; ; it can be mistaken for no other American species of Woodpecker, as 
the peculiar formation of its bill, and the golden colour of the shafts of all its quill- 
feathers and of part of those of the tail, make it known at first sight.. It is a hand- 
some bird, the small round black spots on the under parts, the large black crescent 
on the breast, and the smaller scarlet one at the back of the head, are striking 
beauties. | 


Picus Villosus. — Hairy Woodpecker. 


The Hairy Woodpecker has also an extensive range, being found as far southward 
as Georgia, and was described by Forster from Hudson’s Bay. Hearne mentions a 
Woodpecker with a red head, which frequents the eastern and southern parts of 
Hudson’s Bay, which is probably this species. It is every where abundant, and is 
not migratory. Latham, in his Supplement, supposed it to be a native of Great 
Britain, on the authority of specimens belonging to the Duchess of Portland, said 
to have been killed near Halifax; but, though taken up by British writers, it is not 
included in the European catalogue of M. Temminck. It is not improbable that the 
specimens alluded to by Latham were from Halifax in North America. Wilson has 
given a perfect description of the bird, but in the figure the tail is not correct ; 
the under part, which has white feathers, is represented as the upper part, the 
feathers of which are black. The name is derived from the plumage on the back, 
which has some similitude to fine hairs. Our specimen is that of a male bird, 
having the red mark on the back of the head, and is ten inches in length ; Wilson 
gives nine inches as its usual length. 


Picus Varius. Yellow-bellied Woodpecker. 


The Yellow-bellied Woodpecker continues permanently in all parts. of North 
America where trees are found, and is abundant. It is of small dimensions, varying 
in length, according to different writers, from seven to nine inches. The specimens 
received were those of a male anda female, and were intermediate in size between 
the above extremes; there seems to be some variation in the black and white mark- 
ings, not only between the sexes, but between different males. The male bird now 
under notice has very little white on the back, but the female is elegantly marked 
with cross waving bars of black on the white; the yellow colouring which gives the 
name to the species is very slight; the red on the throat and head of the male is very 
rich. 

Alcedo Alcyon. Belted Kingfisher. 

This is the only species of Alcedo found in the whole of North America ; it is, 

however, an inhabitant of every part of it, from the north to the south, and from the 


678 APPENDIX. [No. Vv. 


eastern to the western shores ; it does not remain in the colder parts in the winter, 
but migrates southward. It is met with in the islands of the New World under the 
tropics, and even extends itself to the southern continent, living on the banks and 
shores of rivers. From the different states of plumage of this bird, a number, to 
the extent of four varieties, as they are erroneously called, have been described or 
figured. If we can depend on the accuracy of Wilson, which is rarely questionable, 
those with ferruginous markings on the breast, and where the upper plumage is 
spotted, are females; the other varieties are probably immature birds. It is 
sometimes exposed for sale in the markets of America, and, when fat, is good eating. 
Wilson’s description is correct ; it is the only perfect one of the male, for Brisson, 
Linneus, Latham, and Pennant, describe only the female; some of these authors 
also err much in their account of the size of the bird. The figures in the Planches 
Enluminées, and in Edwards, are either females or immature. Wilson’s also is a 
female ; so that the male does not appear to have been represented. The species is 
not mentioned, either in Hearne’s Voyage, or by Forster, in the Catalogue of the 
Hudson’s Bay birds, in the Philosophical Transactions for 1772. Our specimen is 
that of a male; it is rather more than twelve inches long, and has a narrow slate- 
coloured belt across its breast, without any ferruginous colour on its under parts, 
which are white, with the exception of some markings of slate colour on the sides 
under the wings. The bill seems to vary in its length; Wilson makes it three 
inches; in the present specimen it is only two inches and_a half. 


Mirundo Purpurea. Purple Martin. 


This bird, which, in size and rapidity of flight, approaches the Swift, has the 
habits and manners of the House Martin (H. Urbica), and seems equally to have 
attached the favour of the Americans, to whom the European bird is unknown. 
It is probably the Swallow of Hearne. The Martins breed generally over the whole 
of North America, and retire, it is supposed, within the tropics in the winter. They 
arrive in Hudson’s Bay in the end of May, and leave it in August, but come sooner and 
retire later in the more southern districts. The male, of which alone a specimen 
was received, is an uniform glossy black ; the female is more brown, with dingy 
white on its under parts. Latham, in his Synopsis, had described it as the Violet 
Swallow, Purple Swallow, and Canada Swallow; but in his Index he brought these 
names together under Hirundo Purpurea. The food of this bird is a much larger 
class of winged insects than its congeners destroy with us. 


Mirundo Viridis. White-bellied Martin. 


Is peculiar to America, and was not noticed as distinct, until described by Wilson. 
Its habits and manners are somewhat similar to the House Martin, but it builds 


No. Ve] ZOOLOGY. - 679 


in holes or boxes, and. does not form an ‘earthen case ‘for its nest, as is done by 
that bird. The whole upper parts of the bird are black glossed with bright blue; 
the tail is much forked, and the wings are so long ‘as to extend beyond the tail’; the 
under parts of the head, neck, and body are white; the wings are brown, both above 
and below; and the tail feathers are similar, but the’ under coverts are white ; 
the length is about six inches and a half. The specimen was killed at’ Cum- 


berland-House. Hearne mentions Martins as frequenting Hudson’s Bay, probably 
these birds. : 


Columba Migratoria. Passenger Pigeon. 


The details given by Wilson of the habits of these extraordinary’ birds are most 
interesting. Their migrations appear to be more in search of food than of climate’: 
though found in all parts of northern America, east of the Rocky Mountains, 
their chief resorts seem to be the countries contiguous to the Ohio. They breed 
together in great numbers, rearing only one young at a time, but have three or four 
hatches in each season; though they prefer living thus in common, they are fre- 
quently known to make their nests in detached places. They are described by Forster, 
but not mentioned by Hearne; they come, however, to the countries near Hudson’s 
Bay, and sometimes remain there late in the season. It seems likely that, as popu- 
lation and cultivation extend westward, the countless multitudes of these birds, which 
darken the air for hours and miles together in their flight, will be reduced ; their 
visitations must be ruinous to agricultural districts, and consequently incompatible 
with civilization; indeed, it is probable that’ their less frequent appearance in the 


Atlantic States has been caused by the necessity they have felt to retire from the 
frequented abodes of man. 


Tetrao Umbellus. Ruffed Grouse. 


Specimens of a male and female were sent from Cumberland-House, where they 
were killed, in November, 1819. This species is: stated by Wilson to be called the 
Partridge in the Eastern States, and the Pheasant in Pennsylvania and the southern 
districts, but’ must not be confounded: with the bird in the next article, which is 
more usually known as the Pheasant, and with which Wilson does not appear to 
have been acquainted, when he wrote on the Ruffed Grouse. This species ig 
found in every part of the United States, as well as in the countries west of the 
Mississippi; it is well known tothe British: settlers in the northern parts also, 
where it has been called the Shoulder-knot Grouse, as well as the Ruffed Grouse, the 
Indian name being Puspuskee, It is described both by Forster and Hearne. ‘This 
species is an inhabitant of woody countries only, in which it differs from’ the Pin. 
nated Grouse of America, (Tetrao Cupido) better known to the sportsmen of the 


680 APPENDIX. — [No. V. 


New World under the appellation of the Prairie Hen and Heath Hen. The female 
differs from the male in being smaller, in the colours of its markings being lighter, 
and in the ruff being composed of smaller feathers; the ruff in the male is entirely 
black, inthe female it is dark brown with some rufous tinge. The figure, published 
by Edwards, is probably that of a female; the Grosse Gelinote de Canada of the 
Planches Enterminées is intended for the Ruffed Grouse, but is a miserable resemblance. 
This bird was described by early Ornithological writers under two different names, 
which error may be thus traced. Brisson described and figured the Grosse Gelinote 
de Canada correctly, and not considering that Edwards’s Ruffed Grouse (of which he 
judged by the defective figure), could be the same bird, he introduced it into his 
Régne Ammal, as the Gelinote Hupée de Pennsylvanie. Linnzeus adopted these as two 
species, making the first T. Togatus. and the other T. Umbellus. Latham, in following 
Linneus, called the T. Togatus, the Shoulder-knot Grouse, and the T. Umbellus, the 
Ruffed Grouse; in the Supplement to his Synopis, he retracted the opinion of their 
specific difference, and in his Index applied the former specific name to the female, 
and the latter to the male bird, but has strangely confounded and misarranged the 
synonyms in separating the sexes. M. Cuvier, in his Régne Animal, has considered 
the T. Cupido and T. Umbellus as the same bird, a strange mistake. 


Tetrao Phasianellus. Sharp-tailed Grouse. 


This bird is probably confined to Canada, and the northern parts of the New World, 
since specimens are not usually received from the more southern provinces ; nor does 
it appear to have been at all observed by Wilson. Little reliance should be placed 
on the statement by Edwards, that it is found in Virginia; Dr. Mitchel, whose 
authority is given for this, made the observation on a view of Edwards’s draw- 
ing, which he might have mistaken for a Ruffed Grouse, which bird is an 
inhabitant of Virginia. The bird now under consideration is well known and 
common in the neighbourhood of the Hudson’s Bay settlements, where it is 
called the Pheasant, or Sharp-tailed Grouse; this latter name is much more 
appropriate, than Long-tailed Grouse, which it received from Edwards. The tail 
is really short, but the two middle feathers, exceeding the others about an inch 
in length, give a pointed appearance to that part, which is peculiar and cha- 
racteristic. Edwards first brought the bird into notice, but his figure is a very 
bad resemblance of it. The Sharp-tailed Grouse are noticed by Hearne, and 
described by Foster; they are found both in the woods and in the plains, and 
are called by the natives of the northern parts of America Au-kis-kow. Linneus, in 
the 10th edition of the Systema Nature, called this bird the T. Phasianellus, founding 
the species on the figure and description of Edwards ; in the twelfth edition of the same 
work, he made it a variety of his T. Urogallus ; subsequent experience has proved 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 681 


that the first opinion was correct, and Phasianellus remains the established specific 
name. There isno difference observable between the sexes, but the summer plumage 
is brighter and darker than the winter ; specimens in both states were received, 
the latter from Cumberland-House, the former from the neighbourhood of York 
Factory. 


Tetrao Salicete. White Grouse. 


The differences between the species of Grouse which assume white plumage in 
winter, have been very imperfectly understood until lately ; it is not, therefore, 
extraordinary that in the accounts of these birds, particularly in those of early 
writers, the descriptions should have been incorrectly referred to the different 
species, more especially as the three kinds which are now known , are all insome 
instances inhabitants of the same countries. The species now before us takes 
precedence, on account of its size, by which, and the following peculiarities, it 
is distinguished. In summer its colour is dark chestnut, with little marking of 
other colour on the breast, and generally with less of the white and black spots, 
and undulating lines, which vary and cross the feathers of the others ; it-is without 
any black line of feathers from the bill to the eye, so that in winter, with the excep- 
tion of the tail and the’shafts of the wing-feathers, it is entirely white; the bill 
is short, strong, and black, and the claws, which in the other two species are black, 
in this are white; the legs and feet are thickly covered in winter with feathers, 
which have some resemblance to the hair of quadrupeds. The remarkable pro- 
perty “which Grouse, that become white in winter, pussess, of doubling each 
feather, is well known to naturalists; from the base of the shaft of all the feathers 
which cover the bodies of the birds, there proceeds, on the under side, a small, but 
perfect feather, of a downy softness, which is no doubt a provision of nature to 
protect them from the inclemency of the winter to which they are exposed. The 
White Grouse, of the countries round Hudson’s Bay, are inhabitants of the plains, 
where bushes of willows abound, on the buds of which they support themselves ; 
from this circumstance they have acquired the appellation of Willow Grouse, 
or Partridges, among the settlers, as well as the present specific name given by M. 
Temminck, in preference to that of Albus, by which the species was designated 
by Linnzus. It is the Lagopede de la Baie de Hudson of Buffon. Hearne has 
given a good account of these birds, and states them to be most abundant in the 
parts of North America which he visited. Specimens, in perfect white plumage, 
or with very few coloured feathers, are frequently received from Hudson’s Bay, 
but are of rare occurrence in the summer dress. The bird was figured by Edwards 
under the name of the White Partridge, but his specimen was only partially white, 
being in a state of change. Forster, who received it amongst the collection he 

AS 


682 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


described; compared it with the European Ptarmigan, and has widely erred in con- 
cluding them to be identical. The White Grouse, in its summer plumage, was consi- 
dered by M. Temminck to be the Red Grouse of Great Britain and Ireland; he has, 
however, retracted this opinion in the Second Edition of his Manuel. The T. 
Scoticus, or Red Grouse, never changes its colour in winter, though it may accidentally 
vary to white, and is solely confined to the British Islands, existing no where 
else as a native inhabitant, whilst the T. Albus is not found in them. 


Tetrao Lagopus. Ptarmigan. 


The Ptarmigan and Rock Grouse (T. Rupestris) were until lately, described generally 
as the same bird; indeed it may be said by every writer, because though Pennant has 
introduced the latter into his Arctic Zoology, he was certainly unacquainted with its 
characteristics, and only noticed it because a bird with that name had been mentioned 
by Hearne. In describing the birds seen during Captain Parry’s late voyage to the 
Polar Seas, Captain Sabine has distinguished the Rock Grouse from the Ptarmigan 
as a distinct species ; his reasons for this separation, and the characters of each 
species, will be found in detail in his Appendix to the narrative of the Voyage. . The 
Ptarmigan has been found on the land situated between Davis’ Straits and Regent's 
Inlet : the Rock Grouse, was abundant at Melville Island, and had also been killed in 
Greenland in the former Voyage; the Ptarmigan corresponded with the birds usually 
so called in the British Islands, and the Rock Grouse are the same as birds which have 
since been abundantly sent by Mr. Andrew Knight, from Norway ; where they are 
considered as Ptarmigans- It is of importance to ascertain from actual examination 
of specimens, now that these birds are distinguished, in what countries they each are 
native. In Scotland and the adjacent Islands, the Ptarmigan alone exist ; whether it 
is to be found in Norway and the mountainous countries of the north of Europe, yet 
remains-to be determined. The specimen now under notice, which was obtained in 
the neighbourhood of York Factory, proves that the Ptarmigan is a native of that 
part of America; but as no specimen of the Rock Grouse has yet come under obser- 
vation from the same quarter, it still remains uncertain whether individuals of the 
smaller species go so far south ; when they leave the Islands of the Polar Seas, they of 
course retire to. the contiguous continent, but to what part of it, is yet to be ascer- 
tained. Hearne’s account of the Rock Grouse will apply as well to the T. Lagopus 
as to the T.. Rupestris ; and as he mentions only one kind, it is possible that the real 
Rock Grouse may not come to Hudson’s Bay. If this be the case, the specific name 
now given to it has been wrong applied, for the T. Rupestris of Gmelin is founded 
solely on Pennant’s Arctic Zoology, and that is derived from Hearne. The specimen 
which has been. observed on here, is in its summer dress, and corresponds nearly, both 
in size and colour of plumage, with those from Scotland killed at the same season. 


Ne Vaio ZOOLOGY. 683 


It has in particular, besides the fourteen black feathers in its tail, the two long super- 
incumbent feathers mentioned by Captain Sabine, as peculiar to the species, exclusive 
of the six other superior coverts ; these two feathers are tipped with white, and are 
otherwise nearly black, but have some mottling of the general brown of the plumage 
on them; the six superior coverts are mottled black and brown with white tips ; the 
fourteen tail feathers are black, part only of them being very slightly tipped with 
white. 


Tetrao Canadensis. Canada Grouse. 


These are the Wood Partridges of Hearne and of the North American settlers. 
They are only found in the northern parts of the New World, not having been observed 
in the United States, nor are they natives of Europe. Though remaining in the cold 
climate of those countries during the winter, their plumage continues unchanged. 
Specimens both of a male and female bird were received in good condition; their size 
is that of the Ptarmigan, and of course they are considerably larger than the Rock 
Grouse. Both sexes are tolerably described in Latham’s Synopsis ; and are each 
figured by Edwards, as well as in the Planches Enluminéos, the species being called 
by Buffon La Gelinote du Canada. The male was made a separate Species from the 
female, by Brisson, which led Linneus into a similar error, and this was not cor- 
rected by Gmelin; they will be found in the Systema Nature, as T. Canadensis and 
T. Canace. : | 


Charadrius Pluvialis. Golden Plover. 


A specimen, in winter plumage, is in the collection. Golden Plovers were found 
breeding abundantly in the North Georgian Islands, and they probably exist through- 
out the whole of the higher latitudes of the American Continent, but they are only 
known in the United States, as visitors from the autumn until the spring. In the 
latter season their whole under parts become black, which disappears with the moult- 
ing after the young are reared. In this darkened plumage they are the C. Apricarius — 
and Alwagrim Plover of different Ornithological writers. The species is well known 
in Europe. 


Charadrius Vociferus. Noisy Plover. | 


This species is confined.to America, and breeds in the more temperate as well as 
in the northern parts of that country. Itis known to the Americans as the Kildeer, 
from the note which it utters incessantly, when disturbed. Wilson has figured and 
described the bird correctly ; it is much smaller than the preceding, and approaches 
more to the appearance of a Ringed Plover, but is peculiar in having a long wedge- 
Shaped tail, the upper coverts of which are orange; the rest of the upper parts of. . 


482 


G84 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


the body are brown, and the under white, the neck is surrounded by a ring of 
white, below which is a similar band of black feathers. 


Charadrius Hiaticula. Large Ringed Plover. 


Ringed Plovers are abundant in all parts of North America; extending also to 
Greenland and the lands contiguous to Lancaster Sound; in Europe, they are 
equally common. We have here to notice a circumstance of rare occurrence ; 
Wilson’s figure is very defective, and does not accord with his description. M. 
Temminck has taken much pains to describe and separate the different species 
of Charadrius, which may be generally termed Ringed Plovers, to the first of which 
the specimens now received belong. They are subject to considerable variation in 
minute particulars, as respects the size and intensity of the dark bands on their 
heads and necks, as well as the proportions of white on the feathers of the tail. 
Latham’s description of this species, in his Synopsis, is particularly clear and correct. 
The specimens received, though agreeing with the accounts referred to, are smaller. 


Vanellus Melanogaster. Grey Plover. 


The specimen of this species is in the varied state which the mature birds exhibit, 
inthe progress of change from the winter dress to that of the breeding season: 
the breast. is mottled with black and white ; it ultimately becomes black, and in 
winter, white. The Grey Plover breeds inland, but resorts, at other times, to- 
estuaries and mouths of great rivers. It is figured by Wilson, and his representa- 
tion and description are both correct; but he has applied to it the names we 
have mentioned as belonging to the Golden Plover in its summer plumage, v7z., 
that of Charadrius Apricarius, or Alwagrim Plover. This species, like many others 
which have different plumage at different seasons, has received various names: 
it has been called, in its winter. state, Tringa Squatarola, or Grey Sand-piper, and 
in its summer dress, Tringa Helvetica, or Swiss Sand-piper: as the first, it is well 
known on the south-eastern coast of Great Britain. M.'Temminck has proposed the 
transfer of this bird, and its congener, the Lapwing, to the genus where it is now 
placed, which was formerly established by Brisson. 


Strepsilas Collaris. Turnstone. 


A specimen, obtained in the neighbourhood of York Factory, was received. It is 
in a state of change approaching maturity, having some of the deep orange-red 
feathers,which indicate a bird in perfect plumage, mixed with brown feathers on the 
back. Turnstones are found in various and remote parts of the world; they were 
observed to breed at Melville Island, and are met with in all parts of North and South 
America, as. well as in Europe, and are also said to be:natives of Africa.. 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 685 


Grus Canadensis. Brown Crane. 


The Cranes have been separated from Ardea by modern writers, and now con- 
stitute the genus Grus: hence the name at the head of this article. It may be 
supposed that the Brown Crane is rare in the United States, for Wilson does not 
seem to have seen it, and he conjectures, under the head of the Hooping Crane, 
that it is the young of that bird ; there are, however, abundant points, independent 
of the colour of the plumage, to convince those who compare them, of the dif- 
ference. Hearne says, that the Brown Crane is much more numerous in Hudson’s 
Bay than the Hooping Crane, and that its flesh is considered good for eating: it 
frequents the lakes of the northern parts of America, breeding there, and retires in 
the winter southward, probably to Mexico and the warmer countries west of the 
Mississippi. This bird was originally published by Edwards ; his figure of it is, 
however, much too splendid. Linnzus founded the species on Edwards’s de- 
scription. The specimen sent home is probably of a male, its size exceeding 
that which is mentioned by authors: it is upwards of four feet in length, 
which is nearly a foot longer than the measure assigned by Pennant. The top of 
the head is bare, with a few black hairs on it: the bill, to the junction of the 
mandibles, five inches long ; back of the head ash-coloured, tinged with rusty; the 
whole of the plumage of the body is dark ash colour; the primary quill feathers are 
dark brown with white shafts, and the other feathers of the wings are lighter than 
the rest of the plumage; the legs are bare for four inches above the knee. 


Argea Lentiginosa. ‘American Bittern. 


The history of this bird is very singular; it was first described by Edwards, who, 
though he stated some difference, especially that of size, between it and the Common 
Bittern (Ardea Stellaris) left it unsettled whether it should be considered as a distinct 
species or not. Linneeus did not notice it, nor did he refer to Edwards, and every 
subsequent writer until the year 1813, included it as a variety of the European 
species. In that year appeared the Supplement to the Ornithological Dictionary 
of the late Colonel Montagu, in which is described and figured, a specimen of a young 
bird of this species, asa British bird, under the name of Ardea Lentiginosa. Mon- 
tagu’s account is, that the bird was shot in the autumn of 1814, at Piddleton, in Dor- 
setshire, by Mr. Cunningham, who sent it fresh to Colonel George, of Penryn, in Corn- 
wall, in whose museum it was called Ardea Minuta, and under that name purchased by 
Colonel Montagu. Ifthe above account of the place where the bird was killed be correct, 
it must either have escaped from some menagerie, or have been driven by accident from 
the North American coast to the British shore. Colonel Montagu, not aware what the 
‘bird really was, described it, and doubting whether it was new or previously known, 


686 APPENDIX. - [No. V. 


called it Ardea Lentiginosa, which specific name, though given under such peculiarly 
unscientific circumstances, being the first which had actually been applied to it, must 
of course remain. Wilson’s account and figure of the bird, which he calls Ardea 
Minor, appeared in 1814. Montagu’s description is full and correct, but that of 
Wilson distinguishes the characteristic points of the plumage, with more precision. 
On comparing the specimens of the two birds, the differences are very obvious ; 
the bill of the American is nearly an inch longer than that of the other; the general 
complexion of the plumage in the American is brown, with less decisive markings; 
that of the European is pale, with the markings very dark, and well defined; the Eu- 
ropean is without the black mark on the side of the neck, which is so peculiar in the 
American; and finally, and conclusively, as is conceived, the primares, in the Ame- 
rican, are dark lead-coloured, whilst those of the European are marked with alter- 
nate bars of dark brown and light ferruginous. The American is also said not 
to make the loud booming, which is so peculiar in the European species. The 
American Bittern is found in Hudson’s Bay, and the adjoining countries; in Ca- 
nada; and further to the southward, in the United States; it breeds in swamps, 
probably returning from the colder countries in the winter. It conceals itself in the 
rushes in the day, and seeks its prey at night. It is not very common, nor confined 
to particular districts, and is said to be good food when fat. 3 


Tringa Variabtls. Dunlin. 

The specimens of this bird are in the summer plumage, under which it is known 
on the coasts of Great Britain, as the Dunlin, and in America, as the Red-backed 
Sandpiper; it does not remain in the Arctic countries, or even in the northern 
parts of America, in the winter ; the alteration of appearance, common to it with all 
the rest of the tribe to which it belongs, has caused it formerly to receive another 
name at that season; it being the Purre of all writers, except the most recent. M. 
Temminck has been very successful in the second edition of his Manuel, in describing 
its different changes, and in collecting the many synonyms, which belong to it, the 
number of which make the specific name under which it stands at present, very 


appropriate. 


Tringa Minuta. Little Sandpiper. 


Wilson has called this diminutive Sandpiper, which does not exceed six inches in 
length, Tringa Pusilla. It appears from his account that it does not remain even in 
the middle parts of America during the winter, but quits them, migrating to the 
southward in October. It is found in all parts of the known world on the borders of 
the ocean ; it also goes inland to the shores of large waters. Several specimens were 
taken by the travellers at different parts of the journey in the summer season, the 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 687 


breeding places of the bird being in the northern regions, but it is not mentioned by 
Captain Sabine as visiting the Islands of the Arctic Sea. 


Totanus Vociferus. Tell-tale Godwit. 


Previous to the publication of Wilson, we had no further information respecting 
this species, than is contained in a short note in the Artic Zoology, where it is said 
to have been received from the coast of Labrador, under the name of Stone Curlew : 
on this authority it was introduced by Gmelin into the Systema Nature, as Scolopax 
Melanoleuca. Wilson called it Scolopax Vociferus; it belongs, however, to the di- 
vision of the Genus, now known as Totanus. The Tell-tale Godwit, or Snipe, breeds 
in the American States in marshy grounds, and has acquired celebrity from the pro- 
tection it affords to the race of aquatic birds from the attacks of the sportsman, being 
very vigilant: when it discovers the approach of any person towards its haunts, it 
rises on the wing, and, by a continued uttering of its very shrill notes, gives the 
alarm to the ducks and other game which are within hearing at their feed, when they 
immediately take flight. These birds retire to the southward in the winter season. The 
specimen received was in a very perfect state ; it measured sixteen inches in length ; 
the bill is two inches and a quarter long, having the upper mandible a little bent at 
the end; the throat, belly, and vent, are white ; the fore part of the neck is marked 
_ with longitudinal stripes of dark brown ; the sides under the wings are marked across 
with bands of black, the white progressively predominating towards the thighs; the 
head and back of the neck are dark, slightly marked with white ; the back, scapulars 
and wing coverts, are dark brown, spotted with white, the white spots being disposed 
along the edges of all the feathers; the primaries are black, the shaft of the first is 
white, of the others, black; the rump is white ; the tail feathers are beautifully 
crossed with alternate narrow bands of dark brown and white ; the legs are naked, 
near two inches above the knee ; the tarse is two inches and a quarter long; the feet, 
with their fore toes, long ; the hind toe a quarter of an inch long; the legs are said to 
be a rich orange colour. 


Totanus Noveboracensis. Red-breasted Snipe. 


This bird, which has been described by Pennant, and, after him, by Latham 
and Gmelin, as the Scolopax Noveboracensis, as well as the Scolopax Grisea, or 
Brown Snipe, breeds in the North, visiting the temperate parts of the United 
States at spring and fall, in its passage from and to its winter quarters. It 
is in high estimation for the table, and is eagerly sought after by sportsmen, 
on the bars and shores of the large rivers and places within the influence of the 
tide, where it feeds. Two specimens, probably in perfect summer plumage, were 
sent home, differing from each other only in size, one exceeding the other an 


688 APPENDIX. . [No. V. 


inch in length ; this, if not arising from difference of season, is difficult to account for. 
The largest, which it is proposed to describe, measures twelve inches from the tip of 
the bill to the end of the tail; the bill is two inches and a quarter long; both man- 
dibles channelled from the base, compressed in the middle, and flattened at the end ; 
the throat, neck, and belly are tinged with ochreous or buff, the throat is palest ; 
the neck minutely spotted with brown, and the belly free from markings ; the cheeks 
are pale, like the throat ; across them, from the upper mandible to the eye, there 
passes a dark line; the fs of the head is dark-brown spotted with ferruginous ; the 
back of the neck mottled dark and light brown; the feathers, on the back and 
scapulars, are black, edged with bright ferruginous; the feathers of the wing-coverts 
are dark brown, edged with pale brown; the primaries are very dark, the shaft of 
the first alone being white; the secondaries are edged with white ; the whole back 
from underneath the scapulars, the sides, and the under wing-coverts, are spotted 
and barred with black or white, forming a beautiful contrast to the black and 
_ferruginous markings of the upper parts; the tail is pointed, and the markings of 
black are continued without interruption from the back to its extremity; but as they 
extend along the tail they gradually change their first character of spots, and become 
more and more distinctly black bands; the tips of the longest tail-feathers’ are 
ferruginous ; the legs are bare an inch above the knee; the tarse measures an inch 
and a half ; the three fore toes are long and slender, the hind toe is very thin, and 
about a quarter of an inch long; the legs are dark green. 


Totanus Flavipes. Yellow-legged Godwit. 


This bird, commonly known in the United States.as the Yellow Shanks, is also 
stigmatized by the sportsmen of that country as the Lesser Tell-tale,; it being nearly 
as troublesome to them in their pursuit as the Totanus Vociferus.- The descriptions 
of this species, in Wilson, as well as in Latham and Pennant, having been made 
from autumnal specimens, do not well agree with the plumage of the specimen 
now before us, which appears to be in its perfect summer dress.’ It measures nine 
inches and a half in length ; the bill is straight, and about an inch and a quarter 
long ; the upper mandible is grooved, and a little arched at its extremity ; the chin, 
neck, and breast are dingy white, marked with longitudinal stripes of dark ash 
colour ; the head and back of the neck dark brown, a little spotted with white ; the 
whole back, wing-coverts, and scapulars brown, spotted with light reddish brown, 
the spots being ranged along the margins of each feather; the wing feathers are 
dark brown, the shaft of the first primary being white; the smaller primaries are 
slightly edged with white, and the secondaries more strongly so; the upper tail- 
coverts are white; the belly, sides, thighs, and abdomen dingy white; the under 
tail-coverts white, slightly barred with brown; the tail feathers brown barred with 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 689 


narrow bands of dingy white; legs naked an inch and a quarter above the knee; 
tarse full two inches long; toes slender ; legs entirely yellow. 


Limosa Fedoa. American Godwit. 


_ The specimen is of a male, killed at Carlton-House on the 20th of May, when 
the colours of the plumage are in the brilliant breeding state. The genus Limosa, 
which contains this Godwit, has been separated from the Linnean genus of Scolopax 
by Beckstein, and adopted by subsequent writers; the name of Limosa originated 
with Brisson. This species appears to have been first published by Edwards, whose 
description is of a male, and is excellent. ‘There seems to be much variation in the 
length of the bill; in some individuals it has been described as being six 
inches long; in the present specimen it was only four inches. The names of 
this bird have been various: it is usually called the Curlew in Hudson’s Bay ; 
Wilson calls it the Great Marbled Godwit ; Pennant, the Great Godwit ; Brisson, 
La Barge Rousse d’Amerique ; and Buffon, La Barge Rousse. de la Baie d’ Hudson. 
It breeds in the north, migrating far to the southward in winter, and is met with in 
the intermediate countries, in spring and autumn, on passage. Wilson has figured 
a female, which differs from the male in having no black markings on the breast, 
and probably also in being less highly coloured. His description of the bird is 
good. 


Lamosa Melanura. Black-tailed Godwit. 


Breeds in the marshes of the country round Hudson’s Bay, but does not go so far 
south as the territories of the United States; at least, the bird not having been 
noticed by Wilson, is negative evidence to that point. This’ species, which 
exhibits, according to its age or the period of the year, great variety of appear- 
ance in some parts of its plumage, may he readily distinguished by its tail being a 
uniform black at all times, with a broad band of white at the base, the feathers 
being very slightly tipped with white or dusky. In the different states of its 
autumn and spring plumage, the Black-tailed Godwit has been mistaken for 
distinct species, and is found in Latham’s Inder and Synopsis, as the Scolopax 
Lapponica or Red Godwit, and Scolopax Limosa or Jaduka Snipe. Specimens of 
both having come into the possession of Colonel, Montagu, he was of opinion after 
much investigation, that they were not identical ; the ultimate determination of the 
question was therefore reserved for M, Temminck, who has described the bird under 
its various appearances, and has adopted Leister’s name, as indicative of its pecu- 
liar character. Two specimens were received, one of which was a young bird, 
and the other mature, in plumage intermediate between its winter and breeding 
State. . 

4 T 


690 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


Gallinula Carolina. Soree Gallinule. 


The Soree Gallinule was received by Edwards from Hudson’s Bay, and published by 
him ; it is a well-known species, belonging to the American Continent only. In the 
autumn migration they appear in the United States in great numbers, and from 
the end of August to the end of September, afford easy amusement to the sports- 
man, and a plentiful supply to the epicure: being very fat at that season, they are 
particularly esteemed at table. A single specimen, apparently of a male, was 
received. | 


Fulica Americana. ° American Coot. 


Wilson, in bis account of this bird, to which he annexed the names and synonymes 
of the Common Coot, expressed a doubt of their identity ; he particularly mentions 
that the colour of the callous membrane on the forehead of the American, is a 
dark chestnut, whilst that of its European congener is white. This doubt has in- 
duced a comparison of a British specimen with that sent home by Captain Franklin ; 
and the conclusion is, that they are distinct though nearly resembling species. 
They are of the same length though there is a general inferiority in the 
size of the body as well as of the legs, head, and bill of the American; the bill 
is smaller, less thick and strong, and shorter by a quarter of an inch; the 
callus, independent of the difference in colour in the American bird, ex- 
tends only half an inch over the head, but in the European above an inch; 
the whole head is smaller; the plumage generally is similar in colour and 
character; the outer margin of the first primary feathers of the wing is more con- 
spicuously marked with white, and there are a few white feathers on the upper edge 
of the wing; the secondaries in both are tipped with white; the principal difference 
in the plumage is that in the American, the feathers at the vent are quite black, and 
the under tail coverts white; in the European Coot these correspond with the rest 
of the plumage; the legs are much more slender in the American bird; the tarse of 
the European measures near two inches and a half, that of the American not quite 
two inches; the toes are smaller in like proportion; the middle toe, including the 
elaw, of the European Coot, is three inches and three-quarters long; of the American, 
three inches and one quarter only. 


Phalaropus Hyperboreus. Red Phalarope. 

A specimen of this bird was brought home by Dr. Richardson, who also saw the 
other known species, Phalaropus Platyrhinchus, the Grey Phalarope, but did not 
preserve a skin of it. Both these species are inhabitants of, and breed in, the most 
northern parts of the world; and though they retire somewhat more to the south in 


No. V.] ! ZOOLOGY. 691 


winter, yet their visits to the milder climates are rare and casual; Wilson has 
figured and described both species from specimens which he considered as only 
accidental. They are subject to much variation of plumage, not only from 
season, but from diversity of age and of sex; they have consequently been de- 
scribed and named most variously; and even confounded with each other. Much 
elucidation of their history and changes of plumage was obtained by Captain Sabine, 
in each of his voyages to the Arctic Seas, and is detailed in his two publica- 
tions before referred to. These, with the investigations of M. Temminck, which 
are to be found in the second edition of his Manuel d’Ornithologie, have nearly 
cleared away the obscurity and doubt in which the account of these birds were 
involved. 


Phalaropus Wilsons. _ American Phalarope. 


This exquisitely beautiful bird, it is believed, has never before been described, 
or come under observation. I was received in the collection despatched from Cum- 
berland House, in the spring of the year 1820. The specific appellation will, it is 
hoped, be considered a proper compliment to the individual who has so often 
been quoted in these notices; in affixing his name to an American bird, it is 
proposed to record the renown amongst naturalists, which that quarter of the world 
has acquired by his labours in Ornithology. The specimen, when extended, measures 

ten inches and a half in length; the bill is one inch and a quarter long, black, 
narrow at the base and slender, the whole of its length having a very slight general 
incurvation ; the upper mandible is flattened and turned downwards a little at its 
termination, and covers the end of the lower mandible; the forehead and top of the 
head is a clear pale ash colour; from near the junction of the mandibles a narrow 
line on each side of the head passes through the eyes to the side of the neck, where 
it widens considerably, and is contained in a broad patch to the back ; this mark is 
at first black, but after it has passed the eye about half an inch, it gradually becomes 
avery deep chestnut; the chin and sides of the head between the above line are 
white; the neck is dingy white, slightly tinged with chestnut, darker near to the 
edges of the above patch; the belly and all the under parts are white ; at the back 
of the neck is a white line between the two dark markings described above; the back 
and scapulars are dark ash colour, in which some few chestnut feathers are mixed; 
these are so disposed as to have an appearance of an irregular continuation of the 
dark chestnut patches on the sides of the neck; the whole of the wing feathers and 
upper coverts are dark ash- colour, the large coverts and secondaries very slightly 
edged with white; under coverts of the wings white; the two middle tail feathers 
ash colour; the others the same on their outer web, having the inner mottled with 
ash colour and white; upper tail coverts ash colour; under tail coverts white: the 


4 T 2 


692 APPENDIX. [No. V. 


legs are black, naked near an inch above the knee; the tarse an inch and a quarter 
long, sharp, with a membrane before and at the back ; the three fore toes lobed, with 
small curved black claws ; the centre toe the longest, and united at the base for a. 
short distance to the outer; hind toe three-eighths of an inch long and membranous. 
The specimen has much the appearance of being in its breeding dress, and having its 
plumage of that state nearly complete ; the irregular disposition of the chestnut feathers 
on the back leads to a supposition, however, that some further change was wanting to 
make that.part perfect. .From the character of the feet and the general figure of the 
bird, it is decidedly allied to. the Phalaropes, and is consequently placed in that genus. 
M. Cuvier, in his Régne Animal, separated the two only species then known into 
two genera, Phalaropus and Lobipes; there is a marked difference in the bills of the 
two birds which will certainly justify their separation; and if they are to be divided, 
the present bird, being intermediate between them, will not perhaps agree sufficiently 
to be united with either, thus a third genus must necessarily’be created ; but in this 
publication, it appears most expedient to consider all as belonging to one genus. 


Podtceps Rubricollis. Red-necked Grebe. 


Though the various writers on Birds have noticed the Red-necked Grebe and its 
European habitats, especially that it has occasionally been killed in Great Britain, none 
of them has mentioned it as a native of North America; the writer of these memoranda 
had received specimens of it from Hudson’s Bay, before the specimen sent. home by 
Captain Franklin was put into his hands. Wilson has not given an account of any 
one Grebe in. his work, but though some species are sufficiently common to the south- 
wards, yet. it is probable that this does not reach far below Canada. The specimen: 
under description is fine, and seems to have been taken froma matureindividual. It 
measures twenty-eight inches in length; the bill from the opening of the mandibles 
is two inches and a half long, the upper mandible black, the lower horn colour ;, the 
top of the head is a deep black, which is. continued, though it is less intense, along. 
the back of the. neck to the back, which with the whole: upper parts is: dark brown, 
the throat and lower half of the neck from the lower mandible to the extent of about 
two inches. and.a half are a very pale drab colour; this. abruptly terminates in a ferru- 
ginous marking which occupies: the whole of the neck except the back part, and 
spreads over the breast, but it is lighter and more glossy in this lower part; the under 
parts are a glossy white as in most other Grebes; the secondaries of the wings are 
white. It is the Jon-gris of the Planches Enluminées. 


Podiceps Carolinensis. __ . Pied-bill Grebe. _ 


This species is confined to America, and is:the Colymbus.Podiceps of Linnzus:.. All 
that has hitherto been published. respecting it has been. derived from Catesby’s figure 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY, 693 


and account. It comes to New York and the Southern States in the autumn, 
and Iéaves them again in April ; its migration is consequently from the North, and 
the specimens now received indicate the countries in which it breeds and passes the 
summer: The specimen to be described is supposed to be that of a male ; it mea- 
sures seventeen inches, including the length of the legs; the bill is short, and the 
upper mandible hooked, not straight, as is usual in the Genus; round the centre of 
both mandibles is a broad band of black ; under the chin is a conspicuous and strongly 
contrasted patch of black, which is said to’be wanting in the females ; the upper 
parts are dark brown; the rest of the throat and cheeks is light brown ; on the breast 
a patch of the feathers is mintitely dotted or sprinkled with black and white; the 
belly is also mottled light brown and white; the secondaries of the wings are tipped 
with white. 


Podiceps Cornutus. Horned Grebe. 


There are two species of Grebe, having their heads full of dark feathers, with tufts 
of a bright colour over their eyes, which, though different, have caused some difficulty 
to naturalists in distinguishing them from each other: These are the P. Cornutus, 
and the P. Auritus, or Eared Grebe; both are found in Europe, but the former only 
is native of North America; it breeds in the countries round Hudson’s Bay, and re- 
tirés southward for the winter. It has been stated that on-account of the expertness 
with which this bird dives, that it is. peculiarly called by the Americans, the Water 
Witch; but that appellation is probably given to all the Grebes indiscriminately, the 
power of rapidly retiring under water, being ‘equally possessed by them all. The 
Horned Grebe hasibeen figured in the Planches Enluminées, as laa Grebe d’Esclavonie, 
whenee it is sometimes called by writers the Sclavonian Grebe, and it is generally 
known by that name among British Ornithologists. In its state of adolescence it: 
has been called the Dusky Grebe, (Podiceps Obscurus;) it is then without any of the 
brilliant plumage of the mature bird, which also is frequently found in a less perfect 
state than in the specimen now under notice. Length, including the extent of the feet, 
seventeen inches; the bill is one inch long, dark, with the tip white ; both mandibles 
are bent towards each other so as tomeet ina point, which circumstance will be found 
an unerring mark of distinction between this species and the Eared Grebe; the upper 
mandible in that bird is straight, whilst the lower mandible is bent upwards to meet 
its point, giving the whole bill an appearance of being curved upwards; the head is 
covered with a thick coat of glossy black feathers, except, that from the upper man- 
dible a patch of feathers of a chestnut red proceeds towards and above the eye; these. 
are’ short, but the continuation of this marking beyond the eye, consists of elongated: 
feathers, forming a tuft on each side of the head, proceeding about an inch and a 
half in length in the direction of the neck ; these tufts near the eye are pale ochreous, 


694. APPENDIX. [No. V. 


increasing in depth of colour, and becoming chestnut towards the other end, at which 
a few black feathers are intermixed ; the black feathers of the head are continued 
along the back of the neck, becoming towards the back dark brown, which is the’ 
colour of the whole back ; the neck, breast, and sides under the wings quite to the 
tail are deep chestnut; the belly is glossy white, the primaries dark brown, and the 
secondaries white. | 


Sterna Arctica. Arctic Tern. 


The Common Tern of the Polar and Northern Seas, was supposed to be the Sterna 
Hirundo, and as such was described by Captain Sabine, in his account of the birds 
of Greenland, noticing however the remarkable difference between the specimens 
he obtained, and the Common European Tern, in the length of the bills and 
legs. M. Temminck, on his visit to England in 181 9, received specimens of 
the northern Tern, and in the second edition of his Manuel described them as a 
new species. The Terns brought from the Polar Seas in the second voyage, as 
well as a specimen sent home by Captain Franklin, have the same characters ; it is, 
therefore, probable that these alone are natives of the more northern seas, and that 
the Sterna Hirundo lives only in more temperate latitudes. M.'Temminck states 
that the specimens he received, corresponded with those killed in Scotland and on the 
English shores ; this surely must be a mistake, for the Arctic Terns have not, it is 
believed, been ever found on the British coast. Captain Sabine, in the Appendix to 
Captain Parry’s Voyage, has described the immature plumage with which M. Tem- 
minck was unacquainted. The Arctic Terns may always be distinguished from the 
Common. Tern by the length of their tarse ; which is not more than half an inch in 
the former, whilst in the latter it is near an inch long; the bill of the Arctic Tern is 
shorter and the tail somewhat longer; there are also some smaller points of difference 
noted by M. Temminck. The Sterna Hirundo, figured and described by Wilson, is 
probably the bird to which that name is properly applied, though his account differs 
in some points from the European bird; he has omitted to give the length of the 
legs and bill of his Sterna Hirundo, which is necessary to the identification of the 
species, which must remain unsettled until a specimen, or further particulars, can 
be obtained from the United States. 


Sterna Nigra. Black Tern. 


- The specimen received is in perfect summer. plumage; the head, neck, and 
whole under parts, except the abdomen, are sooty black; the abdomen and: under 
‘tail coverts pure white; the back, tail, and upper part of the wings dark ash colour ; 
the under parts of the wings light ash colour; wings exceeding the tail about an 
inch in length; the tail slightly forked. In winter the under parts become white. 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. | 695 


In the perfect breeding plumage it has hitherto been called Sterna Fissipes ; in its 
winter dress it is the Sterna Nigra of Linneeus and others; and the young birds, 
under the supposition of their being different, have been called Sterna Obscura, or 
the Brown Tern. M. Temminck has adopted Nigra as the specific name, in pre- 
ference to Fissipes. The Black Tern is not noticed by Wilson. 


Larus Argeniatus. Herring Gull. 


The Herring Gull has been called Larus Fuscus by some writers, but the true 
application of that name is to the Lesser Black-backed Gull of Montagu. The speci- 
mens of this species killed in Greenland and the Arctic Seas, have, in almost every 
instance, the primary feathers of their wings without the black markings towards 
their ends, which distinguish these birds in other countries; the northern birds have 
nevertheless been considered as the same species. Captain Sabine, in his account 
of the birds seen in his first voyage, yielded his opinion on this point to the 
authority of M. Temminck. The specimen now under consideration, as well as 
others which have been received from Hudgson’s Bay, have the primaries marked as 
commonly described; so’ that it seems the singular variations in this change of 
colour in the feathers of the wings does not extend beyond the very cold regions of 
the north. If they are varieties, it will be desirable to distinguish them by calling 
the one, the Silvery Herring Gull, and the other, the Black-winged Herring Gull. _ 


Larus Tridactylus. Kittiwake Gull. 


This species abounds in Hudson’s Bay. The specimen received is of an immature 
bird. Kittiwakes have been more generally called. Larus Rissa, when in their 
perfect breeding plumage ; whilst Larus Tridactylus used only to be applied to them 
in their younger state, in which they are known to the English Ornithologist as 
Tarrock Gulls. The name of the immature bird has, however, superseded the older 
specific name; it is very appropriate, as distinguishing the particular character of 
the species, that of being destitute of the hind claw. 


Larus Atricilla. Laughing Gull. 


This bird is published in the ninth volume of Wilson’s Ornithology, under the name 
of Larus Ridibundus, which name certainly does not belong to it, for his description so 
well accords with the bird sent home by Captain Franklin, as to leave no doubt that it 
was made from a specimen similar to that now before us, which cannot be referred to 
the true Larus Ridibundus. As there are differences between the authors who have 
noticed the Larus Atricilla, a description of this species seems necessary. It is near 
seventeen inches long to the end of the tail; the bill is near an inch and a half long, 
bright orange red ; the feathers extending far beyond the junction of the mandibles, 


696 APPENDIX. [No..V. 


the upper mandible much curved, the lower with a projecting angle underneath; the 
whole head covered with a sooty black, extending lower on the fore part of the neck 
than on the back; asmall white spot round the eye; the rest of the neck, and behind, 
to the junction of the dark feathers of the back, white; the back, belly, and sides, 
white, suffused with a delicate rosy tinge; the back wing coverts and scapulars, dark 
ash colour ; of the primaries, the first has the outer web black, and the inner white, 
with a black spot two inches from the end; the second has: the outer edge above ash 
colour, with about two inches anda half towards the end; black; the inner edge 
white, with a large spot of black below, and the tip white; the third and fourth are 
nearly similar, but with less black below, and more ash-coloured above ;, the fifth has 
only a small spot of black across it, just above the white tip, and the sixth has no 
black on it at all; the secondaries and tertials are ash-coloured, tipped with white, the 
former having more white than the latter; the rump and upper tail coverts, which 
are long, are white ; the tail ash-coloured, and short, the wings extending an inch and 
a half beyond it; the under tail coverts white ; the legs naked above the tarse;.the tarse 
an inch and three-quarters long; the feet small, the centre toe, which is the longest, | 
not exceeding an inch and a half, The above description, except that it is more in 
detail, agrees with the bird in Wilson, but his figure represents the primaries as 
entirely black. M. Temminck, who refers to Wilson’s bird as his L, Atricella, makes it 
only fourteen inches long, and describes the primaries.as black; all the. rest of his 
description accords withthe bird under examination. Pennant, who followed Catesby, 
and both these writers are also quoted by M. Temminck, describes his L. Atricella as 
eighteen inches long, and with the ends of the primaries black. There is little doubt 
but that the Gull above-described by these American authorities is the L. Atricilla of 
Linneeus, and that our bird is referable to that species; but it differs from that of 
M. Temminck in its size, and the colour of the primary feathers. 


Larus Minutus. Little Gull. 


This species has not been hitherto recorded as a native of-the New World; it is 
abundant in the northern dominions of Russia, both in Europe and Asia, and is occa- 
sionally met with in the more southern parts of Europe. The specimen received, ex- 
actly accords with M. 'emminck’s description of the young bird of the first year ; that 
figured by Montagu in the Appendiw of the Supplement to the Ornithological Dictio- 
nary » though immature, is in a more advanced state.of plumage, and was probably 
killed in the winter, the one now before us having been obtained in the summer. 
When mature, the Little Gull has its tail, and the primary feathers of its wings 
white, not tinged with black as in its adolescent. state; the head becomes entirely 
black, changing, in accordance with all the other known Gulls, whie haveh black 
heads, to white in winter, resuming its dark feathers in the breeding season, 


No. V.] ZOOLOGY. 697 


M. Temminck has decided that the Larus Atricilloides of. Falk is referable to this 
species. 


Lestris. Parasiticus.. . Arctic. Lestris. 

Specimens in mature plumage, and with the under. parts .white,. were brought 
home by the Expedition. This species is subject: to much variation of plumage in its 
progress from youth to maturity ; these changes are described, and the synonyms of 
various authors enumerated, in Captain Sabine’s Memoir-on the Birds of Greenland. 
Individuals apparently perfectly mature, corresponding to the specimens now before us, 
but having their under parts of a light brown, are frequently met with; it is difficult to 
account for this diversity of colour; M. 'Temminck supposes that only the older birds 
have white breasts, and: that the darker hue of the under plumage is a proof of im- 
maturity ; but the: birds so marked are said to be found at:the breeding-places, and 
we know of no instance of such a marked difference between individuals of any spe- 
' cies of the same sex, and living in the same districts, which, have attained the age at 
wees oe are capable of. Sa young. 


rerio pie ine _ Geese. Boat 


» Of this extensive genus, a very large portion are.common to the, Old dnd New 
Wiowlla ; their power of flight renders their passage from America, and the lands of 
the Polar Seas to the continent, and contiguous islands of Europe, easy. ‘They come 
in winter to these countries in quest: of food,-and return in spring to the more solitary 
regions ofthe’ north; to: rear their progeny... Some species, however; which are 
inhabitants of the north;:do not migrate so‘far} and are confined. to America alone. 
The birds, which are common:-to:the whole north, are so well. known, and have been 
so perfectly described by. the: various systematic writers; that an enumeration of the 
names of the species will be a sufficient notice. as. of the: following were 
received:—  — | $ Tos oes . 


As TBiae ari Oe-ere ies Maine? Buick! 


A. Boschas, -- - - - -. Mallard, or; Wila Duck. 
Aaaberiaaze 2) St wai eS Pochard, or, Red- headed Window 
A Marila, - - -°- - - Sceaup. al 
A. Clypeatas -- --»/- «= Shoveller. vt 

Ae Aeuta, os steeds) (-0)-h Pintails or; Sea Bien 

_A. Crecea; - = - -- =). Common or Green: winged Teal. 


wt he: following species, which are faite in ease pare of the northern hemi- 

' sphere, are not confined to America omen : 

Si er A. Cygnus, = = =7 = 99s Wild Swanie o> - 
2 A Hyperborea, .--.- 1+ 7+: Snow Goose:... : 


698 APPENDIX;. [No. V. 


A. Segetum; -- - - - ih Bean Goose: 
A. Albifrons, White-fronted Goose: 
A. Leucopis, Bernacle Goose. — 


A. Bernicla, - - - - - Brent Goose. 

A. Mollissima,- - - -- - Eider Duck. 

A. Spectabilis,- - - - - King Duck.. 

A: Strepera; - -. - - -. Gadwall.. 

A. Nigra, 9- - = + = = Séoter.. 

Ai Fuligula,, - - -- - =. Tufted Duck: 
A..Clangula, - - - «+. -. Golden Eye. 

A. Glacialis, - = - -- - Wong-tailed Duck:. 
A. Histrionica; - - > - Harlequin Duck. 


Séveral ‘ofthe birds above enumerated have been described under different names,., 
oceasioned by remarkable variations in the plumage of the sexes, or of the young 
birds from: their parents, but it is believed that the above twenty-one species are all 
which can correctly be considered as common to Europe and Ameriéa:. 

Of the birds belonging to the genus which are found in Hudson’s Bay and its vici- 
nity, but which do not’visit’ or live-in any’part of Kurope, there are eight species; 
specimens of six of these were: brought home by Captain Franklin, and are subse- 
quently particularized; the remaining two are :— . 

A. Canadénsis,. - - -. - -. Canada Gooses 
A’ Labradoria; -. -- - -. = Pied Duck: 

These-are both described and figured by Wilson; the former is well known in mena- 
geries in Kurope; and is frequently kept in a half-domesticated state, on large pieces 
of water and lakes, but though frequently ‘shot when apparently wild, has probably 
in all such cases strayed from its adopted home ; since none of:the species:has been 
traced in a:state of migration. 

' Exclusive of the birds: above-mentioned, and described below,.there are other 
species known in America; but.as they do not go so far north as the countries, visited 
by the- Expedition, itis not considered necessary to include them in these notices. 


Anas Peérspicillata: Black’ or Surf Duck: 

M. Témminck has introduced this bird’into his Manuel as having been occasionally 
though very rarely seen in the Orkneys and in high latitudes in Europe.. A’ it has 
not, however, been mentioned as.a.British bird by any English author, nor included 
in any published list of\the-visitors of‘the British Islands; theecircumstance of its ever 
having been obtained in the Orkneys seems to require confirmation, and therefore it has 
not beenshere considered as one-of the species common to Europe-and America. The 
Black: Duck.is frequent in the-northern parts of. the. New World,.it.is. smaller than. 


No. V.J ZOOLOGY. ‘699 


the Velvet Duck, but, like that bird, is chiefly biack, with the exception of two conspi- 
‘cuous triangular white spots on thefront and back of its head, separated from é¢ach other 
by a space more than an inch and a half broad, which is black ; the bill is remarkably 
irregular in shape, of an orange colour, much elevated at thebase, with black patches 
.on each side near the head. The specimen received is that of.a male, and: measures 
twenty-four inches in length, which is considerably more than has been assigned as’its 
length by any writer. The female is said to be dark brown, ‘and\ not to have the 
markings on the head, though that part of its plumage is lighter than the rest, and 
the bill has no prominences similar to those of the male. 


Anas Vallisnertana. Canvas-back Duck. 


A male specimen of the celebrated Canvas-back Duck was received. Tt is repre- 
sented by the American epicures as being much superior in flavour to any other known 
duck. Wilson has given descriptions of both the male and female, and his figure, though 
small, is tolerably correct. It comes to the waters connected with ‘the Chesapeake 
in October, and continues ‘within the tides, but not inthe salt waters, feeding on the 

- Vallisneriana Americana which is abundant there. It continues ‘in these quarters 
during the winter, and returns to‘the north to breed. It ‘is also called in America the 
White-backed Duck and ‘the Sheldrake. Before Wilson noticed the bird we had no 
distinct account of it. It has probably been confounded ‘with the Anas Ferina or 
Pochard, which it resembles, but is considerably larger, ‘being on an average two 
feet long, whilst the Pochard never exceeds twenty inches. The bill of :the A. 
Vallisneriana is two inches and a half long, of the A. Ferina two inches:; ‘the head 
and neck of the Pochard:are all bright chestnut ; the upper part of the head in the 
other bird is dark brown, and the chestnut colour is confined to the lower part of the 
head, cheeks, and neck; the black on the breast, which extends round ‘the neck 
next the back, is the same in both species; the upper and under parts of the body 
have the same beautiful fine undulation of dark grey, but the whole pencillings, as 
well as the ground colour, are darker in the Pochard than in the Canvas Back : ; on_the 
whole, the two birds are so very much alike, that a comparison of ‘specimens can 
alone establish a distinetion between them, which must, however, be considered as 
certain if it depended only on the difference in the bills ; the Pochard being native of 
America puts the matter further beyond question. ‘Wilson, in describing this latter 
bird, was uncertain whether he was correct in referring it to the European Pochard, 
but a comparison of a British specimen with the American has made the ap gone 

ee op Oe: 


700 APPENDIX. [No. V 


Anas Americana... American Wigeon. 


‘ These birds breed in the neighbourhood of Hudson’s Bay in the Spring, and go 
southward in the winter, even so far as the West-India Islands. Wilson’ mentions 
that they are constant attendants’ on the Canvas-back Ducks in the Chesapeake, 
feeding on the same aquatic plant, which the latter birds detach from the bottom of 
the waters by diving, but are robbed of it on the surface by their more active com- 
panions. According to Wilson, the American Wigeon has the name of Bald-pate 
in the United States, and Pennant states that one was received from New York as 
the Pheasant Duck ; but, perhaps, this was one of the usual names of the A. Acuta 
improperly applied. This species has a very general resemblance to the Common 
Wigeon of Europe, A. Penelope; ‘the top of the head in both, when mature, 
is cream-coloured; the neck in the European is bright ferruginous; and in the 
American is principally marked with specks and undulations of black or dingy 


white, with rich glossy black and green lines passing from each eye backwards, which 


meeting on the back of the neck extend as far down as the undulating markings. on 
the rest of the neck; the sides under the wings in the European have the same 
pencilled-marked. feathers as the back; the belly only being white, but in the 
American both sides and belly are white. The specimen received was of a male in 
the autumnal change, when it has not the light spot on the head, nor the other parts 


of the plumage so brilliant or distinctly marked. Wilson describes the two middle 


feathers of the tail as an, inch longer than the others, but this is not the case in the 
specimen which has been under observation, 


nae Rubidus. Ruddy Duck. 


Wilson has given figures and accounts of both male and female of this curious and 
rare bird, but the figures are too small for satisfactory information; he had never 


seen more than two individuals, which he described, and which were killed on the 


River Delaware. The specimen received was that of a male, and is peculiarly 


valuable and interesting, because it not only confirms the species as introduced by 


Wilson, but ascertains its summer habitation to be in the northern parts of America. 
Wilson’s work being in very few hands, and the subject, from its novelty and rarity, 
being of importance, it seems desirable to add his description of both sexes, the 
extreme correctness of which, as far as regards the male, is confirmed by the 
specimen ;_ the only point of. difference i is in the length, which, according to Wilson, 
is fifteen inches and a half, and that under notice near eighteen inches. The descrip- 
tions of the male are as follows :—é the bill is broad at the tip, the under mandible 
much narrower, and both of a rich light blue; nostrils small, placed in the middle 
of the bill; cheeks and chin white; front, crown, and back part of the neck down 
nearly to the back, black; rest of the neck, whole back, scapulars, flanks, and tail 


No. Vi] ZOOLOGY. 701 


ccoverts, deep reddish-brown, the colour of bright mahogany; wings plain pale drab, 
darkest at the points; tail black, greatly tapering, containing eighteen narrow 
pointed feathers; the plumage of the breast and upper part of the neck is of a 
remarkable kind, being dusky olive at bottom, ending in hard bristly points of a 
silvery grey, very much resembling the hair of some kinds of seal skins; all these. are 
_ thickly marked with transverse curving lines of deep brown; belly and vent silver- 
‘grey, thickly crossed with dusky olive; under tail-coverts white; legs and feet ash- 
coloured.” Wy 

He describes the female as ‘‘ partly of the same size as the male; the front, 
lores, and crown, deep blackish- brown ; _ bill as in the male, very broad at’ the 
extremity, and largely toothed on the ane: of the same rich blue; cheeks a: dull 
eream ; neck plain dull drab, sprinkled about the auriculars: with blackish ;. lower 
part of the neck and breast variegated with grey, ash, and reddish-brown; - the 
reddish dies off towards the belly, leaving this last of a dull white shaded with dusky: 
ash; wings as.in the male; tail brown; scapulars i aie thickly sprinkled 
with whitish, giving them a grey appearance ; legs ash.” , 

The whole plumage is certainly very singular, the is in the specimen appears to 
be very thick, the bill is particularly broad, the body thick, and-the tail is remarkable 
in the feathers being so very narrow. 


Anas Albeola. Buffel-headed or Spirit Duck. 


This species is common in the United States in winter, and equally abundant in 
the north during the breeding season. It has received a variety of appellations, and 
the difference between the sexes has added to its names, since they have been 
taken for distinct species. Both sexes are well described by Latham in his Synopsis. 
Specimens of a male and female were received. The male is the A. Albeola and 
A. Bucephala of Linneus, the Little Black and White Duck of Edwards, the Sarcelle 
blanche et noire ou La Religicuse and Petit Canard a grosse téte of Buffon, the 
Buffel-headed Duck of Catesby, the Spirit-Duck of Pennant, and is known to the 
Canadian settlers also as the Conjuring Duck. The female is the A. Rustica of 
Linneus, the Sarcelle de la Caroline of Buffon, and the Little Brown Duck of Catesby, 
Latham, and Pennant. 


Anas Discors. Blue-winged Teal. 


a6 specimens, both males, differing a little from each other, and marked as 
killed at Carlton-House, and there called the Shoe-string Duck, were received : these 
have not their heads and necks so dark as are described by. authors, nor do the de- 
scription of authors generally agree. The female is said to differ from the male by 
being generally brighter, and in not having the white mark in the head, but the bright 


702 APPENDIX. ‘[No. V. 


colours of the wings are the same in both sexes. Catesby made the two sexes distinct 
birds, calling the male the White-faced Duck, and the female the Blue-winged Teal; 
hence the different names of the writers who followed Catesby. Buffon called the 
male Sarcelle Soucrourou, and the female*SarcelleSoucrourelle. Linneus brought the 
two birds of Catesby together, making them the male and female of his Anas 
Discors. Latham supposes ‘hese birds do not go higher than New York, ‘but 
they evidently breed in the more northern parts, passing the United States in the 
spring and fall, and going for the ‘winter to the West Indian Islands, Cayenne, and 
other warm countries -of the south. They are excellent as food. Catesby de- 
scribes the females of both his birds as being all brown; if he ever saw such, they 
were probably young birds. ‘The male bird may be described from the present spe- 
cimens ;—length, sixteen inches ; bill an inch and a half long, dark slate-colour ; be- 
tween the eye and «the bill, but separated from each by dark feathers, is a semi- 
lunar spot of white, the points turned backwards; the head and neck otherwise 
dark brown; the lower part .of the neck, breast, and whole under parts marked 
with round black spots on pale redilish ground, the spots sometimes ‘running 
together into bars; sides-of ‘the vent white; the under tail-coverts black : feathers 
on the back, dark brown, edged with very light brown narrow markings; primaries 
and tail feathers dusky brown; lesser wing-coverts bright shiny blue; below 
these a white band; speculum a brilliant green; tertials, some having one edge 
light blue, others striped-with pale brown down the centre, otherwise dark brown; 
tarse one inch:and a quarter long; legs and feet yellow. F 


Anas Sponsa. Summer Duck. 


This species, though not included in the preceding enumeration of American 
‘Ducks which are found in the more northern parts of the New World, is here intro- 
‘duced, because it appears bya drawing made by Lieutenant Hood, at‘Cumberland- 
House, in May, 1820, to have been a visitor so far northward at that period. 


Mergus Serrator. ‘Red-breasted Merganser. 


Specimens of two male birds were received. Few birds are more common or better 
‘known at Hudson’s Bay than the Red-breasted Merganser, they breed there and 
migrate to the southward in the winter, at which season they are also common in the 
United States, and have been well described by Pennant and Wilson. They are 
equally well known in Europe. 


Mergus Cucullatus. Hooded Merganser. 


A specimen of a female of this species was brought home by the Expedition ; it 
agrees exactly with the description.of Latham and Pennant, who represent it as breed- 
ing, and being plentiful, in the countries round Hudson’s Bay. 


No. Vy | ZOOLOGY. 703° 


Colymbus Glactalis. _ Great Northern Diver. 


This bird has been long well known, except that in its immature state it has been 
called Colymbus Immer, and the Immer Diver. It is found in the northern coun-- 
tries of both worlds, breeding and living: on the«sides of lakes, and going southwards 
in severe weather, where it is equally oberved on the’sea; and in fresh waters. These 
birds differ much from each other in size, whicli has:led Wilson to’conjecture that there: 
may be two species, the smaller belonging to America; but this-cannot be the case, 
since specimens have been received from Canada, as large as any killed in Europe. 


Colymbus: Septentrionalis. Red-throated Diver. 

This- species, though spread over the whole Arctic Regions,. is particularly abun-- 
dant in Hudson’s- Bay, and in the lakes in the interior. It is a. more northern 
bird than the Northern Driver, is found nearer to the Pole, and goes less to the: 
south. The young. are much more plentiful in the: temperate counties in the winter’ 
than the old birds: It is subject to great variety in size; the length being sometimes 
twenty-one inches; in other cases, twenty-eight inches.. The young have been called: 
Colymbus Stellatus, Striatus, and Borealis; Speckled Diver andStriped Diver. Buffon. 
mistook it for the female of the Black-throated Diver ; and did not, therefore, make’ 
it.distinct.. [tis not noticed by, Wilson in his American Ornithology: 


y: ive on : bal hi Led} be: (ane ites 
maiioa ahigg ba ih ue ogn dy : a : Beibesid ahingr per i 
i a yi aaa o bargdo themes ti soda geod tae vr: areae seh 
axont ehswers ith alerief 

d,xaltsuna ade eioinag rowed, qa 
anna aued d eranaiagcs sanghe 


Nak 


*: da Pe 
ane! 
bit 


Lige ~ etsoina tl gitot \ se sh pero | 


lad top atreedih 


iin pik, alt hon. oo 
sis pa 
i Uuitaaliporas souaz 


2 


No. VI. 


NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 


BY 


JOHN RICHARDSON, M.D., 


SURGEON TO THE EXPEDITION. 


In the following pages I have been led to give much more detailed descriptions of 
some of the fish, observed by the Expedition, than may at first sight appear to be 
necessary ; because I wished to put Ichthyologists in possession of as many facts as I 
could, respecting species. which may not soon come under the notice of another 
observer. I was also desirous of enabling those who are versant in this branch of 
Natural History, to decide whether they may, or may not, have been already described 
by other authors ; a point on which my own opinion is of little value. The descriptions 
were, except in one or two instances, which are noted, taken upon the spot, from 
recent specimens. The disadvantages under which we frequently laboured in doing 
this, will be apparent to those who have read the Narrative of the Journey ; and 
will, I hope, be esteemed a sufficient excuse for diffuseness on the one hand, and 
omissions on the other. 


Petromyzon Fluvialis, L. Lesser Lamprey. 


A lamprey, bearing an exact resemblance in size and appearance to the one 
figured by Bloch, t. cccexv. f. 2., under the name of P. argenteus (and which 
Cuvier, Rég. An. tom, ii, p. 118, considers to be the same with P. fluvialis,) 
was found in Great Slave Lake, adhering to an inconnu, (salmo Mackenzii). It 
had the large eyes, and, comparatively, large mouth, represented in Bloch’s figure, 
with the teeth of the P. fluvialis. The size of its eyes would seem to mark it as a 
young fish. | 


Accipenser Ruthenus. Sterlet. 


Cuvier Rég. An. ii. p. 142. Gmel. Lin. Syst. Nat. p. 1485. Bloch, t. 89. 
Pennant’s Arctic Zoology, ii. p. 358. 
Accipensére Strelet, Lacepede, tom. i. p. 434. 


This fish, termed nameyoo by the Cree Indians, is caught in great abundance in 
the Saskatchawan, but is not known to exist in the more northerly rivers, that 
| 4X 


706 APPENDIX. [No. VI: 


discharge their waters into the Arctic Sea. The sturgeon fishery at Cumberland 
House is most productive in the spring and summer, but some are caught occasionally 
in the winter. Considerable differences in the intensity of the colour of the body, 
and in the length and acuteness of the snout, exist amongst the individuals caught 
there, but they seem to be all referable to this species. A fish of sixty pounds 
weight is esteemed to be large. Tothe westward of the Rocky Mountains sturgeons, 
weighing several hundred pounds,are common. ‘These are probably of the species A. 
huso, L. The sturgeon, in the Saskatchawan, generally spawns in June, but indivi- 
duals are found at all seasons containing roe. 


Salmo Hearnii. Copper-Mine River Salmon. 
Sub-genus salmo. Cuv. Itég. An. ii. p. 160. 
Salmo, maculis carneo-rubris, squamis paryis multum nitentibus, maxillis equalibus, cauda integri. 

Shape, that of the common salmon, but the head rather larger in proportion. 

The colour of the back is olive green, of the sides pale, of the belly bluish white; 
and there are several longitudinal rows of flesh-red spots, of which those on the 
sides are largest, and about the size of.a pea. 

The scales are very small, but possess much lustre, and adhere very firmly to a 
mucous skin. | 

The Aead is destitute of scales. The cheeks are unprotected by bone, but, together 
with the opercula, have much pearly lustre. The eyes are smail, and situated 
about half an inch from the middle of the margin of the mouth. The nostrils are 
double, being composed of two small evalvular openings on each side, which are 
placed superiorly and anteriorly to the eye, or about half way between that organ and 
the mouth. The jaws are of equal length; the upper one is emarginated, and 
receives the knobbed extremity of the lower one into the notch. 

Mouth.—The intermaxillary bones project a little to form the snout, but enter 
only, in a small degree, into the composition of the margin of the mouth, The 
snout thus formed, is separated from the vault of the palate by a thin membrane, 
which arises from the maxillary bones, lies in a plane parallel to that of the palate, 
and has its crescentic edge directed towards the pharynx. The maxillary bones are 
oblong, and form the sides of the upper jaw; their lower extremities play upon 
the outside of the inferior jaw. The limbs of the lower jaw meet in an acute angle, 
and form a knob at the symphysis. 

Teeth.—_The upper and lower maxillaries are furnished sparingly with smal] 
subulate teeth. A solitary tooth, similar to these, is placed on each side of the 
notch, formed by the intermaxillaries. There are also rows of teeth on the palatine 
bones, and a few on the anterior part of the vomer, and some stronger ones cn. the 
tongue, all subulate. ‘3 


LOBE 


2 Inches 


T Curtis dead sice)et scalp. 


Published March 1823, by John Murray, London. 


eine 


‘ 
Riera 
4 


is 


No. VI] NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 707 


The gull-openings are large, and the branchial arches unite nearly at the meesial 
line of the tongue. There are ten oblique rays in the branchiostegous membranes. 

The intestines are similar in form to those of the trouts. The stomach is rather 
small. The ceca, from thirty to thirty- six in number, are simple, cylindrical, and 
from one to two inches long. 

Fins.—The dorsal fin is situated opposite to the ventrals. The anal fin is triangular 
with the apex of the triangle truncated ; it has eighteenrays. The caudal fin is large 
and very entire, truncated with a slight rounding of the angles, and entirely devoid 
of a crescentic form. Its outline is wedge-shaped. 

This fish is inferior to the English salmon in size, its flesh is red, and it is taken in 
great abundance in the months of July and August, in the Salmon Leap, at Bloody 
Fall, on the Copper-Mine River. 

We have compared it with the descriptions of the various species given in Pallas’ 
Jinn.; and with the plates of those indicated by Cuvier, Reg. Animal, ii. p. 162; from 
all of which it appears sufficiently distinct. It resembles the S. Eriox in its 
caudal fin. 


Salmo Mackenzit. 


Inconnu, Mackenzie's Voyages in North America, p.9, and elsewhere, and of the Canadian Voyagers. 
S. corpore sub-tereti elliptico-lanceolato, capite longo: rostro truncato, ore dentibus parvis confertis 
munito, maxilla inferiore longiore.—Tab. xxv. Fig. 1. 


Body roundish: lateral outline betwixt elliptical and lanceolate, tapering towards 
the tail. Lateral line straight. 

Colour of the back and sides changing from bluish to greenish-grey when it is 
moved in the light: of the belly bluish-white. 

Scales sub-orbicular, four lines in diameter, possessing much pearly lustre. 

The head is long and compressed, but a little flattened above. The vertex is 
covered with smooth skin. The mesial line rises into an acute smooth ridge betwixt 
the orbits. The orbits are oval and large—they are placed about an inch from the 
extremity of the snout, or twice as near to it as to the posterior edge of the: opercu- 
lum. ‘The sides of the head have a strong silvery lustre. The operculum and sub- 
operculum form, by the junction of their smooth even posterior margins, a very 
regular segment of a circle rather greater than a semicircle. They form about one- 
third of the margin of the large gill openings, the remaining two-thirds being 
formed by the branchiostegous membranes. ‘Lhe pre-operculum has a lunated form, 
and leaves a small naked cheek not greater than its own breadth betwixt it and a 
double range of suborbitar bones. These sub-orbitar bones, about six in number, form 
a circular patch, the greatest part of which lies posterior to the orbit: a narrow thin 
plate, running out from them along the under margin of the orbit, again expands into 


4X 2 


708 APPENDIX. [No. VI 


a radiated sub-orbicular plate on each side of the snout. The nostrils are double, very 
small, and placed close to the orbit. The anterior foramen, formed in the soft border 
of the posterior one, has a raised margin. The snout is immoveable, and truncated. 

Mouth.—The intermaxillary bones, forming about one-third of the margin of the 
upper jaw, lie transversely, overlapping the curved articulating extremities of the 
maxillaries, and give a truncated form to the snout. The maxillaries are very thick 
and strong, are made up of two plates, have a lanceolate shape with smooth edges, 
and, when the mouth is shut, pass on the outside of, and cover the broad flattened 
sides of, the lower jaw. They send a small curved process behind the extremities of. 
the intermaxillaries to be articulated through the medium of cartilage with the snout. 
The under jaw is strong, has an obtuse and very slightly tuberculated extremity, 
which projects four or five lines beyond the upper jaw. Its articulation, extending as 
far back as the posterior part of the orbit, admits of considerable depression, but 
the opening of the mouth is not of corresponding magnitude, as its sides are con- 
tracted by a tendinous or muscular fold, which runs from the middles of the superior 
maxillaries to the sides of the lower jaw. 

Teeth. The intermaxillary bones, the extremity of the lower jaw, the ata: 
vomer, and tongue, are covered with card-like plates of minute teeth. The same 
kind of plates occur at the root of the tongue, and on the superior and inferior pharyn- 
geal bones. 

The branchiostegous membranes contain ten flat curved rays, which increase con- 
siderably in breadth, and slightly in curvature and length, as they approach the 
operculum. 

The branchial arches are furnished with solitary rows of rigid cartilaginous awl- 
shaped processes, whose inner surfaces are rough, with minute teeth. Those on the 
upper arch exceed half an inch in length; the others are smaller. 

The esophagus and stomach descend from the pharynx in form of a continuous hike. 
having nine longitudinal ruge on its internal membrane. After running towards the 
anus for about three inches, this tube makes a short turn upwards, and terminates 
in the pylorus. . 

The céca are very numerous, conical, or awl-shaped, and about a quarter of an 
inch long. They surround the intestine, and are much crowded from its com- 
mencement to the insertion of the gall-duct, a space of about two inches. Be- 
yond this they are continued down one side of the intestine only for two inches 
more. The remainder of the gut descends naked in a straight line to the anus. 
About an inch and a half of the gut, a short way from the anus, is furnished with 
circular ruge. - The air- bladder is large, without contractions, and communicates. 
freely with the upper part of the stomach, or. lower part of the cesophagus. There 
is a large spleen attached to the curvature of the stomach. | 


No. VI.] NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 709 


_ Fins.—The dorsal fin is situated opposite the ventrals, and about its own length, 
nearer to the caudal fin than to the snout. It is sub-quadrangular, higher than long, 
and gradually diminishes in height posteriorly. It contains twelve rays, of which the 
first is three inches and a quarter long, and is supported anteriorly by three shorter 
ones closely applied to its base. The adipose fin is small and lingueform. The anal 
fin is sub-quadrangular, deepest anteriorly with a slightly crescentic margin. It’occu- 
pies rather more than half the space between the anus and caudal fin. The first ray 
is supported by three minute ones. The caudal fin is large, forked, with the lower 
lobe very slightly larger than the upper one ; the scales, a little diminished in size, 
encroach somewhat upon the fin, and terminate by a well-defined semicircular line. — 

BALOR a GPa DT.2), Dail 23) WVinl2eyeg A. 158 Cy 2282 

_ The length of the specimen described was eighteen inches, or, including the caudal 

fin, twenty inches and a half. | 

This fish grows to the size of thirty or forty pounds, or upwards. Its flesh is white, 
and when in season agreeable ; but it is rather soft, and proves palling when used as 
daily food, differing in that respect from the attihawmegh. The Indians report 
that it comes from the Arctic Sea. We have no account of its being found anywhere 
except in M‘Kenzie’s River, and in the lakes and rivers which flow into it. Its most 
southerly habitat is at the Salt River, the cascades on Slave River preventing it from 
ascending higher. It agrees in some points with the descriptions given of the 
S. peled, S.leucitchys, Nov. Com. Petrop. xvi., and S.autumnalis, L. ; but appears to be 
distinct from all these, not only from the differences in the number of the rays in the 
fins, but also in the teeth. This fish does not arrange well in any of Cuvier’s sub- 
genera of the genus salmo. 


Salmo Farto. L, 


Sub-genus Salmo. Cuv. Rég. An. p. 161. 

Namaycush, Pennant’s Arctic Zoology, Introd. p. cexcviii. 
Namacush, Penn. Arc. Zool. Vol. ii. p. 392. 

Trout, Penn. Arc. Zool. loco citato. Hearne and Mackenzie, passim. 

Among the trout, which abound in every lake and river in the northern parts of 
America, there exist innumerable varieties, differing in size and colours. The Indians 
have no names to denote the varieties, but class them all under one general term ; 
the Crees under that of nammecoos, the Chipewyans of thlooees-inneh, and the 
Esquimaux of cerkallook. I took descriptions of several of the varieties, but did 
not observe any difference of structure, whereupon I could found specific characters. 
The vividness of the spots seemed to change with the season, and with the condition 
of the individual ; and the colour of the flesh, which varied from white to pale red, 
may also be ascribed to some accidental cause, perhaps to the river in which they 


mae) APPENDIX. fNo: VI. 


were bred. It is well known that the colours, both of the flesh and skin of the trout, 
in Scotland, bear a relation to the colour and nature of their native streams. On 
these accounts I have referred them all for the present to the above-mentioned 
species, leaving to those who are better’acquainted with ichthylogy, and have gréater 
opportunities of comparing the different kinds than we possessed, to discriminate 
them hereafter. 

We frequently observed trout weighing forty pounds, and were informed by the 
residents that fish of sixty pounds were not very uncommon in particular lakes. In 
Manito, or God’s Lake, between Hill and Severn Rivers, they are reported to attain 
the enormous size of ninety pounds. The large individuals that we saw, bore a 
striking resemblance to the overgrown trout that are occasionally met with in 
England. They are all, particularly the larger varieties, subject to an incurvature 
of the lower jaw whenout of season, and at that time the teeth appear particularly 
prominent. 

We caught a few trout in the Arctic Sea. They are’ found! also in small land- 
locked lakes in every part of the country. 


Salmo Grenlandicus. Capelan, or. Lodde: 


Capelan. Pennant’s Arctic Zoology, vol. ii. p. 394. 
Salmo Groenlandicus. Bloch. 381, f.1. Clupea Villosa, Gmel. Linn. p. 1409. 
La Lodde. Bonnaterre Planches de VEncycl. Méth. liv 28. p. 167. 
This curious little fish termed by the Esquimaux angmageceuck was met with in 
Bathurst’s Inlet, collected in large shoals on the shallows to spawn. 


Coregonus Albus. White Fish. 


Genus. Salmo. Lin. Coregonus. Artedi. Sub-genus. Coregonus. Cuv. Rég. An. 11. p. 162. 

Salmo Lavarettus, Guiniad and Tickomeg. Pennant’s Arctic Zoology, Introduction, p. 298. and vol. ii, p. 
$93. (excluding the synonym of British Zoology.) 

Coregonus Albus. Le Sueur, Journal of Academy of Sciences, Philadelphia, vol. i. 232, with a figure. 

The Cree name of this fish is attihhawmegh, which is corrupted into tittameg by 
the traders. The Canadian voyagers term it poisson blanc. It is named thlooceh 
by the Copper Indians. The weight of an ordinary-sized fish is three pounds, but 
it is not uncommon to meet with individuals weighing eight pounds, and they have 
been known to reach even twenty pounds. When very fat the shape of the fish is 
somewhat distorted, as it acquires a hump immediately behind the head. The 
very large fish increase principally in circumference, their length suffering little 
augmentation. 

The attihhawmegh seems to prey on insects. Its stomach, however, is generally 
filled with earth mixed with a few slender roots of vegetables and some small white 


S 


N 


= 


Fé 


e 


? 
BO 


is S 
WSs. 

ee 

Me 

N 

\ aN 


MOWUWSLCT 


OFM 


2 


e 


. 
o 


SF tiirtes dé. fad stec) et sciip. 


7) 


No. -VI.] NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 711 


worms, It has been known, though rarely, to take a hook baited with a small piece 
of meat. The structure of its stomach displays in an eminent degree that. peculiar 
thickness of coats which has been observed in many fish of this genus. | 

We caught some fine attihhawmegh at the mouth of the Copper-Mine River, and 
in Bathurst’s Inlet, and it abounds in every river and lake in the country. It forms 
a most delicious food, and at many posts it is the sole article of diet for years 
together, without producing satiety. It spawns in the month of October. 


Coregonus Arteda ? 


Gen. Salmo. Lin. Coregonus. Aréedi. Les Ombres, Cuv. Rog. An. 
Coregonus Artedi, or Herring Salmon, Le Sueur, Jour. of Acad. of Sciences, Philadelph. Vol. i. p. 231. 


This fish bears so strong a resemblance to a lean individual of the preceding 
species, that it requires the eye of an experienced fisherman to detect the difference 
on a cursory view. It is, however, smaller in all its parts, and differs remarkably in 
the comparative thinness of the coats of its stomach, which are scarcely thicker than 
those of an ordinary trout. | 

The Cree name of this fish ottonneebees, has been corrupted by the traders into 
-tullibee. It is inferior to the attihhawmegh as an article of food; but in its habits 
and food it appears to correspond with that fish, notwithstanding the difference in 
the structure of their stomachs. It is found in most of the lakes, and we caught 
a few in the sea at the mouth of the Copper-Mine River, but it is much more rare 
than the attihhawmegh. 


Coregonus Signifer. Back’s Grayling. 
Gen. Salmo. L. Coregenus. Artedi. 
Poisson bleu. or Blue fish, of the Fur traders. 
C. pinna dorsali maxima: radiis posterioribus elongatis, maxilla inferiore longiore, corpore maculato.— 
: Tab. xxvi. 

The body has a compressed, elliptical form, tapering gradually towards the tail: 
the head is small, and the snout, seen sideways, appears acute, but otherwise obtuse. 
The lateraéi line is very nearly straight, and nearer to the back than to the belly. 

Colour.—Its sides are tinged with lavender-purple, mixed with bluish grey, with- 
out streaks; the belly is blackish grey, with several irregular white blotches, and 
there are five or six longitudinal rows of uniform quadrangular spots of Prussian blue 
on the anterior part of the body. There is a large blue mark underneath the lower 
jaw on each side. The dorsal fin, which forms a prominent feature in the fish, is 
of a blackish-grey eclour, with some lighter blotches. Superiorly it has a narrow 
margin of light lake-red, and posteriorly it is beautifully ornamented with spots of 
Berlin blue. The ventrals are streaked with red, and whitish lines in the direction 
of their rays. The scales are moderately large, and have no great lustre; their exte- 


712 APPENDIX. [No. VI 


rior margins are rotundate and entire, or very slightly undulated ; those on the an- 
terior part of the belly are much smaller than the others. 

Head.—The vertex is covered with smooth skin, which, shrinking, shews in the 
dried specimen a central ebtuse ridge, and a lateral one over each orbit, better 
marked, but tuberculated and interrupted. These are inconspicuous in the recent 


_ fish. The operculum and sub-operculum form conjointly nearly a rectangle, having 


its posterior angles slightly rounded off. The inter-operculum is acutely triangular, 
and the pre-operculum, of a lunated form, unites with the sub-orbitar bones to cover 
ereat part of the cheek, a small fleshy portion occurring only over the angle of the 
lower jaw. The orbit is large and nearly round ; it is above one-half nearer to the 
margin of the mouth than to the posterior edge of the operculum. 

The nostrils are small, and placed between the anterior superior angle of the orbit, 
aud the intermaxillaries. 

The. mouth is moderately large. The intermaxillaries, forming about a third part 
of the upper mandible, are narrow, and lie transversely, giving a truncated appear- 
ance to the snout when viewed from above. They are articulated with the maxil- 
laries, which have also a narrow oblong form; and, when the mouth is extended, 
they form its sides, descending perpendicularly to be connected by membrane with 
the broad posterior part of the lower jaw; an oblong pedicle is attached to the pos- 
terior edge of each of the maxillaries. ‘The lower jaw is large and strong, and has its 
articulation under the centre of the orbit; about one-half of it, when the mouth is 
open, projects beyond the upper jaw. Its symphysis, or extremity, is obtuse, form- 
ing the segment of a circle. When the mouth is closed, the maxillaries are retracted 
close to the orbit, the lateral margins of the lower jaw shut in under them, and a 
transverse slit only is seen, formed at the extremity of the muzzle, by the intermaxil- 
laries, and obtuse end of the lower jaw. 

Teeth.—A single row of small hooked teeth runs round the margins of the inter- 
maxillaries, maxillaries, and lower jaws. A double row, rather more minute, exists 
on each side of the palate, and there is a small cluster on the anterior part of the 
vomer. ‘These are all conspicuous in the dried specimen. The tongue is smooth; 
the superior pharyngeal bones are rough, with minute teeth. 

The upper branchial arch is furnished with a row of rough subulate cartilaginous 
processes; there are smaller and softer processes on the other arches. 'The branchios- 
tegous membrane contains eight flat rays, the inner ones becoming gradually more 
curved. 

The alimentary canal descends from the pharynx for two inches and a half, in form 
of a straight tube, having its internal membrane disposed in coarse longitudinal 
ruge; it then dilates considerably, and bends upwards upon itself. This dilated 
part resembles the stomach of the attihhawmegch in its structure, but its coats are 


No. VI.] NOTICES OF THE FISHES. ag 


not so thick. The pylorus, which is much contracted, terminates the ascending part. 
The rest of the intestine runs downwards in a straight line to the anus; its coats are 
very thin, but two or three inches of its inferior part are strengthened by some cir- 
cular rugee of its internal membrane, and round its upper part seventeen or eighteen 
cxca, from one-half to two inches long, are inserted within the space of three-quarters 
of an inch. The liver is small, without lobes, and there is a large spleen attached 
to the lower curvature of the stomach. The air-bladder is large, and communicates 
with the cesophagus. 

Fins.—The pectorals are scimitar shaped, and pointed, and reach rather more than 
half way to the insertion of the ventrals. The dorsal fin is probably by far the largest 
in this genus; it contains twenty-four rays: the two or three first are small, but the 
others, increasing rapidly in height, as their origin is more posterior, become more 
and more branched, and cause the fin to play loosely like a flag over the posterior 
part of the body; the insertion of the fin occupies about one-third of the length of 
the body, and the extremity of its posterior ray, which is five inches long, reaches 
as far as the adipose fin. The extraordinary size and beautiful colours of this fin 
form the great ornament of the fish. The adipose fin is tongue-shaped, about one inch 
long, and situate opposite the posterior edge of the anal. The ventrals are large, 
obliquely fan-shaped, and placed opposite the centre of the dorsal. The anal fin is 
rather small; it contains ten rays, besides two or three very short ones, which lie over 
the base of the first one; the others become shorter as they recede; a naked space, 
equal to the length of the insertion of this fin, is left between it and the tail. The 
caudal has a shallow crescentic form, the lower lobe being slightly larger than the 
upper one. Most of the fin is covered with very small scales, densely tiled. 

Bs. Pi7 D24. Alos V9. C204. 

This beautiful fish inhabits strong rapids. Its stomach is generally filled with 
gravel, or black earth, It bites eagerly at the artificial fly, and, deriving great power 
from its large dorsal fin, affords much sport to the angler. Its rectum is filled with 
black feces. The ordinary length of the species is about sixteen inches, exclusive of 
the caudal fin, or about twelve inches from the snout to the anus. As an article of 
food it is inferior to the attihhawmegh. It is found only in the clear rivers to the 
northward of Great Slave Lake. . 

In the figure, which is an accurate representation of the dried specimen, the pos- 


terior part of the fin is scarcely produced enough, owing to a portion of it having broken 
off in the carriage. | 


T14 APPENDIX. [No. VI. 


Coregonus Thymallotdes, Little Winter River Grayling. 
C. pinna dorsali magna radiis 22 equalibus, maxilla inferiore longiore, dentibus mandibulorum pala- 
torum vomeris et pharyngis parvis. 

This fish resembles the preceding in many points, and is caught in the same places, 
Their teeth and intestines correspond. They differ slightly in shape, colour, and 
lustre, but remarkably in the size of the dorsal fin. Its shades of colour are not so 
beautifully arranged as in the preceding, and are less vivid, but its scales possess 
more lustre. | 

Its body is compressed: its lateral outline broadly lanceolate, tapering gradually 
towards the tail. The belly is rather more obtuse than the back. Its sides are bluish 
grey, with some purplish reflections, when moved in the light. 

The scales, partly orbicular and partly truncated, are of equal size throughout, 
moderately large, and possess a bright pearly lustre. 

The dorsal fin is large, and like that of the preceding species, contains from twenty- 
two to twenty-four rays, but the posterior ones do not branch out in the same man- 
ner, and scarcely exceed the others in height; hence the fin has a very different 
aspect. It is about one inch high, has a dark bluish-grey colour, with several rows 
of spots, having purple centres and light-red borders. It has also several perpen- 
dicular opake whitish streaks. The other fins are the same with those of the 
C. signifer. 

B8. P17. D 24. V 9. A 10. C 20. 

The usual size of this fish is eight inches. 


Coregonus Quadrilateralis. Round Fish. 


Katheeh, of the Copper Indians and okeugnak, of the Esquimaux. 

Sea Gwiniad. Arctic Zoology, Introd. ccxcviii. vol. 2..p.393..No. 173, excluding the synon. of British Zoology. 

C. rostro obtuso, maxilla inferiori truncata sub-breviore, ore omnino edentulo, pinnz dorsalis radiis 11. 
Tab. xxv. Fig. 2. 

Body.—Shape sub-fusiform. It is four-sided, with the angles rounded, and, when 
viewed laterally, presents a lanceolate outline, tapering towards the tail. Its 
form is elegant ; the back is slightly arched, the belly still less so. Itsdepth, imme- 
diately anterior to the dorsal fin, is three inches, or about one-fifth of its length, and 
its transverse diameter, at the lateral line, is about two inches. 

The colour of the scales on the back and sides is intermediate betwixt honey yellow 
and wood brown, with a thin border of blackish grey round their exterior margins. 
Those on the belly are white, and exhibit a pearly lustre. 

The scales are large, being between three and a half and four lines in diameter, and 
have an irregular orbicular form, and much lustre. 

Head.—The forehead runs in a straight line as far as the nostrils, from whence 
the obtuse but not broad snout droops suddenly, The mesial line from the occiput 


No. VI.] NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 415 


to the nostrils is raised into a slight ridge, and the sides of the head are rounded off. 
The opereula and infra-orbitar bones which cover a great part of the cheek are 
yellowish with metallic lustre. The eye is moderately large, and the anterior part 
of the orbit is half an inch from the extremity of the snout. The irides are yellowish 
white with a silvery lustre. 

The nostrils are double and situated about five lines from the end of the snout. 
The posterior openings are rather larger: the anterior ones are surrounded by a soft 
membranous border. 

The mouth, which is very small, is, when stretched to the utmost, nearly quadran- 
gular, and has the broad extremities of the superior maxillary bones projecting on 
its sides ; when shut it has the appearance of a transverse slit about a quarter of an 
inch in length, formed above by the intermaxillary bones, which descend perpendicu- 
larly from the snout, and below by the very obtuse symphysis or truncated extremity 
of the lower jaw. The superior maxillary bones are twice as large as the intermaxil- 
laries, and the crura of the lower jaw form with their transverse symphysis three 
sides of a rectangle. 

There are no teeth whatever. 

The branchiostegous membrane contains seven rays. The branchial arches are 
furnished with single rows of small soft processes. 

Intestines.—The cesophagus and stomach form one tube, which makes a curvature 
upwards for one third of its length, and terminates in a very contracted pylorus. 
It is not thickened like the stomach of the attihhawmegh. The rest of the gut runs 
in a straight line to the anus. The ceca are crowded round its commencement, 
and descend in two or three rows for one third of its length. They are in number 
between eighty and ninety. The lower third of the gut has its internal membrane 
disposed in circular ruge, except about half an inch at the anus. The whole gut 
and cca look black from the colour of their contents. 

fins.—The dorsal fin commences six inches and a half from the snout, is one inch 
and three quarters high, and has eleven rays exclusive of two short ones, which lie 
against the base of the first. The adipose fin is attached nearly its whole length, 
and has a few scales on its base. The ventrals are opposite to the dorsal. The 
anal fin has ten strong rays ; a considerable portion of the tail, which is slender, lies 
behind it. The anus is eleven inches from the mouth. The caudal fin is slightly 
crescentic, its base is covered with scales. The fins have in general a yellowish 
tinge. ; : 

Buen Pp. D. il. A. 10. ¥! C. 

This fish preys on small insects. It spawns in September. We found it in the 
smail rivers about Fort Enterprise and in the Arctic Sea. It occurs also in Hudson’s 
Bay, and is well known to the Esquimaux about Churchill by the name of okeugnak. 

4Y¥ 2 


716 | APPENDIX. [No VI. 


The individual, from which the description was more particularly drawn up, was a 
male fifteen inches long from the nose to the caudal fin. It was selected as being of 
medium size, and there did not appear to be any difference in external form betwixt 
the sexes. “er 

As this fish occurs abundantly in the places from whence Pennant received his sea 
gwiniad, and as no other fish answering to the description of the gwiniad is known 
to the traders, I have quoted him with doubt. The round-fish differs from the 
gwiniad of British Zoology in the number of the rays in all the fins, in the ventrals 
not being blue, and in the want of the deep blue spots on the belly. La Bezole, 
RonveE et, sur les Poissons des Lacs, p. 119, bears a strong resemblance to our 
fish, but the description there given is not sufficient to enable me to decide whether 
they are the same or not. hei, 

It also resembles the S. Wartmanni: Biocn, t. 105, in form, but differs in the 
number of branchiostegous, dorsal, and anal rays. 


Hiodon Clodalis. Gold Eye. 
H. clodalis. Le Sueur Journal of Academy of Sciences Philad. 1. p. 367 t. 14. 
This singular and beautiful fish, resembling in its habits the small trouts, is caught 
‘in nets at Cumberland-House in the spring, but not in sufficient quantity to be of 
importance in an economical point of view. 
It is named oweepeetcheesees by the Cree Indians, and naccaysh and gold eye by 
the traders. 


Clupea Harengus. L. Common Herring. 


A pretty extended description of a herring, caught in Bathurst’s Inlet on August 
5th, has been compared with the common herrings brought to the London market 
in January, and found to agree exactly. The roe of the herrings we caught was very 
small. 


Ksox Lucius? Pike or Jack. 


- The pike abounds in every lake in the northern parts of America, and contributes 
much to the support of the Indians, as it is the only fish that is readily caught with 
the hook in the winter time ; from which circumstance it has obtained the name of 
eithinyoo-cannoosheoo or Indian fish. The Hudson’s Bay pike, referred in PENNaNT’s 
Arctic Zoology to the common species, seems to differ from it in some respects ; but 
without further opportunities of comparison, we cannot venture to pronounce them 
to be distinct. 


No. VI] NOTICES OF THE FISHES. TT 


Catastomus Hudsonius. 
Grey Sucker.—Of the English fur Traders. Carpe Blanche, Of the Canadian Traders. Namaypeeth. Cree 
Se HIN L, Catastomus. Le Sueur. Sub-genus Leuciscus, Les Ables, Cuv. Rég. Animal. ii, p. 195. 
Cyprinus Catastomus, Forster Philosoph. Trans. Ixiii. p. 158. t. vi. | 
Namay-peeth and Sucker, Pennant’s Arct. Zool. Introd. p. ccxcix. and vol. ii. 402. 
Catastomus Hudsonius, Le Sueur Journal of Acad. of Sciences, Phil. vol. i. p. 107. 

The body swells gradually from the head until it attains its greatest girth, about 
half way to the dorsal fin: from thence it tapers to the lower edge of the anal fin, 
and the remainder of the tail is nearly linear. Its sides and back are slightly 
flattened, the depth exceeding the transverse diameter rather more than one half. The 
lateral line runs downwards from the nape of the neck by the side of the gill- 
opening until it becomes nearly equidistant from the back and belly; it then runs 
straight towards the tail, and when it arrives over the anal fin, is reflected 
upwards at a very obtuse angle, thus giving to the tail a direction differi ing, though 
in a slight degree, from that of the body. 

The colour of the back and sides is bluish-grey with a slight tinge of yellowish-red, 
and considerable lustre. The belly is pearly white. The thoracic and ventral fins 
are of an ochre- yellow colour tinged with red. The anal i is flesh-red and the dorsal 
and caudal are bluish-grey. 

The scales are for the most part broadly oval, or nearly orbicular and of a medium 
size. The uncovered portion of each scale is marked with radiated lines, corre- 
sponding to obscure crenz on the edges, and has a transverse diameter considerably 
greater than the longitudinal one. The scales on the belly are smaller. They become 
larger towards the tail. Te 

The head is smooth, flattened laterally and on the vertex, or it is sub-quadrilateral, 
convex before the eyes and ending in an obtuse snout. The breadth of the head at 
the occiput exceeds that of the shoulders, but it gradually decreases towards the 
nose. ‘The operculum is nearly thrice the size of the sub-operculum ; and it exceeds 
the other two bones of the gill-covers nearly in the same proportion. Their edges 
unite to form a smooth segment of a circle, which is edged narrowly with membrane. 
Various porous lines and tubercles are, as M. Le Sueur remarks, very evident in the 
dried specimens, but not conspicuous in the recent fish. The figure of Forster having 
been taken from a dried specimen, conveys on this account a very imperfect idea of 
the appearance of the head. The head is three times and a half as long as the body 
from the gill-openings to the caudal fin. The brain is protected by a piece of car- 
tilage, which, on maceration or boiling, drops out, leaving a rectangular foramen in 
the cranium, one inch long and a quarter of an inch wide. ; 

The eyes are oval and placed about their own length nearer to the gill-openings 
than to the snout. 


18 APPENDIX. : [No. VI. 


The nostrils are double, and situated immediately anterior to the eyes. The 
anterior openings furnish small opercula, which exactly cover the posterior ones. 

The branchtostegous membranes are united to each other by a plicated skin conti- 
nuous with the integuments of the ahdamen, but separated from them by a trans- 
verse Shallow sulcus, and further distinguished by the absence of scales. There are 
three broad flat rays in each membrane. 

The mouth is retractile, and placed under the snout, but when protuded extends a 
little beyond it. When the lips are closed, the orifice of the mouth has a horse-shoe 
shape, but when the jaws are extended itis nearly quadrangular—it admits the little 
finger. The lips are attached to the intermaxillary and lower jaw-bones, and are 
rough with large papille, particularly the lower one, which expands into two pen- 
dulous flaps. ‘There are no cirrhi. 

The palate is lined by a thick gelatinous membrane of a light-red colour, which 
rises anteriorly into two uvula-like eminences, forming the commencement of a 
sulcus leading towards the pharynx. The sulcus is obliterated posteriorly by a large 
pulpy cushion, against which the branchial arches may be pressed. This cushion 
covers, or lines, a number of small bones and cartilages, which connect the superior 
extremities of the branchial arches with each other ; united to it posteriorly there is a 
cordiform substance of firm texture and white colour, which lines an irregular 
cribriform osseous plate, that projects from the basilary process of the occipital bone. 
Certain processes of the inferior pharyngeal bones, when pressed against the 
callous cordiform substance just mentioned, may serve to comminute the tender 
Insects on which this fish preys. 

There are no teeth, but the processes of the inferior pharyngeal bones resemble 
teeth in their form and office. ‘These, to the number of thirty-six, project from the 
bone on each side, in a pectinated manner, are compressed laterally, somewhat club- 
shaped, a. little worn on their summits, and gradually diminish in size, as they 
recede from the mesial line. The pharyngeal bones themselves, which give origin 
to these processes, are very strong, bear a resemblance in shape to the hoof of a 
horse, are lined with the same membrane as the inner surfaces of the branchial 
arches, and surround about two-thirds of the pharynx. The processes of these 
bones are the only parts about the pharynx not thickly covered with membrane ; 
their bodies are. continuous with; and have the same structure as, the rest of the 
bone ; but two or three of the largest have narrow crowns, approaching to enamel 
in texture. There is nosuperior pharyngeal bone, unless the very irregular process 
of the occipital bone may be so denominated. | 

The branchial arches are furnished with a double row of thin, and rather rigid, 
crests, having scolloped margins. ‘These, when pressed against the soft cushion in 
the roof of the mouth, must suffice to retain the food, until it undergoes that degree 
of mastication which the apparatus in the pharynx is capable of giving. | 


No. VI] - NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 719 


The esophagus is short and muscular, and its lining has a glandular appearance. 
The intestinal canal, from pharynx to anus, makes four conyvolutions and a half, and 
bears a proportion to the length of the fish, excluding the caudal fin, of 50 to 
18, or 2.8to1. The proportions, however, vary somewhat in different individuals. 
The upper part of the canal, answering to the stomach, has a greater diameter; 
at the first turn it suddenly undergoes a small contraction, by which a minute sac is 
formed on one side of the canal only. From this contraction to the anus, the diameter 
of the intestinal canal, and the strength of its coat, diminishes gradually. Its inner 
membrane is disposed throughout in minute and delicate rugee, which have a longi- 
tudinal direction, but are indented and waved into each other in a very beautiful 
manner. ‘There are no ceca. 

The lobes of the diver are numerous, and so intermixed with the folds of the 
cut, that it is difficult to separate them entire. It has a pale colour. The gall 
bladder lies betwixt the intestines and air bladder. Its duct opens into the upper 
part of the stomach, immediately behind the septum of the thorax. The bile is 
pale. 

The spleen is large, and lies in a semicircular form round the upper se of the 
exterior convolution of the intestine. 

The air bladder extends the whole length of the abdomen, and consists of two 
portions, united by a very short tube. The upper portion is shorter, and is furnished 
with a remarkably thick shining white capsule, which adheres strongly at its upper 
end to the spine and septum; a very slight degree of force suffices to thrust the 
bladder out of the capsule. The true coats of both portions are firm, and less 
readily torn than the above-mentioned capsule, but are much thinner. A small tube 
for discharging the air proceeds from the upper end of the lower portion of the 
bladder. 

The kedneys extend the whole length of the abdomen, and are connected with each 
other, immediately below the diaphragm, by a transverse lobe. The urinary bladder 
is a long tube, whose width scarcely exceeds the joint diameters of the ureters. 

The lining of the abdomen is white. The intestines are attached on every side to 
the parietes of the abdomen, by numerous processes of the peritoneum. 

The intestines are infested by small worms, which fix themselves to their inner 
coats by a kind of proboscis. 

Fins.—The pectoral fins are elliptical, and are four times and a half shorter than 
the body of the fish, estimated from the setting on of the head to the base of the 
caudal fin. The dorsal fin is rhomboidal; its first ray is short, the next about two 
inches long, the posterior ones gradually become a little shorter ; the last one is 
nearly bipartite; their numbers vary from twelve to fourteen. The ventrals are 
situated opposite to the dorsal, are rather small, and have an obtuse unequal obovate 


720 APPENDIX. [No. VI. 


shape. The anal fin is slightly longer than the pectoral, and its tip, when turned 
back, reaches to the base of the caudal. Its rays are very strong; the posterior one 
is divided almost to’its base. The caudal fin is linear-cuneiform, forked not quite to 
half its length, with its lobes rather obtuse, and the lower one slightly larger than 
the upper one. Its rays are strong. The rays of all the fins are articulated and 
branched at their tips. 
B. 3. P. 17. D. 18. V. 10. A. 7. or 8. O82: 
The dimensions of an ordinary-sized fish are as follow ;— 
Length from snout to caudal fin, eighteen inches. 
Length of the caudal, anal, and pectoral fins, each about three inches. 
One of the specimens I examined had some fragments of a shell in its gut, but 
soft insects seem to compose the greater part of the food of this fish. 


Catastomus Forstertanus. 


Red‘Sucker of the Traders, Meethqua-maypeth, Cree Indians. 

Gen. Cyprinus, L. Catastomus, Le Sueur. Sub-genus Lenciscus. Cuv. Reg. An. p. 194. 
Cyprinus, Catastomus, Var. Forst. Philos. Trans. vol. lxiii., p. 158. 

Mithomapeth. Pennant’s Arctic Zoology, Introd. p. ccxeix. 

Body.—The shape of this fish bears a general resemblance to that of the preceding 
species, but the back is broader and straighter, and the depth less, scarcely exceeding 
the thickness of the body, and being about one-fifth of its length. The body tapers 
gradually from the shoulder to the origin of the caudal fin. The sides and back are a 
little flattened. 

The lateral line runs on a level with the eye straight to the tail, without curving 
upwards over the anal fin. 

The colour of the back is intermediate between honey-yellow and oil-green; the 
sides are lighter, and along the lateral line there is a broad irregular stripe, or rather 
a series of indeterminate patches of light lake red. The belly is white. The anal 
and ventral fins are slightly tinged with ochre yellow. The other fins partake of the 
colours of the parts to which they are attached. 

The scales are oval, very considerably smaller than those of the preceding species, 
and, being entirely covered by a thin membrane, have little lustre; they are very 
small behind the occiput and on the anterior parts of the body, but become larger 
towards the tail. | | 

The head is broader than in the preceding and following species. The forehead is 
not rounded or convex, and the nose is longer and more acute. The head is about 
one-fourth of the length of the body, reckoning from the gill-openings to the 
caudal fin. 

The eye, small and oval, is placed about its own length nearer to the gill-openings 


No. VI.] NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 72) 


than to the extremity of the snout. The motion of the snout, though greater than 
that of the namay-peeth, is even in this species obscure. 

The mouth is larger than that of the namay-peeth, but placed farther back, and 
when protruded to the utmost scarcely equals the extremity of the snout. The 
lips are set with larger papilla and have broader flaps, The interior of the mouth 
pharynx, branchie, &c., do not differ from the same parts in the namay-peeth—The 
lining of the abdomen is covered with a pigment similar to that which clothes the 
choroid coat of the human eye.—This pigment is most abundant on the capsule or 
the air-bladder. 

The distribution and structure of the intestines, are the same as in the other 
species, except that the spleen lies in the centre of the convolutions. The alimentary 
canal is, to the length of the body as 47 to 17, or 3.4. to 1. 

The air-bladder consists of two portions, the lower of which communicates with 
the cesophagus by a slender contracted tube. | 

The fins strongly resemble those of the namay-peeth. The pectorals are upwards 
of five times shorter than the body, and the tip of the anal, when turned back falls 
short of the insertion of the caudal. In shape the anal is more obtuse and rounded 
than the same fin of the namay-peeth ;—the caudal is not so deeply forked. 

a a! Saad ac V 10. A mostly 8. C183. 
The dimensions of an ordinary-sized fish were, 
‘Tleneth to theeauddl tin PUL ee £Y Women yinekes? 
Circumference where SEC ALOE Ee tener atagstensere scone cteie ere ners ot 
HVS CLs s!sUntnds ths ats cata cs peatiols ola/s\pin eraratvaaltin-aleeiasid eeu air 
Length from snout to anuS ....ceceeecscesscoeses 13 
Of alimentary CaHAI Tes ce cnisesies cece s st ss AT 

The figure of C. communis, Le Sueur, in the work already cited, conveys a pretty 
good general idea of the appearance of our fish, but the scales of the latter are 
smaller, and the anal fin placed farther forward than in that species. 

The C. Forsterianus was considered by Forster to be only a variety of the C. 
Hudsonius, but they are so distinct, that I imagine he mentioned it merely from the 
information of the traders, without having seen even dried specimens. 


Catastomus Lesueurit. 


Wawpawhawkeeshew, of the Cree Indians, Picconoo. Fur Traders. 
_ Gen. Cyprinus, Lin, Catastomus, Le Sueur. Sub-genus Leuciscus. Cuv. Reg. An. p. 194. 


The shape of this fish resembles that of the namay-peeth, but the lateral line 
forms a larger curvature posteriorly and the tail is much more bent upwards. 
The colour of the back and sides is wood brown, reflecting, when moved in 
the light, several brilliant tints, amongst which emerald-green, and. gold- 
4 Z 


722 APPENDIX. [No. VI. 


yellow predominate; the belly is reddish white; the dorsal fin has the same hue 
with the back, the others are reddish. 
rs The scales have for the most part an irregular oval shape, and are very large, being 
three quarters of an inch long; they are nearly of equal size over the whole body. 
The uncovered portion of each scale is strongly radiated, and broader enclong : 
their lustre is considerable. 

The head is proportionably smaller than that of the Namay-peeth, and the snout 
is more acute; the gill-openings are small; the lustre of. the opercula is similiar to 
that of the scales; the orbit is orbicular, rather large and placed in the middle of 
the head: 

The mouth has a much smaller orifice than that of the namay- apes and is placed 
farther back, but not so far back as that of the immediately preceding species, the 
meethquamay-peeth.: When the jaws are retracted, the snout.projects about half 
an inch beyond them, but when protruded the edge of the upper jaw and snout are 
even.. The dips instead of being furnished with papille, as in the preceding species, 
are sulcated perpendicularly.in a very regular manner. 

The palate, pharynx, and contents of the abdomen of this fish nearly correspond 
with those of the namay-peeth, they are, however, in general proportionably. smaller. 
The cesophagus is remarkably contracted, which gives to the commencement of 
the gut an appearance of dilatation. The intestines are not connected to the 
parietes of the abdomen by such numerous folds as in the namay-peeth. The 
length of the alimentary canal is to that of the fish, as 2.56 to 1. The lining of 
the abdomen is white. . 

The air-bladder in this species is divided into three portions, the central of which 
is the largest, and communicates with the cesophagus. The upper portion is alone 
furnished with a capsule. 

Fins—The dorsal fin is probortionably larger than that of the two preceding species. 
The length of the pectoral fins is more than five times less than that of the body, 
reckoning from the gill-openings to the tail. The extremity of the anal rather passes 
the origin of the caudal fin. . . 

B 8. P 15.-D 13} V 9. or 10. A 74. C 183. 

The most striking external differences betwixt this fish and the namay-peeth, con- 
sist in the great size of the scales, their lustre, the smallness of the head, and the 
structure of the lips. The three species we have described may be also readily dis- 
criminated by the colour of the peritonzeum, and number of portions into which the 
air-bladder is divided. The usual aise of this fish is sixteen inches, exclusive of 
the caudal fin. 

The wawpawhawkeeshew is considered by the Indians to be lhe HeRPIAE the 
namay-peeth and the attihhawmegh Gomeaaiees albus.) ree | 


No. VJ NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 723 


Of the figures given by Le Sueur in the work so often cited, the C. Duquesnii most 
resembles the wawpawhawkeeshew, and we have some doubts of their being specifi- 
cally different, but the greater size of the head and mouth, and the rather smaller 
scales of the latter, have prevented us from uniting them until the matter is decided 
by actual comparison, or fuller descriptions. The specific name we have employed is 
a tribute to the merit of M. Le Sueur, who has established and illustrated this 
genus. 

In addition to the three species of carp here described, we observed. a fourth of 
considerably smaller size at Carlton-House, but circumstances prevented us from 
taking a description of it at the time,and we did not afterwards meet with it. They 
all spawn in June. They are not esteemed as articles of food, being soft and watery 
when boiled, but they have no disagreeable flavour. The namay-peeth is very 
abundant in the Saskatchawan ; the meethquamay-peeth is more common to the 
northward of Great Slave Lake; and the wawpawhawkeeshew is comparatively rare 


every where. 


Silurus Felts ? Cat-fish. 


Mathemegh, Cree Indians. Cat-fish and Barbue ofthe Traders. 
Genus Silurus, Lin. Sub-genus Pimelodus, Cuv. Rég.®An. p. 203. 
Silurus felis, Gmel. Lin. Syst. Nat. p. 1356 ? 

Mystus, No. 1., Seba Thesaur. p. 82, t. xxix. fig. 1? 


Body oblong, tapering posteriorly, belly swelling out considerably before the central 
fins. Lateral line straight. 

The colour of the back and sides is dark greenish-brown, and nearly uniform ; the 
belly approaches to white. 

~The head is flat and broad, the transverse diameter being equal to its length. There 
is no distinct. osseous plate at the nape of the neck, but there is a small lengthening 
out of the cranium, which is concealed by the thick smooth skin which covers the 
head ; the snout is very obtuse, almost semicircular. 

The mouth is large, and placed at the extremity of the head ; the upper lip projects 
very slightly beyond the lower one. . | 

‘The maxillary bones are lengthened out into cirrhi, which are as long as the head. 
A slender cirrhus, about an inch long, rises on each side from the upper margins 
of the nostrils, and there are four cirrhi on the lower jaw, of which the outermost 
are 24 inches long; the other two are shorter. 

There is a crowded assemblage of small erect teeth on the upper and lower jaw, 
but the palate and vomer are smooth. The first dorsal is sub-quadrangular, and 
contains seven rays, of which the first is very strong and bony, but not denticulated ; 
the others are branched. 4 . 

The first ray of the pectorals is still stronger, and also free from denticulations. 

4Z 2 


724 APPENDIX. — [No. VI. 


The ventrals are about one-fourth part nearer to the head than to the tail. The adi- 
pose fin is moderately large, and opposite to the posterior third of the anal fin. The 
anal fin is large and long, and terminates about one-third of its own length from 
the insertion of the caudal fin. The caudal fin is widely emarginated with obtuse 
rounded lobes. 

15 Fi ei Bo%~ drat oe ouch 2oS,7 wCabts. 

Length, exclusive of caudal fin, 30 inches. 

This fish differs from Seba’s in size, the latter being only 52 inches long, and in 
wanting serratures on the first ray of the dorsal fin, and teeth on the palate. Both, 
however, are described from dried specimens, and they agree in so many circum- 
stances, that it has been judged best to consider Seba’s as a young mathemech. We 
had neglected to take a description from a recent fish. The silurus catus of Catesby 
differs in having its first dorsal fin.of a conical form, placed in the middle of its body. 

The nathemegh is found sparingly in the lakes that flow into the Saskatchawan, 
and more abundantly in the lakes and rivers to the southward. It is much prized as 
a rich food. 


Gadus Lota. L. Burbot. 


Methy, Cree Indians. Laloche, Canadian voyagers. 
Gadus lota and Methy, Phil. Trans. Ixiii. p. 152, Arctic Zoology, and Hearne. 
Burbot, Donov. Br. Fishes, t. $2, Blech. t. 70. 


The burbot is found in every river and lake in the country, and attains the length 
of 30 inches, or more. It spawns in February. It preys upon every kind of fish that 
it can swallow, and in the spring its stomach is generally crammed with cray-fish, 
often to such a degree as to distort the shape of the body. 

The burbot is so little esteemed as food as to be eaten only in cases of necessity. 
Very good bread, however, may be made of the roe, and the livers are always prized. 
Dogs will scarcely ever eat this fish. 


Pleronectes Stellatus. 
Sub-genus, Platessa, Cuv. Reg. An. tom. ii. p. 220. 


Pleuronectes Stellatus, Pallasii, Nov. Act. Petropol. tom. i. an. 1787, p. 347, t. ix. f 1; and Mémoires de- 


V Acad: de Petersbourg, tom. iii. p. 248, t.x.f.1. (The latter figure errs in the dorsal fin not being carried far 


enough forward.) ‘ 
Stellated Flounder. Shaw’s Zoology, iv. pt. ii. p. 235. 


This fish was found at the mouths of the rivers in the Arctic Sea. 


Pleuronectes Glacialis. 


Sub-genus, Rhombus, Cur. Reg. An. tom. ii. p. 222, 
Pleuronectes glacialis, Pall. Itin. p. 706, Gmel. Lin. p. 1235. 


Found in Bathurst’s Inlet of the Arctic Sea. 4 


No. VI.] NOTICES OF THE FISHES. G25 


Perca Fluviatilis, var.? LL. 


Occow, Cree Indians. Horn-fish, Piccarel, or Doré, of the Traders. 
Gen. Perca, Lin. Sub-genus Perca, Cuv. Reg. Ann. ii. p. 293. 
Perca volgensis? E.Gmel. or P. aspera? Pall. Itin. i. p. 461. 


The perch of Hudson’s Bay differs in so many respects from the European one, that 
it has been thought proper to give the following description of it. In its fins it bears 
a stronger resemblance to the Perca Volgensis described by Pallas, although La 
Cepede has referred the latter to the Lucio-Perca, which belongs to another of 
Cuvier’s sub-genera. 

Shape that of the common river perch. 

Colour.—The back and sides have a greenish colour, alternating in small spots 
with king’s yellow. The belly is white. The first dorsal fin is beautifully streaked 
and clouded with different shades of yellowish-brown, and there is a dark patch of 
venous blood-red on its posterior part. The second dorsal, pectoral, and caudal fins 
are coloured and spotted like the back. The lower lobe of the caudal is tipped with 
white. The ventral and anal fins are white, clouded with king’s yellow. The latter 
has, moreover, a slight tinge of red. ‘The upper part of the head is coloured like the 
back. On the cheeks there are some light shades of cherry-red, mixed with yellow. 
The irides have a purple colour, intermixed with spots of pearl white. 

The seales are of a medium size, and rough from minute teeth on their exterior 
edges. 

Head.—The lateral outline of the head, when the mouth is shut, is that of a cone, 
whose summit, formed of the extremities of the upper and lower jaws, is rather obtuse. 
The pre-operculum, of a thin crescentic shape, is entirely unconnected with the oper- 
culum. Its posterior edge is free, and armed with small irregular tooth-like processes. 
The inter-operculum is unarmed. The operculum and sub-operculum have conjointly 
the form of a triangle, of which an entire side and the apex, which is lengthened out 
by a membranous flap, are constituted by the sub-operculum. This latter bone is un- 
armed, but the operculum has three or four small spines, which scarcely project 
through the skin in the recent fish. The nape of the neck is armed on each side by 
a rough bony plate, whose posterior edge projects a little. The cheek is large, fleshy, 
and posterior to the orbit. There are several plates of scales on the anterior parts 
of the cheek, the opercula, and occiput. The os frontis has numerous sulce, which 
appear through the thin skin that covers it. 

The eyes are large and prominent. 

The orifice of the mouth is large. The jaws are of equal length, but the upper 
one is more obtuse, and receives into a depression the more pointed extremity of the 
lower one. The inside of the mouth is of a bluish-white colour, and in some places 
a layer of nacre shines through the lining membrane. 


726 APPENDIX. [No. VI. 


Teeth.—The two largest teeth of the upper jaw project on each side of the snout, | 
like the canine teeth of some quadrupeds, and are visible when the mouth is closed, 
having formed for themselves depressions in the lower lip. These teeth stand on the 
intermaxillaries, which form, with the lower jaw, the whole margin of the mouth. 
The intermaxillaries are further armed with a single crowded row of smaller teeth, 
and the lower jaw has.a thin row of teeth, similar to the two remarkable ones in the 
upper jaw. A set of strong distant: teeth, are also arranged, somewhat in a horse- 
shoe form, on each side of the roof of the mouth, and across the vomer, so as to be 
nearly opposed to those in the lower jaw. ‘These teeth are situated upon the pala- 
tine bones and vomer, and, like those on the jaws, are somewhat hooked, with their 
points directed backwards. The tongue is smooth. _ 

The branchiostegous membranes overlap each other, at their insertion into the root 
of the tongue. They contain seven rather distant cylindrical curved rays. The three 
inner branchial arches are furnished with double rows of tubercles, covered with mi- 
nute teeth. The outer arch has a single row of similar protuberances, and also a 
row of processes about half an inch long, which are armed on their inner surfaces 
with small crowded hook-shaped teeth. The superior andinferior pharyngeal bones 
are also rough, with minute teeth. 

Fins.—The first and second dorsal are about an inch apart, differing in this respect 
from. Bloch’s figure of the P. fluviatilis, t. 52. The former fin is the highest, and its 
rays are spinous. ‘Those of all the other fins are articulated— 

B.7. P.140r15.. V.6.- D.15—21 or 22. A.13. C.16 or 18. 

The dimensions of an ordinary-sized fish were— 


Length to caudal fin -  - - - - 19 inches. 
—toanus - aly : - = 12 
— of caudal fin. - - 5 S . 3 
Height of 1st dorsal fin - = : . 24 
2d do. do. - : = Ms 2 


| Length of alimentary canal from pharynx to anus, 20 
The perch spawns in May. It is very abundant about Cumberland-House.. We 
did not observe it to the northward of Great Slave Lake. 


Cotius Hexacornis. Six-horned Bull-head. 


The body is much less than the head, roundish and tapering to the extremity of 
the tail. The lateral line is rough, and runs near the back. There is a row of small 
orbicular scabrous bony plates between it and the back ; the row is double, opposite 
to the second dorsal fin. There are no other perceptible scales. 


No. VE]. NOTICES OF THE FISHES. 727 


Colour.—The colour of the body is a clouded admixture of tints of broccoli-brown 
and olive-green. The belly is white. The fins are streaked with bluish black. 

The head is large and depressed. The posterior edges of the ‘operculum and sub- 
operculum are armed with four or five small spinous teeth. The pre-operculum is 
furnished with three strong divaricated spines, the posterior of which is the largest, 
and half an inch long. The bones which support the pectoral fins are also armed 
with small spines, and have sharp rough edges. There are six obtuse club, or rather 
nail-shaped processes, rising from the crown of the head. Their surfaces are minute- 
ly cancellated and scabrous. The smallest pair stand betwixt the nares, the largest 
on the superior posterior margins of the orbits, and the third on the occiput. 

The eyes are large; the irides are tinged red. 

The mouth is capacious, and has its margin formed by the intermaxillaries and 
lower jaw. The maxillaries, of a long cuneiform shape, lie in a membrane behind 
the intermaxillaries. The jaws and vomer are set with a crowded assemblage of 
small teeth. The maxillaries, palate, and tongue, are smooth. The tongue is 
obtuse. The anus is situated about midway between the mouth and caudal fin. 

The branchtostegous membrane is capable of inflation, and contains six slender 
cylindrical curved rays. 

Fins.—The pectoral fins are sub-orbicular, with sixteen rays, none of them branch- 
ed. The ventral fins, soft and whitish, have three rays, of which the first is the 
strongest ; none of them are spinous. The anterior dorsal fin commences poste- 
riorly to the pectoral fins, and terminates opposite to the anus. It has seven simple 
rays. The posterior dorsal is larger, and has thirteen rays. Its commencement and 
termination correspond with those of the anal fin—most of its rays are scabrous. 
Both dorsal fins are arched. The anal fin commences a short way behind the anus, 
and terminates so as to leave about one-third part of the tail naked. Its depth 
slightly diminishes as it recedes backwards. The caudal fin is cuneiform, and has 
twelve rays, most of them forked. 


B. 6. P. 16. V. 3. 7 D. 7—138. C. 12. 


This fish is found abundantly in the Arctic Sea. Our Canadian voyagers gave it 
the name of Crapaud de Mer, which is very expressive, but has been already applied 
to a different fish. 

It resembles the cottus quadricomis Bloch, t. 108, very strongly in form and di- 
mensions ; but, exclusive of differences of the number of rays in the fins, the addi- 
tional pair of horns forms a distinguishing character. The body, too, appears to be 
less rough than in Bloch’s species. 


728 APPENDIX. [No. VI. 


Gasterosteus Pungitius? LL. 
Sub-genus Gasterosteus. Cuv. Rég. An. ii. p. 300. 


Great numbers of small fish of this genus were observed, in the spring of 1820, 
in a smal! pond in the neighbourhood of Cumberland-House. We are inclined to 
refer them to the above-mentioned species, but the description of them not having 
been preserved, we are unable to do so with certainty. Specimens of them, which 
were put in spirits, were destroyed on their way home. 


No. VII. 


BOTANICAL APPENDIX; 


JOHN RICHARDSON. 


Tue following list of plants is not offered, as containing any thing like a full cata- 
logue of the Flora of the country through which we travelled. During our summer 
journeys, only a small portion of time could be allotted to Botanical researches, and 
the constant and more important duties of the other officers prevented them from aid- 
ing me in collecting objects of Natural History, which they were otherwise anxious 
todo. Under such circumstances, a large proportion of plants must have escaped our 
notice, and the disasters attending our return across the Barren Grounds from the 
sea-coast, caused us to leave behind the whole collection made during the summer-of 
1821, with the exception of a few plants collected during the descent of the Copper- 
Mine River, which were intrusted to Mr. Wentzel’s care when he left us. The part 
of the collection, which is lost, contained some plants, which I deemed to be new or 
eurious. 

In drawing up the list, imperfect as itis, I have received much assistance from able 
botanists. To Mr. Brown, I am under the greatest obligations, not only for the libe- 
ral use of the Herbarium and Library, which, so happily for science, have been placed 
in his possession ; but, also for the friendly manner in which he aided my researches, 
and condescended to solve the doubts so frequently presenting themselves to one little 
versant in these pursuits. In addition to this general assistance, he kindly super- 
intended the botanical drawings, and has enriched my catalogue with the lists of the 
‘Cyperoidee (including the Carices) the Graminez, Junci and Filices, and, with the 
accounts of the genera Eutoca, Heuchera, and Cryptogramma. 

The collections of Pallas and Pursh, now belonging to Mr. Lambert, rendered the 
power of referring to his valuable Herbarium an object of the utmost importance to 
me; and the desire of. promoting the science, which so eminently distinguishes his 
character, induced him cheerfully to accord it. 

Professor Schweegrichen, when in. London, named the Musci, which renders that. 
part of the list of high authority ; and Professor Hooker, by undertaking the éxamina- 
tion of the Lichenes and Fungi, has stamped a value upon a portion of the catalogue, 
upon which it was peculiarly desirable to have the opinion and authority of an emi- 


nent cryptogamic botanist. 
BA 


730 APPENDIX. [No. VIL 


To reduce the size of the catalogue, the particular habitats of the plants have been 
omitted and letters placed in brackets, at the end of the references, to denote the dis- 
tricts in which they were found. as | 

(H.) Denotes the country about York Factory, which includes a small portion of 
the sea-shore of Hudson’s Bay, and the lower part of Hayes’ River. 

(S.) Distinguishes some plants that were collected on the banks of the Saskatcha- 
wan, but were not observed farther to the northward. 

(C.) Denotes the sandy plains in the neighbourhood of Carlton, strongly resembling 
the plains of the Missouri, upon which the American botanists have lately made ex- 
tensive collections. 

(W.) Denotes the wooded country from latitude 54° to 64° north. 

(B.) Denotes the Barren Grounds from Point Lake to the Arctic Sea. 

(A.) Denotes the Arctic Sea-Coast. 

For an account of these districts, I must refer to the geological notices at the 
commencement of the Appendix. The necessity of reducing the size of the Appendix 
has also compelled me to omit some remarks on the geographical distribution and 
limits of some of the plants, and of the effect of the Hudson’s Bay climate upon ve- 
getation, and also many descriptions of the new, or less known, species. Other more 
important omissions and mistakes will, doubtless, be detected, for which I can only 
plead the haste with which the work has been got out. 


MONANDRIA. | 
1. Hippuris vulgaris: Willd. Spec. Plant. i.p.26. Pursh. Fl. Amer.i. p.3. (W.) 
2. H. tetraphylla: Willd. i. p.27. H. maritima: Vahl. Enum.i. p.14. (H.) 
. Blitum capitatum: Willd. i. p. 30. Pursh. icp. 4. (W.) 


ive) 


DIANDRIA. 
. Veronica peregrina: Willd.i.p. 76.  Pursh.i.p. 11. > (W.) 
. Pinguicula vulgaris: Walld.i. p. 110. (W.B.) 
. Utricularia intermedia: Wahlenberg. Fl. Lapp. p.11. (W.) 
. Lemna trisulea: Willd. iv.p.193. (W.) 
. L. minor: Willd. iv. p..195. Pursh.i. p.22. (W.) 


art oar 


TRIANDRIA. 


9. Valeriana sylvatica: floribus triandris hermaphroditis, foliis caulinis pinnatis 


acutis ; radicalibus oblongis integerrimis. MS. Herb. Banks. 


Hab. on the Clear-water River. Specimens of this plant were brought from Newfoundland by Sir Joseph 
Banks, in 1781. 


10. Sisyrinchium anceps: Persoon. Ench. Bot. i. p. 50. Pursh. i. p. 31. (W.) 
11. Eleocharis palustris: Roem. et Sch. Syst. ii.p.151. Scirpus palustris: Willd. 
i.p. 291. Pursh. i. p. 54. (W.) 


No. VII.) LIST OF THE PLANTS. _ Fi 


12. Scirpus coespitosus: Willd. i. p. 292. (B.) 

13. S. lacustris: Willd. i. p. 296. Pursh.i.p.56. (W.) 

14. S. maritimus: Willd. i. p. 306. 

Hab, Salt River Athabasca. 

15. S. sylvaticus: Willd. i. p. 307. Pursh. i, p. 56. (W.) 

16. Eriophorum vaginatum: Willd.i.p. 312. (W.B.) 

17. E. angustifolium: Willd. i. p. 318. Pursh.i.p.58. (W.B.) 

18. E. strictum: spicis pedunculatis involucro brevioribus; squamis acutiusculis 
tenuissimé ciliatis, foliis strictis planis apice triquetro, culmo teretiusculo. Brown, 


Dubia species E. tenello (Nutt.) proxima. Brown (W.) 


19. Alopecurus alpinus: Smith. Fl. Brit. iii. p. 1386. (B.) 

20. A. aristulatus: Mich. Am. i. p. 43? <A. subaristatus: Pers. Ench. i. p. 80. 
Pursh. i. p. 66. (W.) 

21. Agrostis laxiflora : Trichodium laxiflorum: Mich. Am. i: p. 42. t. 8: Pursh. i. 
p. 61. (W.) ! 

22. Stipa Canadensis: Povret. Encyclop. Bot. vii. p. 452. Pursh. i. p. 72. 

Stipa juncea: Mich. Am. i. p. 54. (W.) 
. 23. Oryzopsis asperifolia : Mich. Am.i. p. 51. t. 9.. Pursh. i. p. 60..(C.) 

24. Calamagrostis Canadensis: Nuttall. Gen. Amer. Pl. i. p. 46.  Arundo Cana- 
_ densis : Mich. i. p. 73. (W.) 

25. C. stricta: Arundo stricta: Schrad. Germ. i. p. 215. t. 4. f. 5. Smith. 
Compend. Fl. Brit. p.20.. Eng. Bot. t. 2160. (W.) . 

26. C. purpurascens: panicula spicata, glumis glabris, perianthii valvula inferiore 
scabra: apice 4-dentato; dorso aristata, rudimento plumoso villis. baseos dupld 
longiore. Brown, MS.(B.) 

27. Aira aquatica: Willd. i. p.376, (W.) 

28. Hierochloa fragrans: Roem. et Sch. Syst. ii. p. 514. Holeus fragrans: Willd. iv. 
p.936. Pursh.i. p. 78. (W.) . . ) 

29. H. alpina: Roem. et Sch. Syst. ii. p. 515. Holcus alpinus: Wahl. Fi, Lapp. 
p. 31. t.2. (B.) 

30. Trisetum airoides: Roem. et Sch. Syst. ii. p.666. Aira subspicata: Willd, i. 
p. 377. (W.) ; 

31. Avena striata: Mich. am. i. p. 73. Pursh. i. p. 86. (W.) 

32. Beckmannia eruceformis: Roem. et Sch. Syst. ii. p. 695. Cynosurus eruce:- 
formis: Willd.i. p. 412. (W.) 

33. Poa crocata: Pursh. i. p. 80. (W.) hod 

34. P.alpina: Willd. i. p.386. Pursh.i.p.79. (W.) 

35. Festuca-ovina: Willd. i. p. 419. (W.B.) 


5 AQ 


732 APPENDIX. [No. VIE. 


36. Bromus purgans: Willd.i. p. 431. Pursh. i. p. 85. NA B.). 

37. Hordeum jubatum: Pursh. i. p. 89. (W.) 

38. Elymus Canadensis: Willd. i.p. 468. Pursh. i. p. 89. (wW.) 

39. E. mollis: spica erecta villosa, locustis geminatis 4-5-floris brevé setigeris 
glumas setaceas superantibus. Brown, MS. (W.) 


TETRANDRIA, 


40. Galium tinctorium: Willd. i. p. 586. (W.) 
The Cree women dye their porcupine quills red with the juice of this plant, or of the G. boreale, indis-- 
criminately. 


41. G. boreale: Willd. i. p.595. Pursh. i. p. 104. (W.) 

42. Plantago major: Willd. i.p. 641. Pursh. i. p. 98. (W.) 

43. P. lanceolata, var.? bracteis obtusissimis, foliis laté lanceolatis glabriusculis. 
(W.) | 

P. lanceolata 6? Willd. i. p. 644. P. montana? Huds. Flor. Angl., ed. i. 

p: 53. (B.) ad 

44. Cornus Canadensis: Willd. i. p.661. Pursh.i.p. 107. Sassagoomena-ahtick, 
Cree lang. (W.» | 

45. C. alba: Willd. i. p. 662. Pursh.i. p. 109. (W.) 


The lead-coloured berries are named by the Crees, musqua-meena (bear-berry), because the bear fattens 
upon them. 


46. Elwagnus argentea: Nuttall. Am. Gen. i. p.97. E. nitida. Banks’ Herb, 
Eleagrus argentea: Pursh. i. p. 114. (W.) 
47. Potamogeton perfoliatum: Mich.Flor. Am.i. p. 101. 


Folia cordato-lanceolata, longé acuminata, longitudine spithamea, latitudine ad basin pollicaria. Species 
_forsan distincta. (W.) 
~ 48. P. pectinatum: Smith. Fl. Brit. i. p.197. Eng. Bot. t. 323. (H.) 


PENTANDRIA. 


49. Batschia. conspicua : caule pilis laxis, foliis oblongis pilis adpressis vestitis, 
laciniis corollz integris. (W.) 


Radix perennis caules plures alens. Caulis dodrantalis, erectus, pilosus, superné in spicas foliosas. 


di-vel tri-chotome divisus. Spice reclinate divaricate, juniores spiraliter. revolute. Folia omnia oblonga, 
plerumque obtusa, pilis brevissimis, adpressis vestita, subtus pallidiora ; floralia subsecunda et apicem’ versus 
spicarum sensim minora. Calyx axillaris, sessilis, hirsutus, laciniis subulatis tubo corollz triplo brevioribus. 
Corolla aurantio-flava, extus pilosiuscula, intus glabra ; ¢ubo superné paulo ampliato: fauce fornicato, sed non 
clauso : limbo patente, laciniis quinque rotundatis sub-undulatis integerrimisque. Stylus longitudine tubi, 
Anthere medium versus tubi adnate. ‘ 

Hab. In dry woods, on the banks of the Saskatchawan, growing in large patches. 

50. B. longiflora: Nuttall. Gen. Amer. i. p. 114. (C. ) 


51. Myosotis Lappula: flore albo. Willd. i. p. 749. Pursh. i. p. 34. (W.) 


. 
| 


No; VIE] LIST OF THE PLANTS. | 733 


52. Pulmonaria paniculata: Willd. i. p..769. Pursh.i. p. 1381. (W.) 

53. P. maritima: Smith. Fl. Brit. i. p. 218. CH. A.) 

54, Androsace elongata: Wiild.i.p. 797. (W.B.) 

55. A. septentrionalis : Willd. i. p. 748. (B.) 

56. Primula Egaliccensis: Flor. Dan. t. MDXI. Lehman. Monogr. p. 64. t. vii. 
(B.) 


Flos rubescenti-albus, ore citrino. 
57. P. farinosa: Snuth. Fl. Brit. i. p. 224. (W.) 


58. P. Hornemanniana: Lehman. Monogr. p. 55. t. iv. 
- P. Farinosa @ stricta: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 60, cujus descriptio cum plant& nostra optimé quadrat. 
P. farinosa quacum habitat minor, umbella florenti longiori et magis divaricaté ; umbelle fructiferz tamen in 
ambabus strictee. Involueri foliola huic et precedenti plura adsunt quam P. Egaliccensi sed ut in illa baseos 
gibbosos habent. (W.) 


59. Dodecatheon integrifolium: Michaux. Fl, Am. i. p. 123. 
Our specimens agree with those in the Lambertian Museum, from Eastern Siberia, collected:i in Billings’ 


Expedition. (W. C.) 

60. Menyanthes trifoliata: Willd. i. p. 811. Pursh.i. p. 139. (W.) 

61. Lysimachia thyrsiflora: Mich. Fl. Amer.i. p. 127. (W.) 

62. Phlox Hoodii : humilis multicaulis, foliis subulatis margine lanatis, floribus 
sessilibus solitariis, limbi laciniis obovatis. (C.) 

Tab. 28. Expl. Icon. figura plante magnitudine naturalis. Sequentes omnes ad lentem aucte. a. folia 
duo. 6. flos. c. calyx longitudinaliter fissus et eile d. corolla aperta ad venas ejus stamina et pistillum 
ostendendas. e. stamen. 

This beautiful species is a striking ornament to the plains in the neighbourhood of Carlton-House, forming 
large patches, which are conspicuous from a distance. The specific name is a small tribute to the memory of 
my lamented friend and companion, whose genius, had his life been spared, would have raised him to a con- 
Spicuous station in his profession, and rendered him an ornament to any science to which he might have chosen 


mor 


to direct his attention. 
63. Eutoca Franklinii: foliis pinnatifidis bipinnatifidisve, ovulis piabetee single: 


viginti pluribus. ~ Brown ad finem hujus catalogt. (W. ) 
64. Campanula rotundifolia: Willd. i. p. 892. Pursh. i. p. 159 (W.) 
var. linifolia: Flor. Dan. t.189. Linn. Fl. Lapp. No. 84. (W.) 

65. C. uniflora: Willd. i. p. 890. Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 63. (B.) 

66. Azalea procumbens : Willd. i. p. 832. Pursh.i. p. 154. (B.) 

67. Caprifolium parviflorum: Pursh. i.p.161. (W.). 

68. Xylosteum ceruleum: Lonicera cxrulea. Willd. ii. p. 988.(W.) 

69. X.villosum: Michaux. Fl. Am. i. p. 106. (W.) 

70. X. involucratum: pedunculis bifloris, baccis distinetis, involucro tetraphyllo: 
foliolis sub-rotundis interioribus bilobis, foliis ovato ellipticis. Lonicera involucrata:. 
M.S. Herbario Banksiano. (W.) | | 

71. Symphoria occidentalis: R. Brown. M.S. (W.) 


S.. racemose proxima.. 


734 APPENDIX. [No. VII, 


72. Rhamnus alpinus : Willd. i. p. 1097. (W.) 

73. Ribesrubrum: Willd. i. p. 1153. (W.) 

74. R. glandulosum: Willd. i.p.1154. R. prostratum: Pursh. i. p- 163. (W.) 
75. R. nigrum: Willd. i. p. 1156. (W.) 

76. R. floridum: Willd. i. p.1156. Pursh. i. p.164. (W.) 

77. R. oxycanthoides: Willd. i.p. 1159. Pursh. i. p. 165. (W.) 

78. Viola pinnata : Willd. i. p. 1160. (C.) 

79. V.blanda: Pursh. i. p. 72. (W.) 

80. V. debilis: Nuttall. Gen. Amer. i. p. 150. (W.) 

81. V.canina: var.? Willd. i. p. 1164. (W.) 

82. V. Canadensis: Willd. i. p. 1166. Pursh. i. p. 174. (C.) 

83. Comandra umbellata: Nuttall. Am. i. p. 157. Thesium umbellatum: 


Pursh. i. p.177. 

Comandra a Santalo differt calyce persistente monenté doctiss. Brown, qui primus genus distinctum esse. 
Prodr. pl. Nove Hollandiz, i. p. 353. indicavit. (W.) 

84. C.: livida sarmentosa, foliis ellipticis flaccidis, umbella axillari solitariA 
pedunculata sub-triflora. (W.) | 

Sarmentum inter muscos repens radicem refert et caules alternatim edit. Caules spithamei simplices suf- 
fruticosi, erecti, inferne teretes, superne obsolete triquetri. Folia elliptica, venosa, obtusa, nervo excurrenti 
apiculata, flavo-viridescentia, concolora, subsessilia. | Umbelld in medio caulis axillaris, bi-vel triflora, 
pedicellis brevissimis. Pedicelli rarissime foliolo involucrati sunt. Flores parvi, inconspicui. Calyx cam- 
panulatus, laciniis quinque acutis, viridibus, intus apicem versus fuscis.. Squame virido-fusce. Stylus 
crassus. Germen nux globosa, calyce coronata: 


Variat foliis rugosis flavo maculatis reticulatisq. 
Hab. In shady mossy woods. Not seen to the northward of Great Slave Lake. 


85. Apocynum androsemifolium : Willd. i.p.1259. Pursh. i. p. 79. (W.) 

86. Gentiana amarella : Willd. i. p. 1347. (W.) 

87. G. crinita: Willd. i. p. 1352. Pursh. i. p. 185. (W.) 

88. G.propinqua : corolla 5-fida tubuloso-campanulata ; apicibus limbi subserratis : 
fauce nuda, foliis radicalibus lineari-obovatis ; caulinis lanceolatis. (H.) 

Facies omnino G. pratensis sed fauce nuda. 


89. G. rotata: Gmel. Flor, Sib. iv. p. 112. No. 78, t. 58, f.1. (A.) 


Cum figura Gmelini planta nostra quadrat, forsan tamen a Swertia rotata, L., species distincta propter 
lacinias calycis angustas corolla longiores. 

90. Heuchera Richardsonii: calycis limbo inaquali obliquo. Brown, ad jinem 
catalogy. (W.) , 

91. Cicuta virosa: Willd. i. p. 1445. (W.) 

92. C. maculata: Willd. i.p.1446. Pursh. i. p.195. (W.) 

93. Smyrnium trifoliatum : Nuttall. Am. i. p. 195. (S.) 


94. Viburnum Oxycoccus: Pursh. i. p. 203. (W.) 
Named, by the Crees, Mongsoa-Meena, or Moose Berry. 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 735 


95. V. edule: Pursh. i. p. 203. (W.) 

Its red berries, termed by the Crees, Peepoom-meena (Winter Berry), form a great ornament to the woods. 

96. Parnassia palustris: Willd. i-p.1516. Pursh. i: p. 208. (H. W. B,) 

97. Azalea nudicaulis: Willd, i. p. 1521. Pursh. i..p. 209. (W.) 
.. The Crees.use the root of this plant as a remedy against the venereal disease, under the name of Waw- 
poos-oootchepeh (Rabbit-root), and also apply the bruised bark of its root to recent wounds. 

98. Statice armeria: Willd. i. p. 1522. Pursh.i. p. 212. (B.) 

8. Foliis angustoribus acutis ciliatis. (B.) 


99. Linum perenne: Willd. i.p.1534. Nuttall. Am. i. p. 206. (C.) 


HEXANDRIA. 
_ 100. Allium angulosum? Willd. ii.p. 76. Pursh. i. p. 223. (C.) 
101. A. schcenoprasum: Willd. ii. p. 81. Weechee'gun (Stinking-Grass), Cree 
Lang. (W.) | 
102. Lilium Philadelphicum: Willd. ii. p.90. Pursh. i. p. 229. (W.) 


Termed, by the Crees, Appecooseesh-ootchepeh (Mouse-root), because the common mouse of the 
country, a species of Campagnol, feeds upon its scaly bulbs. 


103. Uvularia puberula: Mich. Fl. Am. i. p. 199. (W.) 

104. Smilacina bifolia: Convallaria bifolia. Willd. ii. p. 164. Mich. Fl. Am. 
i. p. 201. (W.) 

Caule foliisque ciliatis. 

105. S. trifolia: Convallaria trifolia. Willd. ii. p. 163. Mich. i. p. 202. Gimel. 
Flor, Sib. i. t. 6. (W.) | 

Herba tota glaberrima, caule stricto et non ad insertiones foliorum geniculato ut in priori. 

106. S. stellata: Pursh. i. p. 282. Convallaria stellata: Willd. ii. p. 1632 (W.) 

107. Luzula campestris: Decand. Flor. Franc. iii. p. 161. Juncus campestris : 
Pursh. i. p. 238. (B.) 

108. L. melanocarpa: Desvaur. Journ. de Botan. i. p. 142. t. 5. f.2. Juncus 
melanocarpus: Pursh. i. p. 238. (W.) 

109. Juncus triglumis: Willd. ii. p. 216. (B.) 

110. J. castaneus : Smith. Fl. Brit. i. p. 383. Engl. Bot. t. 900. (H. B.) 

111. J. echinatus: Muhl. Gram. Am. p. 2077 (W.) 

112. J. affinis: foliis subulatis nodoso-articulatis, capitulis subpaniculatis pauci- 
floris (3-5 floris), capsulis ovalibus calyce obtuso hexandro longioribus. Brown. MS. 
(W.) | 

113. J. filiformis: Pursh. i. p. 236. (W.) | 

114. J. tenuis: Willd. ii. p. 214. J. bicornis: Mich. Am. i. p. 191. (W.) 

115. J. glaucus: Willd. ii. p. 206. (W. B.) 

116. Oxyria reniformis: Brown. List of Plants. Ross. Voy. Ed. 2da. p. 4. Ru- 
mex digynus: Pursh. i. p. 248. (B.) , 

117, R. sanguineus: Willd. ii. p. 250. Pursh. i. p. 247. (B.) 

118. R, acutus: Willd. ii. p. 258, (W.) 


436 APPENDIX. 2 [No. VII. 


119. R. verticillatus: Willd. ii. p. 250. Pursh. i. p. 248. (W.) 

120. Triglochin maritimum: Willd. ii..p. 265. Pursh. i. p. 247. (H. A.) 
121. T. palustre: Willd. ii. p.264. Pursh. i. p. 247. (W. B.) 

122. Tofielda borealis: Wahlenberg. Fl. Lapp. p. 89. (W. B.) 

Scapus nudus, involucris (calyculis, Wahl.) albis dimidiatis trifidis pedicellum fulcrantibus ut recté monet 
clariss. Wahlenberg. Herba elegans. 

123. T. coccinea: spica capitata bracteata, involucro trifido regulari. (A.) 

Herba elegantia 'T’. borealis tota carens. Folia basi spathacea, equitantia, compressa, linearia superne 
lanceolata acuminata plana. Caulis palmaris erubescens firmus duriusculus plerumque flexuosus, folio uno 
alterove radicalibus simili instructus. Spathe folior. caulinor. ventricosze, rubescentes. Flores feré sessiles 
in capitulo terminali congesti, interdum proliferi. Calyx trifidus, corolle approximatus, nec dimidiatus, 
laciniis rubescentibus, brevibus, ovatis, acutis. Petala sex viridia, dorso coccineo rubro, interdum tota sordidé 
coccinea, lineari obovata, calyce triplo longiora. Capsule tres ovate, basi connate, petalis altiores poly- 
sperme. Floret Augusto ad oras maris hyperborei. 

Our specimens of this plant were lost in crossing the Barren Grounds ; but the above description, which 
was taken from the live plant, agrees with specimens in the Banksian Herbarium, brought from Unalaska, by 
Mr. Nelson. 

124. Zigadenus ahlogare Wise scapo sub-nudo, petalis obovatis obtusis. _(W.) 

Herba glauca glaberrima. Radix bulbosa tunicata. Folia radicalia, scapo dimidio breviora, erecto- 
patentia, linearia, acuta, canaliculata, basi vaginantia, nervis parallelis. Scapus cubitaligs levis inferné 
obsoleté triqueter, superne teretiusculus vix flexuosus, foliis duobus bracteiformibus plerumque instructus. 
Racemus [terminalis multiflorus sepius basi ramosus;  pedicellis pollicaribus, apicibus incrassatis’; 
bracteis membranaceis lanceolatis concavis acutis pedicellis dimidio brevioribus. Flores viridescenti-albi, 
masculini hermaphroditis immixti. Corolla laciniis sex patentibus, obovatis basi attenuatis infra medium 
glandula viridi obcordata profundéque emarginata munitis. £/amenta corollam subequantia. Capsulu 
membranacea tricocca, trilocularis ovata, acuminata, corollé emarcida obtecta. Semina plurima angulata in 


loculamentis duplici ordini infarcta. 


HEPTANDRIA. 
125. Trientalis Europea 6 Americana: Nuttall. Am. i. p. 228. (W.) 


OCTANDRIA. 
126. Epilobium angustifolium: Willd. ii. p. 318. Pursh. ii. p. 259. (W. B.) 


The young leaves, under the name of L’Herbe Fret, are used, by the Canadian voyagers, as a pot-herb. 

127. E. latifolium: Willd. ii. p. 314. Pursh. i. p. 259. (A.) 

128. E. palustre: Willd. ii. p. 317. Pursh. ii. p. 260. (W. B.) 

129. E. tetragonum: Willd. ii. p. 317. Pursh. i. p. 259. (W.) 

130. Vaccinium Canadense : foliis lanceolatis utrinque pubescentibus integerrimis, 
corollis fasciculato-racemosis ovatis: stylo incluso. (W.) 

Frutex pedalis ramosissimus. Ramuli teretes, flavescenti-virides, verruculosi et pubé brevi desis canes- 
centi vestiti. Folia pollicaria, laté lanceolata utrinque acuta, integerrima, ubique precipué ad nervos 
villosiuscula: stipulis minutis setaceis trifidis. Racemus plerumque terminalis, bracteis obtusis. Cal; lyse 
acanthino-viridis, nutans, laciniis ovatis. Corolla pallidé viridescens, globosa inferne obsolete pentagona, 
ore patulo, laciniis ovatis reflexis. Stamina inclusa, filamentis- planis villosis, cornubus binis deorsum 
spectantibus. Fructus maturus mihi non visus. Ramudli floriferi_foliosi.. Interdum: planta tota fuscescit. 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 137 


Folia masticata saporem acidam gratam edunt. Specimen hujus plante Kalmio lectum et sub hoc nomine 
in herbario. Banks. conservatum extat. Hab. in pinetis. — 


131. V. Vitis Idea: Willd. ii, p. 354. Pursh. i. p- 289. Weesawgum-meena 
(Sour-Berry). Cree Lang. (W. B.) 

132. Oxycoccus palustris, a: Pers. Ench. i. p. 419. Maskoego-meena (Swampy- 
Berry). Cree Lang. (W. B.) | 

133. Polygonum erectum: Willd. ii. p. 450. (H.) 
_ 134. P. viviparum: Willd. ii. p. 441. (W. B.) 

135. P. cilinode: Mich. Fl. Am. i. p. 241. (W.) 

136. Adoxa moschatellina: Willd. ii. p. 472. (W.) 


DECANDRIA. 


137. Thermopsis rhombifolia: Nuttall. Am. i. p. 282. (C.) 


138. Ledum palustre: Willd. ii, p. 602. Pursh. i. p. 300.—Wisha-capucea : 
Hearne’s Journey, p. 456. (W.B.) 

This plant is a better substitute for tea than the following one. 

139. L. latifolium: Willd. ii. p. 602. Pursh. i. p. 300. (W.) 


Termed by the Crees, Kawkee-kee pucquaw, (always leaves, evergreen,) and sometimes Maskeeg, (medi- 
cine,) because they suppose that the white residents drink the infusion of it as a medicine. 


140. Kalmia glauca: Willd. ii. p. 601. Pursh. i. p.296. (W.B.) 

141. Rhododendron lapponicum: Wadi. fl. Lapp. p. 104. (B.) 

142. Andromeda tetragona: Willd. ii. p.607. Pursh.i. p.290. Brown, Ross’s Voy. (B.) 

143. A.polifolia: Willd. ii. p.610. Pursh. i. p.291. (W.B.) 

144. A. calyculata: Willd. ii. p.614. Pursh. i. p. 291, (W. B.) 

145. Arbutus alpina: Willd. ii. p. 618. Pursh. i.283. (W.) 

146. A. Uva ursi: Willd. ii.p. 618. Pursh.i. p. 283. Jackashey-puck, Hearne’s 
Journey. Kleh, Chipewyan lang. Attoongaweeat, Esquimaue. 


It has received the name of Sac.a Commis, from the trading clerks carrying it in their smoking-bags. 

147. Pyrola rotundifolia: Willd. ii. p..621. Pursh. i. p. 299. (W.) 

148. P. chlorantha: Schwartz. Act. Holm. 1810, p- 190, t.5. P. asarifolia: Mich. 
Am. p. 251. (W.) 

149. P. minor: Willd. ii. p.621. Pursh. i. p. 299. (B.) 

150. P.secunda: Willd. ii. p.621. Pursh. i. p. 299. (W. B.) 

151. P. uniflora: Willd. ii. p.622. Pursh. i. p. 299. (W.) 

152. Chrysosplenium alternifolium: Willd. ii. p. 637. (W. B.) 
158. Saxifraga nivalis: Willd. ii. p.645. Pursh. i. p. 310. (B.) 

154. S. Hireulus: Willd. ii. p. 649. (H. A.) . 

155. S. Aizoides: Willd. ii. p. 650. Pursh. ii. p- 312. (B.) 

156. S. oppositifolia: Willd. ii. p. 648. Pursh. i. p. 311. (B.) . 

157. S.cernua: Willd. ii. p. 652. (B.) | | 

158. 8. tricuspidata: Willd. ii. p.657. Pursh. i. p. 313. (W. B.) 


738 APPENDIX. [No. VII. 


159. S. greenlandica: -Pursh. i. p. 312.—S. cespitosa, 6: Willd. ii. p. 657. (A.) 
160. Mitella nuda: Gmel. Sibir. iv. t. 68. fig. 1. Willd. ii. p. 660. M. reniformis: 
Pursh. i. p.314.—M. prostrata: Mich. Am. p. 270. (W.) 

161. Silene acaulis: Willd. ii. p.. 709. Pursh.i. p. 316. (B.) 

162. Stellaria leta: glauca, foliis lineari-lanceolatis carinatis levibus, pedunculis 
sub-geminis terminalibus, petalis longitudine calycis villosiusculi, capsula calycem 
paulo superanti. (B.) | | 

Caulis decumbens, marcescens ramosissimus ; rami erecti palmares debiles uni-vel bi-flori. Folia ungui- 
cularia, inferiora breviora lanceolata utrinque acuta, superiora magis linearia sensim acuminata, omnia cum 
caule et pedunculis glaberrima. Calyx petalis vix brevior acuminatus obsoleté trinervis, villosus, margine 
albo. Petala bipartita, laciniis linearibus obtusis. 

163. St. Edwardsii: Brown Append. ined. Parry’s Voyage. (B.) St. nitida : 
Hooker in Scoresby’s voy. p. 411? 

A priori differt petalis et capsula calyce dupld longioribus, foliisque crassioribus aveniis, costa media vix 
transparenti. Colore quoque obscuriori nec leto, primo conspectu, distinguitur. 

164. St. palustris: Retz. Fl. Scand. ed. 2da, p.106. St. glauca; Smoth, Fl. Brit. 
p. 475. (W.) | | ! 

6 lisdem locis crescens differt tantum habitu strictiori, caule villoso et foliis non 
glaucis. (W.) 
165. St. graminea: Willd. ii. p. 711. (W.) 
A planta Britannica differt caulis angulis retrorsum seabris. 

166. St. gracilis: glaberrima, caule debili, ramis sterilibus gemma foliorum termi- 
natis, foliis lanceolatis, flore solitario sub-terminali, calyee trinervi petalis paulo 
breviore. (H.) 

Caulis dodrantalis filiformis acute tetragonus superne ramosus. Folia lanceolata acuta integerrima enervia ; 
caulina longitudine trilinearia internodiis duplo brevioribus ; ramea caulinis multo minoribus. Lacinie 
calycine ovate acute glabre trinerves, margine hyalino. Petala bipartita calyce vix longiora, laciniis lan- 
ceolatis obtusis, inferne attenuatis. 

167. Arenaria peploides: Willd. ii. p. 716. Pursh. i. p. 317. (H. A.) 

168. A. lateriflora: Willd. ii. p.718. Pursh. i. p. 317. (W.) 

169. A. propinqua: cespitosa glanduloso-pilosa, foliis lineari-subulatis acutis tri- 
nerviis, calyce acuto trinervi petalis vix longiori capsula breviori. (B.) 

Habitus A. verne. Folia, caules, peduneuli et calyces pilis crebris brevissimis patentissimis’ glanduliferis 
vestiti. Lacinie calycine lanceolate acute trinerves, nervis validis «qualibus sub-approximatis, margine 
lato membranaceo, albo. Petala alba ovata vel ovalia obtusa, minora quam in Arenaria verna. 

170. A. Rossii: Brown Append. ined. Parry’s Voyage. (B.) 

Fastigiato-ramosissima denseque foliosa, glabra, Folia enervosa. Pedunculi solitarii terminales,. elongati, 
uniflori. Calyx margine purpurascenti. Petala ligulata calyce paulo longiora. 

171. Lychnis apetala: Willd. ii. p. 810. (B.) | 

172. Cerastium viscosum: Willd. ii. p.812. Pursh. i. p. 320. (W. B.) 

173. C.arvense: Willd. ii. p. 813. Pursh. i. p. 821. (W.) | 

174, Spergula nodosa: Willd. ii. p. 818. (W.) 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 739 


DODECANDRIA. | 
175. Hudsonia ericoides: Willd. ii. p. 858. Pursh. ii. p. 364. (W.) 


ICOSANDRIA. 


176. Prunus Virginiana: Willd. ii. p. 985: Pursh.i. p. 329. (W.) 
_ The tawquoy-meen-ahtick of the Crees is a handsome small tree, rising on the sandy plains of the Saskat- 
chawan to the height of twenty feet, but extending as far north as Great Slave Lake, where it attains the 
height of five feet only. Its fruit, termed Tawquoymeena, or Choke-cherry, is not ry edible in a recent state, 
but when dried and bruised, forms an esteemed addition to pemmican. 

177. P. Pensylvanica: Willd. ii. p. 992. Pursh. i. p.331. Passeeawey-meenan, 
Cree Lang. (W.) 

178. Sorbus Americana: Pursh. i. p. 341. (W.) 

179. Aronia ovalis: Pers. Ench. ii. p.40. Pyrus ovalis, Pursh. i. p. 340. (W.) 

This shrub is common as far north as lat. 62°. It abounds on the sandy plains of the Saskatchawan. Its 
wood, named by the Crees meesassquat-ahtick, is prized for making arrows and pipe stems, and is thence 
termed by the Canadian voyagers bois de fleche. Its berries, about the size of a pea, are the finest fruit in the 
country, and are used by the Crees under the name of Meesasscootoom-meena, both in a fresh and dried state. 
They form a pleasant addition to Peper aes and make excellent puddings, very little inferior to plum- 
puddings. 

180. Spirea salicifolia: Willd. ii. p.1055.  Pursh.i. p. 341. (W.) — 

181. Rosa blanda: Willd. ii. p.1065. Pursh.i. p. 344. Ogganee-ahtick, Cree 
Lang. (W.) | 

182. Rubus ideus 8. Canadensis: Willd. ii. p.1081. Pursh. i. p. 346. (W.) 

183. R. saxatilis 6. Canadensis: Mich. Am. i. p. 298. (W.) 

The fruit of this and the preceding species is termed by the Crees, Athouscan. 

184. R. pistillatus: Smith, Exot. Bot. ii. p.53,t.86. Pursh. i. p.349. (W.) 

185. R. Chamemorus: Willd. ii. p. 1090. Pursh. i. p.349. (W.B.) 

186. Fragaria Canadensis: Mich. Am. i. p.299. Otei-meena (Heartberry), Cree 
Lang. (W.) 

187. Potentilla fruticosa: Willd. ii. p.1094. Pursh. i. p. 355. (W.B.) 

188. P. Pensylvanica: Willd. ii. p.1099. Pursh.i. p. 356. (W.) 

189. P.arguta: Pursh. ii. p.736. Lehm. Monogr. p. 62. (W.) 

Viscido-villosa, flore albo, unguibus citrinis. Planta olim in horto Kewensi culta et ut videtur teste Herb- 
Banks. cum P. Pensylvanica confusa. . 

190. P. Norwegica: Willd. ii. p.1109. Pursh. i. p.354. (W.) 

191. P.anserina: Willd. ii. p.1095. Pursh. i. p. 356. (W.) 

192. P. concinna: foliis septenatis quinatisque ; foliolis ovali-obovatis subtus 
niveo-tomentosis: apicibus serratis, caule abbreviato. (C.) 

Caules plures bi-pollicares diffusi, uti et petioli et pedunculi sericeo-argentei. Folia radicalia 
7-vel quinata, petiolis sericeis ex basibus brunneis membranaceis 5-nervosis orientibus : stipule adnate, 
membranaceze lanceolate acuminate: integerrime, dorso et apice pilosis. Foliola sessilia ovali-obovata 


5B 2 


740 APPENDIX. [No. VII. 


interdum fere truncata, ad apicem inequaliter serrata; supra flavescenti-viridia, pilis adpressis sub- 
sericeis densé obtecta, subtus pulchré niveo-tomentosa, ad margines pilis mollibus exsertis hirsuta: ex- 
teriora minora. Folium unicum prope basin caulis seepius ternatum. Adsunt quoque ad originem pedun- 
culorum foliola duo opposita simplicissima sericea stipulis insidentia. Pedunculi 2-3, unguiculares, ascen- 
dentes dum terni laterales medio bibracteati, tertius nudus. Calyces villosi, laciniis exterioribus brevioribus 
linearibus acutis ; interioribus triplo latioribus . semi-ovatis acuminatis corollam vix cequantibus. Petala fla~ 
vissima laté obcordata. Germina levia, receptaculo hirsuto. Species pulchra. P. humifusam Nuttallii 
non vidi, sed 4 planta nostra diversa videtur propter caules flagellatos et non foliosos, 


193. P.nivea: Willd. ii.p.1109. Pursh. i. p. 353. (B.) 

194. P. hirsuta: Nestl. Monogr. p. 67.. t. 9. P..Monspeliensis. Willd. ii. 
p. 1109. (S.) 

195. P. tridentata: Willd.ii.p.1110. Pursh. i. p. 353. (W.) 

196. P. biflora: Lehman. Monogr. p. 192. No. 88. t. 20. (B.) 


Dense czspitosa. Folia gramineo-viridia subtus glauca,.marginibus revolutis, _apicibus fuscis. . Flos 
erectus plerumque solitarius szepe tamen flores duo terminales, pedicellis brevibus villosis ebracteatis ex axillis 
foliorum caulinorum. Calyx, laciniis exterioribus linearibus, marginibus revolutis, utrinque rotundatis 
subtusque glaucis; interioribus longitudine eequalibus, duplo latioribus ovatis, acuminatis planiusculis. 
Petala calyce duplo grandiora, obcordata citrino-flava ad unguem macula aurantio-flava ornata. Styli flavi 
subulati, curvi, staminibus breviores. Receptaculum dense villosum, germinibus rugulosis. 


197. Geum triflorum: Pursh. ii. p. 736. Nuttall. i. p. 309. (C.) 

198. G. strictum: Willd. ii. p.1118. Pursh. i-p. 351. (W.) 

199. Dryas chamedrifolia: Pers. Ench.ii. p.57. Pursh. i. p. 350. (W.) 
200. D. integrifolium: Pers. Ench. ii. p. 57. (B.) | 

201. Comarum palustre: Willd. ii. p.1119.  Pursh. i. p. 357. (W.). 


POLYANDRIA. 


202. Actea brachypetala: Decand. Syst. i. p. 385. A. Americana: Pursh. ii. 
p. 366. (W.) - 

203. Papaver nudicaule: Willd. ii. p.1145- Pursh. ii. p. 365. (B.) 

204. Sarracenia purpurea: Willd. ii. p.1150. Pursh. ii. p. 367. (W.) 

205. Nuphar lutea: Pursh. i. p. 369. (W.) 

206. Aquilegia vulgaris :: Willd. ii. p. 1245 7 (W.) 

207. Thalictrum corynellum : Decand. Syst. i. p- 1172? Th. Cornuti: Pursh. ii. 
p. 388? (W.) } | 

208. Anemone Nuttalliana: Decand. Syst. i. p. 193. A. Ludoviciania : Nutt. Am. 
ii. p. 20. (W. C.) | . 

209. A. parviflora: Decand. Syst. i. p. 200. - Mich. Am. i. p. 319. (W. B.) 

210. A. ranunculoides? ‘var: Decand. Syst. i. p. 206? (H. B.) 


Involucri foliola laté obovata vix in petiolos attenuata. | 
211. An. borealis: foliis ternatis: segmentis rotundatis dentatis crenatisve ; 


involucralibus amplexicaulibus trifidis, petalis 6 obovatis. (B.) 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE- PLANTS. TA] 


Radix: fibroso-fasciculata, fuscescens.—Folia radicalia, petiolata, ternata, glaberrima, foliolis sessilibus, 
cuneiformi-rotundatis, insequaliter crenatis aut etiam inciso-dentatis. Petiolus tener debilisque pollicaris, 
interdum prope laminam folii pilis paucis mollibus indutus. Scapus palmaris, uniflorus, infra involucrum, 
laxé, supra densé villosus. Involucrum foliaceum amplexicaule, subtus pilosum ‘et ad basin villosum, pro- 
fundé 3-vel 4-partitum, segmentis ‘trifidis, laciniis lineari-obovatis, integerrimis aut cuneiformibus’ et apice 
obtusissime, 3-dentatis. Flos albidus, extus in junioribus ‘preecipue ad basin ccerulescens.  Petald 6 ungui- 
cularia, obovata, obtusissima, plerumque emarginata, juniora extus pube brevi,:lanatd, induta: in 
maturioribus pili adpressi tantum adsunt. - Stamina permulta, petalis triplo breviora.- Germina pilosa. 

212. A. Hudsoniana: foliis radicalibus multipartitis, segmentis bis palmatim 
sectis, laciniis linearibus: involucri ternatim decompositis breviter petiolatis, pedun- 
culis binis, petalis 5-8 ovatis, acutiusculis. (W.) 

A. multifida 8. Hudsoniana. Decand. Syst. Vegetab. i. p. 209. 

Herba fere cubitalis, erecta, pilis albis mollibus longiusculis undique munita. Folia radicalia petiolata, 
caule duplo breviora, tripartita: seymenta basi attenuata, lateralia bipartita, omnia bis palmatim secta: 
Jaciniis ultimis lineari-lanceolatis. Involucrum trifolium, foliis modo radicalium ternatim decompositis et 
in petiolos latos breves attenuatis. Pedwneuli spithamei, pube brevi densius tecti, plerumque Dini, 
quorum unus~ precocior nudus, alter involucellum bifolium  trifidum medio gerens. Flores parvi, intus 
melleo-flavi, extus ad basin paulo fuscescentes. Petala 5-9 ovata, acutiuscula, extus villosa. Stamina 
petalis plus duplo breviora. Germina hirsuta, stylo persistente, recto, glabro mucronata, in capitulum 
ovatum densé aggregata: matura lana involuta qua dispersa sunt. 

8. Sanguinea: An. sanguinea: Pursh. ined. in Herbario Lambert. 

A precedenti differt statura graciliori, floribusque minoribus saturaté sanguineis. (W.) 

213. A, Pensylvanica: Decand. Syst. Veg.i. p. 209. A: aconitifolia. Mich. Fl. 
Am. i. p. 320. (S.) 

214. Ranunculus flammula var.? Decand. Syst. Veg. i. p. 247. (W.) 

215. R. cymbalaria: Pursh. i. p- 392. var. 8. Decand. Syst. Veg. i. p. 252. (W.) 

8. minima ; foliis plerumque 3-dentatis, flagellis paucis vel nullis. (W.) 

216. R. rhomboideus: Edin. Phil. Journ. vi. p. 329. t. xi. f. 1. R. ovalifolius. 
Pursh. inedit.in Herbario Lambert. (C.) 

217. R. arcticus: foliis radicalibus’ petiolatis hastatis tripartitis lobis divisis; 
caulinis in lobos lineares integerrimos partitis, caule trifolio unifloro, calyce villoso 
petalis breviore. (B.) 

Folia glaberrima ; radicalia longius petiolata, hastata, tripartita ; Jobo intermedio unguiculari trifido, 
laciniis lateralibus minoribus, patentibus ; lobis Jateralibus 4-partitis segmentis divaricatis, exterioribus 
sensim minoribus : laciniis omnibus obtusis, lanceolatis vel linearibus ; caulina in lobos lineares integerrimos, 
obtusiusculos partita, ad bases membranacea, amplexicaulia et pilis albis mollibus ciliata: imum sub-petio- 
latum lobis sex, summum lobis tribus. Caulis simplicissimus pedalis erectus uniflorus, foliis tribus remotis 
munitus et supra folium summum pilis albis villosiusculus. - Calyx flavescenti-erubescens, villosus, reflexus, 
petalis dimidio brevior. Petala lutea patentissima, obovata, obtusissima, receptaculo breviora. Stamina 
filamentis brevissimis, antheris oblongis. Germina glabra stylo recurvato mucronata, receptaculo cylindraceo, 

218. R. Pensylvanicus: Decand. Syst. Veg.i. p.290. Pursh. ii. p. 393. (W.) 

219. R. Purshii: glaberrimus, foliis petiolatis : depressis ternatim decompositis ; 
elevatis bis terve palmatim trifidis, caule repente, petalis calyce glaberrimo triplo 
longioribus. R. Fistulosus: Pursh. inedit. in Herb. Lambert. (W.B.). 


7429 APPEN DIX. [No. VII. 


Caules teretes filiformes teneri super arenas irrigatas. implexé repentes, scendentes.’ Folia nonnulla 
depressa ternatim decomposita, laciniis divaricatis, linearibus acutis ; alia elevata sub-reniformia, laciniis 
divaricatis, cuneatis apice dentatis incisisve, lateralibus. seepe trifidis; segmentis omnibus glaberrimis 
utrinque concoloribus marginibusque erubescentibus. Petioli basi amplexicaules, trinerves et. membrana 
teneri, rotundata, integra, ciliata aucti. Pedunculus unus precocior nudus, non sulcatus. caulem quasi 
terminans et internodium proximum longitudine et crassitudine fere aquans, folioque oppositus : alter axillaris, 
brevis uniflorus vel seepe biflorus foliosus et mox elongaturus. Calyx glaberrimus reflexus foliolis tribus 
quaternisve sub-membranaceis, nervis tribus quatuorve ramosis, concavis fere saccatis, deciduis.. Petala 5-6 
saturate flava, laté elliptica, obovatave obtusissima, 5-nervosa, nitentia, subtus opaca, calyce triplo longiora, 
unguibus brevibus, porisque nectariferis patelliformibus margine elevato circumcinctis. Semina sublenticu- 
laria, glabra, stylo brevi compresso terminata. 

&. Margines rivulorum arenosas sicciores habitans, differt foliis omnibus reniformi-rotundatis, palmato- 
trifidis, laciniis divaricatis, cuneatis, apice dentatis, incisisve segmentis obtusis. R. hyperboreo affinis, sed 
flore differt. (B.) 

220. R. Lapponicus: Decand. Syst. Veg. i. p.271. (W.) 

221. R. pygmeus: Decand. Syst. Veg. i. p. 273. Pursh. i. p. 393. (A.) 

222. R. sulphureus. Phipps, Voyage. p. 202. Decund. Syst. Veg. i. p. 274. (B.) 

223. R. sceleratus: Decand. Syst. Veg. i. p. 268. Pursh. i. p. 293. (W.) 

224. Caltha palustris ; Willd. ii. p.1339. Pursh. i. p. 390. (W.) 

225. C. natans: Gmel. Fl. Sibir: iv. t. 82. Willd. ii. p. 1339. (W.) 


DIDYNAMIA. 


226. Mentha Canadensis: Pursh. ii. p. 405. Amiscutcuscoa (beaver-grass.) Cree 
Lang. (W.) 

227. Stachys ambigua: Smith. Comp. Fl. Brit. p. 91. Eng. Bot. t. 2089. (W.) 

228. Dracocephalum ? parviflorum: Nuttall. Am. ii. p. 35. (W. C.) 

229. Scutellaria galericulata: Willd, iii. p.173.  Pursh. ii. p. 412. (W.) 

230. Euphrasia officinalis: Willd. iii. p. 193. Pursh. ii. p. 480. (H.) 

231. Bartsia pallida: Willd. iii. p. 186. Pursh. ii. p. 429. (W. B.) 

232. Rhinanthus crista-galli: Willd. iii. p. 188. Pursh. ii. p. 429. (H.) 

233. Pedicularis macrodontis: caule sub-simplici, foliis pinnatifidis : pinnis linea- 


ribus obtusis, calycibus bilobis cristatis, galea obtusissima ad faucem dentata. (H.) 

Herba glabra. Caulis pedalis et ultra, erectus gracilis plerumque simplex interdum tamen ramulos 
superne ex axillis foliorum prodiens. Folia remotiuscula, fere sesquipollicaria, acuminata profunde pin- 
natifida ; pinnis. patentissimis linearibus obtusis, sinuato-dentatis crenatisve. Flores axillares_sessiles 
foliis floralibus interdum plus duplo breviores. Flos fére P. palustris. Calyx ovatus inflatus, corolla duplo 
brevior. Galea obtusissima nec emarginata et dentibus sub apice carens, ad faucem tamen dente majusculo 
angulo recto stante utrinque munita. Zabiwm inferius galea sub-brevius, 3-lobum, lobis sub sequalibus 
integerrimis. 

234. P. euphrasioides, 6. Labradorica: Willd. iii. p. 204. Pursh. ii. p. 424. (W. B.) 

235. P. flammea: Willd. iii. p. 215. Pursh. ii. p. 246. (B.) 

236. P. Lapponica: Willd. iii. p. 207. Pursh. ii. p. 245. (BY) 

237. P. sudetica: Willd. iii. p. 209. (B.) : 


No. VII.] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 743 


238. P. hirsuta: Willd. iii. p. 216. Brown, Ross’s Voyage. (B.) 

239. P. Nelsonii: Brown. MS. in Herb. Banks. P. verticillata. Pursh. ii. 
p. 426. (B.) 

240. Linnea borealis: Willd. iii. p. 340. Pursh. ii. p. 415. (W.) 


TETRADYNAMIA. 


Pleurorhizee. Decand. 

241. Nasturtium palustre: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 191. Sisymbrium palustre: 
Pursh. ii. p. 240. (W.) 

242, Barbarea precox ; Decand. Syst. ii. p. 207. (W.) 

243. Braya? glabella: foliis linearibus plerumque remote dentatis, racemo fruc- 
tifero laxo elongato. (B.) 

Radix fusiformis ad collum in caudices paucos breves reliquiis foliorum obtectos divisa. Folia sub- 
radicalia fere bipollicaria erecta, é basi tenui lineare sursum lanceolatim dilatata, acuta, medium versus dentibus 
2 vel 3 acutis seepe instructa, utrinque concolora, glabriuscula, costa obsoletiori percursa ged venis nullis 
transparentibus. Caules palmares erecti costati pube bifida rarissima muniti: alii scapiformes ex ipsa radice, 
alii e summo surculorum brevium foliosorum exsurgenteés, rarius folio uno alterove radicalibus simili, 
instructi. Kacemus clongatus, pedunculis erectiusculis calyces eequantibus. Flores parvi. Lacinie ealy- 
eine erecta, lineares, obtuse, glabre. Petala (exsiccata) pallidé purpurascentes, limbis obtusis integer- 
rimis calycem duplo altioribus. Stylus filiformis brevis stigmate sub-capitato emarginato. Silique imma- 
ture sub-erecte calyce persistente triplo longiores, torulose, stylo coronate. 

Hab. On the Copper Mountains. . 

244. Turritis glabra : Decand. Syst. ii. p. 211. W.) 

_ 245. Arabis sagittata: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 221. Turritis ovata: Pursh. ii. 

p. 438. (W.) 

246. A. hispida: Brown. Hort. Kew. iv. p.106. A. petrea, 6. Decand. Syst. ii. 
p. 230. (B.) 

247. A. lyrata: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 231. Pursh. ii. p. 437. (W.) 

248. Cardamine pratensis : Decand. Syst. ii. p. 256. Pursh. ii. p. 440. (H. A.W.) . 

249. C. hirsuta: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 259. (W.) 

250. C. digitata: foliis digitatim pinnatis: pinnis sessilibus linearibus integer- 
rimis, stylo brevi vix siliqua tenuiori: stigmate capitato. (B.) 

Herba glaberrima. Folia digitatim pinnata ; inferiora petiolo longo gracili, pinnisque 7 approximatis 
supertora brevius petiolata pinnis paulo remotioribus : swmmum subsessile, pinnis 3 aut 5 ; pinnss omnibus 
sessilibus conformibus. Caudis dodrantalis, simplex, basi repens ascendens, superne erectus sub-flexuosus. 
Racemi erecti, multiflori. Pedicelli siliquis longiores, patentes. Flores feré magnitudine Card. pratensis. 
Calyx flavescens. Petala obovata, calyce duplo longiora, alba vel purpureo tincta. Stylus crassiusculus 
lineam longus, stigmate capitato. Silique juniores breviuscule ; maturas non vidi. 

251. Vesicaria arctica: Alyssum? arcticum: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 324, (B.) 

252. V. arenosa: foliis inferioribus sub-rhombeis obsolete sinuato-dentatis pube 


stellata canescentibus, caulibus teretibus basi suffruticosis, silicula pubescente. 
Radix fusiformis. Folia radicalia plurima erecta elliptica parciter obsoletéque sinuato-dentata vel non 


4A é APPENDIX. [No. VIE. 


raro rhomboidea, acuta, in petiolum ipsa lamina sesquilongiorem attenuata, utrinque pube stellata adpressa 
dense tecta, supra flavescenti-viridia subtus canescentia. Oaules patentes aut ascendentes, firmi, pal- 
mares simplices, erubescentes, teretes, pilis stellatis vestiti foliisque paucis magis aut minus linearibus, nunc 
sessilibus nunc in petiolum attenuatis instructi. Racemz terminales. Pedicelli flores longitudine eequantes. 
Pubescentia calycis pedicellorumque ut in foliis. Petala- flava obovata in unguem attenuata, calyce 
sesquilongiora. Stamina edentula. Stylus filiformis, stigmate capitato. Germen pilosum. Stliculam ma- 
turam non vidi. Floret Maio. 


Hab. On the sandy plains of the SEM pti ee 

253. Draba alpina: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 338. Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 178. t.. xi. 
f. 4, (B.) Migr. 

254. D. muricella: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 340. Brown. App. Ross’s Voyage. (B.) 

255. D. hirta « inferalpina: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 175. t.-xi. f. 3. Decand. ii. 
p. 340. (B.) | 

256. D. glabella: Pursh. ii. p..434. (B.) 

257. D. lutea 8. longipes ? Decand. Syst. ii..p. 351. (W.) 

258. Capsella bursa pastoris: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 383. (W.) 


Notorhizee. Decand. 
259. Sisymbrium canescens? Decand. Syst. p. 475? Nuttall. Gen. Am. ii, 
p. 68.? (W.) 
260. S. brachycarpon: foliis bipinnatisectis : lobis obtusis integris -vel parciter 
incisis, petalis calyce majoribus, siliquis linearibus sub- etter pedicello bre- 


vioribus. .(W.) 

Facies S. Sophie, at facile distinguitur siliquis duplo brevioribus.. -Caulis bipedalis, simplex aut.superne 
corymboso-ramosus, glandulis parvis pedicellatis munitus. Folia pinnata, pinnis pinnatifidis, lobis oblongis 
lanceolatisve, extimis majoribus, glabra aut pube glandulosa munita. Petala obovata, pallidé flava, calycem 
saturatius flavum paulo superantia. S%/iqua erectiuscula, pedicello patenti brevior vel interdum fere eequalis, 


teretiuscula sed propter lineam elevatam in axi valvularum subtetragona, stigmate orbiculato terminata, 
4 lineas longa, lineam lata. 


261. S. Sophia? Var. Decand Syst. ii. p. 474? (B.) 


Lobis foliorum latioribus obtusis et notis aliis forsan species diversa ? 
262. Erysimum cheiranthoides: Decand.Syst.i.p.498. Pursh.ii. p.436. (€.) 
263. Lepidium ruderale: Decand. Syst. ii. p. 540. (H.) 


MONADELPHIA. 
264. Geranium Carolinianum? Willd. iii. p.711. Pursh. ii. p. 449. (W.) 


DIADELPHIA. 
265. Corydalis glauca: Pursh. ii. p. 463. (W.) 
266. C. aurea: Pursh. ii. p. 463. (W.) | 
267. Polygala paucifolia: Willd. iii. p. 880. Pursh. ii. p. 464. (S.) 
268. P. Senega: Willd. iii. p.894. -Pursh. iii. p. 464. (H. W.B.). 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE PLANTS. AS 


269. Lupinus perennis? Var. foliis magis acutis et cum caule pilosioribus::. Willd. 
iii. p. 1022? Pursh. ii. p. 467? (B.) | 

270. Lathyrus pisiformis ? Varietas ? stipulis folia tantum eequantibus eeneeae 
tato-cordatis : basi angulato-dentato, ceteris similis. Walld. iii. p.1092? (S.) .. 

271. Pisum maritimum: Willd. iii. p. 1071. Pursh: ii. p: 470. (&.) 

272. Vicia americana: Willd, iii. p. 1096. Pursh. ii. p. 471. (W.) 

273. Hedysarum alpinum: Willd. iii. p. 1207, a H. alpino Mich. diversum. — 

274. Hedysarum Mackenzii: caulescens decumbens, foliis pinnatis foliolis ob- 


longis utrinque canescenti-pilosis, stipulis vaginantibus, articulis lomenti transver- 


sim rugosis pilosis. (B.) 

Caulis ulnaris decumbens parciter ramosus, angulatus superne pilis mollibus brevissimis adpressus tectus. 
Folia pinnata cum impari palmaria fere sessilia rachide trilaterali adpresso-pilosa : foliolis 5-'7-jugis, petiolatis 
sub-oppositis zqualibus sesquipollicaribus oblongis aut ovato-lanceolatis obtusis, utrinque pilis brevibus in- 
canis, venis paucis curvis ramosis obscure transparentibus. Stipule coalite vaginantes parve membrana- 
cee acuminate pilose. Pedunculi axillares foliis duplo longiores caulem crassitudine «equantes superne vil- 
losi. Racemus 7-10 florus, pedicellis sericeis calyeem equantibus bracteisque suis membranaceis subulatis 
brevioribus. Calyx membranaceus pilosus mox erubescens bracted setaced adpressd utrinque fulcratus 5- 
fidus : laciniis subulatis, superioribus sinu obtusiori separatis. Corolla magna speciosa carmesino-rubra pur- 
purascensve. Veaillum obcordatum carinam obtusissimam equans calyceque quintuplo longius. Ale calyce 
triplo longiores. Legumen 5-7 articulis compre transversim ore et pilis brevissimis adpressis vestitis. 
Semena reniformia. 

This is the Liquorice-plant mentioned by Sir Alexander M‘Kenzie in his Voyage to the Arctic Sea, 

275. H. boreale? caulescens erectus, foliis pinnatis foliolis ellipticis obtusis 


supra glabris subtus canescenti-pilosis, stipulis vaginantibus articulis lomenti glabris. 


‘Nuttall, Am. ii. p. 1102 


A H. Mackenzii cui valdé similis diversum foliolis supra glabris minoribus omnino aveniis et proportioni- 
bus petalorum relativis. Caulis erectus flexuosus glaber brachialis et ultra. Foliola pollicaria plerum- 
que elliptica interdum ovato-lanceolata obtusa. Flores magnitudine et colore precedentis. Carina vexillo 
longior, calyce triplo longior. Ale lineari-oblonge obtuse vexillo breviores, calyce plus duplo longiores. 
Ovarium glabrum seminulis sex. . Fructum maturum non vidi. 


276. Phaca frigida: Willd. iii. p. 1258. Wahl. Lapp. p.188. Fi. Dan. t. 856. 


Odo age ne oe 
277. Ph. autinaselbiaity: Decand. Astr. p. 52. Astr. alpinus, Pursh. ii. p. 472. 
(H. W. B.) 


278. Oxytropis oxyphylla: Pall. Astr.t.74? Pall. Itin. iii. t. x. f. 2? (W.) 

279. O. deflexa: Decand. Astr. p.96. Astragalus parviflorus: Willd. iii. p. 1278. 
(W.) 

280. O. canned Desgea Astr. ay 74. Astr. ns dag? Willd. iii. p. 1317. 
(B.) 

281. O. argentata: Pursh. ii. p. 478. Astr. argentata: Pall. Astr. p. 60, t. 48. 
(C.) 


5 C 


C46 APPENDIX. [No. VIL. 


282. O. uralensis: Decand. Asir. p. 69. Astr. uralensis, Hort. Kew. iv. p. 370. 
Phaca sordida: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 190. (A.) | 

283. Astragalus melanocarpus: Frazer’s Catalogue. A. Missouriensis: Nuttail, 
ii. p. 99? exclus. syn. Purshii. A.Setosus: Pursh ined. Herb. Lamb. (C.) 

284. A. vaginatus: Pall. Astr. p. 76, t. 36. (B.) , 

285. A. aboriginorum: suffruticosus erectus canescens, foliis sessilibus, foliolis 


6-jugis lanceolato-linearibus, racemis axillaribus laxis foliis longioribus. (C.) 
Preacedenti similis. Radix teres longa flavescens Glycirrhize similis é quo surgunt caules plures pedales 


suffruticosi erecti graciles simpliciusculi pilis mollibus canescentes. olva sessilia pinnata, pube canescenti’ 


ut in caule sed longiori et densiori: rachidebipollicari filiformi ; foliolis plerumque 11, pollicaribus, sessilibus, 
linearibus lanceolatisve obtusiusculis basi attenuatis utrinque concoloribus nunc alternis nune oppositis 


rariusve verticillatis ; stipulis caulinis: inferioribus connatis ovatis acutis ; superioribus magis distinctis acu- 
minatis. Peduneuli axillares foliis duplo longiores pilosi. Racemus erectus laxus 15-20 florus, pedicellis 


erectis calyce et bracted subulata pilosa brevioribus. Calyx nigrescenti-pilosus, laciniis quinque subulatis 
eequalibus ; superioribus sinu obtuso separatis.. Corolla albida czrulescensve carina eminente ceruled. Vex- 


illum ungue lato horizontali calyce breviori, limbo obcordato erecto. Ale vexillo breviores carina paulo lon-. 


giores, ungue tenui lineari, limbo oblongo emarginato ad basin lobo lineari obovato aucto.. Carina obtusa 


ealyce tertia parte longior. Legumen immaturum oblongum, pilis:canis adpressis tectum, pedicello longitudine 


ealycis sustentatum, stylo brevi incurvo capitato terminatum. Semina 14., 

The Crees and Stone Indians gather its roots in the spring, as an article of food. 

286. A. hypoglottis: Willd. iii. p. 1285. Nutt. Am. ii. p. 99. (S.) | 

287. A. succulentus: caulescens decumbens glabriusculus, foliolis ovalibus obtu- 
sis, stipulis glabris triangularibus, spicis pedunculatis folio brevioribus. (C.) 

Herbaceus spithameus glabriusculus vel pilis adpressis vix conspicuis deciduis munitus. Caulis decumbens 
sub-angulatus superne crassior.. Folia sessilia rachide bi-pollicari sub-trilaterali superne attenuata, foliolis 
21 trilinearibus, ovalibus obtusissimis aveniis brevissime ciliatis supra glabra subtus pilis sparsis inconspicuis 


munitis ; foliolis exterioribus paulo minoribus ; sé¢pulis caulinis triangularibus integerrimis glabris viridibus, 
basibus infra petiolum connatis ibique costis tribus decurrentibus munitis. Folia basin versus caulis breviora 


foliolisque minora. Peduneuli foliis breviores; axillares, crassi. Spica sub-decem#flora conferta. Flores 
magni ochroleuci, carine- apice purpurascenti, bracteis-¢membranaceis suffulti. Calya subsessilis cylindricus 
membranaceus pallescens, inférne glaber, superne pilis sparsis munitus, dentibus subulatis sinubus obtusis 
separatis. Veaillwm alis quarta parte longius, oblongum, acute emarginatum, lateribus replicatis. Ale carina 


. tertia parte, calyce duplo longiores, ungue tenui, limbo lineari-oblongo integerrimy obtuso inferne lobo brevi 


obtuso aucto. Cermina glabra polysperma, stylo longo ad apicem incurvo acuminata. Fructum maturum 


non vidi. 


SYNGENESIA.. 


288. Leontodon palustre: Smith. Fl. Brit. ii. p. 823. Eng. Bot. t.553. (W. B.) 

289. Troximon glaucum :. Pursh. ii. p. 505. (S2) 

290.. Hieracium prenanthoides: Willd. iii. p.1590. Nuttall. Gen. Am. Pi. ii. 
p. 125. exclud..syn. Purshir. (B.) 7 

291. Crepis? nana: glaberrima, foliis ovatis integerrimis,.pappo sessili.. (B.) 


egy 


No. VIT.] LIST OF THE PLANTS. TAG 


Herba glauca sesquipollicaris multiflorus. Radix fusiformis simplex caules plures brevissimos decum- 
bentes alens. Folia ‘radicalia confertissima ovata integerrima trinervia glaberrima supra olivaceo-viridia, 
subtus rubescenti-viridia, petiolis caules pedunculosque superantibus. Caules reliquiis foliorum obtecti in 
pedunculos vel ramos corymbosos uniflores foliis paucis linearibus munitos divisi. Calyx gracilis cylindricus 
calyculatus pedunculo vel ramo suo longior ; squamis exterioribus brevibus linearibus adpressis diverse altitu- 
dinis : interioribus equalibus carinatis glaberrimis. Flosculé saturaté flavi calyce altiores lineares 5-den- 
tati. Semina linearia superné paulo attenuata pappo sessili simplice scabriusculo coronata. 

Hab. ‘On the Copper-Mine River. 

- 292. Saussuria multiflora? Decand. An. du Mus. tom. xvi. p. 199?  exclud. 
synon. Lin. (B.) | 

293. Sonchus sibiricus: Willd. iii. p. 1522. (W.) 

294. Tanacetum pauciflorum : foliis bi-pinnatis villosis sessilibus, caule simplici 
foliis longiore subunifloro, flosculis omnibus hermaphroditis. MS. in Herb. Banks. (S.} 

Ulnaris. Folia bi-pinnata et tripinnatifida, laciniis angustis obtusiusculis. Flos plerumque unicus ter- 
minalis interdum alter é suprema axilla. 

295. Artemisia virgata: frutescens sericeo-incana, ramis erectis gracilibus, foliis 
capillaceis bi-pinnatifidis: floralibus simplicibus calyce hemispherico villoso lon- 
gioribus. (W.) 


Odor Art. Abrotani cui habitu similis sed foliis duplo minoribus. 

296. A. campestris: Willd. iii. p. 1827. Pursh. ii. p. 521. (W.) 

297. A. borealis: Willd. iii. p. 1839. Pall. Itin. iii. p. 755. t. H. h. f. 2. 

A. spithamea? Pursh. ii. p. 522? (B.) 

298. A. vulgaris: Willd. iii. p. 1845. Pursh. ii. p. 522. (B.) 

299. A. integrifolia: Willd. iii. p. 1846. Gmel. Sibir: t. 48. f. 1. Pursh. ii. 
p. 521. (W.) 

300. Gnaphalium plantagineum: Pursh. ii. p. 525. G. plantinaginefolium : 
Willd. iii. p. 1882. (W.) 

301. G. dioicum: Willd. iii. p. 1882. (W.) 

302. G. alpinum: Willd. iii. p. 1883. Pursh. ii. p. 524. (B.) 

303. Erigeron pulchellum: Mich. Am. ii. p. 224. E. bellidifolium: Pursh. ii. 
p. 532. E. serpentaria: Herb. Banks. MSS. (S.) 

304. E. purpureum: Willd. iii. p. 1958. Pursh. ii. p. 533. (S.) 

305. E. philadelphicum: Wlld. iii. p. 1957. Pursh. ii. p. 533. (W.) 

306. E. glabellum: Nuttall. Am. ii. p. 147. (W.) 

307. E. uniflorum: Willd. iii. p. 1960. Eng. Bot. t. 2416. (A.) 

308. Senecio pauciflorus: Pursh. ii. p. 529. (S.) 

309. S. gracilis: Pursh. ii. p. 529. (W.) 

310. S. balsamite: Willd. iii. p.1998. Pursh. ii. p. 530. (W.) ° 

311. S. aureus: Willd. iii. p. 1998. Pursh. ii. p. 580. (W.) » 

312: S. lugens: tomentosus, foliis integris glanduloso-dentatis: radicalibus 
sub-spatulatis : caulinis linearibus acutis, caule simplici, corymbo denso. (B.) 

5 C2 


748: APPENDIX. [No. VIL. 


- Herba pedalis, ubique parciter lanosa. Caules plures ex eodem radice, simplices costati, erubescentes. 
Folia adeo crassa ut vene nulle transparent plana nec ullo modo ensiformia nihilominus costé erubescenti 
valid& sub.apice evanida munita: radicalia primordialia palmaria spatulata et obtusissima ; mox exsurgunt 
alia versum apicem elliptica vel lanceolata et acuta, basibus tamen semper angustis et nil nisi costas alatas: 
exhibentibus: caulina minora, remota, sessilia, semi-amplexicaulia lanceolato-linearia, acuminata; acuta, 
summa. in bracteis sensim diminuta : omnia dentata, dentibus nunc raris et ex glandulis parvis acutis omnin6d 
formatis, nunc frequentioribus et ex substantia folii constructis sed tunc etiam glandulis apiculatis. Folia 
juniora interdum revoluta sunt. Corymbus terminalis circiter 10-florus, pedunculis calyce vix duplo lon- 
gioribus, tomentosis, bracteis linearibus aeuminatis suffultis. Calyx cylindricus squamis paucis laxis mino- 
ribus calyculatus. Squamarum apices nigerrime. Floruli disci calyce longiores, antheris stigma superan- 
tibus. Flosenli radii patentes calyce duplo longiores, limbis lanceolatis integerrimis vel emarginatis. 
Pappus simplex sessilis. Receptaculum nudum. 
Hah. At Bloody Fall, where the Esquimaux were destroyed by the Northern Indians that Tacatanied 
Hearne, whence the specific name. 
313. Cineraria integrifolia: Willd. iii. p. 2082. Pursh. ii. p. 528. (H.) 
314. C. palustris: Willd. iii. p. 2080. (H. W. A.) 7 | 
315. C. frigida: deciduo-tomentosa, foliis ovatis obsolet® dentatis: radicalibus 
petiolatis, caule ascendente unifloro. (B.) . 
Radix repens. Caulis palmaris et ultra, simplex striatus, uniflorus tomento laxo deciduo vestitus. Folia 
plerumque ovata obtusa remote obsoleteque dentata 3-vel 5-nervosa, marginibus sub revolutis ; sub- 
radicalia minora, glabra, in petiolum longum attenuata ; caulina media majora tomento ut in catile ves- 
tita ; caulina suprema minora, linearia. ° Flos luteus. Calyx simplex pilis glanduliferis ‘villosus, laciniis 
linearibus acutis longitudine disci. Flosculi radii calyce duplo longiores 3-dentati. 
316. C. Lewisii: Erigeron compositum: Pursh. il. p 535. (B.) 
317. Aster? exscapus: foliis radicalibus lineari-lanceolatis: adpresso pilosis ftore 
sessili altioribus. (C.) 
Radix fusiformis superne in caudices breves crassos reliquiis foliorum obtectos divisa. Folia radicalia 
sesquipollicaria angusta acuta, inferne sensim attenuata, integerrima, utrinque pilis adpressis vestita. Flos 
magnus albidus in summo caudicis sessilis foliisque paulo brevior. Calyx adpresso-imbricatus, laciniis an- 
gustis lineari-subulatis acutis marginibus membranaceis ciliatis. - Floseuli disci calyce paulo longiores 
pappo breviores. Fl. radii calyce plus duplo ae angusti, lineares ges dentibus 3 conniventibus. 
Hab. at Carlton House. 
318. A. salicifolius : Willd. iii. p. 2030. Pops ii. p. 549. wy 
319. A. graminifolius: Pursh. ii. p. 545. (H.) 
320. A. paludosus: Willd. iii. p. 2033. Pursh. ii. p. 551. (H) 
321. A. paniculatus: Willd. iii. p. 20385. Pursh. ii. p. 551. (W.) 
392. A. cordifolius: Willd. iii. p. 2036. .Pursh. ii. p. 552. (W.) 
323. A. salsuginosus: caule unifloro, foliis lineari-obovatis acutis sub-integerrimis 
venosis, calycibus laxé imbricatis linearibus acutis diseo vix dupe: radio plus triplo 


brevioribus. (W.) 


Herbaceus. Caules plures ex eadem radice, dodrantales erecti aut ascendentes firmi simplices purpurei 
sed pilis brevissimis sub-incanis. Folia sessilia lineari-ohovata lanceolatave plerumque acuta, integerrima 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 749 


vel ad apicem dentibus raris munita, venosa, utrinque concolora, supra glabra, subtus pilis brevibus paten- 
tissimis vestita. Jos magnus terminalis infra quem caulis paulo incrassatus est et villosus. Calyx laxius- 
culus pilis brevibus canis obtectus, laciniis linearibus acutis, marginibus purpurascentibus. Flosculi 
diset calyce fere duplo longiores: radzz triginti sesqui-unguiculares disco duplo Jongiores, lineares sub- 
emarginati. Germina hirta pappo simplici dentato fuscescente discum «quante coronata. 
Hah, On the Salt Plains in the Athabasca. 
324, A. montanus: radice repente, caule ramoso sub- hiflore ad apicem densé 
tomentoso, foliis laté oblongis remoté dentatis subtus breviter pilosis, calycibus 
squarrosis, flosculis radii numerosis angustis. (B. ) 
Radix repens. Caules plures spithamei ascendentes simplices aut ramosi firmi sulcati villoso-canescentes 
ramis plerumque sterilibus. Folia sesquipollicaria apicem versus remoté dentata, subtusque pilosa, varia, 
modo laté lanceolata acuta, modo lineari-oblonga obtusa sed costa excurrente apiculata. - Flos mag 
nitudine Erigerontis alpini, terminalis propé quem caulis incrassatus est et tomento incano densissimé obtectus. 
Calyx villosus laciniis lineari-lanceolatis acutis imbricatis squarrosis, interioribus purpurascentibus radium 
sub-zquantibus. #losculi disci calyce. breviores ; radii subtriginti angusti lineares sub-emarginati calyce 
paulo longiores. Germina pilosa, pappo simplici dentato. fuscescente disco longiori., Specimen hujus plante 
é Sibiria in herbario Pallasii nunc Lambertiano sub nomine falso Erigerontis alpini conservatum est. Asteris 
species propter calycem potius quam Erigerontis. 
325. Solidago tenuifolia: Pursh. ii. p.540. (H.) 
326. S. virga-aurea: Willd. iii. p. 2065. Pursh. ii. p. 542. (W.) 
327. S. stricta: Willd. iii. p. 2062. Pursh. ii. p. 540. (W.) 
328. S. juncea: Willd. iii. p. 2060. Pursh: ii. p. 538. (W.) 
329. S. procera: Willd. iii. p. 2055. Pursh. ii. p. 535. (H.) 
330. S. lanceolata: Willd. iii. p..2062. Pursh. ii. p. 540. (H.) 
331. S. humilis: Pursh. ii. p. 543. (W.) | 
332. Arnica montana: Willd. iii. p. 2106. Nuttall. Gen. Am. ii. p. 164. (W.B.) 
' 333. Grindelia squarrosa : ear Lin. Trans. v. xii. p. 102. . Donia squarrosa : 
Pursh. ii. p. 559. 

Hab. On the Salt Plains in the Athabasca. 
334. Tussilago palmata: Willd. iti. p. 1972. Pursh. ii. p. 531. (W.) 

335. T. frigida: Willd. iii. p. 1968. - Pursh. ii. p. 531. (A.) 

336. T. sagittata: Pursh. ii. p. 531. (W.) > 
387. Chrysanthemum integrifolium: pilosum, foliis linearibus integerrimis, -catle 
sub-aphyllo unifloro. | 

Radix gracilis perennis. Folia radicalia conferta, feré villicastc linearia, obtusiuscula integerrima pilosa. 
Caulis simplicissimus, digitalis, superne incrassatus, pilis mollibus patentissimis densé-tectus et’ interdum 
folio uno alterove fere setaceo instructus. #%os pro ratione plante magnus. Calyx hemisphzricus 
imbricatus, squamis elliptico-obovatis, appressis, viridibus, marginibus membranaceis laceris umbrino-fuscis. 
Flosculi radii albi, magni, laté elliptici 3-dentati ; disc lutei. a eMC LTE pilosiusculum, C. graminifolio 
Lam, Ill. t. 678. f. affinis. Hab. On the Copper ‘Mountains, 

338. Achillea ptarmica: Willd. iii. p. 2191.~ Pursh. ii. p. 562. (W.B.) © ~*~ 

339. A. millefolium: Willd. iii. p. 2208. Pursh. ii. p. 563. (W.B.) vue 


750: APPENDIX. [No. VIL 


GYNANDRIA. 


340. Habenaria obtusata: Orchis obtusata: Pursh. ii. p. 588. (H.) 

341. H. hyperborea: Brown. Hort. Kew. v. p. 198. Orchis hyperborea: Pursh. 
ii. p. 588. (W.) 

342. H. rotundifolia: Orchis rotundifolia: Pursh. ii. p. 588. (W.) 

348. Neottia cernua: Willd. iv.p. 75. Pursh. ii. p. 589. (B.) 

344. Corallorhiza innata: Brown. Hort. Kew. v. p. 209. Nuttall. Gen. Am. ii. 
p. 197. (W.) 

345. Cypripedium parvitlorum: Willd. iv. p. 143. Pursh. ii. p. 594. (W.) 
_ 846. C. pubescens: Willd. iv. p. 148. Pursh. ii. p. 594. (W.) 

347. C. humile: Willd. iv. p. 144. Pursh. ii. p. 595. (W.) 


MONCHCIA. 


348. Chara translucens: Eng. Bot. t. 1855. (B.) 

349. Typha latifolia? Pursh. i. p. 34? (W.) 

350. Kobresia scirpina: Willd. iv. p. 205. (B.) 

Carex. 1. Spicts diotcis. | 

351. C. dioica: Willd. iv. p. 207. (W.) 

352. C. scirpoidea: Mich. Am. ii. p.171. Pursh. i. p. 34. C. Wormskioldiana : 
Hornemann. Fl. Dan. t. 1528. (W.) | 

2. Spica androgyna simplict, artista stricta (vel exserta vel inclusa.) 

353. C. filifolia: Nutt. Am. ii. p. 204. (C.) 

3. Spica androgyna simplict mutica. : 

354. C. aflinis: spica androgyna simplici superne mascula, ieee tribus, 
squamis lanceolatis acutis muticis ; infima aristata. Brown, MS. (W.) 

Obs. Proxima C. polytrichoidi. Br. 

355. C. attenuata: spica androgyna simplici: superne mascula densa: femineis 
paucioribus alternis, squamis omnibus obtusis. Brown, MS. (B.) 

4, Spicis androgynis pedunculatis. 

356. C. media: spicis androgynis ternis brevissimé pedunculatis sessilibusve 
approximatis basi masculis, stigmatibus tribus, capsulis ovatis rostellatis glaber- 
rimis squama ovata obtusiuscula longioribus. Brown, MS. (W.). 

Prope C. bicolorem. Br. 

357. C. fuliginosa: Sternb. et Hoppe. in Act. Soc. Bot. Ratisb. i. p. 159, t. 3. (B.) 


5. Sprcis androgynis sessilibus alternis. 
358. C. scoparia: Willd. iv. p. 230. Pursh. i. p. 37. (W.) 
359. C. loliacea: Willd. iv. p. 287. (W.) 
360. C. remota; Willd. iv. p. 239. Pursh. i. p. 37. (W.) 


No, VII.J LIST OF THE PLANTS. 75Y 


6. Spicis sexw distinctis, mascula solitaria, femineis subsessilibus scapo nudo 
bracteisque membranaceis vaginatis. 

361. C. Richardsonii: spica mascula pedunculata, femineis binis alternis sub- 
sessilibus exsertis multifloris, stigmatibus tribus, fructibus obtusis pubescentibus. 
Brown, MS. (W.) 

7. Spices sexu distincirs, mascula solitaria, femineis sessilibus s. incluse pedun- 

culatrs. 

- 862. C. concinna: spica mascula sessili cylindracea, femineis ternis subsessilibus 
approximatis, bracteis semimembranaceis, stigmatibus 3, capsulis trigono-obovatis 
brevissimé rostellatis pubescentibus duplo feré longioribus squamis obovatis, foliis 
eaulinis superioribus abbreviatis. Brown, MS. (W. B) 
_ Affinis C. marginate, que diversa spica mascula majori, femineis binis brevioribus, squamis obtusiusculis 
capsulam subeequantibus. Br. 

363. C. varia: Walld. iv. p. 259. Pursh. i. p. 40. (C.) 

364. C. compacta: Brown, App. Ross’s Voyage. (B.) _ 

Obs. Prope C. saxatilem. Br. 

365. C. lupulina: Willd. iv. p. 266. Pursh. i. p. 41. (W.) 

8. Spicis sexu distinctis, mascula solitaria, feminets supervoribus sessilibus vel 
enclusé pedunculatrs inferiorvbus pedunculatis. 

366. C. mutica: spica mascula squamis obtusis, femineis tribus distantibus 
subexserte pedunculatis erectis raris, stigmatibus binis, capsulis ovalibus muticis 
Jevibus squama ovata mucronata longioribus, foliis bracteisque planis. Brown, 
MS. (W.) 

367. C. oligocarpa: Willd. iv..p. 279. Pursh. i. p. 41. (W. B.C.) 

9. Sprcis sexu distinctis, mascula solitarra, feminers omnibus pedunculatis. 

368. C. capillaris: Willd. iv. p. 290. (W.) 

, 369. C. limosa: Willd. iv. p. 293. (W.) 

370. C. podocarpa: spica mascula solitaria, femineis binis pendulis oblongis, 
stigmatibus tribus, fructibus ellipticis brevissimé rostellatis integris levibus acheniis- 
que pedicellatis, foliis caulinis inferioribus brevioribus lanceolatis. Brown, MS. (B.) 

10. Spices sexu distinctis masculis pluribus. | 

371. C. pellita: Willd. iv. p. 302.  Pursh. i. p. 44. (W.) 

372. C. ampullacea: Willd. iv. p. 308. (W.) 

373. C. aristata: spicis femineis ternis quaternisve cylindraceis distantibus brevé 
pedunculatis, stigmatibus 8, capsulis glaberrimis nervosis rostro longissimo alte- 
bifido lavi: laciniis patentibus, squamis omnibus aristatis, foliis subtus vaginisque 
villosis. Brown, MS. 

Inter C. bullatam et lacustrem. @r. 

374. Alnus glutinosa: Willd. iv. p. 434. Pursh. ii. p. 622. (A. W. HA) 

375. Urtica gracilis: Willd. iy. p. 356. (W.) 

376. Myriophyllum.spicatum: Willd. iv. p..406. Pursh. i. p. 274. (W.) 


752 APPENDIX. [No. VII. 


377. Corylus americana? Willd. iv. p. 471? Pursh. ii. p. 6347 (S.). 

378. Betula papyracea: Willd. iv. p. 464. Pursh. ii. p. 621. (W.) 

379. B. glandulosa: Willd. iv. p. 466. Pursh. ii. p. 622. (H. W. B. A.) 

380. Calla palustris: ‘Willd. ii. p. 290. Pursh.i. p. 399. (W.) 

381. Pinus balsamea: Willd. iv. p.504. Pursh. ii. p.639. (W.) 

382. P. nigra: Lambert. Monogr. p. 41. t. 27. Pursh. ii. p. 640. (W.) 

It is found in swampy situations, as far north as lat. 65°, where it terminates together with the Betula 
papyracea. = “he 

383. P. alba: Lambert. Monogr. p. 39. t. 26. Pursh. il. p. 641. . 

The Meenahi¢ of the Crees is the most northerly tree that came under our observation. On the Copper- 
Mine River, within twenty miles of the Arctic Sea, it attains the height. of twenty feet or more. Its timber 
is in common use throughout the country, . and its slender roots, denominated Watapeh, are indispensable to 
canoe-makers for sewing the slips of birch- bark together. The resin which it exudes is used for paying 
over the seams of the canoes, and canoes for temporary purposes are frequently formed of its own bark. It 
is the only tree that the Esquimaux of the Arctic Sea have access to while growing, and they contrive to make 
pretty strong bows by joining pieces of its wood together. 

384. P. Banksiana: Lambert. Monogr. p.7.t.3. Pursh. ii. p. 642. 

This tree occupies dry sandy soils to the exclusion of all others. It is a handsome tree with long spreading 
flexible branches, generally furnished with whorled curved cones of many years’ growth. It attains the 
height of forty feet and upwards in favourable situations, but the diameter of its trunk is greater in proportion 
to its height than in the other pines of the country. ‘In its native situation it exudes much less resin than 
the pinus alba. The Canada porcupine feeds on its bark; and its wood, from its lightness and the 
straightness and toughness of its fibres is much prized for canoe timbers. The Canadian voyagers term it 
Cypres, the Crees Ooskartawuc-ahtic. It occurred on our route as far to the northward as lat. 64°, but it 
is said to attain higher latitudes on the sandy banks of Mackenzie's River. 

385. P. microcarpa: Lambert: Monogr. p. 56. t.. 37. » Pursh. ii. p. 645. 

Hab, In swampy situations, from York Factory to Point Lake, in lat. 65°. In the latter place it is very 
dwarfish, seldom exceeding six or eight feet in height.. 1t is named by the voyagers L’Epinette Rouge, and 
by the Hudson's Bay men, Juniper. Its Cree name is Wagginawgan - (the tree that bends.) 

386. Thuya occidentalis: Willd. iv. p. 508. .Pursh. ii. p. 646. (S. a 


‘DIGECIA. 
387. Salix purpurea: Smith. Fl. Brit. iii. p. 1039. (W.) 


388. S. rubra: Smith. Fl. Briteiii. p. 1042. (W.) > _ 

389. S. decipiens: Eng. Bot. t. 1987. _ Pursh, ii. p. 617. (W.). 

390. S. fragilis: Smith. Fl. Brit. iii. p. 1051. Eng. Bot. t. 1807. (W.) 
391. S. cordata: Pursh. ii. p. 615. (W.) 

392. S. myrsinites: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 262. Pursh. ii. p. 617. -(B,) 
393. S. myrtilloides: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 266. (W.) 

394. S.Ammaniana: Willd. iv. p. 663? (W.) 

395. S. reticulata: Willd. iv. p.685. Pursh. ii. p. 610. (B.) 

396. S. arctica: Brown’s List of Plants, Ross’s Voyage. (B.) 


‘ 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 153 


Diffusa. _ Folia elliptico-obovata integerrima pilis sericeis vestita mox glabra subtusque glauca venosa. 
Anthere purpuree: Germina sessilia elongata sensim acuminata griseo-tomentosa : stylo gracili. Squame 
germinibus 5-tuplo breviores obovate rotundateve nigrescentes pilis sericeis vestite. 

397. S. desertorum: foliis ovalibus integerrimis: subtus glaucis deciduo ?-villosis 
venosis, germinibus sessilibus longitudine squamorum tomentosis, stigmatibus sessi- 
libus bifidis. (B.) 

Frutex erectus sesquipedalis, cortice flavescenti-bruno, nitido. Folia exstipulata exacte elliptica obtusa 
supra opaca glabra, subtus pube laxa molli decidua? vestita. Amenta serotina: masculina diandra pollicaria 
cylindrica: fceminea pedicellata foliisque fulcrata ; squamis fuscis ellipticis obtusis ; germinibus sesquilineis 
ovatis acuminatis squamis vix altioribus, stigmatibus bifidis, segmentis filiformibus divaricatis ; nectario 
interno filiformi. 

398. S. vestita: Pursh. ii. p. 610. (H. W.) 

399. S. slauca, «: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 264. t. xvi. f. 3? (B.) 

400. S. arenaria, macrostachys: Schleicher. S. limosa: Wahl. Lapp. p. 265? (B.) 

401. S. candida: Pursh. ii. p. 608. (W.) 

8? rugosa foliis nudiusculis exstipulatis reticulato-rugosis subtus glaucis, 
amentis omnino varietatis «. (W.) 

402. S. rostrata: foliis ellipticis acutis integerrimis  pubescentibus subtus 
glaucescentibus, germinibus longé pedicellatis ovato-subulatis tomentosis, stigmate 
sessili quadrifido. S.phylicifolia? Smith. Comp. Fl. Br.p. 146? -Eng. Bot. t.1958? 

Folia sesquipollicaria, exstipulata, pube sericea caduca? vestita, subtus grisea sub-glauca. Amenta 
foeminea sepe feré palmaria pedunculata foliis tribus quatuorve fulcrata. Squame elliptice pallide brunnez 
pilose. Pedicelli primo squamas vix superantes mox ad longitudinem unguicularum elongati et squamis triplo 
quadruplove longiores. Germina e basi ovata in rostrum fere cylindrieum producta, semper pedicellis longiora. 

403. Empetrum nigrum: Willd. iv. p. 713. Pursh. i. p. 93. (W. B.) 

In high northern latitudes its berries, after the first frosts, are very juicy and pleasant. They are 
hoarded up by the different species of marmots, and form the autumnal food of the Anas hyperborea. 

404. Myrica gale: Willd. iv. p..745. Pursh. ii. p. 618. (W.) - 

The Indian women use the buds of this plant to dye their porcupine quills with. 

405. Populus trepida: Willd. iv. p. 803. Pursh. ii. p. 618. (W.) 

Hab. From Hudson’s Bay to the northward of Great Slave Lake, as far as lat. 640. It is denominated 
by the Crees, metoos, and is esteemed to burn better in a green state than any other tree in the COmnTne 

406. P. balsamifera: Willd.iv. p. 805... Pursh. ii. p. 618. 

The trunk of this tree attains a greater circumference than that of any other in the northern parts of 
America. 1t burns badly, -and gives little heat when green, but its ashes yield a large quantity of potash. 
We traced it as far to the north as Great Slave Lake, and the south branch of Mackenzie’s River has 
been named Riviére aux Liards, from its abundance in that quarter. It constituted the greatest part of the 
drift timber that we observed on the shores of the Arctic Sea. Its Cree name is Matheh-metoos, 
(ugly poplar.) | 

407. Juniperus communis: Willd. iv. p. 853. Pursh. ii. p. 647. (W.) 

Its fruit is termed Caw-caw-quew-meena, (crow-berry), by the Crees. 

408. J. prostata: Pers. enchir, ii. p. 632. (W.) 

_ [tis nearly as common as the other species, greys: close to the ground, and sends out flagelliform branches 
two yards long. | 
5 D 


ThA APPENDIX. [No. VJ. 


409. Hippophae canadensis : Willd. iv. p. 744. Pursh. i. p. 115. (AH. W.B. A.) 
410. Acer saccharinum : Willd. iv. p. 985% Pursh. i.p. 266? (S.) 


CRYPTOGAMIA. FILICES. 


rl. Equisetum arvense: Willd. v.p.1. Pursh.ii. p. 651. (W.) 
412,.-K, sylvaticum: Willd.v. p. 3. Pursh. ii. p..651. (W.) 
413. Ei. umbrosum:. Willd. v.p. 4? (C.) 


Charaeteri, specifico quadrat.. Vagine glauce dentibus. circiter 14 nigro-fuscis, marginibus hyalinis. 

414, E. palustre: Willd. v..p.5.  Pursh. ii. p. 651. (B.) 

415. E. variegatum: Smith. Comp. Fl. Brit. p. 154. Eng. Bot. t. 1987. (B.) 

416. E. scirpoides: Willd. v. p. 7. Pursh. ii. p. 652. (W.) 

417. Lycopodium complanatum: Willd. v.p.19.  Pursh. ii. p.. 652. (W.B.) 

418. L. selago: Willd. v..p.49. Eng. Bot. t. 238. (W.B.) 

419. L. dendroideum: Willd. v. p. 21. Pursh. ii. p. 653. (W.) 

420. L. annotinum: Wilid. v.p. 23.  Pursh.ii. p. 653. (W. B.) 

421. L. alpinum: Willd. v. p. 20. Eng. Bot. t. 234. (B.) 

422. Polypodium vulgare: Willd. v.p.172.  Pursh. ii. p. 658. (W.) 

428. P. dryopteris: Willd. v. p..209. Eng. Bot. t. 616. (W.) 

424. Woodsia ilvensis:- Pursh. ii. p. 660. Nephrodium rufidulum: Mich. Am. ii. 
p. 269. fide exempl. 4 D. Reichard. | erinaatileny 

425. W. glabella: frondibus (lanceolato-linearibus) pinnatis glaberrimis, pinnis 
triangularibus pinnatifidis: imis dilatatis ; laciniis cuneiformibus, rachi nuda, stipite 
squamato. Brown. MS. (W.) 

426. Athyrium fragile: Aspidium fragile: Walld. v. p. 280. (W.) 

427. Nephrodium fragrans: Aspidium fragrans: Willd. v. p..253.(C. W.B.) 

428. Pteris gracilis? Willd. v. p. 3762? Pursh. ii. p. 668” (W.) 

Var ? nana, fronde unguiculari, pinnis omnibus indivisis. 

429. Cryptogramma acrostichoides: frondibus bipinnatifidis, sterilium pinnulis 
ovalibus crenatis ; fertilium demum explanatis, soris linearibus discum totum occu- 
pantibus. Brown, ad finem Catalogs. (W.). 


MUSCI. 


430. Sphagnum squarrosum: Schwegr. Muscor. Front. Suppl. i. par. i. P. 49. 
Hook & Taylor, Muscol. Brit. p..4. (W.B.) 

431. S. acutifolium: Schwegr. Sup. 1.i. p.15. Musc. Brit. p. 4. (W.B.) 

6 rufescens: (W.B.) PS ane 
y tenera. (W.B.) 

432,. er ciliatum : Schwegr: Sing: I. i. p. 38. Muse. Brit. p. 14. (W.B.) 

433. Tetraphis pellucida’: Schwegr. Sup. I.i. p.'89. Mich. Fl. Am.p.'287. Musc. 
Brit. p. 16. (W.) | 

434. Andrea alpina: Schwegr. Sup. 1.i. p. 42. Mus. Brit. p. 1. (B.) 


No. VIE] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 755 


435. Splachnum mnioides: Schwegr. Sup. I. i. p. 48. (B.) 
Hab. Very common on the Barren Grounds, forming tufts, whose roots always include the bones of some 
small animal. 


436. S. angustatum: Schwegr. Sup. I. i.p.48. Mus. Brit. p. 20. (W.) 


437. S. Brewerianum: Schwegr. Sup. 1.i.p.49. S. mnioides. Eng. Bot. t. '786.(B.) 


8. minus. (B.) 

438. S. urceolatum : Schwagr. Sup. I. i. p. 49. (B.) 

439. S. vasculosum, var., minima: Schwegr. Sup.I.i. p. 51. Mus. Brit. p. 21. (B.) 

440. S. luteum: Schwegr. Sup. 1. i. p. 55. Wahl. Flor. Lap. p. 308. (B.) 

441. Encalypta pilifera: Schwegr. Sup. Il. t. 26. Funz. in Sturmit Flor. Germ. 
Crypt. 15. (W.B.) : 

442. Weissia cirrata; Schwegr. Sup. 1. i. p. 75, Mus. Brit. p. 46. (W.)- 

448. Grimmia ovata: Schwegr. Sup. 1. p. 85. t. 24. Mus. Brit. p. 39. (B.) 

444. G. sudetica: Schwegr. Sup.I.i. p. 87. (B.) 

445. G. apocarpa: Schwegr. Sup. J. i. p. 95. (W.B.) 


446. Barbula unguiculata: Schwegr. Sup. I. i. p. 128. Tortula unguiculata : 


Muse. Brit. p. 33. (W.) 
447, Tortula ruralis: Schwegr. Sup. 1. i. 187. Musc. Brit. p.31. (W.B.) 


448. Trichostomum lanuginosum: Schwegr. Sup. I. i. p. 149. Musc. Brit. p. 60. 


(W.B.) 


449. Dicranum scoparium: Schwegr. Sup. I. i. p. 162. t. 42. Mich. Fl. Amer. 


p. 297. (W.) 


450. D. polysetum: Schwegr. Sup. 1. i. 165. Mich. Fl. Am. p. 297. D-undulatum : 


Musc. Brit. p. 57. (W.) 

451. D. Schraderi: var. major: Schwegr. Sup. I. i p. 166. (B.) 

452. D. fuscescens: Turner, Musc. Hiber. p. 60. t. 5. fig. 1. (B.) 

453. D.elongatum: Schwegr. Sup.1.i.p. 171. 

Hab, On the Barren Grounds. ‘This, and the other species of Dicrana, furm dense tufts on the Barren 
Grounds, that are very troublesome to pedestrians, and obtain from the Indians the name of: women’s heads, 
because, say they, when you kick them they do not get out of the way. 

454. D. polycarpum: Schwegr. Sup. I. i. p. 179. Muse. Brit. p. 57. (B.) 

455. D. purpureum : Schwegr. Sup. I. i. p. 183. Mich. Fl. Am. p. 298. (W.B.) 

456. D. strictum: Schwegr. Sup. 1. i. p.188. (B.) Te 

457. D. virens: Schwegr. Sup.1.i. p.194. Musc..Brit. p. 34. (B.). 

458. D. strumiferum: Schwegr. Sup. 1.i.p.194. Muse. Brit. p. 34. (B.) 
8. prelongum. (B.) | 
459. Fissidens taxifolus: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p.10. Musc. Brit. p. 54. (B.W.) 

460. Didymodon ¢capillaceum: Muse. Brit. p. 67. (B.) 

461. Orthotrichum obtusifolium : Schwegr. Sup..1. ii. p. 14. t. L. (B.) 

462. O. rupestre : Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 27. t. liii. (B.) 

463. O. cupulatum: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii.p. 35. t. L. Muse. Brit. p.72. (W-B.) 
5-D.2 


756 APPENDIX. [No. VIL. 


464. O.anomalum: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p. 37. Muse. Brit. p. 72. (B.W.) 

465. O. Hutchinsie: Musc. Brit. p.73.t. xxi. (W.) 

466. O. speciosum: Flor. German. Sturmit. (W.) 

467. O. elegans: Schwagr ined. (W.) oe 

468. Bartramia ithyphylla: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p. 51. Musc. Brit. p. 86. (B.) 

469. Webera pyriformis : Schwagr. Sup. 1.ii. 66. Mich. Fl. Am. p. 302. (W.) 

470. W.nutans: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii.p.67. Ban nutans : Muse. Brit. p. 123. (B.) 

471. W. alpina: Schwegr. (B.) 

472. Funaria hygrometrica : Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 75. Ware. Brit. p. 69. (W.) 

473. Meesia uliginosa: Ba I. ii. p. 82. Bryum trichodes: Musc. Brit. 
p. 116. (B.) 

474. Timmia megapolitana: Schwegr. Sone I.p. 84. T. cucullata: Mich. Fl. Am. 
p. 304. (B.) 

475. Bryum carneum,6: Schwegr. Sup.I.p. 91. (B.) 

476. B. pulchellum, atro-purpureum: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p.360. (B.) 

477. B. cespiticium: Schwegr. Sup.1.ii. p. 109. Musc. Brit. p. 121. (W.B.) 

478. B. ventricosum: Musc. Brit. p. 124. (W.B.) 

479. B. pallens: Schwegr. Sup. 1.ii.p.111. (W.) 

480. Mnium palustre: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 122. Mich. Fl. Am. p. 305. (W.) 

481. Mn. turgidum: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p. 123. Wahl. Fl. Lap. p. 351. (W.) 

482. Mn. crudum: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 127. Bryum crudum: Musc. Brit. 
p. 119. (W.) : 

483. Mn. cuspidatum: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p. 132. Bryum cuspidatum: Musc. 
Brit. p. 127. (W.) 

484. Mn. rostratum: Schwegr Sup. 1. ii. p. 186. Bryum rostratum : Muse. Brit. 
p. 126. (W.) 

_ 485. Climacium dendroides : Schwegr. Sup.\. ii. p. 141. Leskea dendroides : Mich. 
Fl, Am. p. 309. (W.) 
486. Neckera pennata: Schwegr. Sup.1.ii.p.144. Mich. Fl. Am. p. 307. (W.) 

487. Leskea polyantha: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p.173. (W.) 

488. Hypnum denticulatum : Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 187. Var. « Musc. Brit. 
p. 92. (W.B.) Eh 

489. H. stramineum: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 218. Musc. Brit. p. 97. (W.) 


490. H. Schreberi: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 227. Musc. Brit. p. 96. (W.) 

491. H. nitens: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p.228. Musc. Brit. p. 100. (W.) 

492. H. abietinum: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 232. Mich. Fl. Am. p. 316. (B.) 
493. H. splendens: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 237. Mich. Fl. Am. p.317. (W.B.) 
494. H. lutescens: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 237. Muse. Brit. p. 100. (W.) 
495. H. striatum: Schwegr. Sup: I. ii. p. 228. Musc. Brit. p. 106. (W.) 

496. H. plumosum : Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p. 244. (W.) 

497. H.serpens: Schwegr. Sup.J. ii. p. 260. Musc. Brit. p. 94. (W.) 


No. VII.] LIST OF THE. PLANTS. 150 


498. H. crista castrensis: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p. 298. Mich. Fl. Am. p. 314. (W.) 
499. H. scorpioides: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 293. Musc. Brit. p. 112. (W.) 


500. 


H. rugosum: Schwegr. Sup. 1. ii. p. 301. H. rugulosum; Musc. Brit. p. 


212. (W.) 


501. 
502. 


503. 
504. 
505. 
506. 
507. 
508. 
509. 
510. 
511. 
512. 
513. 
514. 
515. 


H. uncinatum: Schwegr. Sup. J. ii, p..304. Musc. Brit. p. 111. (W.) 
H. fluitans: Schwegr. Sup. I. ii. p. 304. Musc. Brit. p. 98. (W.) 


HEPATICA. 


Jungermannia tamariscifolia: Schwegr. Prodrom.p. 14. Hook Jung. t. vi. (B.) 
. bidentata: Schwegr. Prodr. p.18. Hook. Jung. t. xxv. (B.) 

. pulcherrima: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 21. J. ciliaris: Hook. Jung. t. Ixv. (W.) 
. setiformis: Schwegr. Prodr. p.21. Hook. Jung. t. xx. (B.) 

. complanata: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 22. Hook. Jung. t. lxxxi. (W.) 

- hemorosa: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 28. Hook. Jung. t. xxi. (W.) 

. Sphagni: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 24. Hook. Jung. t. xxxiii. et Sup. t. ii. (B.) 
. emarginata: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 27. Hook. Jung. t. xxvii. (B.) 

. saxicola: Schrader. Schwegr. Prodr. p. 27. (B.) 

. bicornis: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 27. 

. bicuspidata: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 28. Hook. Jung. t. xi. (B.) 

. exsecta: Schwegr. Prodr. p.29. Hook. Jung. t. xix. (B.) 

- quinquedentata: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 29. J. barbata: Hook. Jung. t. 


Cp yyy yy yyy 


Ixx. (B.) 


516. 


Marchantia polymorpha: Schwegr. Prodr. p.23. Mich. Fl. Am. p. 227. 


(W. B.) 


517. 
518. 


519. 
520. 
521. 
522. 
523. 
B24. 
525. 

526. 
527. 


(W.) 


528. 


M. conica: Schwegr. Prodr. p. 34. Eng. Bot. t. 504. (W.) 
Riccia natans; Schwegr. Prodr. p.38. Eng. Bot. t.  . (W.) 


LICHENES. 


Arthonia astroidea, 6 radiata: Ach. Syn. p. 6. (W.) 


Spiloma versicolor: Ach. Syn. p.2. Eng. Bot. t. 2076. (W.) 

Solorina crocea: Ach. Syn. p. 8. Lichen croceus: Eng. Bot. t. 498. (B.) 
Gyalecta bryophila: Ach. Syn. p.10 & 337. Flor. Dan. t. 1351. f. 2. (B.) 
Lecidea atro-alba: Ach. Syn. p. 11? (B. W.) 

L. fumosa: Ach. Syn. p. 12. Lichen arthrocarpus : Eng. Bot. t. 1829. (W.) 
L. lapicida: Ach. Syn. p.13. Muhl. Cat. p. 105. (W.) 

L. confluens: Ach. Syn. p.16. Eng. Bot. t. 1964. (W. B.) 

L. parasema: Ach. Syn. p.17. Eng. Bot. t. 1450. Mudl. Catalog. p. 105. 


L. sabuletorum : Ach. Syn. p. 20. (W.) 


758 APPENDIX. [No. VIL. 


529. L. atro-virens : Ach. Syn. p. 21. (W. B.) __ ) 

B geographica: Ach. Syn. p. 21. Lichen geographicus : Eng. Bot. t. 248. (B.) 

530. L. Oederi: Ach. Syn. p. 22. Lichen Oederi: Eng. Bot. t. 117. (B.) 

531. L. uliginosa: Ach. Syn. p. 25? Eng. Bot. t. 1466? (B.) 

532. L.rivulosa: Ach. Syn. p. 28. Eng. Bot. t. 1737. (B;) 

588. L. abietina.: Ach. Syn. p. 30. (W.) 

534. L. vernalis: Ach. Syn. p. 36. (W.) 

535. L. decolorans 8, granulosa: Ach. Syn. p. 38. ng. Bot. t. 1185. (W.) 

536. L.luteola: Ach. Syn. p. 41. Lichen vernalis: Eng. Bot. t. 845. (W.) 

537. L. fusco-lutea: Lichen fusco-luteus: Eng. Bot. t. 1007. Lecidea fusco- 
lutea: Ach. Syn. p- 42? (B.) 

538. L. anthracina: Ach. Syn. p. 43? (W.) 

539. L. icmadophila: Ach. Syn, p. 45. Muhl. Cat. p. 105. (B. W.) 

540. L. Ehrhartiana, 6 polytropa: Ach. ‘Syn. p.47. Lichen polytropus: Eng. 
Bot. t. 1264. (B.) 

541. L. lucida: Ach. Syn. p. 48. Lichen lucidus ; Eng. Bot. t. 1550. (B.) 

8 theyotea: Ach. Syn. p. 48. On dead wood. (B.) 

542. L. luteo-alba: Ach. Syn. p. 49. Lichen luteo-albus: Eng. Bot. t. 1426. (W.) 

543. L. Wahlenbergii: Ach. Syn. p. 50. Method. Lich. t. 2. f.2. (B.) 

544, L. candida: Ach. Syn. p. 50. Lichen candidus: Eng, Bot. t. 1138. (B.) 

545. L. vesicularis: Ach. Syn. p. 51. Lichen cceruleo-nigricans: Eng. Bot. 
t. 1139. (B.) 

546. L. decipiens; Ach. Syn. p. 52. Lichen decipiens: Eng. Bot. t. 1501. (B.) 

547. Calicium tigillare: Ach. Syn. p. 55. Lecidea tigillaris: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. 
p. 468. Eng. Bot. t. 1330. (W. B.) 

548. C. chlorellum, 6 trabinellum: Ach. Syn. p. 60. Lichen trabinellus: Eng. 
Bot. t. 1540. (W. B.) 

549. C. debile: Eng. Bot. t. 2462. (W.) 

550. C. claviculare: Ach. Syn. p. 57. (W.) 

551. Gyrophora proboscidea, 6 arctica: Ach. Syn. p.65. Tab. xxx. fig. 4. 

Thallus monophyllus, umbilicatus, orbicularis, tenuis, in ambitu plerumque lacerus ; supra rugis umbilicum ~ 
versus majoribus reticulatus, concavus vel convexus et nisi ex rupto margine planus, semper medio umbonem 
vel umbilicum ostendens ; subtus pedicello brevissimo centrali saxo affixus, glaber, ambitum versus -levissimé 
lacunosus, quandoque punctis depressis notatus et rarissimé fibrillis quibusdam instructus. 'Thalli color brun- 
nescenti-niger et aliquando quasi pulvisculo suffuso fere cinereus : subtus sordidé flavescenti-brunneus interdum 
cinerascens: utrinque opacus. In aqua totus’ pallet. Apothecia sessilia, orbicularia, rarius angulata, disco 
plano vel convexiusculo, plicis concentricis pulcherrimé notato et margine proprio elevato cincto. 

Expl. Iconis. @. Superf. supina. 5. Superf. prona, mag. nat. e. Apothecium et portio thalli sub lente visi. 

Hab, On rocks on the Barren Grounds ; more abundant towards the Arcti¢ Sea than the following species. 


552. G. hyperborea: Ach. Nov. Act. Stockh. xv. t. 2. f. 2. Ach. Syn. p. 66. 
Tab. xxx. fig. 3. é | 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 759 


Thallus lacero-laciniatus, supra densissimée purpureo-rugosus, subtus magis aut minus reticulato-lacuno- 
sus, glaber. Apothecia difformia, angulata, convexa, plicis utplurimum circinatis notata, Precedenti 
affinis et fortassé varietas senilis. (B.) 

Expl. Iconis eadem ut in preecedenti. 

558. G. pensylvanica: Ach. Syn.p.67. MuAl. Cat. p.105. Tab. 30. Fig. 2. 

Thallus tenuis umbilicatus, irregulariter expansus flexuosus, passim erosus, in ambitu lacero-laciniatus, 
supra umbrino-brunneus, plerumque prope umbilicum materid quadam crustaced canescens, papulis elevatis, 
oblongis vel conoidéis, obtusis, sparsis, discretis, saccis pagine adverse respondentibus munitus ;' subtus 
lacunosus, punctis crebris elevatis scaber ; brunnescenti-niger ambitum versus pallidior ; utrinque opacus 
Madefactus aliquantulum pallet et supra olivaceus vel zeneo-fuscus evadit. 

Apothecia simplicia adpressa, orbiculata vel flexuosa angulataque, disco opaco, plano vel concaviusculo, 
equabili interdum ostiolo centrali impresso et margine proprio elevato nitidiusculo cincto, Apothecia ali- 
quando in discis suis alia minora ferunt vel cum aliis confluunt quibus modis formatur apothecium satis 
magnum disco planiusculo irregulariter plicato margine communi flexuoso, et angulato cincto. Sunt 
quoque in thallis quibusdam fortassin vetustioribus apothecia dissimilia. parva, discreta, aut conferta, discis 
depressis et’ marginibus granulato-crenulatis, rugosis, inflexisque. Apothecia vetustiora utr iusque generis 
in ambitu a thallo elevata sunt. 

Thallus interdum locos humidos opacos habitans flavescenti-cinereus fit. (B.) 

Expl. Icon: a. superficies thalli supina, b. superf. prona mag. nat. c. grosneenua et portio thalli exsecti 
sub lente visi. 

554. G. Muhlenbergii: Ach. Syn. p. 67. Muhl. Cat. p. 105. 

Thallus hujus quam trium precedentium paulo crassius, plerumque polyphyllus, hepatico-brunneus, 
extrorsum fere nigricans, oblique umbilicatus, flexuosus, prope umbilicum capillaceo-brunneus corrugato-pli- 
catus, plerumque irregulariter expansus, margineque ‘lacero, hic illic pertusus erosusque ; supra glaber, niti- 
diusculus, foveolis ab apotheceis impletis ambitum versus precipue impressis ; subtus sordidé flavescenti- 
brunneus, minute verrucosus, at fixuris cribriformibus nigrescentibus fere obtectus. Apothecia majuscula vix 
unguam orbiculata, fere semper angulata, et non raro pulchré stellata, convexa, densissimé plicata non 
semper in sacculis immersa sed etiam in plana superficie thalli sessilia. Dantur quoque in eodem thallo 
apothecia alia parva fere orbicularia, disco depresso et margine granulato rugosoque inflexo. 

Expl. Icon. a superficies thalli supina, b superficies partis thalli prona mag. nat. ¢. pars thalli cum apo- 
thecio exsecta, et sub lente visa. 

Hab. This and the three’ preceding‘species were found in greater or less abundance in all rocky places 
throughout ourjourney. We used them all four as:articles of food, but not having the means of extracting 
the bitter principle from them, they proved noxious to. several of the party producing severe bowel com- 
plaints. The Indians use the G. Muhlenbergii, rejecting the others, and when boiled along with fish-roe or 
other animal matter, it is agreeable and nutritious. On the Barren Grounds this lichen is scarce, and we 
were obliged to resort to the other three, which served the purpose of allaying the appetite, but were very 
inefficient in recruiting our strength. 

555. G. vellea, Ach. Syn. p. 68. Cnibitidaria vellea. Mich. Fl; Am. ii. p. 323. 

Thallus crassiusculus, molliusculus, sepe) latitudine sesquipedalis, sordide flavescenti-griseus (sub lente 
verrucosus) pertusus erosusque, in ambitu sub rotundato-lobatus, lacerusque ; subtus fibrillis densis brevi- 
bus, furcatis, nigris, hirsutus.. Apothecia nunquam inveni. 

Hab. on shady and moist rocks, most luxuriant in woods. This is more agreeable to eat than any of 
the preceding species, but we met with it very sparingly on the Barren Grounds, 


556. Opegrapha macularis: Ach. Syn.'p.72. Muhl. Cat. p. 105. (W.) 


760 APPENDIX. [No. VIL. 


557. O. epipasta, 8. microscopica: Ach. Syn. p. 75. O. microscopica. Eng. 
Bot. t. 1911. (W.) 72 

558. Verrucaria epidermidis: Ach. Syn. p. 89. (W.) 

559. V. stigmatella: Ach. Syn. p. 89. Eng. Bot. t. 1891. MuAl. Cat. p. 105. (W.) 
560. Endocarpon complicatum: Ach. Syn. p. 102. Eng. Bot. t. 593. (B.) 

561. E. viride (absque scutellis) ; Ach. Lich. Univers. p. 300. (B.) 

562. Thelotrema lepadinum: Ach. Syn. p. 115. Lichen inclusus. . Eng. Bot. 
. 678 (B.) | 

563. Variolaria communis, g. aspergilla: Ach. Syn. p. 131. Eng. Bot. t. 2041. 


[oto 


Muhl. Cat. p. 105. (B.) _ 


564. Urceolaria cinerea: Ach. Syn. p.140. Hoff. Pl. Lich. t. 20. f. 2. (B.) 

565. Lecanora atra: Ach. Syn. p.146. Lichen ater. Eng. Bot. t. 949. Mud. 
Cat. p. 105. (B.) 

566. L. oculata: Ach. Syn. p. 148. Lichen oculatus. Eng. Bot. t. 1833. (B.) 

567. L. periclea: Ach. Syn. p. 150. (W. B.) 

568. L. badia; Ach. Syn. p. 154. Lichen piceus. Dicks. Crypt. Fasc. 4: t. 12. 
ies eC) 

569. L. epibryon: Ach. Syn. p. 155. (B.) 
570. L. sub-fusea: Ach. Syn. p. 157. Eng. Bot. t. 2109. Muhl. Cat. (W. B.) 

571. L. ventosa: Ach. Syn. p.159. Eng. Bot.t. 906. (B.) 

572. L. glaucoma: Ach. Syn. p. 165. Eng. Bot. t. 2156. (B.) 

573. L. parella, y upsaliensis: Ach. Syn. p. 169. Lichen upsaliensis. Eng. Bot. 
t. 1634. (B.) | 

574. L. tartarea: Ach. Syn. p. 172? Lichen tartareus. Eng. Bot. t.156? (B.) 

575. L. cerina: Ach. Syn. p. 173. Lichen cerinus: Eng. Bot. t. 627. Muhl. Cat. 


p. 105. - 
576. L. erythrella: Ach. Syn. p. 175. 


577. L. citrina: Ach. Syn: p. 176. Eng. Bot. t.1798. (W.) 
578. L. straminea: Ach. Syn. p. 180. Wahl. Fl. Lapp. t. 28. f:1. (B.) 
579. L. miniata: Ach. Syn. p.182. Muhl. Cat. p. 105. (B.W.) 
580. L, elegans: Ach. Syn. p. 182. Lichen elegans. Hng. Bot. t. 2181. (B.) | 
581. L.cervina: Ach. Syn. p. 188. Lichen squamulosus. Eng. Bot. t.2011.(bad.) (B.) 
582. L. liparia: Ach. Syn. p. 190. (B.) 
8. rubina : Ach. Syn. p. 190. -(B.) 
583. L. virella: Ach. Syn. p.191. Eng. Bot. t. 1696. (B.) 
584. L. candelaria: Ach. Syn. p. 192. Lichen candelarius. Eng. Bot. t. 1794. (W.) 
8. polycarpa: Ach. Syn. p. 192. Lichen polycarpus. Eng. Bot. t. 1795. (B.) 
585. L. hypnorum: Ach. Syn. p.193.. Lichen hypnorum. Eng. Bot.t. 740. (B.) 
586. L. brunnea: Ach. Syn. p. 193. Lichen brunneus. Eng. Bot. t. 1246. (B.) 


No. VIL] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 761 


587. Parmelia caperata, b. cylisphora: Ach. Syn. p. 196. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 

588. P. herbacea: Ach. Syn. p. 198. Lichen leté virens: Eng. Bot. t. 294..(W.) 
589. P. olivacea: Ach. Syn. p. 200. L.olivaceus. Eng. Bot. t. 2180. Muhl.Cat. (W.B.) 
590. P. saxatilis: Ach. Syn. p. 203.. Eng. Bot. t. 603. Muhl. Cat. p. 105. (W. B.) 


591. P. fahlunensis: Ach. Syn. p. 204. Eng. Bot. t. 653. (B.) 

592. P. stygia: Ach. Syn. p. 205. Lichen.stygius. Eng. Bot. t. 2048. (B.) 

593. P. ambigua: Ach. Syn: p. 208. (B.) 

594. P. conspersa: Ach. Syn. p. 209. Muhl. Cat. Eng. Bot. t. 2097. (W. B.) 
595. P. muscigena, 8. lenta: Ach. Syn. p. 218. (B.) 

596. P. pulverulenta: Ach. Syn. p. 214. Eng. Bot. t. 2063. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 
597. P. aipolia: Ach. Syn. p. 215. .Muhl. Cat. (W.) 

598. P. stellaris; Ach. Syn. p. 216. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 

599. P. cycloselis: Ach. Syn. p. 216. (W. B.) 

600. P. physodes: Ach. Syn. p. 218. Muhl. Cat. (W.B.) 


y. platyphylla: Ach. Syn. p. 218. absque scutellis. (B.) 

601. Borrera ciliaris: Ach. Syn. p. 221. Muhl. Cat. (W. B.) 

602. B. tenella: Ach. Syn. p. 221. (W.) 

603. Cetraria juniperina: Ach. Syn. p. 226. Muhl. Cat. p. 106. (B.) 
8. Pinastri: Ach. Syn. p.226. (B.W.) 


604. C. sepincola: Ach. Syn. p. 226. (W.B.) 

605. C. nivalis: Ach. Syn. p. 228. (B.) 

606. C. cucullata: Ach. Syn. p. 228. (B.) 

607. C. islandica: Ach. Syn. p. 229. Muhl. Cat.p.106. (B.) 


608. C. Richardsonii: (Hooker, MS.) thallo brunneo omnino libero: laciniis dicho- 
tomis linearibus, apotheciis marginalibus flavescenti-brunneis. (B.) 
Thallus coriaceus prostratus, angustifolius, divaricato-bi-pinnatifidus aut dichotomé sinuato-bipartitus, 
supra conyexus, rubescenti-brurneus nitidus, subtus canaliculatus opacus pallidior fere canescens, sed maculis 
magnis irregularibus ejusdem substantiz colorisque ac pagina superior interspersus. Lacini@ omnes preter 
ultimas ejusdem latitudinis sunt et stellatim extrorsum expanse: ultimz augustiores plerumqne divaricato- 
furcate sunt aut tantum emarginate. Margines thalli integerrimi aut sparsiter granuluto-dentati etiam in 
sicco revoluti, in humido it& connivent ut lacinias tubulosas reddunt ; Exsiccatione iterum evolountur. 
Apothecia in margine thalli sparsa, in initio concava margine inflexo mox ampla sub-pedicellata flexuosa 
margineque irregulariter reflexo ; supra lamina proliger’ flavescenti-brunnea, nitida, margine thallode eam 
non excedente sub-cincta subtus e pagina thalli superiora formata. Ambitus apotheciorum granulatus 
repandus aut etiam fissus semper valde irregularis et modo Cetrariarum gub-liberus. Thallus in sicco 
fragilis vix tamen rigidus, madefactus pallet totus et ejus apices interdum olivaceo-virides fiunt. Sunt 
quoque specimina quorum apices colorem viridem etiam in sicco conservent. In nuda terra late pulvinatim 
expansus est sed nulla radice humo affixus. Rarius fructificat. 
Hab, On the Barren Grounds generally in Rein-deer tracks. It was not found to the southward of Great 
Slave Lake. 
609. Peltidea scutata: Ach. Syn. p.237. Eng. Bot. t. 1834. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 
610. P. aphthosa: Ach. Syn. p. 238. Muhl. Cat. (W. B.) 


5 E 


762 APPENDIX. [No. VII. 


611. Nephroma polaris: Ach. Syn. p.241. (W. B.) 
612. N. resupinata: Ach. Syn. p. 241. (W.) 

613. Evernia prunastri : Ach. Syn. p. 245. Eng. Bot. t. 859. -Muhl. Cat. ww. ) 

614. Dufourea arctica: thallo sulphureo-flavo nitido fistuloso, apotheciis hepatico- 
brunneis: D. rugosa. Brown, Ross’s Voyage ? (B.) 

Ex thallo vetusto fistuloso prostrato surculi subulato-ventricosi exsurgunt ; spe cespitosim, sese inter 
muscos erigentes: thallo primordiali destructo hi surculi thallos erectos fere palmares sulphureo-flavos, ad 
basin flavescenti brunneos seepissime simpliciusculos efficiunt, nunc tamen ramum unum valalterum edunt aut 
furcati extant, interdum nec non apicibus casu excisis, ramuli excrescunt podetias Cenomyceum quarundam 
simulantes. Thallus membranaceus extus nitidiusculus, obsolete lacunosus sepe punctis obscure brunnes- 
centirubris maculatus, intus leviusculus niveo-albus opacus, absque septis ; nunc integerrimus, nunc uno vel 
altero foramine perforatus. Apothectum ex lamina proligera plana, nitida castaneo-vel hepatico brunnea in 
apicem rami posita, margineque obsoletiori sub-crenulato ex thallo corrugato facto, formatum. Humiditate 
lamina proligera melleo-flava fit. 


615. Cenomyce cervicornis: Ach. Syn. p. 251. Eng. Bot. t. 2574. (B.) 
616. C. pyxidata: Ach, Syn. p.252. Muhl. Cat. (W. B.) 
617. C. fimbriata: Ach. Syn. p. 254. Eng. Bot. t. 2438. (B. W.) 
f. prolifera: Ach. Syn. p. 256. (W.B.) 
618. C. gonorega, h. polypea: Ach. Syn. p. 260. Muhl. Cat. (W.B.) 
619. C. eemocyna, a. gracilis: Ach. Syn. p. 261. (B.) . 
620. C. oxyceras. Ach. Syn. p. 264. (B.) 
8. cladonioides: Ach. Syn. p. 264. (B.) 
621. C. deformis: Ach. Syn. p. 268. Eng. Bot.t. 1934. Muhl. Cat. (W. B.) 
622. C. coccifera: Ach. Syn. p. 269. Eng. Bot. t. 2051. Muhl. Cat. (W. B.) 
623. C. parecha: Ach. Syn. p. 272. Fl. Dan. t. 1356. f. 2. Muhl. Cat. (W.B.) 
624. C. rangiferina: Ach. Syn. p. 277. Muhl. Cat. p. 106. (W. B.) 
5. pungens: Ach. Syn. p. 278. Lichen pungens: Eng. Bot. t. 2444. (W.B.) 
625. C.? vermicularis: Ach. Syn. p. 278. (B.) 
626. Stereocaulon paschale: Ach. Syn. p. 284. Muhl.Cat. (W. B.) 
627. Spherophoron compressum: Ach. Syn. p.287. (B.) 
628. Alectoria jubata: Ach. Syn. p.591. Eng. Bot. t. 1880. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 
S. chalybeiformis: Ach. Syn. p. 598. (B.) 
629. Ramalina fastigiata: Ach. Syn. p. 296. Eng. Bot.t. 1890. Muhl. Cat. (W. B.) 
630. R. farinacea: Ach. Syn. p. 297. Eng. Bot. t. 889. (W.B.) 0 
631. Cornicularia tristis: Ach. Syn. p. 299. (B.) — 
632. C. divergens: Ach. Syn. p. 300? Lichendivergens: Wahl. Fl. cE p- 439? (B.) 
633. C. ochroleuca: Ach. Syn. p. 301. Cum scutellis. (B.) 
634. C. pubescens: Ach. Syn. p. 302. Eng. Bot. t. 2318. (B.) 
635. Usnea florida: Ach. Syn. p. 304. Muhl.Cat. (W.) 
636. U. plicata : Ach. Syn. p. 805. Eng. Bot. t. 257. Muhl. Cat. p. 106. (W.) 
y. hirta: Ach. Syn. p. 305. Eng. Bot. t.1354. Muhl. Cat. (B.) 


No. VIT.] LIST OF THE PLANTS. 763 


637. Collema nigrum: Ach. Syn. p. 308. Lichen niger, Eng. Bot. t. 1980. (B.) 
638. C. saturninum: Ach. Syn. p. 320, Eng. Bot. t.1980. (B.) _ 
639. Lepraria chlorina: Ach. Syn. p.329. Eng. Bot. t. 2038. Muhl.Cat. (W.B.) 


FUNGI. 


640. Spheria concentrica: Pers. Syn. Fung. p. 8. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 

641. S. disciformis: Pers. p. 24, MuAl. Cat. S. depressa: Sowerby. Nemaria 
disciformis. Gray. Nat. Arr. Brit. Pl. (W.) 

642. Hysterium pinastri: Pers. Addend. p. xxviii, (W.) 

643. Lycoperdon pratense: Pers. p.142. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 

644. L. perlatum, var: Pers. p. 145. (W.) 
. 645. Schizophyllum commune: Fries. Syst. Myc. i. p. 330. Agaricus alneus: Pers. 
p. 485. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 

646. Deedalea serpens: Fries. i. p. 840. (W.) 

647. Polyporus varius: Fries. p. 352. Boletusnummularius: Pers. p. 535. (W.) 

648. P. betulinus: Fries. i. p. 858. Boletus betulinus: Pers. p. 535. (W.) 

649. P. velutinus: Fries. i. p. 368. Boletus velutinus et lutescens: Pers. p. 539. 

Muhl. Cat. (W.) . 

650. P. abietinus: Fries. i. p. 370. Boletus abietinus: Pers. p. 541. (W.) 

651. P. cinnabarinus: Fries. i.p. 371. Boletus cinnabarinus. Pers.540. (W.) 

652. Hydnum fagineum? Fries. i. p. 473. (W.) 

653. Thelephora purpurea: Pers. p. 571. (W.) 

654. Th. amorpha: Greville. Pezizaamorpha: Pers. p.657. (W.) 

655. Tremella mesenterica: Pers. p. 622. Muhl. Cat. (W.B.) 

656. Peziza sarcoides; Pers. p. 633. Muhl. Cat. p. 108. (W.) 

657. P. populnea: Pers. p. 672. (W.) " 

658. Erineum betule: Greville, Ed. Philos. Journ. v. 6. p.77.t. 3. f. 1. (W.) 


ALG AL. 


659 Oscillatoria muralis: Agardh. Syn. Alg. Scand. p. 108. (B.) 

660. Conferva glomerata: Agardh. p. 89. Muhl. Cat. (W.) 

661. Ulvacrispa: Agardh. p. 48. Lightfoot. Fl. Scot. p. 972. (B.) 

662. U. montana: Eng. Bot. t. 2198. (exclud. Syn. Palmelle alpicolea Lyngbye) 
Palmella rupestris: Lyngbye, Hydrophytolog. Dan. (excludend. Tretell. sab. et Uly. 
rupestris, Eng. Bot.) 

663. Fucus ceranoides: Wahl. Fl. Lapp. p. 490. (A.) 

Exclusive of a Conferva, and the fragment of a Floridea (Lam. ), this was the only alga we observed in the 
Arctic Sea. 


764 APPENDIX. [No. VII. 


# 


ADDENDA, sy ROBERT BROWN, F.RS. 


EUTOCA. Brown. 
Syst. Linn. Pentandria Monogynia, post Hydrophyllum. | 


Cuar. Gen. Calyx 5-partitus, persistens. Corolla subcampanulata : membra- 
nulz tubi decem, per paria filamentis alternantes. Stamina exserta. Stylus bifidus. 
Capsula polysperma, unilocularis, bivalvis, valvis indivisis medio placentiferis. 


Orn. Nat. Hydrophyllee, Brown in (Prodr. Fl. Noy. Holl. 492.) Bot. Regist. 242. 
post Phaceliam. 


Cuar. Gen. Calyx quinquepartitus, sinubus edentulis. _ Capsula polysperma. 
Herbe annue, pubescentes, eglandulose. Folia alterna, sepius pinnatifida, nunc 
indivisa! Racemi terminales et quandoque é summis alis, secundt, ebracteatt, novelli 
spiraliter revolutt. ; 
Obs. Ad hoe genus, a coordinatis (Hydrophyllo, Nemophila, Ellisia, Phacelia) diversum ovulis’ placente 
singulee numerosis (unde nomen), pertinent E. Menziesii, (erecta, foliis linearibus integerrimis nonnullis 
‘ quandoque incisis, ovulis placente singule viginti pluribus,) que forsan Hydrophyllum lineare, Pursh. Am. 
i. p. 134; et E. parviflora (diffusa, foliis pinnatifidis trifidisve ; superioribus quandoque indivisis lanceolatis, 
ovulis placente singule 6—8,) que Phacelia parviflora, Pursh. Am. i. p. 140. Polemonium dubium, Linn. 


EUTOCA FRANKLINII. Tab. 27. 


Eutoca erecta, foliis pinnatifidis bipinnatifidisve, ovulis placente singule viginti 
pluribus. 

Hah. Abundantly amongst trees that have been destroyed by fire, on the banks of the river Missinippi. 

Herba annua, erecta pubescens 6-10-uncialis. Radix descendens subramosa. Caulis simplicissimus teres 
cavus, crassitié penne columbinz, fuscus, pilis acutis tenuibus patulis pubescens. Folia radicalia conferta, 
caulina alterna ; omnia petiolata exstipulata pinnatifida, (in plantis procerioribus bi-pinnatifida,) cireumscrip- 
tione lanceolata, laciniis lanceolatis integerrimis, inferioribus quandoque dentatis incisisve, plana utrinque 
viridia pilisque caulinis similibus pubescentia. Petioli foliis breviores super canaliculati basi parum dilatata 
semiamplexanti. Spice racemose breves secunde, ebracteatz, novelle arcuato-recurvee, approximate, termi- 
nales et e summis alis. | 

Calyx monophyllus equalis quinquepartitus sinubus edentulis, foliaceus, persistens: Jacini@ lineares acu-. 
tiuscule plane, trinervie nervis lateralibus margini approximatis medio venoso, hirsute pilis acutis strictis, 
marginalibus crebrioribus longioribusque. 

Corolla monopetala, hypogyna, regularis, subcampanulata, calyce sesquilongior, glabra limbo extus pube 
rara consperso, cerulea immaculata, siccatione seepiusalbescens, decidua. ubasintusnervis 15, ternatim cum 
staminibus alternantibus, lateralibus ternationis singulz infra medium auctis membranula lineari imberbi apice 
subtruncato medium fere tubi attingenti, basi ad ortum filamenti respondentis producta et cum eodem fere 
confluenti, versus nervum medium conniventi. Faux nuda. Limbus tubo brevior, 5 partitus, zqualis, patens, 
lobis sub-rotundis integerrimis planis, venosis venis anastomosantibus, estivatione imbricatis gemma obtusa. 


No. VIL] ADDENDA. 165 


Stamina 5, epipetala, zequalia, limbum corolle paul6 superantia. Filamenta prope basin tubi inserta cum 
limbi laciniis alternantia, filiformia, basi parum dilatata, pilosiuscula pilis longiusculis sparsis in ipsa dilatata 
basicrebriorjbus, estivatione induplicata. Anthere ovali-oblong imberbes, incumbentes, basi semibifide lobis 
approximatis, loculis parallelo-contiguis medio longitudinaliter dehiscentibus. Pollen sphericum simplex 
leve, in cumulo albicans. 

Pistillum altitudine staminum. Ovarium liberum, sessile ovatum pilosum, basi auctum disco annulari 
adnato, uniloculare, placentis duabus parietalibus semiseptiformibus cavitatem fere bipartientibus, polyspermis 
lateribus ovuliferis ventre plano nudiusculo: ovulis plurimis (30 pluribus) in singula placenta confertim nec 
utrinque seriatim affixis. Stylus 1, filiformis pilosiusculus, semibifidus, laciniis filiformibus equalibus modice 
patentibus glabris. Stigmata obtusa papulosa ipsis apicibus laciniarum styli paulo crassiora. 

Capsula calyce persistenti parum aucto cincta eoque pauld brevior, ovata modice ventricosa, pilosa, 
unilocularis, bivalvis, valvis indivisis medio placentiferis, placentis adnatis longitudine fere loculi, lateribus 
seminiferis ventre nudiusculo. Semina numerosa in singula placenta viginti plura maturescentia, parva, 
circiumscriptione ovalia, trigona angulis anguste alatis, areolata fusca, nucleo ovali. 


1TABULZ 27. EXPLICATIO. 


Euroca FrRANKLINI, magnitudine naturali cum foliis duobus separatis, quorum alterum bipinnatifidum ad | 
procerius alterum ad nanum exemplar pertinet. 
Sequentes omnes ad lentem aucte. 
a. ejusdem. Calyx apertus cum Pistillo. 


b. Corolla aperta exhibens paria quinque membranularum tubi et Stamina cum iisdem al- 
ternantia. : 

es Anthera cum portione filamenti. 

d. ———-  Ovarii sectio transversalis exhibens placentas duas parietales polyspermas. 

e. ————_—- Capsula haud penitus matura. 

f. ———= Capsule sectio transversalis. | 

g. Semen. 


1. Evroca Menzizsu, Capsula matura aperta, 2. Ejusdem Capsule valvula altera exhibens placen- 
tam seminibus denudatam. 3. Ejusdem Semen. 4. Idem testa remota. 5. Sectio longitudinalis Albu- 
minis Embryonem ostendens. 


HEUCHERA, Linn. 


Pentandria Digynia. Flores pentapetali, superi, capsulares cum Vahlia. 


Cuar. Gen. Caps. unilocularis, placentis 2, parietalibus adnatis polyspermis. 
Calyx 5-fidus (nunc ineequalis), estivatione imbricata. 


Orp. Nat. Saxifrages inter Telliman et Vahliam. 


Cuar. Gen. Calyx 5-fidus, estivatione imbricata. Petala indivisa. Stamina 5. 
_Ovarium uniloculare, placentis duabus adnatis polyspermis. Styli 2. Capsula semi- 
infera, flore emarcido coronata, birostris, inter rostra dehiscens. — 

Herbee perennes, sepius acaules. Folia radicalia conferta, elongato-petiolata, cordata, 
sublobata lobis serrato-incisis; stipulis lateralibus infra adnatis apicibus distinctis : 
caulina, dum adsunt, alterna, minora, brevius petiolata. Scapi paniculati, pedun- 
culis trifidis bast untbracteatis, divisuris bibracteatis. . 


Obs. I. In ordine Saxifragearum locus Heuchere est inter Mitellam grandifloram Pursh. ('Tellimam) 
convenientem capsule unilocularis birostris dimidio supero flore persistente tecto, diversam staminibus 


766 APPENDIX. [No. VII. 


decem, petalis laciniatis ; et Vahliam Thunb. (cujus certé species genuina est Oldenlandia pentandra Retz. 
que Oldenlandia Smith in Rees. Cyclop.) similem floribus pentandris, petalis indivisis, et capsule unilocularis 
dehiscentia, distinguendam placentis ab apice cavitatis pendulis solutis, zstivatione valvata calycis et habitu 
diversissimo. 

Obs. II. A Saxifrageis transitus haud difficilis ad Ribes structura floris et ovarii admodum simile 
Heuchere, diversum stylo semibifido, fructu baccato, albumine densiore, funiculis umbilicalibus longis ad 
chalazam usque liberis! et habitu. Attamen velin eadem prorsus familia cum Ribe includenda, vel in proximo 
ordine (Escallones) disponenda Escallonia Mutis. (Stereoxylon Ruiz et Pavon.) et nonnulla genera inedita 
Nove Hollandie, nec non Anopterus Labill. (et Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl. 457.) cujus petala distincta, calyci 
inserta et ovarii capsuleque basis adherens. Sed Anopteri cum Saxifrageis affinitas mediante Heuchera in 
fructificatione saltem obvia, obstante quidem habitu omnino cum Escalloneis et nec Cunoniaceis nec Saxifra- 
geis conveniente. 


HEUCHERA RICHARDSONII. Tad. 29. 

Heuchera calycis limbo inequali obliquo. 

Hab. On the rocky banks of rivers from lat. 54° to 64° north. 

Desc. Herba acaulis, perennis. Foléa radicalia conferta, elongato-petiolata, cordata, diametro sesquipol- 
licari, semiseptemloba, lobo medio majore, omnibus inzequaliter serrato-incisis, super scabra subter levia, se- 
cundum nervos venasque primarias pubescentia pilis brevissimis acutis, eglandulosa. Petiolus folio longior, 
triuncialis, pilosiusculus, scaber, antice canaliculatus. Stipule laterales infra adnate, apicibus lingulatis 
scariosis subciliatis. Scapus simplex, erectus, pedalis—sesquipedalis, gracilis, teres, striatus, pilosiusculus, 
dimidio inferiore pilis acutis divaricatis glandulisque intermixtis paucissimis, superiore pube brevissima 
glanduloso-capitata copiosa pilisque acutis rarioribus. Panicula laxe thyrsoidea, angusta, ramis alternis 
bractea lineari apice bi-trifido subtensis, trifidis pedicellis lateralibus 1-2-floris medio unifloro precociore, 
divisuris singulis bibracteatis, bracteolis lineari subulatis glanduloso-pubescentibus. 

Calyx monophyllus, campanulatus, irregularis, persistens, extus glandulis subsessilibus parvis copiosis 
tectus: limbus obliquus 5-fidus, laciniis obtusis obovatis magnitudine subzqualibus sed ob faucis obli- 
quitatem altitudine inequalibus, duabus altioribus paribus impari demissiori. omnibus quinquenerviis 
nervis venosis, zstivatione imbricatis, duabus altioribus reliquas equitantibus. 

Peiala 5, ipsis simubus calycis inserta, unguiculata, indivisa, brevé ciliata, vix calycis lacinias superantia, 
persistentia, altiora lamina cuneato-obovata, demissiora sublanceolata, omnia trinervia nervis extus venosis, 
unguibus angustis linearibus. 

Stamina 5, summo tubo calycis inserta, ejusdem laciniis opposita, petala vix superantia, persistentia. 
Filamenta subulata, glabra, laciniis calycis altitudine proportionata. Anthere incumbentes, brevé ovales, 
obtuse, loculis parallelo-contiguis, longitudinaliter dehiscentibus. Pollen lateritium. 

Pistillum: Ovarium semiinferum, uniloculare, placentis duabus parietalibus longitudinaliter adnatis 
prominulis, cum stylis alternantibus, polyspermis: ovulis indefinite numerosis confertis superficiem ventralem 
lateraque placente operientibus. Styli duo, subulati, glabri, altitudine staminum. Stigmata obtusa im- 
berbia, apicibus stylorum vix crassiora. | 

Capsula semiinfera, dimidio supero breviore calyce aucto persistente cum petalis vix emarcidis et 
filamentis sepe antheris orbatis tecto, stylis rostrato, apice bilobo lobis intus dehiscentibus, unilocu- 
laris, placentis proportionatim auctis. 

Semina numerosa, sessilia, ovalia, punctis elevatis acutis dedonu aadualiter seriatis aspera, altera extremitate 
obtusiore. Testa crasso-membranacea, fusca, facile separabilis, Menibrana interna albumini arete adhe- 
rens absque chalaza rapheve manifesta. Albumen semini conforme, album, carnosum, molle, oleosum. 
Embryo minutus, subovatas albus ad albuminis extremitatem obtusiorem situs. Cotyledones brevissime. 
Radicula processu capillari terminata, centrifuga. 


No. VII.] ADDENDA. 167 


TABULA 29. EXPLICATIO. 


HevucHera RicHARDsoni, magnitudine naturali. i. basis dilatata petioli cum stipulis infra adnatis. 
Figure sequentes ad lentem plus minus aucte. | 
a. Flos plurimum auctus. 5. Idem hine longitudinaliter apertus. c. Ovarium longitudinaliter sectum 
placentas parietales adnatas accurate, sed perperam stylos infra connatos, exhibens. d. idem transversé 
sectum. e. Capsula matura flore stylisque coronata, paulo tantum aucta. f. Ejusdem sectio transversalis. 
g. Semen plurimum auctum. A. Idem testa orbatum. 


CRYPTOGRAMMA. Brown. 
Orv. Nar. Filices. Gyrate (Polypcdiacee) inter Onocleam et Lomariam. 


Cuar. Gen. Sort lineares (v. subrotundi) venulis coste (pinnule) obliquis insi- 
dentes. Capsule pedicellate, receptaculo communi elevato nullo. Involucrum com- 
mune (pinnule) marginale, continuum, disco venoso, margine scarioso libero sepius 
induplicato ; partiale nullum. 


Filicule glabelle. Frondibus cespitosis bi-tripinnatifidis: centralibus mutato-con- 
tracts fertilibus, extertoribus sterilibus. Involucris dorsum totum pinnule tegentibus. 
Capsulis brevé pedicellatis, annulo incompleto. Sporulis obtuse iriugonis, levibus. 

Obs. Typus generis est Cryptogramma acrostichoides, sed character constructus pro receptione Pteridis 
crispe auctor. que dubia equidem species, ob Ss. abbreviatos potius subrotundos quam lineares, 
venulas terminantes sinum feré involucri occupantes et cito confluentes, tunc emulantes sorum linearem con- 
tinuum cost parallelum Pteridis, cum cujus speciebus pinnulis angustatis involucro omnino tectis, habitu 

-bené satis convenit. CC. acrostichoides habitu et sororum dispositione et forma Grammitidibus nonnullis 
presertim G. leptophylle analoga, diversa frondibus fertilibus distinctis et presentia involucri dorsum 
totum pinnule tegentis: His notis autem Cryptogramma convenit cum Pteridi thalictroidi Swartz (a nobis 
tredecem abhine annis in Prodr. Fl. Nov. Holl. i. p. 154, uti genus distinctissimum indicata.) In hoe 
genere (Teleozoma nob.), Capsule sessiles, annulo completo latissimo, distinctz in serie simplici insident 
venis coste parallelis, utrinque vel solitariis marginalibus, vel binis altera superficiaria. ‘Teleozoma insuper 


insigne est Sporis in ordine naturali forsan, in tribu quantum scio maximis obtuse trigonis pulchre striatis, 
puncto unico opaciore. 


CRYPTOGRAMMA ACROSTICHOIDES. 
Cryptogramma, frondibus bipinnatifidis, sterilium pinnulis ovalibus crenatis ; fer- 
tilium demum explanatis, soris linearibus discum totum occupantibus. 


Hab. Yn shady rocky woods, between lat. 56° and 60° north. (First found by Mr. Menzies at Nootka 
Sound.) Y 


Desc. Filix 4-8-uncialis, glabra, leté virens, frondibus cespitosis, stipitatis, crasso membranaceis opacis 
venis vix adversus lucem conspicuis. 

Frondes exteriores cxspitis steriles, circumscriptione lanceolate bipinnatifide apice pinnate pinnis distinetis 
alternis, brevissime petiolatis ; pinnulis confluentibus, ovalibus obtusis, crenatis, inferioribus passim dentatis, 
omnium venis e costa vix prominula acutangulis distinctis simplicibus bifidisve intra marginem crenaturz 
desinentibus. Sézpztes pallidi, subtus semiteretes anticé bisulci, infra medium conspersi squamulis lineari-lanceo- 
latis acuminatis disco fusco-atro limbo pallido, supra glabri. Rachis epaleata, angusta, compressa, colore et 


768 APPENDIX. [No. VIL 


et fere substantia frondis. Frondes centrales fertiles stipite sterilium longiore alioqui simili insidentes bi- 
pinnate : pinne petiolate ; pinnule omnes fructifere distincte inferiores brevissimé petiolate ; ante expli- 
cationem involucri lineares, limbo utrinque recurvo, efformante znvolucrum fornicatum discum totum operiens 
pallide viride venosum margine scarioso avenio sepius induplicato: demum explanate angusto-oblonge 
involuero quasi nullo: costa subtus particulis parvis flavis conspersa, venis coste obliquis, alté bifidis fere 
bipartitis, distinctis. 

Sor¢ ramulos omnes venarum 4 basi fere ad apicem occupantes, lineares, distincti sed ita approximati ut 
discus totus pinnule explanate capsulis maturis tectus est et in hoc stadio filix species Grammitidis vel 
Acrostichi quasi evadit. ; 

Capsule brevé pedicellate, turgide lenticulares annulo incompleto, altero lateri infra annuli terminationem 
transversim dehiscentes, »eceptaculo communi elevato nullo sed vene parum incrassate insidentes. 

Sporule triangulares, leves, absque striis manifestis vel puncto opaciori, in cumulo diluté flave separatim 
hyaline. 


THE END. 


LONDON: 
PRINTED. BY WILLIAM CLOWES, 
Northumberland-court. 


ERRATA. 


Page 7 line 292, for 3° 98’ 98” W., read 3° 24’ 14” W. 
g 9 


27 
87 
93 
118 
208 
230 


? 
99 


2) 


39 


99 


4, for Lea read Sea. 
1, dele A very new magnesian. 
13, and 14, dele and resembling the garfish. 
98, dele A very new magnesian. 
8, from the bottom, for Troquois read Iroquois. 
8, from the bottom, for Martin, read Little Marten. 
2, from the bottom, for Gilleway read Gillivray. 
20, for progressive read progress in. 
10, for Isillawkawdoot read Isillawdawhoot. 
19, for 11 57” read 11.57". 


Plate, for Point Lata read Point Lake. 


29 
29 
99 

39 


12, for Started read Left the Harbour. 


7, for Bopulus palsamifera read populus Balsamifera. 


20, for Mississippi read Missinippi. 
25, for amygdalord read amygdaloid. 


i 


id 


VU 


ae F 


Liblished Murch 1623,by John Murray, London. 


yay ae 


L126. 


TF. Curtis del, fad stec)et seulp. 


I 


Published March 1623, by John Murray, Londen. 


S. Cartes del. fad seco) ce scuulp. 


Lublished March 1623, by John Murray, London. 


£1.30. 


e 


SSA A A ae 


Ud 


J 


ay Labee ed Solan d 


Wee dale 


se 
wee 1 Lo 


¥ Swarnypy Zz ie 
) Masse Poppe ORES: 


a Ma, Koes 
. Dive Pirst Pore te ge feck gis Hooks Bart 2? 


y ‘Swampy Lake Honse 
Second Porte flower Portage Y 
gph Go, ai 
diree so EA °° Pore ase+ © Y 


"wen p | 
PLE Sep it nyt © V 


OP White Mud sipr ee 
r about boo Fee: 
pig ee intersecting 


= 2,00 / | 
iver Hurt Wood Poe © Be 


\ 


epg” 


a 


at 


rw R.Wepin, " 


Moores Port? 20% 
Feed Sp 


at Goo, 
Rabbit Gro 
Lower Zp PO ea uh, 


Upper Fhill aad 


Lower Part? Sep? 29? 
out g Opper Port’ 
CLS Windy Lake 

rs | 
WA 


| 
| 


OE RE ee ee es 


aa 


I a a eae 


7 


rene 


f 
Gia 
S| 


ie 
Burnewoot 


2 
ag 


ney ine 

Forests: & swat 
ar il 
Pol 


or ol 
POP Punting gy 
fee 


yy sor broken into small will? 
ing ne 
ins 


fadian Dents oH : ~ 
Ba A De Z ’ | 


(Wer Veppeween cunky 4 
Loplar S Witiow 


4 Jack House 


ttle bs de 


y Ho 
oye muse 


1 
a 205)" a Tod =p ola ames SSS Se = ae 
j bis ee z : a! S: = 
| 
3 | | | 
\| 
| | 
| 
| | 
| | | 
| | 
| — / Hi \ 
(NEG yy Me L : ae aw we Lee Wit (=D ) | 
chk Hact r od nberkand pi oust. | 
Jork cle ory TO KUT er 
es, , ' 
i, > eee I * a0 bite: Su: WHER & manger ee WILE ee BRE ite wee 10 
— a | | 
var \ _ | | | 
h — W avy we sosity —_————— - T 
( esd. DA! 
F LD f fp YO 
tit Helis SLO. 
= 4 
| | 
7 | | 
References | } 
t Meaater the place where arn Observation tor Tistitudy way taken i NO 235 
4 2 Sore, * White Mud Port is Hill ag lakes| 
© Di tar Longitude Vo tor Varration. % tor £6 | ae eos refi Pit i eC te Brom fall 26 sh 
| lle kane Révengs + Direction of the Stream ; a aE pasPort! mance : 
[a "ae lalionge. upon, firme The tigutes: at the dtager exprerr the distance th yates: of such Portage. ie tte Hoos Prt®s0 | 
. ; ; : z Portsgo ee || 
foe Rocks Port©y00 sept 
ee fee Tart Seta 
i] 
| 
| | 
| 
| 
| | 
== =a : | i [ 
a | 
re | =3Ie™* Sees = ‘ 
Tee | 
{ ! | 
| 
Hay River 0% 
fay River © 
Yaa wh | agate 
‘ ort es 
| | | F Moo vee F Porton Port? Coe 
a 
| wn e Lipper Port? 
| | Beaver Lake } | Rabbit Grou, forth YWindy Lake 
| | hing Harts Tower Lip OE af : 
| Upper Hitt ef, 
anh seit | | Iter Fit hl 
riper - | | | 
Paes the Red Rock 
| 4 Masgrito Poin, S i" Z j ——— 
? 6. | Groat py, he ittle Play Green Lake 
10th | ; “Teen, & P| eG reat JackRever 


: Tak | 
fo 101 Wt Long. from. Green rich ’ ayo a6 30" 
LET 28 MeL lirects March 1833. ba Helen Mer vay A Bernaar le SUreel ORM. Mather Fey 


5 : : a ; * Le cyeeaion re : i y H 
} A ei Sk PF a 7h > ys 
: ied : £ , 5 


} ; sige ania PEG a : 


7 ae, sina. te e : i ee ’ ’ 


i . : 1 as he i < mien i Ora \ ee ae 
: Ticks Cf tae 5 Ls ee ed pas ft pf Hb _ | Cin ake Migr z . top> 
; clas wo On ibe etlaly 
: | ie 1 } 
we eo eal Pell Ks tthe er 


itiade ahi. Rey te i : } 
aS { . 
a anaes en ame 3 Os ft 


cdg i 


: 


Seite east eatie tease I) 


ee ae 


; uormuoy pany eauogypy rd Upf A] GOQE YALE SPIRAL JOR fl FO. POYENT so = 
bya, LIST, fy t — wee = = - 2 = Brats o = 
ee eT OTL PRMUPALN WAL 4, CUOT 4 M5 UL : ole a? 
4 - 
| 
i i 
” 
‘ He _». 
og 
oO 
| | 
| ¥ 
| | ep ST NT LIP 2D a 
; oof te %, 
» 
7 IL 
« 
| | a fe : —<co 
| OO8T ROT HUNG 
SS a laa | eee 
: sic oe nese oe =i ssbb 
: / y . : pel One 
te u LOE aMaz hintag any 2 
— 
\ | og NRE Panog tomoz” 
© - 
2a ae 
We nas aqnog addy yeh 
: a ee ays ; : : =a j ; O74  2LOF FUT, § + 
aes 7 ; 7 aoe a eal a 
mp a 2 ae: eee Se AG: ; Bias 


~ | A AL? Lake Port: 20 


Wiper Double Fall x30 


of He Ha pedittore firm 


eS See 
Felon tn Grote TO Hort sae rouidence, 


References 


4 
+ Denotes the place where an Observation ror Latitude was taken 
© DP Longitude. \ tir Variation. V for Dip. 
~~ Direction of the Streane. 


The Yigures at the forlages express the distance th yards of: tech Lorltage 


bate § Springs © 
and. me Sedliyger ? 


yup HO STUPQ 


eel 


as or L 


Up 


Rina py 


—— 


KE OF THE HILLS 


P 


“is 


00 
frome 600%0 a 


dling i wn Black ra Brown Bears wd 


we! Long trom Greenwide 


Published as iter directs March aBes. by Joan Maras Aberar 


Widleer Teal? 


i oo Pst. f en 
Sic MONS 


. 
: 
emanated 


BAA. Sk Sats 


ye 


ples a a 


*, 


» “a sane 
ot 
Ye 


LpP er SBa 's 


“eSaeneer” 


— 


ST 


to 
bi 


& 7 LG, % lL! | 


—— ek to shew the WV! [Cee Pe 


CONNE ECTED, DISCOVERIE 
yy ~ —— y ‘6 a GE = 
: Eo, Te Hd, ao if Vinton IW, “ 


A THE YEARS /~ ps : 
. aH 


ae sta Ej 


1818, 19 320 _ ASD o—) 


Leopold. 


AIT 
Ia 5B. 


arrows STRA 


ae oY 
Oe 


= 
ceed cor 


= West Rais ON Grecnwith 


Lublished as the Act directs March 123, by Jain Marray.dtlbemarte Street Londen 


Weather Scalp? 


ui 5 i 
nN TA 2 AE ET 


‘ 


as 


i SSSR a 


Me to shew thy 
ays or 
i ii ; sD 
Re, } ae 
\ ee ope : . [ 
E oe tN UME SYS. 
Ly rn ge 
ee ms y 5/20 
Bees age 1S peat > 
a Pa f 
4 2 EX: 
# be 
a Z F 
Ys f ff : ae 
aie te Ke ig het 


WO x 5 


Br 


. . ee 8 oe ’ “= Prete r R 
MA Us AO eg: gO 
she Se aileiirane dinmendieh ate tote ARC: ties: iil hiets nie ia : ; : ‘i ) i 


4 
H ‘ 
| t : i 
AS i 3) a : ‘ | 
Roi e Pe I 
eae f j } 
4 ' ; 4 
} ; a 
‘ jae 
ean seas ae Sw Ry Agondt ye wa : 
ati A, 
oT th te try aie 
2 Ag 
Pb! 
4 
“o 
a 
‘ 


if 
ah 


i 


7 = 7 tea : ; j ae a, = T to? [- 105° 1 ToBe a) 1072 te 
ius? m5: | m4? Ts: Wz: ' ire : “s 
~ — = = = ee = = = ——————————— = — a SS ee wees ig es) ee ee i eo == ee 
i } Sie PLEO TE : , 
| @ two small Islands 


go 


Point Turnagain. 


co Bier 1 Falls {ho 


vs Gress: 
Y yn as gio” here 
Zs By 4 @ Ailled a Bear 
pig -™ | 
| RY ; | 
ee 
Liscape Rapid} i i 
< ‘ ; 
‘ do ] 
: | 
Opper Ore found. as tp e | 
” Suly.2g No wees beyond this place 
if WY 5 i. t | 
Uslenee P & LE i IO ok 7 i : 
ee ‘ tH Tran s j . 
2 y es UR EE ARTIS, parattlet zo thle Coast 
Sly 12 Reygh Sandstone Rapids 
TOV ) Ny S | 
~/ Wusk Ox Rapid 
= ¥ 
: ad 
& ° 
a 
asi 
~| 
q 
a 
a 
wi 
{ mall Canoes here 
a ES }: let Red. sandstone 
Iberforce 
a7 oe S 
Senay Plains bounded by Trap ills 679 J 
(Teh 97S 10% 5, oy 
CWP I50 Feet highs, 4 | 
Rocky defile Rapid —— = - 
Por Pine sand S 
fs y 
Cay Slate with beds 
of Greenstone | 
P80 te SM Clay Slate with peak 
Sy, 36 
poeerre te an 7 ; Aretic Circle 
| yb 
i bes | 
| ft's River 
i 
7 meadows 
’ > ay 
\\ 
> \, 
Q 
\ 
; . 
7 \ fairy Lake River 
| | ~ 
| 44 4 Lortage 
B Discharge 
. D e iiteg Sandy River = ‘ } i mi 
lay ge & 2 | 
662] kas 
ca N , SS 
Port©650F » 
| | EPS _ Willmgham' pager Rapif ~ 
| 8 x N Mountains — Gane 
o 88 ' 
NS iS 
ns é 7p) 
7k Bs 
8 NS O) Rapids, Canoe. broke here , A 
oS. A 
g % é s - Banks well wooded 
a SS 
SRN 
Seed 
REN 
x ia | 
SS SS \ ee hor’ | 
be Sandy 5) i 400 ee | 
ge dy 28 . 
| ¥ Rapids 
A | | S 7 
| } | 
So | | | 
ake Ce | 
| Ween Abe of Greenstone | | | 
peas | | 
| 
| | 
nl | 
| 
| 
2 
tl River enters 
Soe zo | ; 
| e | = No 
i) 
| = 652) 
52H - 
= =: ss Small streams runing » various directions © 4 = 
| = =F : - 
| sa) : 
| 


| 
a 
8 N 
We Rg 
| Forr ENTERPRISE a ‘ 
| PE ae 
33 
| © as 
a 
< 
£& A & 
| | @ ‘ | 
64S | 
| 2 ” 
ee | x \ | | 
se | 
1 
| | - & CHAR? | 
\q | | WW i ye ole stinie vend) | 
| | DiscovEntes & it O Cee | 
ae! ) BBD | 
| | 4s tines Carp Ay bolt: ———— Ce B® @QG&é : er i 
| a | NORTHERN: LAND EXPEDITION, pas 
“Carp Por e ) ‘ 
- | ae sah =< _ . untle A) Uae! COMP: Diet ve i ee | 
\ e Fa ae 5 
| | s | ( CAPTAIN HE RANELIN, BINS 5 
| | | va S 4 | | Se lin lhe Yars 02, 
XN ; ; a Ze eS j | 
| | . ; on : _\ Laid down under ins iuspection ) 
e | = kG) 
i | | | . . | SF SS he | 
| | | eee ik ciel | | : a OFFICERS ASSISTINGAN THE EXPEDITION. | 
|} “ee S | | a= el 
| S ge | 
| ae . | | | Qs References ©) ) 9 
| | y ri ishing Lake Port? gys s | | | T Denotes the place ae an Observation tor Latitude was taker 
i | x val | © D? forLongitude Y¥ for Variation T for Dip 
| { nd || Thee Rapid Port?1 mite . S =» Direction of the Stream 
63° | cky Lake = | | The figures at. the Portages enpress tn yards ts Length of such Portage 
| : ae cs | . | 2 = Troute going out =---Lteturning 
Ueland Port? go + SS | | Excursions from Fort Enterprise during the winter. 
Upper Double Fall 230 |B 
| i !2llex; Port? Go : | | - 7 
| i. | 
| : of ©. NS | | 
| Y ~ 
| | cme a ! | 
| uy ig tt S 
| | ® 2 
| | Steep Port ne Ss 
| + Bow String Port!2300 | 
} ss > | 
| © pf wi Lake * ; 
| ‘Osperous | 
: | Slate Portizg5 | Q | % 
. s 
BS | 
I ~ 
S 
IM & 
= = | 
| QR | 
| | 
| | 
| Fort Providence H 
| $OVT 
ae a | . ae Tongiade West from Greenwich nse 7 ° : aE | 
— Piblishal as the det directs March 25, by Sel Mirray Albemarle Strect London. - 


one pete 


PSI Bi fe 


1 ee emt 
Poe ; 
f 


Saar 


eat gn ni 


ee ae 


- 


edict eee 


=a ot 


ae: Ne 


BOOKS 


PRINTED FOR 


LONDON, 1823. 


JOHN MURRAY, 


BOOKSELLER TO THE ADMIRALTY, AND TO THE BOARD OF LONGITUDE, 


ALBEMARLE-STREET, LONDON. 


IEW of the STATE of EUROPE during 
| the MIDDLE AGES. Third Edition, 
3 vols. 8vo. 36s. 


By Henry Hawiam, Esq. 


THE HISTORY of PERSIA, from the 
most early period to the present Time. 
With an Account of the Religion, Govern- 
ment, Usages, and Character of the Inhabit- 
ants of that Kingdom. 


By Colonel Sir Jounw Maucoum, 
K.C.B. and K.L-8., late Minister to the 
Court of Persia from the Supreme Court of 
India. 2 vols. royal 4to. Witha Map and 
Twenty-two Engravings. 81. 8s. 


LECTURES on the PHILOSOPHY of 
MODERN HISTORY, delivered in the Uni- 
versity of Dublin. 4 vols. 8vo. 21. 8s. 


By Greoree Miter, D.D., 
Late of Trinity College, Dublin. 


ORIGINAL LETTERS written during 
the Reigns of HENRY VI., EDWARD IV. 
and V., RICHARD IIl., and HENRY VII. 
By various Persons of Rank or Consequence, 
containing many curious Anecdotes, relative 
to that turbulent, bloody, but hitherto dark, 
period of our History ; and elucidating, not 
only Public Matters of State, but likewise 
the Private Manners of the Age; digested 
in Chronological Order ; with Notes, Histo- 
rical and Explanatory; and authenticated 
by Engravings of Portraits, Autographs, 
Fac-Similes, Paper Marks and Seals. Vol. 5. 

4to. inthe Press. 


By the late Sir Joun Fenn, Kut. 


M.A., F.A.S. 


The COURT of ENGLAND in the Reign 
of Charles I., being a Translation of Marshal 
Bassompiere’s Account of his Embassy to 
London. With Notes and Commentaries. 
8vo. 9s. 6d. 


The LIFE of MARY QUEEN of SCOTS. 
Drawn from the State Papers. With Six 
subsidiary Memoirs :- 

1, OF Decency eoncern- | 4. Of James, Earl Bothwell. 
2. Mihoreoftenee tie” | 5 Ofthe Barl of Murray. 

3. Of Lord Darnley. 6. Of Secretary Maitland., 
Illustrated with Ten Plates of Medals, Por- 
traits, and Views. Second Edition. In 3 vols. 
8vo.. 21. Ss. 


By George Cuatmers, F.R.S. S.A. 


LIFE of WILLIAM SANCROFT, Arcn- 
BISHOP of CANTERBURY; compiled princi- 
pally from original and scarce Documents ; 
With an Appendix, containing the Diary of 
the leaned HENRY WHARTON, now 
first published from a Manuscript in Lam- 
beth Palace; also the remaining Works, 
now scarce, of Archbishop SancrorT, With 
a Portrait, from an Original Picture by Lut- 
TREL, in Lambeth Palace. 2 vols. 8vo. 24s. 


By the Rev. Georer D’Ov ey, 
B.D., F.R.S., late Chaplain to his Grace the 
Archbishop of Canterbury. 


MEMOIRES of HIS OWN TIMES, (the 
present portion is the Last Ten Years of the 
Reign of George if.) From the original 
MSS., found inthe chest left by his Lord- 
ship’s Will to be opened by the first Earl of 
Waldegraye who should attain the age of 
Twenty-one after the year 1800. With Ele- 
ven Portraits, with Characteristic Devices, 
from the curious Pen and Ink Drawings of 
Bentley and Muntz, as inserted in the origi- 
nal MSS. 2 vols. royal 4to. 51. 5s. (Forming 
also Vols. VII. and VILL. of Lord Orford’s 
collected Works.) 


By Horace Watpote, Earuof Orrorp. 


** Though some, who know mankind, and the various follies, 
faults, and virtues that are blended in our imperfect natures, 
may smile with meat this free relation of what J have seen 
and known, yetI am aware that more will be offended at the 
liberty Lhave taken in painting men as they are; and that 
many, from private conuexions of party and family, will dis- 
like meeting such unflattered portraits of their heroes or their 
relations. Yet this, I fear, must always be the case in any his- 
tory written impartially by an eye-witness; and eye-witnesses 
have been generally allowed to bethe properest historians.?— 
Axtract from Lord Orford’s Postscript. 


MEMOIRS, being ashort Account of Po- 
litical Contentions, Party Quarrels, and 
Events of Consequence, from 1754 to 1757, 


By James EArt Watpegrave, K.G. 


One of His Majesty’s Privy Council in the 
Reign of George I1., and Governor of George 
Ili., when Prince of Wales. 4to. 25s. 


“ T have now finished my Relation of all the mate™ 
rial Transactions wherein | was immediately con- 
cerned; and though I can never forget my obligations 
to the kindest of masters, I have been too long behind 
the scenes, I have had too near a view of the machin- 
ery of a Court, to envy any man either the power of u 
minister, or the favour of a prince.’—Close of the 
Memoir. 


MEMOIRS of the LIFE of the Right Hon. 
WILLIAM PITT. Fourth Edition. 3 vols. 
8vo. 36s. 


By Gzeorce Tomine, D.D., 
Bishop of Winchester. 


: 
| 
: 
: 
| 
: 
| 
| 
| 
| 


The SUFFOLK PAPERS, from the Col- 
lection of the MArcutioness of LONDONDERRY. 
Letters to and from Henrietta, Ceuntess of 
Suffolk, and her Second Husband, the Ho- 
nourable George Berkely. 2 vols. 8yo. Jn 
the Press. 

This interesting correspondence comprises letters 
from Pope, Swift, Gay, and Young; the Duchesses 
of Marlborough, Buckingham, and Queensbury; La- 
dies Hervey, Lansdowne, Vere, and Hester Pitt ; 
Lords Bolingbroke, Peterborough, Chesterfield, and 
Bathurst; Mr. Law (the Financier), Mr. Pelham, 
Mr. Hampden, Mr. Earle, Horace Walpole (both se- 
nior and junior); and several other persons of emi- 
nence in the fashionable, political, and literary circles 
ofthe reigns of Queen Anne, and George I., George II., 
and George III. : 


REMINISCENCES. Third Edition, 8vo. 
9s. Gd. 
By Cuartes Burier, Esq. 


NARRATIVE of a JOURNEY from the 
SHORES of HUDSON’S BAY to_ the 
Mouth of the COPPER-MINE RIVER ; 
and from thence, in Canoes, along the Coast 
of the POLAR SEA, upwards of 500 miles, 
and of the RETURN of the EXPEDITION, 
OVERLAND, to HUDSON’S BAY, &c. 


By Captain Joun Franxuiy, R.N., 
Commander of the Expedition. 
With an APPENDIX, containing subjects of 
Natural History. 

Undertaken, and now published, under the di- 
rection and authority of the RARL BaTHoursr, 
one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of 
State. 

Handsomely printed in 4to., and illustrated 
by Four Maps, Six Engravings of Natural 
History, and Twenty-four Copperplate En- 
gravings, executed in the best manner by 
Edward Finden, fromDrawings made on the 
Joumey by Lieut. Back and the late Lieut. 
Hoop. Price 41. 4s. 


A VOYAGE for the DISCOVERY of a 
NORTH-WEST PASSAGE from the AT- 
LANTIC to the PACIFIC, performed by 
His Majesty’s Ships Hecta and Griper, 
under the Orders of 

Caprain Parry, 


In the Years 1819 and 1820. Containing a 
full Account of the interesting and important 
Geographical Discoveries, the Nautical and 
Astronomical Observations, and the Natural 
History of the Seas and islands to the West- 
ward of Batlin’s Bay; more particularly of 
Melville Island in the Polar Sea, where the 
Ships were frozen up for nearly Eleven 
Months. In 4to., illustrated by ndmerous 
Charts and other Engravings. Second Edi- 
tion, 31. 13s. 6d. By Authority of the Lords 
Commissioners of the Admiralty. 


A VOYAGE of DISCOVERY, made un- 
der the Orders of the Admiralty, in his Ma- 
jesty’Ship’s Isabella and Alexander, for the 
purpose of exploring Baffin’s Bay, and of 
inquiring into the probability of a North- 
West Passage. With Two-and-Thirty co- 
loured Plates, Maps, &c. 4to. 3/. 13s. 6d. 


By Captain Joun Ross, K.S., R.N., 


Commander of the Expedition. 


A CHRONOLOGICAL HISTORY of 
VOYAGES into the POLAR REGIONS ; 
undertaken chiefly for the pur ose of disco- 
vering a North-East, North-West, or Polar 
Passage between the Atlantic and Pacific ; 
from the earliest Period of Scandinavian 
Nayigation, to the Departure of the Expe- 
ditions, under the orders of Captains Ross 
and Buchan. To which are added, a Narra- 
tive of Captain Buchan’s Expedition into the 
Interior of Newfoundland ; and a Relation 
of the Discovery of the Straits of Anian, made 
by Captain L. F. Maldonado, in the year 
1588. With an Original Map of the Arctic 
Regions. 8vo. 12s, 


By Joun Barrow, F.R.S. 


HISTORY of the late WAR in SPAIN 
and PORTUGAL. vol. 1, 4to. 27, 10s. 


By Rosert Soutuey, Esq. 


The TRAVELS of the late JOHN LEWIS 
) BURCKHARDT. 


Vol. I.—In Nusta and in the InTERIoR of 
North Eastern AFRICA, performed in the 
Months of February and March, 1813. To 
which are prefixed, a Life of the Author, and 
a Portrait, Maps, andEngravings. Second 
Edition, 4to. 21. 8s. 


Vol. If.—In Syria and Mount S1nat. With 
Maps. 4to. 21. 8s. viz. 


4. A Second Tour in the 
Haura 


uran. 


1. A Journey from Aleppo to 
Damascus. 
2. A Tour in the District of | 5: 4Journey from Damas- 


4 on cus, through Arabia-Petrza. 
Monn Libanus and Antiliba- and the Desert Bl Ty,toCairo. 


6. A Tour in the Peninsula 
3. A Tour in the Hauran. ; Of Mount Sinai. 


Vol. IJ1.—In the Hepsaz. With Plates. 
4to. In the Press. 


TRAVELS in the. INTERIOR DIS- 
TRICTS of AFRICA; performed in the years 
1795-6-7, and during a subsequent Mission 
in 1805. With Masor RENNELL’s valuable 
Memoir on the Geography of Africa; with 
the Portrait, and all the Maps and Plates. 
A New Edition, 2 vols. 4to. 31. 13s. 6d. 


By Muneo Park. 


NARRATIVE of an EXPEDITION to 
explore the River ZAIRE, usually called 
the CONGO, in SoutH Arrica, in 1816, 
under the direction of 


Captain J. Tuckey, R.N. 


Published by Permission of the Lords Commis- 
stoners of the Admiralty. Fourteen Engray- 
ings, 4to. 2/. 2s. 


NARRATIVE of the OPERATIONS and 
RECENT DISCOVERIES within the PY- 
RAMIDS, TEMPLES, TOMBS, and EX- 
CAVATIONS in EGYPT and NUBIA, 
and of a Journey to the Coast of the RED 
SEA, in search of the ancient Berenice, and 
another to the Oasis of Jupiter Ammon. 
Third Edition, with a Portrait, 2 vols. 8yo. 
28s. = 

By G. BELZzonI. 


FORTY-FOUR LARGE PLATES, all 
coloured, to illustrate the OPERATIONS 
of BELZON? in Egypt and Nubia. Atlas 
folio, 61, 6s, 


SIX Additional PLATES, Coloured, viz., 
I. General View of the Site of Thebes.—II. The 
mode in whichthe Colossal Head of Young Memnon 
(now in the British Museum) was taken from Thebes 
by G. Belzoni, in the year 1816.—III. Zodiac taken 
from the ceiling of the great vaulted Hall in the 
Tomb, supposed to be that of Psammis at Thebes. 
—lV. View of the Ruins of Ombos and adjacent 
Country.—V. Architectural View of the Ruins of 
Ombos.—VI. Interior. View of the Temple in the 
Island of Phila. 
Illustrative of G. Betzonr’s Travels and 
Researches in Egypt and Nubia. Folio, 25s. 


JOURNEY OVER LAND from INDIA, 
through Egypt to England, in the Year 1818. 
With Maps, Plans, and Views. 4to. 21. 8s. 


By Lieut. Col. FirzcLarEence. 


TRAVELS ABOVE the CATARACTS of 
EGYPT and in NUBIA. Second Edition, 
with a Map, and Eleven Plates. 8vo. 12s. 


By Tuomas Leen, M.P. 


An ACCOUNT of the MISSION from 
CAPE COAST CASTLE to the KINGDOM 
of ASHANTER, in Arrica ; comprising its 
History, Laws, Superstitions, Customs, Ar- 
chitecture, Trade, &c. To which is added, 
a Translation, from the Arahic, of an Ac- 
count of Mr. Park’s Death, &c. Witha Map, 
and several Plates of Architecture, Cos- 
tumes, &c. 4to. 31. 3s. 


By Tuomas Enwarp Bownicu, Esq. 
Conductor and Chief of the Embassy. 


A NARRATIVE of TRAVELS in NOR- 
THERN AFRICA, from TRIPOLI to 
MOURZOUK, the Capital of FEZZAN; 
and from thence to the Southern Extremity 
of that Kingdom, in the Years 1818, 19, and 
20; accompanied by Geographical Notices 
of SOUDAN, and of the Course of the 
NIGER ; of the state of Slavery, and of the 
Slave Trade, as now conducted, chiefly by 
the Sultan of Fezzan. With a Chart of the 
Routes, and a great variety of coloured 
Plates; illustrative of the Costumes of the 
several Natives of Northern Africa. 4to. 
31, 35. 

By Capratn Lyon, R.N. 
Companion of the late Mr. Rircuie, 


A JOURNEY to TWO of the OASES of 
UPPER EGYPT. With Engrayings. 8vo, 
10s. 6d. 


By Sir ArcurpaLp EpmonsTons, Bart. 


NOTES during a VISIT to EGYPT, 
NUBIA, the OASIS of EGYPT, MOUNT 
SINAI, and JERUSALEM. With Plates. 
8yo. 12s, 


By Str Freperick HennikeR, Bart. 


JOURNAL of a VISIT to some Parts of 
ETHIOPIA. With Maps, and numerous 
Plans and Drawings of the Pyramids, and 
other Antiquities discovered there. 4to. 21. 


By Georce Wanpineton, Esq., A.M., 
Fellow of Trin. Coll. Cambridge ; and the 


Rey. BARNARD Hanzsury, A.M. F.A:S. 
Of Jesus’ College. 


NR RN | 


| 
| 
| 
| 


WORKS PRINTED FOR JOHN MURRAY. 


NARRATIVE of the EXPEDITION to 
DO'NGOLA and SENNAR, under the 
Command of his Excellency Ismart Pacua. 
By an AMERICAN in the service of the Vice- 
roy. Undertaken by order of his Highness 
MEHEMMED ALI Pacna, Viceroy of Egypt. 
Svo. 9s. Gd. 


STATE of the CAPE of GOOD HOPE 
in 1822. Being anauthentic Description’ of 
the Public Establishments, the Government, 
Civil and Municipal; the Manners of the 
Inhabitants, and the actual Condition of the- 
Settlers. With a Map. 8vo. 12s. 


Edited by H. T. Coresrooks, Esq. 


A GEOGRAPHICAL, STATISTICAL, 
and HISTORICAL DESCRIPTION of 
HINDOSTAN, and the adjacent country 
composed from the most authentic printed 
documents, and from the manuscript records 
deposited at the Board .of Control; con- 
sisting of the official reports, and public cor- 
respondence of nearly all the most eminent 
Civil Servants, at the three Presidencies 
and also of many of the most distinguished 
Military and Medical Officers. With Maps. 
2 vols. 4to. 4l, 14s, 6d. 


By Waiter Hamiron, Esq. 


ASIATIC RESEARCHES, or Transac- 
tions of the Society instituted in Bengal, for 
an Inguiry into the History and Antiquities, 
the Arts, Sciences, and Literature of Asia, 
Printed in Calcutta. Vol. XIV. 4to. 21, 2s. 


SKETCHES of the’ POLITICAL HIS- 
TORY of INDIA, from 1784 to the present 
Date. Second Edition, royal 8yo. 18s. 

By Sir Joan Maxcorm. 


THE EAST-INDIA GAZETTEER, con- 
taining particular Descriptions of the Coun- 
tries comprehended under the general name 
of the EAST INDIES, with an Account of 
the Manners, Customs, Institutions, Manu- 
factures, Commerce, Castes, Religion, &c., 
of their various Inhabitants. Handsomely 
printed in one large volume, 8vo. 25s. 


By Wattrer Hamitton, Esq. 


ORIENTAL MEMOIRS, selected and 
abridged from a Series of Familiar Letters, 
written during Seventeen Years’ Residence 
in India ; including Observations, on Parts 
of Africa and South America, and a Narra- 
tive of Occurrences in Four India Voyages. 
Illustrated by Engravings from Original 
Drawings. Handsomely printed by Bensley, 
in 4 vols. royal 4to., with Ninety Engravings. 
161, 16s. ' 

By JAMES ForsBes, FRS., &c. 


An ACCOUNT of the KINGDOM of 
CAUBUL, and its Dependencies in Persia, 
TARTARY, and INDIA ; comprising a View of 
the Afghan Nation, and a History of the 
Dooraunnee Monarchy. With Plates and a 
Map, 4to. 3/.. 13s. 6d. 8vo. 21. 2s, A New 
Edition, 2 vols. ’ 
By the Hon. Movnrstuarr E.pxin- 

STONE, 
Of the Hon. East India Company’s Service, 
resident of the Court of Poonah, and late 

Envoy to the King of Caubul. 


WORKS PRINTED FOR JOHN MURRAY. 


NARRATIVE ofa CHINESE EMBASSY 
from the Emperor of China, Kang Hy, to the 
Khan of Tourgoth Tartars, seated on the 
_ banks of the Volga,in the years 1712, 13, and 
14, By the Chinese Ambassador, and pub- 
lished by the Emperor’s authority, at Pekin. 
Translated from the Original’Chinese, and ac- 
companied by an Appendix of Miscellaneous 
Translations from the same language, consist- 
ing of Extracts from the Pekin Gazette, an 
Abstract of a Chinese Novel, Argument of a 
Chinese Play, &c. With a Map, 8vo, 18s. 


By Sir Gzores Sraunton, Bart. 
LLD. F.RS. 


MISCELLANEOUS NOTICES relating 
to CHINA, and our Commercial Intercourse 
with that Country, including a few Transla- 
tions from the Chinese Language. Second 
Edition, with an Appendix, 8vo. 12s. 


1. A Portion of the Emperor 
Yong-iching’s Book of Sacred 
Instructions. 

2, A popular Game among 
the Chinese, called Tsoey- 
moey. : 

3. Extract from a Chinese 
Work, called Tong-wha-loo. 

4. On the Chinese Language 

and Poetry. 
. OF Chinese Books. 
Certain Rites and Ceremo- 
nies of the Chinese. 
7.CatholicMissions in China. 

8. Chinese Account of the 
Settlement of Macao, 

9. Chinese Dispatch sent to 
Russia, 21st Jan. 1789. 

10. Contents of a Chinese 
and Mantchoo-fartar Diction- 


ary. : 
11. The Pleasing History, a 


Translation of a Chinese 
Novel. s 

12, Chinese Language and 
Character. 

13. Of Chinese Books. 

14. Renaudont’s Ancient Ac- 
counts of India and China. 

15. Amiot’s Translation of 
Kien-lonz’s Elogede Mougden, 
a Poem. 

16, Note upon the Chinese 
Court Ceremony of the Ko-tou. 

17. Considerations on the 
China Trade, with Notes. 

18. Additions to Considera- 
tions on the China Trade. 

19.Note on the British Factory 
in China, and the late Em- 
bassy. 

20, Carrying Trade between 
the Port of Canton and the 
Continent of Europe. 


By Sir Geo. Tuomas SraunTon, Bart. 
LL.D. and F.R.S. 


_ JOURNAL of the PROCEEDINGS. of 
the late EMBASSY to CHINA ; comprising 
a correct Narrative of the Public Transac- 
tions ot the Empassy, of the Voyage to and 
from CHINA, and of the Journey from the 
Mouth of the Pei-ho to the Return to Canton. 
Interspersed with OBsERVATIONS upon the 
Face of the Country, the Polity, Moral Cha- 
racter, and Manners of the CHinEsE NaTION. 
Printed uniformly with Sir Grorce STAUN- 
Ton’s Account of the former Embassy. With 
a Portrait of Lord Amherst, and a Map. 
A Second Edition, in 2 vols. 8vo. 2ls. 


By Henry E..is, Esq. 


Secretary to the Embassy, and Third Com- 
missioner. 


ACCOUNT of a VOYAGE of DISCO- 
VERY to the Western Coast of COREA, and 
the Great LOO CHOO Island, in the Japan 
Sea, in H. M.S. Lyra. With a Vocabulary 
of the Language of that Island, by Lieut. 
Ciirrorp, R.N. And an APPENDIX, 
containing Charts and various Hydrographi- 
cal and Scientific Notices. Mlustrated by 
Fight coloured Engravings, after Drawings 
by Havell, of Scenery, and the Costume of 
the People of Corea, and particularly of the 
more interesting People of Loo Caoo. In 
one volume, 4to. 21. 2s. 


By Captain Basit Hat, 
R.N. F.R.S. et L. et E. 


Awotner Epition of the ahove Work, 
with Four Plates,and a general Chart, small 
Syo. 7s. Gd. é 


By Captain Basiz Hart, R.N. F.R.S. 


In order that this edition may appear in the most 
popular form, the narrative alone has been retained ; 
while the nautical and scientific matter, together with 
a Clifford’s Vocabulary, are confined to the quarto 
edition, - 


i I ee 


VOYAGE of his Majesty’s late Ship 
ALCESTE, along the Coast of Corea, to the 
Island of LEwcHEew ; with an Account of her 
Shipwreck. With a Portrait of Captain Sir 
Murray Maxwell, and Six coloured En- 
gravings. Third Edition, 8vo. 9s. 6d. 


By Joun M‘Leop, M.D., 


Surgeon of the Alceste. 


A MEMOIR and NOTICE of a CHART 
of MADAGASCAR, in the ARCHIPELAGO, or 
Islands North-east of that Island ; drawn up 
according to the last Observations, under the 
auspices and government of his Excellency 
RogerT TOWNSHEND FaravHAR, Governor 
of the Isle of France, &c. &c. With a Chart. 
Ato. 18s. 

By Lister Grorrroy. 


An ACCOUNT of the ABLPONES, an 
Equestrian People in the INTERIOR of 
SOUTH AMERICA. Translated from the 
original Latin of Martin DoBRizHOFFFR, 
one of the Ex-Jesuits, two-and-twenty years 
a Missionaryin Paraguay. 3 vols. 8vo. 36s. 

“The Abipones haye been in one thing fortunate 
above all other savages ; for the history of their man- 
ners and fortunes by Martin Dobrizhoffer, a German 
Jesuit, who devoted the prime of his years to the task 
of converting them, and in old age, after the extinction 
of his order, found consolation in recording the know- 
ledge which he had so painfully acquired, and the la- 
pours which had so miserably been frustrated, is, ofall, 
books relating to savage life, the most curious and, 
in every respect, the most interesting. —SOUTHEY, 27 
his History of the Brazils. 


An ACCOUNT of the Singular Habits and 
Circumstances of the PEopLe of the Tones 
IsLANDs, in the South Pacific Ocean. With 
a Pertrait, and Map. Second Edition, 2 vols. 
8vo. 24s. 


By Mr. Witt1am Mariner, 
Of the Port-au-Prince private Ship of War; 
the greater part of whose Crew were massa- 
cred by the Natives of Lefooga. 


JOURNEY from MOSCOW to CON- 
STANTINOPLE. With a Continuation of 
the Route to Jerusalem, the Dead Sea, Petra, 
Damascus, Balbec, Palmyra, &c.; in the 
Years 1817, 1818. With Six Plates, 4to. 
Il. 11s. 6d. 

By Wm. Macumicuaryt, M.D. F.R.S. 
One of Dr. Radcliffe’s Travelling Fellows, 

from the University of Oxford. 


LETTERS from the CAUCASUS and 
GEORGIA. With a Map and Views. 8vo. 
Inthe Press. 


JOURNAL of a TOUR in the LEVANT. 
With Maps, Plates, and Wood-cuts, 3 vols. 
8vo, 3l. 3s. 


By Wittiam Turner, Esq. 


JOURNAL of a TOUR in GERMANY, 
SWEDEN, RUSSIA, POLAND, &c., during 
the Years 1813 and 1814. Third Edition, 2 
vols. 8yo. with Twelve Plates. 11. 10s. 


By J. T. James, A.M. 
Christ Church, Oxford. 


A VIEW of the AGRICULTURE, MA- 
NUFACTURES, STATISTICS, & STATE 
of SOCIETY of GERMANY, and Parts of 
HOLLAND and FRANCE, taken during a 
Journey through those Countries in 15]9, 
Ato, Il. 15s. 

By W. Jacoz, Esq., F.R.S. 


3 


An AUTUMN near the RHINE; or 
SKETCHES of COURTS, SOCIETY, and 
SCENERY in GERMANY near the RHINE. 
Second Edition. To which are added, an 
Account of a Tour in the Taunus Mountains, 
in the Year 1820, and some Translations from 
the Poems of Schiller and Goéthe. Second 
Edition, 8vo. 14s. 


TRAVELLERS GUIDE on the CONTI- 
NENT: in one Handsome and closely printed 
Volume. Second Edition, 8vo. Il. 5s. 


By Mariana STARKE. 


This Work willbe found avery useful guide through 
France, Switzerland, Italy, Germany, Portugal, Spain, 
Holland. Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Russia : 
containing an account of the Antiquities of Italy; par- 
ticularly those of Rome, Herculaneum, Pompeii, and 
Pestum; together with, minute lists of the most emi- 
nent Statues and Paintings which embellish the Con- 
It gives acenrate details of the ex- 
penses incurred by residing in various parts of France, 
Italy, &c.; so that persons who visitthe continent from 
economical motives, may select the most eligible places 
for permanent residence, and for the use of families, 
who may wish to avoid the expense attendant upon 
travelling with a Courier; withinstructionsfor invalids. 


tinental Galleries. 


SWITZERLAND ; or a JOURNAL of a 
TOUR and RESIDENCE in that COUN- 
TRY. Followed by a General View of its 
History, brought down to the Present, Time, 
and principally directed to the Manner and 
Mode of Life of the People in Ancient and 
Modern Times. 2 vols. 8vo. 24s. Second 
Edition. 

By S. Srmonp, 
Author of the Journal of a Tour and Resi- 
dence in Great Britain. 


The DIARY of an INVALID in pursuit 
of HEALTH ; being the Journal of a ‘Tour in 
Portugal, Italy, Switzerland, and France. 
Third Edition, 2 vols. post 8vo. 15s. 

By Henry Marruews, A.M.,, 
Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge. 


FIRST IMPRESSIONS ; on a Tour upon 
the Continent, in the Summer of 1818, through 
part of France, Italy, Switzerland, the Bor- 
ders of Germany, and a part of French Flan- 
ders. S8yo. With Plates. 15s. 


By Marianne Baiviie. 


SKETCHES descriptive of ITALY, im 
1816 and 1817. With a brief Account of 
Travels in various Parts of France and 
Switzerland, inthe same Years. In 4 vols. 
fep. 8vo. Il. 12s. 


ITALY and its INHABITANTS, in the 
Years 1816 and 1817. With a View of the 
Manners, Customs, Theatres, Literature, and 
the Fine Arts, with some notice of its vari- 
ous Dialects. 2 vols. 8vo. 26s. 


By James GALIFFE, 
Of Geneva. 


LETTERS from the NORTH of ITALY, 
relating principally to the Government, Sta- ' 
tistics, Manners, Language, and Literature 
of that Country. Addressed to Henry Hal- 
lam, Esq. 2 vols. 8vo. 18s. 


By Witiram STEWART Rose. 


The ANTIQUITIES, ARTS, and LITE- 
RATURE of ITALY. Third Edition, 8vo. 
15s. Inthe Press. 

By Josepu ForsyTu, Esq. 


A DESCRIPTION of the ANTIQUITIES 
and other CURIOSITIES of ROME. Svo. 
15s. 


By the Rey. Epwarp Burton, M.A. 
Student of Christ Chnrch. 


DISSERTATIONS on the RUINS of 
ROME. and an ESSAY on ITALIAN Li- 
TERATURE. Second Edition, 8vo. 14s. 


By Joun Hosnouse, M. P. 
Trinity Coll. Cambridge, M.A., F.R.S. 


VESTIGES of ANCIENT MANNERS 
and CUSTOMS, discoverable in Modern 
Italy and Sicily. Svo. 9s. 6d. 


By the Rev. Joun James Brunt, 

Fellow of St. John’s, Cambridge, and late 
one of the Travelling Bachelors of that 
University. 


A VIEW of SICILY and its ISLANDS, 
describing their peculiar Feotures, Produc: 
tions, Natural History, Antiquities, and Hy- 
drography ; together with the Manners, Cus- 
toms, Character, Condition, and Resources 
of the several Classes of their Inhabitants, 
more particularly those of Sicily ; and illus- 
trated with Charts, Views, Costumes, &c., 
from Drawings made on the Spot. 


By Captain Wittiam Henry Smytu, 
Of the Royal Navy. 

The Materials for this Work having been 
collected in the course of a complete Hydro- 
graphical Survey of the Coasts of these 
Islands, and other parts of the Mediterranean, 
hy Order of the Lords Commissioners of the 
Admiralty. 4to. 


The TOPOGRAPHY of ATHENS, with 
some Remarks on its Antiquities. With 
Plates from the Drawings of C. CocKERELL, 
Esq. 8yo. 1. 10s. 


By Lieut. Colonel Leaxe. 


TOPOGRAPHY illustrative of the BAT- 
TLE of PLATA*A ; consisting of Plans of 
the Plain and City of Plataa, of Plans of 
Eleuthera, A‘noe, and Phyle, and a View of 
Eleuthera, from Drawings made on the Spot, 
by T. ALLAson, and engraved by Cooke. 
Accompanied by Memoirs read to the Aca- 
demy of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres of 
the Institute of France. With Plates sepa- 
rate, in Folio. 28s, 


By Joun Spencer Sranuore, F.R.S. 
R. Instit. Paris. Corresp. Bell. Lett. 


RESEARCHES in the SOUTH of IRE- 
LAND, illustrative of the Scenery, Archi- 
tectural Remains, Manners, and Supersti- 
tions of the Peasantry ; from personal Obser- 
yations, Ancient Authorities, and Original 
Manuscripts. . With Sixteen Drawings from 
Nate, and on Stone, by Miss Nicholson 
and Mr, Alfred Nicholson, and Engravings 
m Wood by the first Artists. 4to. Jn the 
Press. 


By T. Crorron Croker. 


NARRATIVE of a RESIDENCE in BEL- 
GIUM during the Campaign of 1815; and ofa 
Visit to the FIELD of WaTERLOo. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 


MEMOIR of the EARLY CAMPAIGNS 
of the DUKE of WELLINGTON, in Por- 
tugal and Spain. 8vo. 8s. Gd, 


By an Officer of Rank employed in his Army, 


<5 L— — — LLL —  Oeeo 
a A ee 


MEMOIR of the OPERATIONS of the 
ALLIED ARMIES under Prince Schwart- 
zenberg and Marshall Blucher, during the 
latter end of the year 1813, and the year 
1814. By the Author of the Early Campaigns 
of the Duke of Wellington. With numerous 
Maps and Plans, 8vo, 21s. 


A CIRCUMSTANTIAL NARRATIVE of 
the CAMPAIGN in SAXONY, in the Year 
1818. Witha Map, 2 vols. 8vo. 24s. 


By Baron Ope.esen, 
One of the General Officers of the Army. 


This Publication is, more properly, a sort of Per- 
sonal Narrative of Buonaparte and his Staff, and in- 
comparably more entertaining than any detail of the 
Campaign could have been. The Author, an Officer 
of rank, attached to the Head Quarters of Buonaparte, 
was close enough to see and hear a great deal, and 
yet not sufficiently familiar with these extraordinary 
scenes to have lost the interest which their novelty 
was calculated to excite. He, fortunately, confines 
himself to the transactions which fell under his own 
immediate observation ; and his book gives, certainly, 
the best account of the machinery of which Napoleon 
was the spring. 


A NARRATIVE of the OPERATIONS 
ofthe LEFT WING of the ALLIED ARMY, 
in the Western Pyrenees and South of France, 
in the years 1813-14, under Field Marshal 
the Marquess of Wellington. Comprising 
the Passage of the Rivers Bidassoa, Ni ivelle, 
Nive and Adour, the Blockade of Bayonne, 
&c. Royal 4to. MUlustrated by numerous 
Plates of Mountain and River Scenery, 
Views of Fontarabia, Irun, St. Jean de Luz, 
and Bayonne, with Plans, &c. Drawn and 
Etched 
By Captain Barry, of the Grenadier 

Guards, F.R.S., 
Member of the Imperial Russian Order of 
St. Anne. In the Press. 


‘A NARRATIVE of the CAMPAIGNS of 
the BRITISH ARMY at WASHINGTON 
and NEW ORLEANS, in 1814-15. Syo. 12s. 


By an OFFicer. 


NARRATIVE of the EXPEDITION to 
ALGIERS, in the Year 1816, under the 
Command of the Right Honourable Admiral 
Lord Viscount Exmoutu. Published by per- 
mission, and ornamented with a Portrait, 
and other Plates. 8vo. 15s. 


By Mr. ABRAHAM SALAME, 

A Native of Alexandria in Egypt, Interpre- 
ter in His Britannic Majesty’s Service for 
the Oriental Languages, who accompanied 
his Lordship in quality of Interpreter, for 
the subsequent Negociations pail the Dey. 


NARRATIVE of the late POLITICAL 
and MILITARY EVENTS in BRITISH 
INDIA, under the Administration of the 
Marquess of Hastings. With Maps, Plans, 
and Views, 4to. 21. 10s. 


By Henry T. Princerp, Esq., 


Of the Honourable East India Company’s 
Civil Service, Bengal. 


AN ACCOUNT of some recent DISCO- 
VERIES in HIEROGLYHICAL LITERA- 
TURE and EGYPTIAN ANTIQUITIES, 
including the Author’s original ALPHABET, 
as extended by Mr. CHAMPOLLION; with a 
Translation of Five unpublished Greek and 
Egyptian Manuscripts. Svo. with numerous 
Plates. 7s. Gd. 


“By Tuomas Youne, M.D., 
Fellow of the Society, and of the Royal Col- 
Jege of Physicians. 


a el NP a NN I PON PRN 


WORKS PRINTED FOR JOHN MURRAY. 


A COPIOUS GREEK GRAMMAR. 
By Aveustus Marrniz, 
Translated from the German, by the 


Rey. E. V. Buomrretp, M.A. 
Fellow of Emanuel College, Cambridge, 
A New Edition, 2 vols. 8vo. 30s. 


An ABRIDGMENT of MATTHIA’s 
GREEK GRAMMAR. For the use of 
Schools. 12mo. 3s. Gd. Edited by 


The Rev. C. J. BLhomrietp, D.D. 


A LATIN GRAMMAR. By IL. J. G. 
ScHELLER. ‘Translated from the German, 
with an Appendix and Notes. 2 vols, 8yo. 
In the Press. 


By George Waker, M.A,, 

Late Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, 
and Head Master of the Grammar School, 
Leeds. 

This Grammar has passed through many editions. 
It is particularly accurate and copious on the Syntax 
of the Latin language; in which respect all Latin 
Grammars, which have appeared in English, not ex- 
cepting the Port Royal, are remarkably deficient. 
Marrur14,in his excellent Greek Grammar, confesses 
that he has taken SCHELLER for his moded, and that 
his object was to effect for the Greek language, what 
Scheller had effected for the Latin. 


EDRIPIDIS HERACLIDAY, ex Recen- 
sione Petrat Exvmstey, A.M., qui Annota- 
tiones suas et Aliorum Selectas adjecit. Svo. 
5s. 6d, 


PALZOROMAITCA, or HISTORICAL 
and PHILOLOGICAL DISQUISITIONS, 
inquiring whether the Hellenistic Style is 
not Latin-Greek? whether “the many New 
Words in the Elzevir Greek Testament are 
not formed from the Latin? and whether the 
Hypothesis, that the Greek Text of many 
Manuscripts of the New Testament is a 
Translation or Re-translation from the Latin, 
seems not to elucidate numerous Passages ; 
to account for the different Recensions; and 
to explain many Phenomena hitherto inexpli- 
cable to Biblical Critics? S8vo. 16s. 


MUSEUM CRITICUM ; or, Cambridge 
Classical Researches. 7 Nos., 8vo. 33s. 


ODES of PINDAR, Translated, with 
Notes, Critical and Explanatory. Royal 8vo. 
In the Press. 


By ApraHam Moors, Esq. 


The COMEDIES of ARISTOPHANES. 
Translated from the Greek, with numerous. 
illustrative Notes. 8vo. Vol. I, 15s. Vol. I. 
10s. 6d. Sold separately. 


By Tuomas Mitcnett, A.M., ; 
Late Fellow of Sidney-Sussex College, 
Cambridge. 


The ANTHOLOGIES : a COLLECTION 
of the most beautiful POEMS of the Minor 
Poets of Greece, as preserved in Brunck, 
Stobzeus, &c. Svo. 18s. Translated by 


The Rev. R. Bianp, &c. 


The SATIRES of AULUS PERSIUS 
FLACCUS, translated in English Verse, | 
With Notes and Illustrations, and the Latin 
Text. Syo. 10s. 6d. 


By Wiuiiam Girrorp, Esq. 


WORKS PRINTED FOR JOHN MURRAY. 


The GEORGICS of VIRGIL. A New 
Edition, with Notes and the original Text. 
Printed uniformly with Mr, Gifford’s Juvenal. 
Svo. 9s. 6d. Translated 


By Witi1am Soruesy, Esq. 


The ORLANDO FURIOSO of Artosto, 
Translated, with an Introduction and Notes, 


By W. 8. Roses. 
Vol. 1, (containing 6 Cantos) will be pub- 
lished immediately, and the remaining Vo- 
' lumés in succesion. 


This work has been undertaken in the wish to sup- 
ply a void in Italo-English literaturé, since Ariosto, 
though the writer most calculated to please our taste 
in an English dress, is almost the only distinguished 
Italian author of whom we have no tolerable transla- 
tion.—The object of this attempt is to to give, at least, 
a faithful outline of his work: and; with this view, a 
style has been adopted as analogous to that of the ori- 
ginal as the genius of the two languages would admit; 
and the same metre chosen as that of the Furioso ; 
into which it has been translated throughout, stanza 
for stanza, and line for line, where it could be effected 
without too great a sacrifice of worthier considera- 
tions. 


The POEMS of CAIUS VALERIUS 
CATULLUS. 2 vols. fe. 8vo. 12s. Transla- 
ted, with a Preface and Notes, 


By the Hon. Georce Lams, 


The RICCIARDETTO, of FORTIGUER- 
RI, CantoI., translated from the Italian, with 
Notes, and an Introductory Essay on Ro- 
mantic, Burlesque, and Mock-Heroic Poetry. 
With Two Portraits. 8yo. 10s. 6d. 


By Sytvesrer (Doveias) Lorp 
GLENBERVIE. 


An INQUIRY into the DOCTRINES of 
NECESSITY and PREDESTINATION. 


By Epwarp Copieston, D.D. 
Provost of Oriel College, Oxford, and Pre- 
bendary of Rochester. Second Edition, 8vo. 
Zs. 6d. 


A DISCOURSE on PREDESTINATION. 
By Dr. Krve, 

late Lord Archbishop of Dublin; preached 

at Christ Church, Dublin, before the House 

of Lords, May 15, 1709. With Notes, by 

the Rev. Richard WuarTELy, M.A,, Fellow 

of Oriel College, Oxford. 8vo. 5s. 6d. 


The BOOK of the CHURCH. 8vo. In 


the Press. 
By Rosert Soutuey, Esq. 


“¢ Manifold as are the blessings for which English- 
men are beholden to the institutions of their country, 
‘there is no part of those institutions from which they 
derive more important advantages than from its 
Church Establishinent, none by which the temporal 
condition of all ranks has been so materially promoted. 
So many of our countrymen wonld not be ungrateful 
for;these benefits, if they knew how numerous and 
how great they are, how, dearly they were prized by 
our forefathers, and at how dear a price they were 
purchased for our inheritance; by what religious 
exertions, what heroic devotion, what precious lives, 
consumed in pious labours, wasted away in dungeons, 
or offered up amid the fames. Thisis a knowledge, 
which, if early inculcated, migat arm the young heart 
against the pestilent errors of these distempered times. 
I offer, therefore, to those who regard with love and 
reverence the religion which they have received from 
their fathers, a brief but comprehensive record, dili- 
gently, faithfully, and conscientiously composed, which 
they may put into the hands of their children.”— 
Preface. 


| 


PAGANISM and CHRISTIANITY COM- 
PARED, in a Course of Lectures to the 
King’s Scholars at Westminster, in the years 
1806-7-8. 8yo. 10s. 6d. 


By Joun [revanp, D.D., 


Dean of Westminster. 


NUPTIZ SACRA; or, an INQUIRY 
into the SCRIPTURAL DOCTRINE of 
MARRIAGE and DIVORCE, addressed to 
the Two Houses of Parliament. First pub- 
lished in 1801, and nosy reprinted by desire. 
Syo, 5s. 


SERMONS, chiefly delivered in the Cha- 
pe! of the East India College, Hertfordshire. 
One vol. 8vo. 10s. 6d. 


By the Rev. CHArLes Wess LE Bas,A.M. 


Professor of Mathematics atthe E.J. College, 
and late Fellow of Trin. Coll. Cambridge. 


HISTORICAL MEMOIRS of the *ENG- 
LISH, TRISH, and SCOTTISH CATHO- 
LICS, since the Reformation. With a Suc- 
cinct Account of the Principal Events in the 
Ecclesiastical History of this Country ante- 
cedent to that period, and in the Histories of 
the Established Church, and the Dissenting 
and Evangelical Congregations ; and some 
Historical Minutes respecting the temporal 
Power of the Popes ; the Separists from the 
Church of Rome before the Reformation; the 
Society of Jesus; and the Guelphic Family. 
Third Edition, corrected, revised, and con- 
siderably augmented, 4 vols. 8vo. 21. 8s. 


By Cuaries Burier, Esq. 


The CONNEXION of CHRISTIANITY 
with HUMAN HAPPINESS. 2 vols. post 
8yo. Lis. 


By the Rev. Witt1am Harness, a.m. 


The BIOSCOPE; or, Dial of Life Ex- 
plained. To which are added, a Transla- 
tion of St. Paulinus’s Epistle to Celantia on 
the Rule of Christian Lite, and an Elemen- 
tary View of General Chronology ; with per- 
petual Time-Tables. Second Edition, in small 
8vo., with a Dial-Plate inacase. 12s. 


By Granvit.e Penn, Esq. 


The COMFORTS 
Biographical Illustrations. 
fe. 8vo. 7s. 


By Sir Tuomas Bernarp, Bart. 


of OLD AGE, with 
Fourth Edition, 


SACRED- MEDITATIONS, and Devo- 
tional Poems, with Essays in Prose, com- 
osed on various Occasions of Life, and pub- 
lished for the use of the intelligent Mind in 
its senous Moments. Second Edition, f.c. 
Svo. 7s. 6d. 


* An INQUIRY into the PRINCIPLES of 
BEAUTY in GRECIAN ARCHITEC- 
TURE; with an Historical View of the Rise 
and Progress of the Art in Greece. Post 


Svo. 7s. 


By Georce Hart of ABERDEEN, K.T. 
&e, &e. 


The DESTINATION of WORKS of 
ART, and the Use to which they are ap- 
plied, considered with reference to their 
influence on the Genius and Taste of Artists, 
and the sentiments of Amateurs. Trans- 
lated from the French. Fe. 8vo. 5s. 6d. 


By Henry Tuomsoy, R.A, 


rd 


ESSAYS on the ANATOMY of EXPRES 
SION, on the Passions as they are exhibited 
in the Changes of the Countenance, and in 
the Agitation of the Frame generally. Also 
on the Origin of our Conceptions of Beauty, 
in the Forms of the Head; and of the Cha- 
racters of Youth and Age. 4to. with many 
Engravings. (Second Edition, with very im- 
portant additions. In the Press. 


By Cuarues Bent, Esq. 


The FLEMISH, DUTCH, and GERMAN 
SCHOOLS of PAINTING. 8vo. 12s. 


By the Reverend J. T. Jamzs, 
Author of the Italian Schools. 


The several ITALIAN SCHOOLS of 
PAINTING, with Observations on the pre- 
sent State of the Art. Svo. 9s. 6d. 


By J. T. JAmus, M.A. 


Author of Travels in Germany. 


A DESCRIPTION of the Collection of 
ANCIENT MARBLES in the British Mu- 
seum. Containing Seventy-seven Engray- 
ings. Parts I. Ul, ILL. and IV. 4to. I. 5s. ; 
21.12.6d.; 11. 10s.; and 21. 2s.; Large Paper, 
11.15s.; 31.13s.6d. ; 20. 2s. 5 and 31. 3s. 


VIEWS in iTALY, illustrative of Addison, 
Eustace, Forsyth, Rose, &c., from accurate 
Drawings made on the spot by JAmEs HAKE- 
WILL, Architect, and J.M. W. Turner, R.A. 
which have already appeared, each 12s. Gd. 
Complete in Twelve Numbers, royal 4to.; 
18s. imperial 4to. ; and 20s, imperial 4fo. on 
India paper. 


WELSH SCENERY.—Views in Wales, 
engraved in the best Line manner, by 
Epwarpb FIixpeEN, from Drawings by Carp- 
TAIN Barry, of the Grenadier Guards, F.R.S. 
To be completed, in Twelve Numbers, each 
containing Five Plates, with descriptive 
Letter-press, and to appear regularly each 
Month. Nos. 1, 2. and 3, already published. 
Insmall 8vo. 5s.; 4to. Proofs, 12s.; India, 18s: 


A SERIES of VIEWS of SPAIN and 
PORTUGAL, to illustrate Mr. Southey’s 
History of the Peninsular War; drawn on 
Stone by W. Westall, A.R.A., from Sketches 
by General Hawker, E. H. Locker, Esq., 
T. HEApry, Esq., &c. To be completed in 
Three Parts, Part I., containing Light Views, 
illustrating Vol. I., 4to. 18s. 


DESCRIPTION of an ANTEDILUVIAN 
DEN cf HY/ENAS, discovered at KIRK- 
DALE in YORKSHIRE, in 1821, and con- 
taining the remains of the Hyena, Tiger, 
Bear, Elephant, Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus, 
and 16 other Animals, all formerly natives in 
this country. With a comparative View of 
many similar Caverns and Dens in England 
and Germany ; and a Summary Account of 
the Evidence of Diluvial Action afforded by 
the Form of Hills and Valleys, and the gene- 
ral Dispersion of Beds of Gravel and Loam, 
containing similar Bones, over great part of 
the Northern Hemisphere. Illustrated with 
aMap, Views, and Sections of the Caves, 
and Drawings of the Animals Remains. 4to. 
Invihe Press. 

By the Rey. Wint1am BucKanp, 
F.R.S., F.L.S., and Professor of Mineralogy 

and Geology in the University of Oxford. 


A SYSTEM of MECHANICAL PHILO- 
SOPHY, by the late Jonn Rosison, LL.D, 
Professor of Natural Philosophy in the Uni- 
versity, and Secretary to the Royal Society 
of Edinburgh, With Notes and Illustrations, 
comprising the most recent Discoveries in the 
Physical Sciences. In 4 yols. 8vo., with nu- 
merous Plates, 41. 


By Davip Brewster, LL.D., F.R.S.E. 


*,* A copious Article on the Hisrory and Opx- 
RATIONS of the SrkAM ENGINE, has been com 
pletely revised by the late Jamzus Warr, Esq. and his 
Son, of Soho; who have also made many additions ; 
so that itis now become the only account which can be 
relied upon. This ‘subject is illustrated with eight 
large and original Hngravings. 


The CENTURY of INVENTIONS of the 
MARQUIS of WORCESTER, from the 
original MSS. with Historical and Explana- 
tory Notes, a Biographical Memoir. “An ori- 
ginal Portrait,8vo. In the Press. 

“ A practical mathematician, who has quickness to 
seize a hint, and sagacity to apply it, might avail him 
self greatly of these scantlings. It is extremely pro- 
bable, that Savery took from the Marquis the hint of 
the Steam Engine, forraising water with a power made 
by fire, which invention alone would entitle the author 
to immortality.’,—Grang. Biog. Hist. Vol. v. p. 278. 

“ Here it may not be amiss to recommend to the 
aitention of every mechanic, the little work entitled 
a Century of Inventions,by the Marquis of Worcester, 
which, on account of the seeming improbability of dis- 
covering many things mentioned therein, has been too 
much neglected ; but when it is considered that some 
of the contrivances, apparently not the least abstrase, 
have, by close application, been found to answer all 
the Marquis says of them, and that the first hint of that 
most powerful machine the steam engine is given in 
that work, it is unnecessary to enlarge on the utility of 
it.—Trans. of the Society of Arts, vol. iii. p. 6. 


A MANUAL of CHEMISTRY, containing 
the Principal Facts of the Science, arranged 
in the Order in which they are discussed and 
illustrated in the Lectures at the Royal In- 
stitution. New Edition, considerably en- 
larged and improved, with numerous Plates, 
Wood-Cuts, Diagrams, &c. 3 vols. 8yo. 2/.5s. 


By W. T. Branbe, 


Secretary to the Royal Society, Professor of 
Chemistry at the Royal Institut., &c. &c. 


OUTLINES of GEOLOGY ; being the 
Substance of a Course of Lectures, delivered 
at the Theatre of the Royal Institution in the 
Year 1816. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 


By W. T. Branpe, F.R.S. Sec. B.S. 


ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS of 
the CELESTIAL MECHANICS of LA- 
PLACE, Comprehending the First Book ; 
with an Introduction, containing the Rudi- 
ments of the Mathematics ; being the First 
Part of a Work intended to supply the Stu- 
dent with every Link that is actually re- 
quired for a complete Chain of Demonstra- 
tion, extending to the whole Theory of Pla- 
netary Motions. With numerous Engravings. 
Svo. U0s. 6d. 


ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATIONS 
made at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, 
in 1811 to 1820. Folio, 21s. each. 

By Joun Ponn, Esq, 
Astronomer Royal, and F.R.S. 


AUTICAL ALMANACK and Astrono- 
acl Ephemeris. Published by Order of 
the Commissioners of Longitude, from its 
commencement to the. Year 1825. Royal 
Syo. 5s. each. 


= 


TABLES requisite to be used with the 
Nautical Almanack for finding the Latitude 
and Longitude atSea. 8vo. 5s. The Ap- 
pendix 2s. 


TABLES to be used with the Nautical 
Almanac, for finding the Latitude and Lon- 
gitude atSea. Containing a complete and 
compendious set of Tables, in which the 
quantities are taken out by immediate in- 
spection, and the proportional parts are ad- 
ditive ; with Easy and Accurate Methods of 
solving the various Problems required, and 
the Newest Determinations of the Latitudes 
and Longitudes of Places; intended as a 
Substitute for the Reavisire TABLES. S8yo. 
10s. : 


By the Rev. W. Lax, M.A.,, F.R.S. 


Lowndes’ Professer of Astronomy and Geo- 
metry in the University of Cambridge. 


A TREATISE on NAVAL GUNNERY. 
Published with the approbation and per- 
mission of the Lords Commissioners of the 
Admiralty. With Plates, 8vo. 15s. 

By Col. Sir Howarp Doveuas, Bart., 

K.S8.C. 0.B. F.R.S., §¢. 


A VIEW of the HISTORY and ACTUAL 
STATE of the MILITARY FORCE of 
GREAT BRITAIN. Translated, with Notes, 
by an OFFICER. 2 yuls. 8vo. 21s. 

By Cartes Durin. 


Member of the Royal Institute of France ; 
Field Officer in the Corps of Marine Engi- 
neers ; Member of the Legion of Honour, 
&c. &e, &c, 


A COURSE of MILITARY INSTRUC- 
TION. Svyo. 42s. 
By C. W. Pas.ey, 


Lieut.-Col. in the Corps of Royal Engineers, 
and F.R.S. 


ALGEBRA of the HINDUS, with Arith- 
metic and Mensuration ; translated from the 
Sanscrit. 4to. 3/. 3s. 


By H. T. CoLeBRooke, Ese. 


ESSAYS on the LOVE, the POETRY, 
and the CHARACTER of PETRARCH, 
comprising numerous Translations by the 
Author’s friends. 8vo. 12s. 


By Uco Foscoto. 


LETTERS of MARY LEPEL, LADY 
HERVEY. With a Memoir, and illustrative 
Notes. 8vo. 95. Gd. 


POLITICAL and LITERARY ANEC- 
DOTES of HIS OWN TIMES. Second Edi- 
tion, cr. 8vo. 8s. 6d. 

By Dr. Wittram Kine, 
Principal of St. Mary Hall, Oxford. 


The LIFE of the Right Hon. R. B. SHE- 
RIDAN. 4to. Inthe Press. © 


By Tuomas Moors, Esq., 


The LIFE of SIR THOMAS BERNARD, 
Bart. With a Portrait, 8vo. 8s. 6d, 


By the Rey. J. Baker, 
His Nephew and Executor. 


a ee wy 


| 
| 


j WORKS PRINTED FOR JOHN MURRAY. 


MEMOIRES pour servir 4 LHISTOIRE 
de la VIE PRIVEE, et du RETOUR, et du 
sae oe NAPOLEON en 1815, 2 tom. 

yo. As. ; 


Par M, Fieury pr CuaBouon. 
Ex Sécrétaire d’ PEmpereur Napoleon et de 
son Cabinet. 


The same Work Translated, 2 vols.8vo. 24s, 


The LIFE of FENELON, with other 
Eiogmapnical and Historical Tracts. 8vyo. 
10s. 6d. 


By Cuarues Butrer, Esq, 


LIVES of HAYDN and MOZART, with 
Criticisms upon their Works ; to which are 
added, Observations on Metastasio, and on 
the present state of Music in France and 
ltaly. By the Author of Sacred Melodies. 
Second Edition, 8vo. 12s. 


MEMOIRS of the LIFE of ROSSINI, 
with an Historical and Critical Account of 
his Compositions, and an Historical Sketch 
of the State of Music in Italy. From the 
beginning of the present Century to the year 
1822. By the Author of the Lives of HAYDN 
and Mozart. 8vo. Im the Press. 


The LIFE of NELSON. Second Edition. 
2 vols. foolscap 8vo., with a Portrait, 10s. 


By Rozert Sourney. 


The MISCELLANEOUS WORKS of 
Edward Gibbon, with Memoirs of his Life 
and Writings, composed by himself; illus- 
trated from his Letters, with occasional 
Notes and Narrative. In 5 vols. 8vo., com- 
prising nearly One-Third of New Matter, 
with a new Portrait, from the best Likeness 
of the Author, and other Plates, 3/.5s. A 
very fow Copies are printed in royal Svo. 
Al. 10s 


By Joun Lorp SHEFFIELD, 


CURIOSITIES of LITERATURE, Seventh 
Edition, 5 vols. small 8yo. 35s. 


By I. D'Israeut, Esq. 


A SECOND SERIES of CURIOSITIES 
sf LITERATURE, consisting of Researches 
in Literary, Biographical, and Political His- 
tory—of Critical and Philosophical Inquiries 
—and of Secret History. 3 vols. Syo. 36s. 


By J. D'Israew, Esq. 


On the LITERARY CHARACTER, illus- 
irated by the History of Men of Genius ; 
drawn from their own Feelings and_Confes- 
sions. Third Edition, enlarged and improved, 
2 vols. post 8vo. 16s. 

By J. D'IsRAsit. 


QUARRELS of AUTHORS ; or, Memoirs 
for our Literary History, including Speci- 
mens of Controversy from the Reign of Eli-” 
zabeth, By the Author of “ Curiosities of 
Literature.” 3 vols. post 8yo, I/. 4s. , 


The WORKS of the RIGHT HON. LADY 
MARY WORTLEY MONTAGUE, includ- 
ing her Correspondence, Poems, and Essays. 
Published, by Permission, from her genuine 


Papers. New Edition, 5 vols. post 8vo. 21. 5s 


WORKS PRINTED FOR JOHN MURRAY. ? 


_ANASTASIUS, or MEMOIRS of a 
GREEK of the Nineteenth Century, writ- 
ten by Himself. 3 vols. crown 8vo. Witha 
Map: Third Edition, 11, 11s. 6d. 


LIFE and ADVENTURES of ANTAR 
a celebrated Bedowen Chief, Warrior, an 
Poet, who flourished a few years prior to 
the Mahommedan fra, Now first translated 
from the original Arabic. A New Edition,in 
4 vols. cr, 8yo. 11. 16s. 


_ By Terrick Hamitron, Esq. 
Oriental Secretary to the British Embassy to 
Constantinople. 


** Vols. (2, 3, and 4, 11. 7s. 


The SKETCH BOOK of GEOFFREY 
CRAYON, Gent. A New and beautifully 
printed Edition, in? 2 vols. post 8vo. 16s. 
Another Edition, in 2 vols. 8vo. 24s. 


BRACEBRIDGE HALL; or, the HU- 
MOURISTS. A New Edition, in 2 vols. small 
8vo. 16s. Another Edition, 2 vols. Svo. 24s. 


By the Author of the Skercu Book. 


KNICKERBOCKER’s (Author of The 
Sketch Book) HUMOUROUS ACCOUNT of 
NEW YORK, from the Beginning of the 
World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty ; 
containing, among many surprising and cu- 
rious Matters; the unutterable Ponderings of 
Water the DoupterR, the disastrous Pro- 
jects of WiLi1aM the Testy, aud the chivalric 
Achievements of Peter the Heapsrrone, 
the Three Dutch Governors of New Amster- 
dam, being the only authentic History of the 
Times that ever hath been published, 2 vols. 

small 8vo. 12s. Plates. 


VING, (Author of the Sketch Book,) with 
Ten Plates, to illustrate the Sketch Book, 
and Knickerbocker’s New York; from De- 
signs by C. R. Leslie, A.R.A., engraved by 
Scriven, Heath, Rolls, Romney, W. and E. 
Finden. A. W. Warren. 8vo. 11. 11s. 6d. 
Only Twenty-five copies, proofs, India. Fifty 
copies only, 4to., proofs. 


ULTIME LETTERE DI JACOPO ORTIS, 
Nuova Edizione, 2 vols.8vo. Ys. 


ADA REIS, a Romance. 3 yols. fe. 8yo. 15s. 


The PIONEERS, or the Sources of the 
Susquehanna. By the Author of the Spy. 
3 vols. 12mo. 18s. 


KRUITZNER, a nieve Fifth Edition, 8vo; 
. Ss Ye 


By Hare Ler. 


The following Drama (WER NER)is taken entirely from 
Kruitsner, a Tale, by Miss Lez. When I was young 
{about fourteen, I think), I first read this Tale, which 
madea deep imptession upon me; and may,indeed, be 
said to contain the germ of much that I have since writ- 
ten. I have getierally found, that those who had read 
this Tale, agreed with me in their estimate of the sin- 
gular, power of mind and conception which it deve- 
lopes: Amongst those whose opinions agreed with 
mine upon this story, I could mention some very 
high names; but it is not necessary, nor indeed of any 
use, for every one must judge according to their own 
feelings. I merely refer the reader to the original 
story, that he may see to what extent I have borrowed 
from it; and am not unwilling that he should find 
much greater pleasure in perusing it than the Drama, 
which is founded upon its contents,—Lorp ByYROn’s 
Preface to WERNER. 


A PORTRAIT of WASHINGTON IR- 


CHINESE NOVELS ; translated from the - 
Original. To which are added, PROVERBS | 
collected from ° 


and MORAL MAXIMS 
their Classical Books and. other Sources. 
The whole prefaced by Observations on the 
Language and Literature of China. &yo. 
8s. 6d. 

By Joun Francis Davis, 


The STORY of our FIRST PARENTS, in 
one continued Narrative, selected from MIL- 
Ton’s PARADIsE Lost. For the use of Young 
Persons. 8vo. 5s. 6d. 


By Mrs. Sippons, 


This immortal Poem is seldom appreciated by the 
young; and its perusal is, perhaps, very generally re- 
garded rather as a duty than a pleasure, This has 
been attributed by Dr. Johnson to the want of hu- 
man interest. In those passages, therefore, which I 
selected for our evening readings, my purpose was to 
obviate this objection, by bringing before my family, 
in uninterrupted connexion, those parts which re- 
late to the fate of our first parents ; and by omit- 
ting every thing, however exquisite in its kind, which 
did not immediately bear upon their affecting and 
important story. Such was the origin of the present 
volume. Some friends lately suggested to me, that 
the Abstract, which had been found interesting and 
instructive to my own children, might not be wholly 
unprofitable to those of others; and, in that hope, I 
have been persuaded to the present publication.— 
PREFACE: 


The POEMS of the Right Hon. LORD 
BYRON. A New Edition, handsomely 
printed in 4 vols. 8vo., with a Portrait, 21. 2s. 


Another New Edition, handsomely printed 
in 5 vols. small Syo. 35s. 


The TRAGEDIES, to complete these Edi- 
tions, may be had separately. 


Volumes V. VI. VII. VIII. small Svo. se- 
parately, 7s., to complete former Editions. 


LORD BYRON'’S POEMS, printed uni- 
formly, and sold separately, in Octavo.— 


I, Childe Harold, Cantol. and | 11. Hebrew Melodies, 5s. 6d. 
- 19s, -| 12. Fare Thee Well! &c. 95. 
chide Harold, Canto III. | 13. Monody on Sheridan, is. 


5s. Gd. iq, Manfred, a Drama, 8vo. 
Childe Harold, Canto 1V.| "” 5s.6d.” ae 


ie ae 8yvo. Sy 15. aes oe Vaan 1s. 6d. 

e Giaour. 5s. 6d. 10. Beppo, a Veuneti Stor 
The Bride sien ea re 
The Corsair, 5s. 6d. 17. Mazeppa, 5s. 6d. 

Lara, §s. 6d. | 18. The one of Venice, a 
Siege of Corinth and Para- Tragedy. 1s. 


© POMP @ » 


sina, 5s. 6d. 19. Sardanapalus, &c. 155. 
Prisoner of Chillon, 5s. 6d. | 20. Werner. 55. éd. P 
0 Ode to Napoleon Buona- 

parte, 1s. Gd. 


i 


*,* PLATES, to illustrate these and former 
Editions, engraved by Heath, from Draw- 
ings by Westall, are sold separately. 
Pa, Il. 10s. 8vo. 2. 2s. 4to. Proofs, 

. 3S. 


Another Set of Engravings, ‘designed by 
STOTHARD, and engraved by Heath, 
fe. Evo. 18s. S8vo. 30s. 4to, Proofs, 21. 2s, 


SPECIMENS of the BRITISH POETS, 
with Biographical and Critical Notices, and 
an Essay on English Poetry. 7 vols. cr. 8yo 
31. 13s. 6d. 

By Tuomas Campsetn, Esq. 
Author of the. Pleasures of Hope. 


REJECTED ADDRESS. Fourteenth Edition, 
corrected and revised. Insmall8vo. 5s, 6d. 


RR IAAL ALN ALAS AL AL APRA POOR NGAP LVI NEAL ALANA APP APA AEA AARP APART NOON PA PR POS PD PPR RP PPP PR PPR 


The POETICAL WORKS of the Rey. 
GEORGE CRABBE. Printed, for the first 
time, uniformly, and very handsomely, in 
5 vols. 8vo. 21, 12s. 6d.; and also in 8 vols. 
fc. 8vo, 24. 8s. 


TALES of the HALL. Second Edition, 
2 vols. 8yo. 24s. 3*vols. fc. 8vo. 18s. 


By the Rev. Groree Crapse. 


THIRTY-ONE PLATES, to Illustrate the 
Poems of Crabbe. Engraved by Hearn, 
from the Drawings of WEsTALL. 4to. Proofs, 

4l. 4s, 8vo. 3l. Fe. Syo. 21. 2s. 


POEMS by the Rev. H. H. MILMAN, 
viz., The Fat of JERUSALEM. 8vo. 8s. 6d. 
The Martyr of Antrioca. Svo. 8s.6d. Brr- 
SHAZZAR.  8yo. 8s. 6d. “The BELVIDERE 
APoLLo; FAzio, a Tragedy; and other 
Poems. 8vo. 8s. 6d. Samor; Lorp of 
the Brient City. S8yo. 12s. 


HUMAN LIFE, a Poem. Printed uni- 
formly with. the Pleasures of Memory. New 
Edition, ¥'c.8vo. 5s. 6d. 


By Samvuen Roéers, Esq. 


The MONKS and the GIANTS; being a 
New Edition of WuistLECRAFT’s PRosPEcTUS 
and SPECIMEN of an INTENDED NATIONAL 
Porm. Cantos I, II, UI,and IV. Fourth 
Edition, in one vol. small 8yo. 4s, 6d. 


POEMS, by Mrs. HEMANS, viz. Re- 
STORATION of the Works of Art to Ivary. 
Second Edition, 8vo. 3s. 6d. Tats and His- 
TORIC SCENES, in Verse. fc. 8yo. 9s. 6d. 
MopERN GreEcE, 8vo, 5s. 6d. The Scrp- 
Tic, 4s. Sranzas to the: Memory of the 


Late Kine, 

ORLANDO in RONCESVALLES, a 
Poem, in Five Cantos. With Wood-cut 
Vignettes. Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d, 


By J. H. Merivare, 


ORIENTAL TALES, in Verse. Fe. 8vo. 
Gs. 6d. 


By Henry Garry Knrenr, Esq. 


FABLES from LA FONTAINE. In 
English Verse. “ Full of wise Saws and 
modern Instances.” S8vo. 10s, 6d. 


RELIGIO CLERICI; Two Epistles by 
a Churchman, with Notes. To which is now 
added, by the same Author, a Parson’s 
Choice of Town and Country ; an Epistle to 


a NonnE Divine. New Edition, Crown S8yo. 
8. 6d. 


COMMEMORATION of REYNOLDS. 
Foolseap Svo. 6s, 


By M. A. Suzz, Esq., R.A. 


POEMS, by the Hon. WILLIAM HER- 
BERT ; viz, The. Weirp WANDERER of JuT- 
LAND, a Tragedy.’8vo. &s. 6d. Jvita Mon. 
TALBAN, a Vale. 8yo. 85. 6d. THE GuaHIBa, 
a Tale. 8vo. 3s. Hepin; or the Sprcrre 
of the Toms, a Tale. 8vo. 3s. 6d. Pra DELLA 
Prerra, a Tale. 8yo. 3s. 6d. 


LETTERS to JULIA. In Rhyme. Third 
Edition, revised and corrected. With Lines 
WRITTEN at AMPTHILL Park. Second Edition, 
fc. 8vo. Ss. 6d. 


By Henry Lurrrett. 


The COURT of TUSCANY, a Tragedy. 
The Hetr of InnEs, a Tragedy. 8vo. 7s. 


The ENCHANTED PLANTS, and Fes- 
TIVAL of the Rosk, with other Poems. 
Fourth Edition, post 8vo. 6s. 


By Mrs. Monro.iev. 


RICCIARDA, Tragedia di Uco Foscoio. 
8vo. 7s. 6d. 


PLAYS of MASSINGER, with Notes 
Critical and Explanatory. Second Edition, 
with Additions and Corrections, 4 vols. royal 
Svo. Al, 4s. 


By Wiii1am Girrorp, Esq. 


WORKS of BEN JONSON, complete; 
carefully collated with the earliest Editions, 
and corrected; illustrated with Notes, Criti- 
cal and Explanatory. To which is prefixed, 
an original Life of the Author. Handsomely 

rinted by Bulmer, in 9 vols. 8vo. 6l. 6s, 
Pages Paper, 9. 9s. 


By Witi1AM Girrorp, Esq. 


The PLAYS and POEMS of SHIRLEY, 
now first collected and chronologically ar- 
ranged, and the Text carefully collated and 
restored. With occasional Notes, and a Bio- 
graphical and Critical Essay. In 6 vols. 8vo., 
uniformly with MassinGer and Ben Jonson. 

A few Copies are printed in royal octayo. 
In the Press. 


By Wiiu14M Girrorp, Esq. 


The DRAMATIC WORKS of the Right 
Hon. R. B. SHERIDAN, now first collected, 
with a Preface. 2 vols. 8vo. 28s. 


By T. Moors, Esq. 


FAZIO; a Tragedy. Sixth Edition, 8vo. 3s. 
By the Rev. H. H. Minman, 


HAMLET, and AS YOU LIKE IT, A 
Specimen of a New Edition of Shakspeare. 
Royal 8yo. 15s. 


An ESSAY on the PRINCIPLE of PO- 
PULATION ; or, A View of its Past and 
Present Effects on Human Happiness ; with 
An Inquiry into our Prospects respecting the 
Future Removal or Mitigation of the Evils 
which it occasions. A Fifth Edition, with 
important Additions and Corrections. 3 vols. 


8vo. 36s. 

By T. R. Matruus. 

Late Fellow of Jesus’ College, Cambridge, 
and Professor of Hisory and Political Eco- 
nomy, inthe East India College, Hertford- 
shire. 


The PRINCIPLES of POLITICAL ECO- 
NOMY CONSIDERED, with a View to 
their Practical Application. S8vo. 18s. 


By T. R. Mautuus, A.M. 


On the PRINCIPLES of POLITICAL 
ECONOMY and TAXATION. Third Edi- 
tion, 8vo0. 12s, ; 


By Davin Ricarpo, M.P. 


THOUGHTS and DETAILS on the High 
and Low Prices of the last Thirty Years. 
Part I. on the Effects of Alteration in the 
Currency. 8vo. 6s. 


By Tuomas Tooke, Esq.; F.R.S. 


An INQUIRY into the PRESENT STATE 
of the STATUTE and CRIMINAL LAW of 
ENGLAND. 8vo. 9s. 6d. 


By Joun Mitten, . Esq. 
Of Lincoln’s-Inn. 


An HISTORICAL SKETCH of the IN- 
TERNATIONAL POLICY of MODERN 
EUROPE, as connected with the Principle 
of the Law of Nature and Nations. With 
some short Remarks on the Policy which 
the Continental Nations have pursued since 
the Holy Alliance. 


By the Hon. Freperick Ensen, 
Of Lincoln’s-Inn, Barrister at Law. 8vo. 4s. 


An ESSAY onthe MILITARY POLICY 
and INSTITUTIONS of the BRITISH EM- 
PIRE. Fourth Edition, 8vo. 12s. 


By Lieut. Col. C. W. Pastry. 


STORIES selected from the HISTORY 
of ENGLAND, for Children, New Edition, 
half-bound, 3s. 6d. 


“ T was led to tell my little girl the following 
Stories, which I found to amuse her in a very high 
degree, without having any of the disadvantages 
which result from relations merely fictitious. My 
principal object was not to instruct but to amuse, 
and I therefore did not attempt any thing like a 
course of history ; but as I have, in general, adhered 
to historical fact, and departed from it only (when 
History was doubtful or silent) in favour of some 
popular prejudices, whatever lasting impression may 
be made on the young mind, will be, on the whole, 
consistent with truth, and conducive to its further 
and more substantial improvement. As these Stories 
have appeared to answer my purpose in the indivi- 
dual case, I think it right to offer them to the public, 
and shall be glad to hear that they are as successful 
in other families as they have been in my own.”?— 
Preface. 


CULINA FAMULATRIX MEDICINE. 
Receipts in Modern Cookery, with a Medi- 
cal Commentary. Fc. 8vo. 4s. 6d. 


By the late A. HunvEr (of York), M.D., 
F.R.S. L. and E, 


NEW FAMILY RECEIPT-BOOK, a 
Collection of more than eight hundred truly 


valuable Receipts (omitting those in Medicine ’ 


and Cookery) in various Branches of Do- 
mestic Economy, selected from the Works 
of British and Foreign Writers of unques- 
tionable experience and authority, and from 
the attested Communications of scientific 
Friends. Dedicated, by Permission, to Dr. 
Charles Taylor, Secretary to the Society of 
Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce; to 
whose superintendence the work has been 
submitted, and to whom the Editor has been 
indebted for many valuable communications. 
New Edition, greatly improved ; handsomely 
printed in smail Syo., similar to Domestic 
Cookery. 7s, 6d, 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
: 
: 


ee 
ee 


LLL PRP Ps 


WORKS PRINTED FOR JOHN MURRAY. 


A NEW SYSTEM of DOMESTIC 
COOKERY ; formed upon Principles of 
Economy, and adapted to the Use of Private 
Families, comprising also the Art of Carvin 
Observations on the Management of the 
Dairy, and Poultry-Yard ; Instructions for 
Home Brewery, Wines, &c., Cookery for the 
Sick and for the Poor; many very useful 
Miscellaneous Receipts and Directions, pro- 

er to be given to Servants both in Town and 

ountry. To which is prefixed, an Essay on 
Domestic Economy and Household Manage- 
ment, comprising many Observations, which 
will be found particularly useful to the Mis- 
tress of a Family. 4 New Edition, containing 
Ten Plates. Small 8vo. 7s. 6d. 


By a Lavy. 


‘The QUARTERLY REVIEW; from its 
Commencement, in 13809, to 1823, 56 Num- 
bers at 6s, each, forming 28 vols. 8yo. 


New Editions of the former Numbers are 
constantly reprinting, and may be had se- 
parately ; at 6s. 


A JOURNAL of SCIENCE, LITERA- 
TURE, and the ARTS, edited at the Royal 
Institution of Great Britain. os. I: to 
XXIX. with Plates, Svo. 7s. 6d. each. 
Published Quarterly. 


EDINBURGH ENCYCLOPAEDIA ; or, 
Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and Miscella- 
neous Literature. To be completed in 18 
vols. _ 410. Thirty-one Half Volumes, or 
Parts, have already appeared, price 11, 1s. 
each. Published Quarterly. 1 


Conducted by Davip Brewsrer, LL.D. 
F.R.S. and F.A,S., Edinburgh. 


With the assistance of Gentlemen eminent 
in Science and Literature. 


LIST of the NAVY ; compiled by Autho- 
rity of the Lords Commissioners of the Ad- 
miralty, from original and authentic Decu- 
ments, 2s. Pubiished Quarterly. 


The ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION CHA- 
RITIES in LONDON; or, an Account of 
the several Sermons, Dinners, Concerts, 
Balls, and meetings of every description, by 
which the different Establishments of the 
Metropolis, for Charity, or other purposes 
connected with the general welfare of so- 
ciety, are supported. 


The object of this little work is therefore, not merely 
to furnish memoranda to persons engaged as active 
patronsin the cause of charity, but also to serve as a 
guide to those whose welfare is the object of those ex- 
ertions ; and it is hoped that, by the nororiety which 
it aims at giving to various charitable institutions and 
societies in London, it may be the means of providing 
against much unnecessary trouble, and saying many 
useless inquiries to both the parties concerned. 

The date of each society has been given, when it was 
to be ascertained, after which follow in succession the 
objects of its institution, the qualifications and sub- 
scription of members and governors, thegeneral times 
of anniversaries und quarterly-meetings, dinners, ser- 
mons, &c., together with a general account of its pro- 
gress and pecuniary resoufces, as ‘well as the extent 
aud sphere of its activity. : 

The general Almanack of Metropolitan Benebolence, 
which is prefixed, will be found useful to all public 
men who are in the habit of attending the meetings of 
these several societies; and contribute, it is to be 
hoped, beneficially to the general disposal of their 
time. 


a 


on pe oe 
epee 


aie 
seceeerene 


Pe 


‘eee 
4 


ry 
Cd 


Yow, 
Oe ate 4 
yeuaL 
