St. Francis of Assisi (trans. T. W. Arnold), The Little Flowers of St. Francis (1910)
==========================================================================
The beloved collection of stories about St. Francis and his followers — the classic of Franciscan spirituality and medieval popular piety. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

First Issue of this Edition . 1910

Reprinted .... 1912, 1917, 1923


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


INTRODUCTION


Then shalt thou feel thy spirit so possest
And ravisht with devouring great desire
Of His deare selfe, that shall thy feeble brest
Inflame with love, and set thee all on fire
With burning zeale, through every par t entire.

That in no earthly thing thou shalt delight
But in His sweet and amiable sight.

Since the appearance of Paul Sabatier's Vie de Saint Francois
d } Assise in 1894, the starting-point of the neo-Franciscan
movement, scholars have disputed with much unfranciscan
acrimony concerning the relative value of existing documentary
authorities: the main outlines, however, of the life of the
founder of the Franciscan order are clear enough. Giovanni
Bemadone, better known as Francesco, tenderest and sweetest
of Christian saints, was born at Assisi in 1182. The male
child that the Lady Pica, wife of the wealthy mercer, Pietro
Bernadone, brought into the world during her husband's
absence in France, received the baptismal name of Giovanni;
and it was probably on his return that the joyous father
substituted the name of Francesco. The little lad was in due
course sent to the priest's school at the church of St. Giorgio,
and there received the usual education of a mediaeval school¬
boy. He was not a diligent scholar. We need not accept
too literally his own description of himself as ignorant and
unschooled, 1 for he read, dictated, and spoke Latin (although
with difficulty), and, as befitted the son of a merchant, early
acquired a knowledge of French. The only work by St.
Francis we possess, other than in Latin, is a poetical rhapsody
composed in the Umbrian dialect, and more nearly akin to
the formless inspirations of Walt Whitman than to any
known metrical model. If, indeed, the famous “ Hymn to
the Sun " be the work of St. Francis at all, for an eminent
Italian scholar, after subjecting that composition to an
exhaustive criticism, concludes that “ at most it is but a very
unfaithful echo of an improvisation that burst from the lips
of the seraphic father when he was assured of the near approach
1 Epist. ad cap. gen* 5. Quia ignorans sum et ydiota m
vii


viii The Little Flowers of St. Francis

of celestial felicity; or it may be nothing more than a re
fashioning of the 148th Psalm and the Song of the Three
Holy Children, composed at the end of the thirteenth
century, without a breath of the poetic spirit with which the
seraphic father was so exquisitely endowed.” 1

Francis was neither a good boy nor an exemplary youth.
Fond and foolish parents indulged him with an early command
of money; he was endowed with a romantic and emotional
, temperament, and association with gay, dissolute, and
« pleasure-loving companions led to a wasted early manhood.

The ancient city of Assisi at the beginning of the thirteenth
century was far different from the decayed, poverty-stricken
Assisi of to-day. It was a rich and busy trading centre, with
a turbulent aristocracy. Its traditions of communal freedom,
never lost since Roman days, had been stirred by the general
rising of the towns of Northern Italy against their German
imperial oppressors, which culminated at Legnano (1176)
where the mail-clad hosts of Barbarossa had bitten the dust
before the stout burgesses of the Lombard League. The
burghers of Assisi, after a bitter period of feudal reaction,
rose in 1202 against their nobles, razed the sinister stronghold
of Count Conrad of Swabia, and girdled their city with defen¬
sive walls. In the ensuing conflict with the republic of
Perugia, that had allied herself with the expelled Assisian
nobles, the young Francis was taken prisoner. He supported
his incarceration with admirable courage and gaiety, and at
the peace of November 1203 was back again in Assisi. But
soon the hand of the Lord was upon him, and those crises of
the soul which throughout the ages have summoned the great
saints of the Christian faith to action, wrought upon Francis.
Between 1204 and 1209, tossed with fever on a sick-bed at
Assisi; again at Spoleto, whither he had ridden, richly
armed, on the way to win his spurs with the army of Walter
of Brienne in Apulia; on a pilgrimage to Rome; at prayer
before the crucifix at St. Damian’s, mysterious voices called
him, like St. Augustine of old, to the service of a Lord and of
ideals far removed from those with which the troubadours of
Provence had fired the minds of the youth of Italy. And he,
the refined and delicate signor, who was wont to turn aside
and hold his nostrils with disgust at the sight of a. leper, was

1 Ildebrando della Giovanna, S. Francesco d'Assisi Giullare e la
“ Landes Creaturarum .” Giornale Storico d. Lett. Ital. xxv. 1895. The
poem is, however, accepted as genuine by most recent critics.


Introduction ix

constrained to kiss their sores and serve in nauseous lazar-
kouses.

Between 1207 and 1209, interpreting literally the words
uttered by the figure of Christ painted on the crucifix at
St. Damian's, “ Francis, go, repair my house that thou seest
is all in ruins,” he applied himself with fervent zeal to the
restoration of that rustic chapel and of the forsaken little
Benedictine oratory of St. Mary of the Porziuncula (the Little
Portion), 1 or St. Mary of the Angels, below Assisi. To procure
money for the repair of St. Damian's, Francis had conveyed
a load of cloth from his father's shop and sold it at Foligno
market. The wrath of Peter Bernadone may be imagined.
Francis, his firstborn, on whom he had counted for the future
conduct and prosperity of an honourable and profitable house,
had become a prodigal indeed; all his hopes were wrecked,
and he cited his mad son—for so he was esteemed in Assisi—
before the magistrates. At Francis' request the case was
referred to the bishop’s court, and there in April 1207
father and son met. At his angry complaints Francis
stripped off his garments, flung them down at his father's feet
in a passionate act of repudiation, and wrapped in a peasant's
tattered cloak, on which he had rudely chalked a cross, went
forth to his mission.

But the neglected and crumbling temples of God were but
an outward sign of the spiritual rot within, and soon it was
revealed to Francis that his calling was to restore the spirit
of Christ and proclaim anew His message of peace, goodwill,
and salvation to men. One early February morning in 1209,
while hearing mass at the Porziuncula, the aged priest read
from the Gospel of St. Matthew—it was St. Matthias' Day
—the words of Jesus to the twelve as He sent them forth
to preach. In a moment of inspiration God’s will was made
known to Francis, and the seed of the Order of the Barefoot
Friars was sown in his bosom. He too would go forth, with
neither gold, nor silver, nor wallet, nor shoes, nor staff, and
with but one coat, to call men to righteousness. He began
to preach, disciples joined him — Bernard of Quintavalle,
Peter Catani, Giles of Assisi. A forsaken travellers' shelter
near the leper hospital at Rivo Torto, so small and mean that
Francis had to chalk the name of each friar over his narrow
sleeping-place, became the first settlement of the Franciscan

1 It was built on a “ small portion ” of land given by the Assisians to
St. Benedict in the sixth century.

* 485


X


The Little Flowers of St. Francis


friars. A simple Rule, based on the teachings of their divine
exemplar, was drawn up by Francis, 1 and one summer's day
in 1210 the little band of disciples set forth from Rivo Torto
to obtain its confirmation at Rome. The Church had been
much plagued with innovators and heresy, and the pope
hesitated to admit them; but the wavering mind of Innocent
III., as legend tells, was fixed by a wondrous vision to receive
this strange deputation of ragged enthusiasts. As he lay in
his bed he beheld the great basilica of St. John Lateran
tottering to its fall; and while he stood, paralysed \rith terror
and unable to stir, lo, a poor little man, barefoot and clad in
peasant's garb, strode up and applied his shoulders to the
falling church, and ever growing to a mighty stature, he set
the building erect again, and left it more firmly founded than
before. Innocent gently warned his suppliant that he was
making too great demands on feeble human nature, but gave
a verbal approval to the Rule, authorised the friars to preach,
and dismissed them with his blessing. They received the
tonsure, and went their way rejoicing. Calling themselves
the mindres, Or poof little folk, as distinguished from the
majores, or upper classes, they began their wondrous mission.

In 1212, a peasant claiming to use the hovel at Rivo Torto
to stable his ass, it was humbly surrendered to him, and an
opportune offer to Francis by the Benedictines of the use of
the Porziuncula enabled the friars to build rude cells of wattle
and daub round the little chapel and to settle there; and the
friary of the Little Portion became evermore the holy Sion
of the Franciscans. The venerable little sanctuary still
exists, overarched by the vast dome of the present magnificent
sixteenth-century temple of St. Mary of the Angels, and few
are they who can look with dry eyes on the rude masonry of
this, the mother-house of the Franciscan religion.

Of the success of the movement, the rapid increase of the
friars and of their settlements, of the wanderings of Francis
and his solitary wrestling with the Spirit in Umbria, in the
Marches, in the Vale of Rieti, at La Verna, space forbids a
detailed treatment. His power as a preacher was marvellous.
As soon as the news ran that Francis was coming, the whole
life of the community was at a standstill. Bells rang, the
merchant left his desk, the trader his counter, the workman
his tools, women and children crying “ ecco il santo / " went forth

1 The Rule was probably little more than a transcript of the charge of
Jesus to the twelve; it has not come down to us.


Introduction xi

to meet him; men strove to touch the hem of his tunic, and
women bent down to kiss his footprints on the ground. Such
was the consuming passion of his eloquence that he spoke not
so much with his tongue as with the whole body, and at times,
in the vehement fervour of his pleading for souls, he seemed to
dance like David of old. He had the supreme wisdom of the
simple and the pure in heart; he possessed that piercing insight
into the very core of things that comes from absolute sincerity
and undeviating truthfulness. We have a precious contem¬
porary witness to the efficacy of his preaching. Thomas of
Spalato relates that when he was a student at Bologna, in the
year 1222, he saw St. Francis preaching in the piazza in
front of the Palazzo del Podest& on the text, " Angels, men,
and devils.” The whole city had assembled to hear him, and
“ he treated his theme so well and so wisely that many learned
men who were present stood filled with admiration when
they heard such words from the lips of an untutored friar.
The whole matter of his discourse was directed to the quenching
of hatred and the establishment of peace. His dress was
mean, his person insignificant ( contemptibilis ), his face without
beauty. But with so much power did God inspire his words
that many noble families, sundered by ancient blood feuds,
were reconciled for ever.” Often whole populations were
moved to declare themselves his disciples and to follow him,
so that he was forced to restrain them and to meditate on
some rule of life that would allow his converts to attain the
desire of their hearts without wholly renouncing theit family
and secular duties. A certain rich merchant of Poggibonsi
named Lucchesio, and a former acquaintance of Francis,
being converted, had gathered around him a small group of
like-minded penitents who sought to live, so far as they might,
according to the Franciscan ideal, being in the world but not
of the world; similar communities were soon formed in other
Italian cities, and lived under a Rule indited or inspired by
Francis. Thus was founded the Order subsequently known
as the Third Order, but which, at its inception, was called
the Order of Continents or Penitents. The earliest known
foundation was at Faenza in 1221, and the first extant Rule—
a precious find by Sabatier—is dated August 18, 1228. The
Penitent vowed to make restitution of all ill-gotten gain, to
become reconciled with his enemies, to live in peace and
concord with all men, to pass his life in prayer and works
of charity, to keep certain fasts and vigils, to pay tithes


xii The Little Flowers of St. Francis

regularly to the Church, to take no oath save under excep¬
tional conditions, never to wear arms, to use no foul language,
and to practise piety to the dead.

The Franciscan movement was not without its Mary who
chose the good part that was not taken away from her.
Among the hearers of Francis during the Lent of 1212 was the
young and beautiful Lady Clare, daughter of the patrician
houses of the Scifi and the Fiumi. She, a girl of eighteen
summers, already quickened by his preaching, left her parents'
mansion on the night of Palm Sunday, March 18, and hurried
to the Porziuncula, where Francis awaited her. Falling
prostrate before the altar of the Virgin in silent prayer, she
took the vows of poverty, of chastity, and obedience. Her
rich and noble robes she exchanged for coarse sackcloth, her
jewelled girdle for a cincture of rope, her lovely golden tresses,
shorn by Francis' own hand, fell at her feet no longer adorned
with silken hose, but thrust naked into rough wooden, sandals.
Her sweet face veiled in black, she was led in the early dawn
to the Benedictine nunnery at Bastia, whence she was driven
by the importunities of her kinsfolk to a more secluded
cloister; there she was joined by Agnes, her younger sister.
Francis, having begged for her the use of the chapel of St.
Damian, built with his own hands a few rough cells and
established her there. He composed a summary rule of life,
and promised that he and his friars would have diligent care
and special solicitude for her. She, too, soon found her
spiritual disciples, and in 1215, Innocent III. with his own
hand wrote the first notula which conferred the privilege of
Holy Poverty on the poor ladies of St. Damian. In 1219#
their Rule was drawn up by Cardinal Hugolin, approved by
Francis, and confirmed by Honorius III. Thus the “ un¬
worthy handmaid of Christ and little plant of the most blessed
Father Francis " became founder of the famous sisterhood of
the Poor Clares, which for forty years she ruled and uplifted
towards the loftiest ideals of their spiritual father. The little
convent of St. Damian, with its rude, worm-eaten benches,
the old bell with which St. Clare called the sisters to prayer,
the pectoral cross given her by St. Bonaventura, the breviary
written for her by Friar Leo, the tabernacle of alabaster for
the Blessed Sacrament, with which she miraculously drove
away the Saracen host in 1234, her tiny cell—remain to-day,
thanks to the liberality of the Marquis of Ripon, much as
they were in the days when St. Francis broke bread with her


Introduction xiii

or sought guidance and consolation from her prayers. There,
too, is the little patch of garden where she tended her favourite
flowers—the lily, symbol of purity; the violet, of humility;
the rose, of love for God and man. In the old chapel of St.
Giorgio, still preserved within the church of St. Clare, we may
ga^e upon her body with the coarse brown habit in which she
was buried, clasping the book of the Rule in her hand, even
as she was found in 1850, with the wild thyme her sisters had
cast around her, six centuries before, still retaining some of
its fragrance. There, too, the old crucifix of St. Damian's is
preserved, which uttered the command to Francis to go and
repair the ruined house of the Lord.

Between 1212 and 1215, Francis sought martyrdom in two
attempts to reach the infidels (in Palestine and in Morocco),
which were frustrated by sickness and shipwreck, and we are
permitted to see the saint and his companion returning as
stowaways from Slavonia. At the second Chapter-General
of the Order, held at the Porziuncula on May 26, 1219, the
first great foreign mission of the friars was organised. John
of La Penna with sixty friars went to Germany; Friar Pacifico,
once a famous troubadour, crowned king of poets (rex versuum )
by the emperor, was sent to France; Friar Giles to Tunis;
others to Spain, Hungary, and Morocco. 1 All were furnished
with copies of a brief from Honorius III. (June 11, 1219),
commending the friars to the prelates of the catholic world.
Soon news came that the five sent to Morocco had suffered
martyrdom, and St. Francis again set forth for the lands of
the infidel. After his attempt to convert the soldan in
Egypt, he set sail about March 1220 for Palestine, soon,
however, to be recalled to Assisi by news of serious dissension
and attempts at innovation among his friars at home. In
September 1220, he obtained from the pope at Orvieto the
appointment of his friend Cardinal Hugolin as protector and
corrector of the Order. Having resigned his office of minister-
general in favour of Peter Catani, owing to severe ophthalmia
contracted in Egypt, he prepared, after recovery from an
attack of malaria, to deal, early in 1221, with the crisis in the
affairs of the Order.

On May 30, the great Chapter-General, called of the Mats,
was held—Peter Catani having died in the meantime, and the
powerful and worldly Friar Elias ruling in his stead. It is

1 The first mission to England, composed of nine friars, was sent forth
in June 1224.


xiv The Little Flowers of St. Francis

with the children of the spirit as with the offspring of the body
—they soon grow to an independent life of their own, and
pass beyond their parents* control. So it was with the
mighty creation of Francis of Assisi. The new Order had
grown far beyond the statesmanship of its guileless founder.
From 3000 to 5000 friars met at the Chapter; the warning
note sounded by Innocent III. had not been in vain, and the
brief gospel Rule of 1210 no longer sufficed to meet the needs
of a vast organisation covering almost the whole civilised
world, and including in its ranks men of ideals far below the
lofty heights of renunciation and self-sacrifice reached by
the earliest friars. Already, in September 1220, it had been
found necessary at Rome to forbid any one to be received into
the Order without a noviciate of one year. The easy-going,
lazy friar, called “ friar fly ** by Francis, who “ plied his jaws
more than his hands; ** the vagrant impostor, trading on the
reputation of the Order, were become an urgent problem to
the provincial ministers. Moreover, the mediaeval revival
was an artistic and an intellectual as well as a religious one.
The passion for beauty and knowledge that characterised the
early thirteenth century had touched the minds of Franciscan
as well as of Dominican friars, and the fratres scientiati de¬
manded a relaxation of the more stringent clauses against the
possession of books and against attendance at the universities,
no less than a revision of the regulations as to food and dress.
The discussions at the Chapter resulted in the elaboration of
the so-called Regula prima, or Rule of 1221. How far this
may have modified the primitive Rule of 1210 is not known,
for whatever fragments may remain of that Rule are involved
in a mass of admonitions and precepts composed by Francis at
different periods. 1 The Rule of 1221, however, never received
papal sanction, and the definite constitution of the Order, known
as the Regula bullata, was the outcome of long and complicated
negotiations between Francis, Cardinal Hugolin, Friar Elias,
and other influential Franciscans; it was finally confirmed by
Honorius at Rome on November 29, 1223, and published at
the Chapter of June 1224.2 Space forbids a detailed com¬
parison of the two Rules. Suffice it to say that the Regula
bullata was a compromise between the zealots of gospel
poverty, some of them more Franciscan than Francis himself,
and the innovators who, like Friar Elias, would have sup-

1 It fills twenty-six pages in Boehmer’s Analecten.

* This occupies six pages only in Boehmer.


Introduction xv

pressed the primitive Rule altogether, and substituted for it
another, based on that of the Dominicans. The bitterest trial
to Francis was the merciless elimination of what he regarded
as the very pith and marrow of his religion—the gospel rule
of the opening verses of the ninth chapter of St. Luke’s Gospel.
And this, too, from Elias—Elias, one of the earliest of his
disciples, whom he had chosen to himself as a mother. It was
like rending his breast. Already blind and weakened by
disease, the heart-broken Francis retired from the active
conduct of the Order; he spent his days with his faithful few
in solitary prayer, ever striving, by example, by admonition,
and by letters, to strengthen his followers in the worship of
poverty and in loyalty to his simple ideals.

From the rise of the new spirit within the Order, the story
of Francis is that of all the great saviours of mankind. The
coarse thumb of the world had smudged the purity of his
ideal. Powerless to arrest the tide of advancing worldliness,
his via cruets began. Too ill, or too heart-broken, to attend
the Chapter-General of 1224, he retired to the new hermitage
of La Verna, and there, at the end of his forty days’ Michaelmas
fast, his spiritual anguish was sealed with the material wounds
of Christ’s passion. In the summer of 1225 he withdrew to a
solitary hut of reeds, prepared for him near St. Damian’s by
Clare, the faithful daughter of his soul, where the poor blind
saint, ravaged by disease and tormented by vermin, is said to
have composed the “ Hymn to the Sun.” In September he
had left St. Damian’s, and at the urgent entreaty of Cardinal
Hugolin came for treatment by an eminent oculist to Rieti.
In accordance with the savage surgery of the time, a red-hot
iron was slowly drawn across his face from ear to eyebrow,
and his already debilitated body was bled again and again;
plasters and eye-salve were liberally applied —nihil proficeret ,
says Thomas of Celano.

In March 1226, he was under a famous physician at
Siena. Admonished by a severe haemorrhage, he dictated
his spiritual Testament to Benedict of Prato—a last touching
appeal for the pure, strict, and single-minded observance of
his Rule. After a short rest at Cortona, where dropsy set in.
Friar Elias had the death-stricken saint carried to Assisi, and
at Bagnora the sorrowful procession was met by an armed
force sent by the authorities at Assisi, who were fearful lest
the men of the rival city of Perugia might snatch the body
and thus deprive them of its lucrative possession. Francis


xvi The Little Flowers of St. Francis

was carried to the bishop's palace, where he lay guarded
outside by sentinels day and night. Having entreated his
physician, Bongiovanni of Arezzo, to number his days, he was
advised that his release was near at hand. Joyfully he added
the last lines in praise of sister Death to the “ Hymn to the
Sun," and desired that the fast-decaying tenement of his soul
might be borne to his beloved Porziuncula. Halfway thither
he bade the bearers lay the litter down and turn his blind
eyes towards Assisi. Then, painfully rising a little, he
solemnly blessed the city of his birth, fell back exhausted, and
was carried on to the Porziuncula, where he was visited and
consoled by his Roman friend, the Lady Jacqueline of Set-
tesoli, and tended by his faithful companion and secretary.
Friar Leo. Having received the Sacrament, he made a last
appeal to the friars to cleave to Holy Poverty, gave them his
blessing, and began to sing the 142nd Psalm: Voce mea ad
dominum clamavi 1 (“I cry with my voice to the Lord”); and
so, writes Thomas of Celano, mortem suscepit cantando (“he
welcomed death with a song"). 2

As the great burial procession slowly wound its way up the
hill to Assisi, amid the clangour of trumpets, the tolling of
bells, and the chanting of litanies, it was halted before the
convent of St. Damian. The coffin was carried into the
church, the lid removed, and there, through the little grated
window whence they were wont to receive the Lord's body,
the Lady Clare and her sisters took a last look at the body of
their spiritual father, and as the bearers shouldered the bier
again, they cried in voices choked with sobs, “ Father, father,
what shall we do ? " The body was temporarily placed in the
church of St. Giorgio, and on May 25, 1230, transferred to the
magnificent basilica that Friar Elias, with the aid of papal,
indulgences, had raised on the hill of Assisi. Had Francis;
been alive he would have sought to tear down the proud
edifice stone from stone. Elias, fearing robbery, so effectually-
concealed the body in the rock on which the church was built,
that it was not discovered again until the year 1818. On
July 16, 1228, Hugolin, now Pope Gregory IX., set the official
seal on the canonisation which the universal voice of Europe:
had long since conferred on Francis of Assisi.

The ravelled fabric of the Order was never knit together,,
and a long and bitter contest ensued between the Spirituali, or-
strict Observants, and the more lax friars, or Conventuali. On>
1 The 141st in the Vulgate. a October 4, 1226.


Introduction


xvn


September 28, 1230, Gregory IX. declared the Testament of
St. Francis not to be binding; in May 1318, four Spirituali
were burnt at the stake at Marseilles; on November 12, 1323,
John XXII. denounced as a heresy the doctrine that Christ
and His apostles possessed nothing personally or collectively;
and finally, the Order was rent asunder by Leo X. in 1517,
each section being authorised to choose its own superior: that
of the Spirituali to be called Minister, that of the Conventuali,
Master-General. I well remember, some years since, the scornful
gesture with which a cultured French friar, who conducted
me over the great church at Assisi, and who had just won a
suit in the courts against the Italian government, turned
towards the friary of the Observants below, and exclaimed:
“ What's the use in these days of sitting down there, comme
un hibou (like an owl)?"

Thomas of Celano, who was received into the Order by
St. Francis himself, has left a vivid word-picture of his
spiritual father. He was of medium stature, inclining to
shortness; his head was round and rather small, and he had
a rather long and prominent face, with a smooth but not
high forehead. His eyes were dark, clear, and frank ( sim -
plices ); his hair was black, eyebrows straight, nose well
formed and thin, ears erect but small, temples smooth. He
had thin lips, teeth regular and white, a rather sparse black
beard, a slender neck, straight shoulders, short arms, and
delicate hands with long fingers. His legs were thin, feet
small; his skin was fine and tender, and he had little flesh on
his bones. He used to wear coarse clothing, was of a kindly
aspect, with a joyful countenance, and was fearless without
arrogance. His voice was eager, sweet, clear, and sonorous,
and he was a man of supreme eloquence. But the gentle
Francis, if we may believe the same biographer, could be
sometimes stirred to indignation; for on a certain friar
desiring too gladly to visit a convent of Poor Clares, the saint
upbraided him most severely in words unfit for publication
(increpavit eum sanctus durissime, verba non modo referenda
inculcans ). 1

It would be a grave misconception to assume that the
Franciscan friar was essentially a beggar. Poverty, not
mendicancy, was the ideal of St. Francis, who repeatedly
urged the friars to earn their living by honest work and to
beg only exceptionally. “ I worked with my hands," he states
1 Legenda Secunda, clvi.


xviii The Little Flowers of St. Francis

in the Testament, " and desire to work. I steadfastly will and
desire that all the friars work at some honourable handicraft;
and as for those that know none, let them learn—not for the
sake of the price of their labour, but for example and to eschew
idleness. And when we can obtain nothing for our labour,
then we may have recourse to the table of the Lord, begging
alms from door to door/’ 1 In the Regula prima each friar
is exhorted to work at the craft he has learned (save such as
might cause scandal or imperil salvation), for he that will not
work neither shall he eat. The friar may also possess tools
needful for his craft. In case of necessity he may beg, as
other poor folk do. 2 A like injunction is included in the
Regula hullata. 3

St. Francis was the very antithesis of a sour Puritan. He
was the most joyous of saints, would have no sad, long faces
about him, and always rebuked any friar that was gloomy or
melancholy. His friars were to be the joculatores Dei (“the
minstrels of God”), scattered about the world to sing the
gospel truths. “ At times,” says Thomas of Celano, “ I have
seen him, with my own eyes, draw a stick across his arm,
in the guise of one playing a viol, and sing in French praises
of the Lord.” Indeed, the mediaeval evangelist was the
analogue of the modern Salvationist. Salimbene tells of a
famous revivalist, a simple and unlettered man, Friar Benedict
of the Trumpet, whom he heard preaching in the streets of
Parma during the famous revival of 1233, known as the
Great Halleluiah. Standing on the unfinished wall of the
bishop’s palace, surrounded by a crowd of boys, Friar Benedict
would blow a small brass or gilt trumpet to call folk together,
et terribiliter reboabat tuba sua ('• and terribly was he wont to
bray with his trumpet”). X

Of Friar Elias a little may be said. In 1227, after an
unseemly scuffle at the Chapter-General, he was replaced as
minister-general by Giovanni Parenti, re-elected in 1232, and
finally deposed on May 15, 1239, as the result of a widespread
opposition to his policy. In 1238, he had been sent by
Gregory IX. on an embassy of peace to the Emperor Frederick
II., and, after his fall in 1239, soon threw in his lot with
the excommunicated emperor. He joined the court at Pisa,
began a stirring life of war and diplomacy, and retired on the
emperor’s death in 1250 to Cortona, where he employed his
energy in building a fine church and friary. On April 22, 1253,

1 Testamcntum , 5. 2 Regula prima , 7. 8 Regula bulletin t 5.


Introduction


XiX


his unquiet spirit found rest in a lonely cell in the hermitage
outside Cortona. According to the Fioretti, he was assoiied of
his sins at the point of death; according to Salimbene, his
body was flung on a dunghill.

The reader of the Mirror of Perfection , and of the Little
Flowers, will not fail to perceive the anti-Elian and pro-
Spirituali bias of their compilers; and this impression will
probably do less than justice to Elias* memory. Friar Elias,
by his powerful statesmanship, aimed at welding the somewhat
loosely organised friars into a compact and mighty com¬
munity that should cover the known world with its ramifica¬
tions, and become the greatest of the regular orders of the
church. The easy-going, tolerant, and scandal-loving Salim¬
bene, whom Elias had received into the Order, has drawn
up a heavy indictment of sins in thirteen counts against his
sponsor. 1 He tells, too, how he saw him at Parma, when on
his way to the emperor’s court in 1238, with his own eyes,
sitting in the guest-chamber on a couch of down, with a
roaring lire in front of him and an Armenian cap on his head,
and hovy when the podest 4 , Dominus Ghirardus, called Denti-
bus because of his big teeth, paid Elias a visit of courtesy,
with an honourable escort of knights, the haughty superior
neither returned the salutation of the podest 4 nor stirred
from his seat. A passing remark of the gossiping diarist
helps us, however, to comprehend some part of the opposition
to the government of the Order by the autocratic and master¬
ful Elias. “ The aforesaid Elias held the provincial ministers
so under his rod that they trembled before him as a reed
buffeted by the waves, or as a lark trembles when the pursuing
hawk is swooping down upon her.** ... Sub dominio suo
durissimum erat vivere (“We had a very hard time under his
rule **).

The three works of which this volume is composed axe
printed in the inverse order of their composition, although not
of their charm and interest. The Little Flowers (Fioretti) is
a free and amplified Italian translation of a Latin original 2
compiled some time after 1322. The Mirror of Perfection
(Speculum Perfectionis), according to Boehmer, is a compila¬
tion, edited by one of the Spirituali of the Porziuncula, and
based chiefly on documents and memoirs left by Friar Leo,
and completed about 1318. Of the date and authorship of
the Life of St. Francis by St. Bonaventura there is no question.

1 Liber de Prcelato. * Actus B. Francisci et sociorum ejus.


xx The Little Flowers of St. Francis

It was written by command of the Chapter-General of Nar-
bonne in 1260, and was intended to be the definite and
authoritative Life, and to supersede the great variety of
fragmentary Lives then in circulation. Bonaventura went
to Assisi for the purpose of consulting documents and to
interrogate the surviving companions of St. Francis. He
was attached to neither of the two great contending parties
within the Order, and softened certain matters with a view
to pacification. In 1263, Bonaventura had completed his task,
which he presented to the Chapter-General at Pisa. So
satisfied were the authorities with the result, that at the
Chapter-General at Paris in 1266, under the presidency of
Bonaventura, it was commanded that the whole of the existing
Lives in the friaries of the Order should be destroyed, and the
friars were instructed to remove from circulation any that
they might find outside. The Life by St. Bonaventura is the
Vita et Miracula 1 of a conventional hagiographer, and the real
St. Francis shines but dimly through its ornate periods; but
the Fioretti and the Speculum, later in date though they be,
are based on the ingenuous records, written and oral, of the
saint’s intimate, faithful, and steadfast followers. St. Clare
lived until 1253; Friar Giles until 1261; and if we may trust
the authority cited by Wadding, Friar Leo survived the fatal
order of the Paris Chapter by more than five years. Assuredly
the aged and beloved disciple, brother and companion in
tribulation, as he meditated in his lonely cell, would commit
to paper the cherished memories of his master with even more
diligence than he had done in the past, and as he sat at their
humble repasts he would talk with the new generation of friars
of the fair days of old, and repeat to them the precious sayings
and doings, embroidered doubtless by his pious fancy, of their
spiritual father. He would recall, too, the betrayal of Elias,
and dwell with edification on his apostacy and fall. The
Lady Jacqueline, his noble devotee of Rome, was still living
at Assisi, amid scenes eloquent of her dear master, as late as
October 1273, according to documentary evidence discovered
at Assisi by Sabatier. Living memory of St. Francis thus
reached to the later decades of the thirteenth century. Many
of the stories of the Fioretti are, doubtless, but memories of
memories; ensamples, fused and transfigured in their fervent
imaginations, which the second and third generations of

1 The Miracles attributed to St. Francis after his death do not appear in
this volume.


Introduction xxi

Spirituali would tell as they went by the way or gathered
together in their refectories. The dramatic force of the
narration, the transition from past to present tense (which
I have retained in translation), 1 suggest that we have here the
realistic form in which the friars recited some of these stories
in their sermons to the people that filled the market-places
and the great Franciscan churches of Italy. Dichtung and
Wahrheit are inextricably interwoven. The once savage
brigand Fra Lupo of La Verna, or, perhaps, a cruel feudal
oppressor wreaking havoc and desolation among a peaceful
community, may easily have been developed into the fierce
wolf of Gubbio, and the judicious reader who peruses the
Fioreiti and the Speculum will gain a truer insight into the
poverello of Assisi than he will from the studied eloquence
and insistent preoccupation with the miraculous of his
official panegyrist. There is small need to bespeak the
reader's benevolence. It is a far cry now to the early nine¬
teenth century, when the great Hallam could contemptuously
dismiss the most potent spiritual force of the Middle Ages,
a saint in whom the Jesus of the gospels found His purest
incarnation, “ as a harmless enthusiast, pious and sincere, but
hardly of sane mind, who was much rather accessory to the
intellectual than to the moral degradation of mankind."

T. OKEY.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Canticle of the Sun. Edited in four versions by A. Rossi, 1882; transla¬
tion in M. Arnold’s Essays in Criticism, 1875; and in Works {see below)
The Seraphic Keepsake: a talisman against temptation written for
Brother Leo by St. Francis of Assisi; also his Words of Counsel and Praise
of God Most High, facsimile from saint’s own handwriting, and set
forth in English by Reginald Balfour, 1905. .

Works. —A certain number appeared m Speculum Vita B. Prancisci et
Sociorum ejus, 1504 (Venice), 1509 (Metz); in Speculum Minorum, 1509;
Monumcnta Ordinis Minorum, 1511; Firmamenta tnum Ordinum B.

' Chief Printed Editions of Works. —Edited by Father Wadding
(Antwerp), 1623; published by de la Haye (Paris), 1641; m Magna
Bibliotheca, vol. 5, 1654; in Bibliotheca Patristica, vol. 6, 1880; by von
der Burg (Cologne, Bonn, Brussels), 18495 critical edition published by
the Friars Minor at Quaracchi, 1904; see also H. Boehmer Analekten
£ur Geschichte des Franciscus von Assisi, 1904; and W. Goetz, Die


1 The translation of the Fioreiti di San Francesco has been made, on
the advice of M. Sabatier, from the well-known text of Antonio Cesan.
In a very few passages, however, I have not hesitated to follow more recent
texts by Passerini, where they have filled a gap in the Cesari text or have
seemed to offer a better reading.


xxii The Little Flowers of St. Francis

Quellen zur Geschichte des HI. Frandscus von Assisi, 1904, in both of
which the writings of the saint are dealt with.

Translations of Works.—B y a Religious of the Order, 1882, 2nd
edition, 1890; by Father Paschal Robinson, 1906; by Countess de la
Warr (from the French of F. U. d’Alen^on), 1907.

Selections. —A. Macdonell, 1904.

Life. Earliest Sources: Thomas de Celano, 1st life written, 1228-29;
life, 1244-47; ed. H. G. Rosedale, 1904; English translation by
A. G. Ferrers Howell, 1908. Bonaventura, Legenda Major, or Aurea
Legenda, 1260-63, first printed, 1507; trans. A. Mountague, 1635; Lock¬
hart, with preface by Archbp. Manning, 1868; E. G. S., Temple Classics
1904. Speculum Perfectionis, attributed to Brother Leo, secretary and
companion of St. Francis, ed. P. Sabatier, 1898; trans. S. Evans, 1901;
R. Steele, Temple Classics, 1903. Legenda Trium Sociorum (Brothers Leo,
Rufino, and Angelo), 1244-47, first printed, 1768; first complete edition,
Rome, 1899; trans. E. G. Salter, Temple Classics, 1902; by Countess de la
Warr, 1902. Speculum Vitae S. Francisci et Sociorum ejus, 1504; ed. P.
Sabatier, 1903. Fioretti, earliest dated MS., 1390; trans. ed. bv Archbp.
Manning, 1864, 1887; trans. by the Upton Fathers, revised by'T. Okey
x 5 ? 4 , 1899, 1905 , 1909; trans. by T. W. Arnold (Temple Classics), 1898)
with note by Dr. Biagi, 1908; with illustrations from Laurentium MS.
1909; trans. (into English verse) by J. Rhoades, 1904; by W. Heywood
1906; by A. G. Feirers Howell, 1906. Giovanni de Parenti, Sacrum Com-
mercium, first Latin ed., 1539 J trans. M. Carmichael, 1901; Sacrum Com-
mercium: the Converse of Francis and his Sons with Holy Poverty trans
by Canon Rawnsley, with The Lady Poverty and how St. Francis came to
love Her, with introduction by P. Sabatier, translated by E. S. Fisher
(Latin and English) (Temple Classics), 1904.

Later Biographies.— From the French of C. Chalippe (with Essay by
Faber),1847; Life and Sketch of the Franciscan Order, by a Religious of
Order of Poor Clares, 1867; Mrs. Oliphant (Sunday Library), 1871; from
the French of L. de Ch6van6e, by R. F. O’Connor, 1880; A. L. Cotton
A Sketch, 1885; from the French of L. Le Monniet, by a Franciscan
Tertiary, with preface by Cardinal Vaughan, 1894; Paul Sabatier 1894
trans. by Louise Seymour Houghton, 1894; W. J. K. Little 1897'
J. A. Jackman, The Seraph of Assisi, 1898; F. Vemet, The Inner Life of
St. Francis, 1900; J. G. Adderley, Francis, the Little Poor Man of Assisi
1900; W. O. E. Oesterley, 1901; J. Herkless, Francis and Dominic and
the Mendicant Orders, 1901; A. M. Stoddart (Little Biographies) 1903;
W. P Swamson, Christian Mystics, No. I., 1903; Paschal Robinson,
ihe Real St. rrancis of Assisi, 1904; L. L. Dubois, St. Francis of Assisi
Social Reformer 1906; M. A. Heins, The Story of St. Francis of Assisi'
1908; H. Grnnley, St. Francis and his Friends, rendered into English
from Franciscan Chronicles, 1908.

See also: Paschal Robinson, A Short Introduction to Franciscan
Literature, 1907* C. Goff, Assisi of St. Francis^ and Influence of the
rranciscan Legend on Italian Art, etc., 1908.


CONTENTS


The Little Flowers of St. Francis

Translated by T. Okey

The Mirror of Perfection .

Translated by Robert Steele

The Life of St. Francis

Translated by Miss E. Gurney Salter


page
. I

. 181


. 301


THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF
ST. FRANCIS


CHAPTER I

IN THE NAME OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, THE CRUCIFIED, AND
OF HIS MOTHER THE VIRGIN MARY. IN THIS BOOK ARE CON¬
TAINED CERTAIN LITTLE FLOWERS, MIRACLES, AND DEVOUT
ENSAMPLES OF CHRIST’S POOR LITTLE ONE, ST. FRANCIS, AND
OF SOME OF IJIS HOLY COMPANIONS; TO THE PRAISE OF JESUS
CHRIST. AMEN

It is first to be considered that the glorious St. Francis in all the
acts of his life was conformable to Christ the Blessed. And that
even as Christ, at the beginning of his mission, chose twelve
Apostles who were to despise all worldly things and follow Him
in poverty and in the other virtues, so St. Francis in the begin¬
ning chose for the foundation of his Order twelve companions
who were possessed of naught save direst poverty. And even
as one of the twelve Apostles of Christ, being reproved by God,
went and hanged himself by the neck, so one of the twelve com¬
panions of St. Francis, whose name was Friar 1 John della Cap-
pella, became a runagate and at last hanged himself by the neck.
Now these things are a great warning to the elect, and matter
for humility and fear when they consider that none is certain of
persevering to the end in God’s grace. And even as those holy
Apostles were, above all, wondrous in their holiness and humility
and filled with the Holy Ghost, so those most holy companions
of St. Francis were men of such saintliness that, since the days
of the Apostles, the world hath never beheld men so wondrously
holy. For one among them was rapt, like St;. Paul, up to the
third heaven, and he was Friar Giles; another, to wit, Friar
Philip, was touched on the lips by an angel with a coal of fire,
even as the prophet Isaiah was; another, to wit, Friar Silvester,
spake with God as one friend speaketh with another, after the

1 The Italian text distinguishes between frate —“ friar” or “brother” in
its religious sense—and fratello —“ brother ” in its ordinary sense.


2


The Little Flowers of St. Francis

manner of Moses; another by the purity of his mind soared as
far as the light of the Divine Wisdom, even as did the Eagle, that
is to say, John the Evangelist, and he was Friar Bernard,
humblest of men, who was wont to expound the Holy Scriptures
most profoundly; yet another was sanctified by God and
canonised in heaven while yet he lived in the world, and he was
Friar Rufus, a nobleman of Assisi. And thus were all distin¬
guished by singular marks of holiness, as will be made clear
hereafter.


CHAPTER II

OF FRIAR BERNARD OF QUINTA VALLE, THE FIRST
COMPANION OF ST. FRANCIS

The first companion of St. Francis was Friar Bernard of Assisi,
that was converted after this manner: St. Francis, while yet in
the secular habit, albeit he had renounced the world, was wont
to go about in meanest guise and so mortified by penance that
by many he was held to be a fool, and was mocked and hunted
as a madman and pelted with stones and filthy mire both by his
kinsfolk and by strangers; but he, even as one deaf and dumb,
went his way enduring every insult and injury patiently. Now
Bernard of Assisi, who was one of the noblest and richest and
wisest of that city, began to consider wisely concerning St.
Francis and his exceeding contempt of this world and his long-
suffering under injury; and that, albeit for two years he had
been thus hated and despised by all men, yet did he ever seem
more steadfast. And he began to ponder these things and to
say within himself, “ Of a surety this friar hath great grace from
God.” And he invited St. Francis to sup and lodge with him;
and St. Francis accepted and supped and tarried the night.
And then Bernard determined in his heart to contemplate his
holiness: wherefore he had a bed made ready for him in his own
chamber wherein by night a lamp ever burned. And St. Francis,
to conceal his holiness, flung himself on his bed immediately he
entered his chamber and feigned to sleep: and Bernard likewise,
after a little while, lay down in his bed and began to snore
loudly, as one wrapped in deepest slumber. Wherefore St.
Francis, verily believing that Bernard slept, arose, in the still¬
ness of the night, from his bed and knelt down to pray; lifting
his eyes and hands to heaven he cried with great devotion and


Conversion of Friar Bernard 3

fervour, “ My God, my God I ” And so saying and weeping
bitter tears, he prayed until morning, ever repeating, “ My God,
my God! ” and naught else. And St. Francis said this, while
contemplating and marvelling at the excellency of the Divine
Majesty that had deigned to stoop down to this perishing world,
and, through His poor little one, St. Francis, had resolved to
bring healing salvation to his soul and to others. And therefore,
illumined by the Holy Ghost or by the spirit of prophecy, he
foresaw the great things that God was to work through him and
his Order. And considering his own insufficiency and little
worth he called on God Almighty and prayed that of His com¬
passion He would supply, aid, and complete that which he of
his own frailty could not achieve. Now Bernard, when he
beheld these most devout acts of St. Francis by the light of the
lamp, and had reverently considered the words he uttered, was
moved and inspired by the Holy Ghost to change his manner of
life; wherefore when morning was come he called St. Francis to
him and spake thus, “ Friar Francis, I have fully determined
in my heart to forsake the world and obey thee in all things thou
commandest me.” When St. Francis heard this he rejoiced in
spirit and said, “ Bernard, this that you 1 tell is a work so great
and so difficult that it behoves us to seek counsel of our Lord
Jesus Christ and pray that it may please Him to reveal His will
concerning this thing, and teach us how we may put it into
execution. Therefore we will go together to the bishop’s house,
where a good priest dwells, and mass shall be said, and then we
will remain in prayer until tierce, beseeching God that He will
point out to us in three openings of the mass book the way it
pleaseth Him we should choose.” Bernard answered that this
pleased him much. Whereupon they set forth and went to the
bishop’s house, and after they had heard mass and had remained
in prayer until tierce, the priest, at the entreaty of St. Francis,
took the book, and having made the sign of holy cross, opened
it thrice in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And at the first
opening he happened on those words that Christ in the gospel
spake to the young man who asked concerning the perfect way,
“ If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast and give to
the poor and follow Me.” In the second opening occurred those
words that Christ spake to the Apostles when He sent them to
preach, “ Take nothing for your journey, neither staves nor

1 Voi (you) instead of the more familiar tu (thou). The more reverent,
voi, is used by Dante only in addressing spirits of great dignity, e.g.
Brunetto Latino, Cacciaguida, and a very few others.


4 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

scrip, neither shoes nor money / 7 desiring by this to teach them
that all trust for their livelihood should be placed in God, and
all their mind intent on preaching the holy gospel. In the third
opening were found those words which Christ spake, “ If any
man will come after Me, let him take up his cross and follow Me . 77
Then said St. Francis to Bernard, “ Behold the counsel that
Christ giveth us. Go, therefore, do faithfully what thou hast
heard, and blessed be the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
hath deigned to reveal to us the life evangelical . 77 Hearing this,
Bernard departed and sold all he had (for he was very rich), and
with great joy distributed all to widows and orphans, to prisoners
and hospitals and pilgrims; and in all these things St. Francis
helped him faithfully and carefully. And one whose name was
Silvester, when he saw that St. Francis gave and caused to be
given so much money to the poor, was constrained by avarice,
and said to St. Francis, “ Thou didst not pay me fully for the
stones thou boughtest of me to repair the church, and "therefore
now thou hast money, pay me . 77 Then St. Francis, marvelling
at his avarice, and as a true follower of the gospel desiring not
to contend with him, thrust his hands in Bernard’s bosom, and
with hands full of money placed them in Silvester’s bosom,
saying, that if he would have more, more should be given him.
And Silvester, satisfied with this, departed and returned home,
but in the evening, pondering on what he had done that day
and on the fervour of Bernard and the holiness of St. Francis,
he reproved himself for his avarice. And that night following
and two other nights he had from God this vision: he beheld a
cross of gold issue from the mouth of St. Francis, the top whereof
touched heaven, and the arms stretched from the east as far as
the west. Because of this vision he gave up all he had for love
of God, and became a friar minor, and such holiness and grace
had he in the Order that he spake with God even as one friend
with another, according as St. Francis proved and as will be
related hereafter. Bernard likewise was so filled with God’s
grace that in contemplation he was often taken up to God. And
St. Francis was wont to say of him that he was worthy of all
reverence and had founded this Order, for he was the first who
had forsaken the world, holding back nothing, but giving all to
Christ’s poor, and the first who began his evangelic poverty by
offering himself naked to the arms of the Crucified, to whom be
all praise and glory world without end. Amen.


Friar Bernard


5


CHAPTER III

HOW ST. FRANCIS, BY REASON OF AN EVIL THOUGHT IIE CHERISHED
AGAINST FRIAR BERNARD, COMMANDED THE SAID FRIAR
THAT HE SHOULD TREAD TIIRICE ON HIS NECK AND MOUTH

St. Francis, the most devout servant of the Crucified, had
grown almost blind by the rigour of his penance and incessant
weeping, so that he saw but ill; and once on a time he departed
from the place where he was, and went to a place where Friar
Bernard was in order to speak with him of divine things. Being
arrived there, he found that Friar Bernard was at prayer in the
wood, wholly lifted up and united with God. Then St. Francis
went forth into the wood and called him. “ Come,” said he,
" and speak with this blind man.” And Friar Bernard answer, d
him not a word; for being a man great in contemplation,^ his
soul was lifted up and raised to God. And forasmuch as briar
Bernard was possessed of singular grace in discoursing .of God,
even as St. Francis had proved many times, great was his desire
to speak with him. After some while he called him a second
and a third time in that same wise, and no time did Friar
Bernard hear him: therefore he neither answered nor came to
him; whereat St. Francis departed somewhat disconsolate,
marvelling within himself and grieving that Friar Bernard,
being called thrice, had not come to him. St. Francis turned
away with these thoughts in his mind, and when he was gone
some little distance he said to his companion, “ Tarry for me
here.” And he went aside hard by into a solitary place and
prostrated himself in prayer, beseeching God to reveal to him
why Friar Bernard answered him not; and remaining thus in
prayer there came to him a voice from God, saying, “ 0 poor
little one, wherefore art thou troubled ? Ought a man to forsake
God for His creature? When thou didst call, Friar Bernard
was united with Me, and therefore could neither come to thee
nor answer thee. Marvel thou not if he could not respond, for
he was so lifted out of himself that of thy words he heard none.”
St. Francis, having heard these words from God, straightway
returned with great haste towards Friar Bernard, in order to
accuse himself humbly before him of the evil thoughts he had
nursed concerning him. And Friar Bernard, beholding him
come towards him, drew nigh and cast himself at his feet; and
then St. Francis made him rise up, and with great humility


6 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

related to him the thoughts he had had and the tribulation he
had suffered concerning him, and how that God had answered
his prayer. And thus he concluded, “ I command thee by holy
obedience that thou do whatsoever I command thee.” Friar
Bernard, fearing lest St. Francis might lay on him some excess
of penance, as he was wont to do, desired with all sincerity to
escape such obedience, and answered him thus, “ I am ready to
do your obedience if you will promise to do what I shall com¬
mand you.” And St. Francis gave him the promise. Then
said Friar Bernard, “ Say on, father; what would you that I
do?” And St. Francis answered him, saying, “I command
thee by holy obedience that, in order to punish the arrogance
and rashness of my heart, thou shalt now, even as I lay me
supine on the ground, set one foot on my neck and the other on
my mouth, and so pass thrice from one side to the other, reviling
and crying shame on me; and especially shalt thou say, * Lie
there, churl, son of Peter Bernadone! whence cometh such pride
to thee, thou that art so vile a creature?’” Friar Bernard
hearing this, albeit it was very hard to do, performed, in holy
obedience, what St. Francis had commanded him, with all the
gentleness he could. This done, St. Francis said, “ Now com¬
mand thou me what thou wouldest I should do, for I have
promised thee holy obedience.” Then said Friar Bernard, “ I
command thee by holy obedience, that every time we are
together thou rebuke and correct me harshly for all my faults.”
Whereupon St. Francis marvelled greatly, for Friar Bernard
was of such exceeding sanctity that he held him in great
reverence and in no wise worthy of reproof. And thenceforth
St. Francis was careful to avoid being much with him, because
of the said obedience, lest it befell that he utter one word of
reproof against him, that he knew to be of such great holiness.
But when he desired to see him, or indeed to hear him speak of
God, he made haste to leave him and depart from him, and a
goodly thing it was to behold, what great charity and reverence
and humility St. Francis, the father, used towards Bernard, his
first-bom son, when he spake with him. To the praise and
glory of Christ Jesus and of the poor little Francis. Amen.


Friar Elias


7


CHAPTER IV

now THE ANGEL OF GOD PUT A QUESTION TO FRIAR ELIAS,
WARDEN OF THE FRIARY 1 IN THE VALE OF SPOLETO, AND
BECAUSE FRIAR ELIAS ANSWERED HIM HAUGHTILY, DEPARTED
AND WENT ALONG THE WAY TO ST. JAMES’S, WHERE HE
FOUND FRIAR BERNARD AND TOLD HIM THE STORY

At the first beginning of the Order, when there were but few
friars and their friaries were not yet established, St. Francis
repaired for his devotions to St. James’s of Compostella in
Galicia, and took a few friars with him, one of whom was Friar
Bernard. And as they journeyed thus together, he found a poor
sick man in a village by the way. Filled with compassion, he
said to Friar Bernard, “ Son, I desire that thou remain here to
tend this sick man; ” and Friar Bernard humbly kneeling and
bowmg his head, reverently received the holy father’s obedience
and remained in that place: and St. Francis and the other
companions went their way to St. James’s. Arrived there, they
passed the night m prayer in the church of St. James, where it
was revealed to St. Francis that he was to establish many
friaries throughout the world; for his Order was to spread and
grow into a great multitude of friars: whereat, according to
this revelation, St. Francis began to establish friaries in those
lands. And as St. Francis was returning by the way he came,
he found Friar Bernard, and the sick man with whom he had
left him healed perfectly; whereupon St. Francis gave Friar
Bernard leave to go the following year to St. James’s. And
bt. Francis returned to the vale of Spoleto, and he and Friar
asseo and Friar Elias and others abode in a wilderness; and
each took heed not to vex or disturb St. Francis in his prayers
because of the great reverence they bore him, and because they
knew that God revealed great things to him in his prayers. It
fell out one day, while St. Francis was in the wood at prayer
that a fair youth, apparelled as for a journey, came to the door
ot the friary and knocked so impatiently and loudly and for so
long a time that the friars marvelled much at so unwonted a
loiocking. Friar Masseo went and opened the door, and said
to the youth, ‘ Whence comest thou, my son; it seemeth thou

lU » g ° dd % aH: “ P^ce of the friars/’ I have rendered

. fr ^y f* as the term convcyito, used by the Franciscans when

bdckandSone^^ P °° r h ° VelS &nd CaVCS Were exchan ged for edifices of


8 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

hast never been here before, so strangely hast thou knocked.^
The youth answered, “ And how then ought one to knock?
Friar Masseo said, “ Knock three times, one after the other,
slowly; then tarry so long as the friar may say a paternoster
and come to thee: and if in this space of time he come not,
knock once again.” The youth answered, “ I am in great haste,
and therefore I knock thus loudly. I have to go a journey, and
am come here to speak with Friar Francis; but he is now m the
wood in contemplation, and I would not disturb him; but go
and send Friar Elias to me, for I would ask him a question, and
he is very wise.” Friar Masseo goes and bids Friar Elias haste
to that youth; and he takes offence and will not go. Whereat
Friar Masseo knows not what to do, nor what answer to make
to that youth; for if he said, “ Friar Elias cannot come,” he
lied; if he said he was in evil humour, he feared to set a bad
example. And while Friar Masseo was thus laggard hi return¬
ing, the youth knocked yet again, even as before. Friar Masseo
came back to the door and said to the youth, “ Thou hast not
observed my instructions in knocking.” The youth answered,
“ Friar Elias will not come to me; but go thou and say to Friar
Francis that I am come to speak with him; but since I would
not disturb him in his prayers, bid him send Friar Elias to me.
And then Friar Masseo went to St. Francis, that was praying in
the wood with his face lifted up to heaven, and gave him the
youth’s message and Friar Elias’s reply. And that youth was
an angel of God in human form. Then St. Francis, changing
neither his position nor lowering his face, said to Friar Masseo,
“ Depart and bid Friar Elias by obedience go to that youth.
Now Friar Elias, when he heard the command of St. Francis,
went in great fury to the door and flung it open with great
violence and noise, saying to the youth, “ What wouldst thou?
The youth answered, “ Beware, friar, lest thou be angry as
thou seemest, for anger hindereth much the soul and cloudeth
the perception of truth.” Friar Elias said, “ Tell me, what
wouldst thou of me? ” The youth answered, “ I ask thee if it
be lawful for observers of the holy gospel to eat whatsoever is
placed before them, according as Christ said to His disciples;
and I likewise ask thee whether it be lawful for any man to
command things contrary to evangelical liberty.” Friar Elias
answered proudly, “ This know I well, but I will not answer
thee: go thy ways.” Said the youth, “ I could answer this
question better than thou.” Then Friar Elias slammed the
door in a great rage and departed. And then he began to ponder


Friar Elias


9

the said question and to doubt within himself, and he could not
solve it; for he was vicar of the Order, and had ordered and
made a rule outside the gospel and outside the Rule of St.
Francis, to wit, that no friar of the Order should eat flesh:
therefore the said question was aimed against him. Whereupon,
unable to get clear with himself, he began to consider the
youth’s modesty, and that he had told him he could answer the
question better than he, and Friar Elias returned to the door
and opened it, to ask the youth concerning the aforesaid ques¬
tion. But he had already departed, for the pride of Friar Elias
made him unworthy to speak with angels. This done, St.
Francis, to whom all had been revealed by God, returned from
the wood, and loudly and severely reproved Friar Elias, saying,
“ Thou dost ill, proud friar, that chasest away the holy angels
from us that come to teach us. I tell thee, much do I fear lest
thy pride make thee end thy days outside this Order.” And
so it befell thereafter even as St. Francis had said, for he died
outside the Order. On that same day, at the very hour he
departed, the angel appeared in that same form to Friar Bernard,
who was walking along the bank of a great river, on his way
back from St. James’s, and gave him salutation in his own
tongue, saying, “ Hail, good friar, the peace of God be with
thee! ” And Friar Bernard marvelled greatly, and considering
the comeliness of the youth and the salutation of peace in the
mother tongue and his glad countenance, questioned him thus:
“ Whence comest thou, good youth? ” The angel answered,
“ I come from such a place, where St. Francis dwells, and I
went to speak with him, but could not, for he was in the wood
contemplating divine things, and I would not disturb him.
And in that same house dwell Friar Masseo and Friar Giles and
Friar Elias; and Friar Masseo taught me how to knock at the
door after the manner of a friar, but Friar Elias, because he
would not answer a question I propounded to him, repented and
desired thereafter to hear and see me; and he could not.”
Having spoken these words the angel said to Friar Bernard,
“ Wherefore dost thou not pass over yonder? ” Friar Bernard
answered, “ Because I dread danger from the depth of the water
I see.” Said the angel, “ Let us pass over together; fear not: ”
and he takes his hand and in the twinkling of an eye places him
on the other side of the river. Then Friar Bernard knew that
he was the angel of God, and with great reverence and joy said
in a loud voice, “ 0 blessed angel of God, tell me, what is thy
name? ” The angel answered, “ Wherefore askest thou my

B 4»5


io The Little Flowers of St. Francis

name, that is marvellous? ” This said, the angel vanished, and
left Friar Bernard much consoled, so much that he went all that
journey with great joyfulness; and he marked the day and the
hour of the angel's appearance. And reaching the friary, where
St. Francis was with the aforesaid companions, he related to
them all things in the order of their happening; and they
knew of a surety that that same angel had appeared to them
and to him on that very day and at that very hour*


CHAPTER V

HOW THE HOLY FRIAR BERNARD OF ASSISI WAS SENT BY ST*
FRANCIS TO BOLOGNA, AND THERE ESTABLISHED A FRIARY

Forasmuch as St. Francis and his companions were called and
chosen by God to bear the cross of Christ in their hearts and in
their works, and to preach it with their tongues, they seemed
and truly were, men crucified, so far as regarded their dress, the
austerity of their lives, their acts, and their deeds; and therefore
they desired rather to endure shame and reproach for love of
Christ than worldly honour, or reverence, or praise from men*
Yea, they rejoiced in contumely, and were afflicted by honour;
they went about the world as pilgrims and strangers, bearing
naught with them save Christ crucified. And because they
were true branches of the true vine, which is Christ, they brought
forth great and good fruit in the souls they won to God. It
came to pass in the beginning of the Order that St. Francis sent
Friar Bernard to Bologna, that he might bring forth fruit to
God there, according to the grace God had given him. And
Friar Bernard, having made the sign of holy cross, departed
in holy obedience and came to Bologna. And when the children
beheld him in a ragged and mean habit they mocked him and
reviled him loudly as were he a fool. And Friar Bernard
suffered all things patiently and joyfully for the love of Christ*
Aye, and in order that he might be the more derided he set
himself openly in the market-place of the city; and as he sat
there many children and men gathered around him, and one
plucked at his cowl from behind, and another in front; one
cast dust at him, and another stones; one pushed him on this
side, and another on that; but Friar Bernard, neither uttering
complaint nor changing his position, abode there patient and
glad: and for many days he returned to that same place, solely


Friar Bernard at Bologna 11

to endure the like things. And since patience is a work of
perfection and proof of virtue, a wise doctor of laws, on
beholding Friar Bernard’s exceeding great constancy and virtue,
and how he could not be provoked during many days by any
hurt or insult, said within himself, “ It is impossible but that
this must be a holy man.” And drawing nigh to him, spake to
him thus, “ Who art thou, and wherefore art thou come hither? ”
And for answer Friar Bernard put his hand in his bosom and
drew forth the Rule of St. Francis and gave it him that he might
read. And when he had read it and had considered its lofty
perfection, he turned to the companions with greatest amaze¬
ment and admiration, and said, “ Verily this is the most exalted
state of the religious life whereof I ever heard: therefore this
man and his companions are the most saintly men in this world,
and he who revileth him is the greatest of sinners; for he is
worthy of highest honour since he is the true friend of God.”
Then said he to Friar Bernard, “ If you would take a place
wherein you might conveniently serve God, I fain would give
it you for the salvation of my soul.” Friar Bernard answered
him, “ Master, I believe this offer is an inspiration from our
Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore willingly do I accept it for the
honour of Christ.” Then the said judge led Friar Bernard to
his home with great love and joy: and he gave him the promised
place, and furnished and completed it at his own cost: and
thenceforth he became to him as a father, and was the diligent
upholder of Friar Bernard and his companions. And Friar
Bernard began to be so greatly honoured by all men, that
any one who could touch or behold him held himself blessed.
But he, as a true disciple of Christ and of the lowly Francis,
fearing lest the honours of this world might hinder the peace
and salvation of his soul, departed one day and returned to
St. Francis, and spake to him thus, “ The place has been taken
in the city of Bologna; send friars thither to abide and main¬
tain it, for I have no profit there; nay, I fear, by reason of the
too great honour done to me, lest I lose more than I should
gain.” Then St. Francis, having heard all things in order that
God had wrought there through Friar Bernard, gave thanks to
God who thus began to spread abroad the poor little disciples
of the cross: and then he sent some of his companions to
Bologna and to Lombardy, who established many friaries in
divers places.


12 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER VI

HOW ST. FRANCIS BLESSED THE HOLY FRIAR BERNARD AND
APPOINTED HIM TO BE HIS VICAR WHEN HE SHOULD PASS
FROM THIS LIFE

Friar Bernard was of such holiness that St. Francis bore him
great reverence and ofttimes praised him. St. Francis being on
a day devoutly at prayer, it was revealed to him of God that
Friar Bernard, by divine permission, was to endure many and
grievous assaults from devils, wherefore St. Francis, that had
great compassion on the said Friar Bernard and loved him as a
son, prayed many days in tears, commending him to Christ
Jesus, and entreating God that victory over the devil might be
vouchsafed to him. And one day while St. Francis was thus
devoutly praying, God answered him, saying,. “ Francis, fear
not; for all the temptations whereby Friar Bernard shall be
assailed are permitted by God as an exercise of virtue and crown
of merit; and at the last he shall gain the victory over all his
enemies, for he is one of the ministers of the kingdom of heaven.”
At which answer St. Francis rejoiced greatly and gave thanks
to God; and from that hour he bore greater love and reverence
to Friar Bernard. And this he showed not only in his life, but
also at his death, for when St. Francis came to die, after the
manner of the holy patriarch Jacob, with his devout children
standing around him, all sorrowing and weeping at the departure
of so loving a father, he asked, “ Where is my first-born? Come
nigh to me, my son, that my soul may bless thee ere I die.”
Then Friar Bernard said secretly to Friar Elias, that was vicar
of the Order, “ Father, go to the right hand of the saint that he
may bless thee.” And Friar Elias drew nigh to his right hand,
and St. Francis, that had lost his sight through excess of weep¬
ing, placed his right hand on Friar Elias’s head, and said, “ This
is not the head of my first-born, Friar Bernard.” Then Friar
Bernard went to his left hand, and St. Francis moved his hands
over in the form of a cross, and placed his right hand on Friar
Bernard’s head and his left on Friar Elias’s head, and said to
Friar Bernard, “ God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ bless
thee with all spiritual and celestial blessings. Thou art the
first-born, chosen in this holy Order to give evangelical example,
and to follow Christ in evangelical poverty, for not only gavest


Death of Friar Bernard 13

thou thine own substance and didst distribute it wholly and
freely to the poor for love of Christ, but thou didst offer thyself
also to God in this Order, a sacrifice of sweetness. Blessed be
thou therefore by our Lord Jesus Christ and by me, poor little
one, His servant, with blessings everlasting, walking and stand¬
ing, watching and sleeping, living and dying. Let him that
blesseth thee be filled with blessings, and he who curseth thee
go not unpunished. Be thou lord over thy brethren and let all
the friars obey thy commands; whosoever thou wilt, let him be
received into this Order; let no friar have lordship over thee,
and be it lawful to thee to go and to abide wheresoever it may
please thee.” And after the death of St. Francis, the friars
loved and revered Friar Bernard as a venerable father; and
when he was nigh unto death, many friars came to him from
divers parts of the earth, among whom was that angelic and
divine Friar Giles; and he, beholding Friar Bernard, cried with
great joy, “ Sursum corda, Friar Bernard, sursum corda / ” and
Friar Bernard secretly bade a friar prepare for Friar Giles a
place meet for contemplation; and this was done. Now Friar
Bernard being come to the last hour of death, had himself raised
up and spake to the friars that stood around him, saying,
“ Brethren, most dear, I will not say many words to you, but
ye must consider that this religious state wherein I have lived,
ye live; and such as I am now, ye shall be also, and this I know
in my soul—that not for a thousand worlds such as this would
I have renounced the service of our Lord Jesus Christ for that
of any other lord, and I do now accuse me of all my offences, and
confess my sins to Jesus my Saviour, and to you. I beseech
you, dearest brothers mine, that ye love one another.” And
after these words and other good exhortations he lay back in his
bed, and his countenance shone with exceeding great joy;
whereat all the friars marvelled greatly; and in that joy his
most holy soul departed from this present life, crowned with
glory, to the blessed life of the angels.


14 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER VII

HOW ST. FRANCIS KEPT LENT ON AN ISLAND IN THE LAKE OF
PERUGIA, WHERE HE FASTED FORTY DAYS AND FORTY
NIGHTS, AND ATE NO MORE THAN HALF A LOAF

Forasmuch as St. Francis, the true servant of Christ, was in
certain things well-nigh another Christ given to the world for
the salvation of souls, it was the will of God the Father that in
many of his acts he should be conformable and like unto His Son
Jesus Christ, even as he showed to us in the venerable company
of the twelve companions and in the wondrous mystery of the
sacred stigmas, and in the continuous fast of the holy Lent,
which he kept in this wise. St. Francis was once lodging on
carnival day in the house of one of his devout followers on the
shores of the lake of Perugia, and was inspired by God to go
and pass that Lent on an island in the lake; wherefore St.
Francis prayed his disciple to carry him in his little bark to
an island, whereon no man dwelt, and this on the night of Ash
Wednesday, to the end that none should perceive it. And he
by the great love and devotion he bore to St. Francis satisfied
diligently his desire, and carried him to the said island, St.
Francis taking with him naught save two small loaves. And
when he had reached the island, and his friend was about to
depart and return to his home, St. Francis prayed him earnestly
to reveal to no man where he was nor to come for him before
Holy Thursday, and so the friend departed and St. Francis
remained alone. And finding no house wherein he could take
shelter, he crept into a very dense thicket of thorn and other
bushes fashioned after the manner of a lair or a little hut: and
in this place he betook himself to prayer and to the contem¬
plation of divine things. And there he abode the whole of Lent,
eating and drinking naught save the half of one of those small
loaves, even as his devout friend perceived when he returned
for him on Holy Thursday: for of the loaves he found one
whole and the other half eaten. And it was believed that St.
Francis ate this through reverence for the fasting of Jesus Christ,
who fasted forty days and forty nights without taking any
bodily food; for with this half-loaf he cast the venom of vain¬
glory from him while following the ensample of Christ in the
fast of forty days and forty nights. And God wrought many


Friar Leo 15

miracles thereafter in that same place where St. Francis had
endured so marvellous an abstinence, because of his merits:
wherefore folk began to build houses and to dwell there. And
in brief time a fair burg 1 was built there, and there also is the
friary that is called of the island; and to this day the men and
women of that burg hold the place where St, Francis kept Lent
in great devotion and reverence.


CHAPTER VIII

HOW ST. FRANCIS SET FORTH TO FRIAR LEO, AS THEY JOURNEYED
TOGETHER, WHERE PERFECT JOY WAS TO BE FOUND

One winter’s day, as St. Francis was going from Perugia with
Friar Leo to St. Mary of the Angels, suffering sorely from the
bitter cold, he called Friar Leo, that was going before him, and
spake thus, “ Friar Leo, albeit the friars minor in every land
give good examples of holiness and edification, nevertheless
write and note down diligently that perfect joy is not to be found
therein.” And St. Francis went his way a little farther, and
called him a second time, saying, “ 0 Friar Leo, even though
the friar minor gave sight to the blind, made the crooked
straight, cast out devils, made the deaf to hear, the lame to
walk, and restored speech to the dumb, and, what is a yet
greater thing, raised to life those who have lain four days in the
grave; write—perfect joy is not found there.” And he journeyed
on a little while, and cried aloud, “ 0 Friar Leo, if the friar minor
knew all tongues and all the sciences and all the Scriptures, so
that he could foretell and reveal not only future things, but even
the secrets of the conscience and of the soul; write—perfect joy
is not there.” Yet a little farther went St. Francis, and cried
again aloud, “ 0 Friar Leo, little sheep of God, even though the
friar minor spake with the tongue of angels and knew the
courses of the stars and the virtues of herbs, and were the hidden
treasures of the earth revealed to him, and he knew the qualities
of birds, and of fishes, and of all animals, and of man, and of
trees, and stones, and roots, and waters; write—not there is
perfect joy.” And St. Francis went on again a little space,
and cried aloud, “ 0 Friar Leo, although the friar minor were
skilled to preach so well that he should convert all the infidels

1 Gastello. See Petrocchi, Nuovo dix. universale de lingua ital.: piccolo
paese con ntura.


16 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

to the faith of Christ; write—not there is perfect joy.” And
when this fashion of talk had endured two good miles, Friar
Leo asked him in great wonder and said, “ Father, prithee in
God’s name tell me where is perfect joy to be found? ” And
St. Francis answered him thus, “ When we are come to St. Mary
of the Angels, wet through with rain, frozen with cold, and foul
with mire and tormented with hunger; and when we knock at
the door, the doorkeeper cometh in a rage and saith, 1 Who are
ye?’ and we say, ‘We are two of your friars,’ and he answers,
‘ Ye tell not true; ye are rather two knaves that go deceiving
the world and stealing the alms of the poor; begone! ’ and he
openeth not to us, and maketh us stay outside hungry and cold
all night in the rain and snow; then if we endure patiently such
cruelty, such abuse, and such insolent dismissal without com¬
plaint or murmuring, and believe humbly and charitably that
that doorkeeper truly knows us, and that God maketh him to
rail against us; 0 Friar Leo, write—there is perfect joy. And
if we persevere in our knocking, and he issues forth and angrily
drives us away, abusing us and smiting us on the cheek, saying,
* Go hence, ye vile thieves, get ye gone to the spital, for here ye
shall neither eat nor lodge; ’ if this we suffer patiently with love
and gladness; write, 0 Friar Leo—this is perfect joy. And
if, constrained by hunger and by cold, we knock once more and
pray with many tears that he open to us for the love of God
and let us but come inside, and he more insolently than ever
crieth, * These be impudent rogues, I will pay them out as they
deserve; ’ and issues forth with a big knotted stick and seizes
us by our cowls and flings us on the ground and rolls us in the
snow, bruising every bone in our bodies with that heavy stick—
if we, thinking on the agony of the blessed Christ, endure all
these things patiently and joyously for love of Him; write,
0 Friar Leo, that here and in this perfect joy is found. And
now, Friar Leo, hear the conclusion. Above all the grace and
the gifts of the Holy Spirit that Christ giveth to His beloved is
that of overcoming self, and for love of Him willingly to bear
pain and buffetings and revilings and discomfort; for in none
other of God’s gifts, save these, may we glory, seeing they are
not ours, but of God. Wherefore the Apostle saith, ‘ What
hast thou that is not of God, and if thou hast received it of Him,
wherefore dost thou glory as if thou hadst it of thyself? ’ But
in the cross of tribulation and of affliction we may glory, because
this is ours. Therefore the Apostle saith, ‘ I will not glory save
in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.’ ”


Friar Leo


1 7


CHAPTER IX

HOW ST. FRANCIS TAUGHT FRIAR LEO HOW TO ANSWER HIM, AND
FRIAR LEO COULD NEVER SAY AUGHT SAVE THE CONTRARY
OF THAT WHICH ST. FRANCIS BADE HIM ANSWER

In the early days of the Order, St. Francis and Friar Leo were
once in a friary where no book could be found wherefrom the
divine offices might be said, and when the hour of matins was
come St. Francis said to Friar Leo, “ Dearest, we have no
breviary to say matins from; but in order that we may spend
the time in praise of God, I will speak and thou shalt answer
me as I teach thee, and beware lest thou change one of the
words I teach thee. I will say thus, ‘ 0 Friar Francis,. thou
hast done so many evil deeds and committed so many, sins in
the world that thou art deserving of hell; ’ and thou, Friar Leo,
shalt answer, 1 Truly thou dost merit the deepest hell.’” And
Friar Leo said, with dove-like simplicity, " Willingly, father; do
thou begin in God’s name.” Then St. Francis began to say,
“ 0 Friar Francis, thou hast done so many evil deeds and hast
committed so many sins in the world that thou art deserving
of hell.” And Friar Leo answers, “ God will perform so many
good works through thee that thou shalt go to paradise.”
Saith St. Francis, “ Say not so. Friar Leo, but when I say, ‘ O
Friar Francis, thou hast committed so many iniquities against
God that thou art worthy of being cursed by God/ do thou
answer thus, ‘ Verily thou art worthy of being numbered
among the accursed.’ ” And Friar Leo answers, “ Willingly,
father.” Then St. Francis, with many tears and sighs and
smitings of the breast, said with a loud voice, “ 0 Lord God of
heaven and earth, I have committed so many sins and iniquities
against Thee that I am wholly worthy of being cursed by Thee.”
And Brother Leo answers, “ O Friar Francis, God will do in
such wise that among the blessed thou shalt be singularly
blessed.” St. Francis/marvelling that Friar Leo ever answered
contrary to that which he had charged him, rebuked him thus,
saying, “ Wherefore answerest thou not as I teach thee? I
command thee by holy obedience that thou answer as I .teach
thee. I will say thus, ‘ 0 Friar Francis, little wretch, thinkest
thou God will have mercy on thee, seeing thou hast committed
so many sins against the Father of mercies and God of all con-


18 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

solutions that thou art not worthy to find mercy? ’ And thou,
Friar Leo, little sheep, shalt answer, * In no wise art thou worthy
of finding mercy. , ” But when St. Francis said, “ 0 Friar
Francis, little wretch,” et cetera y lo, Friar Leo answered, “ God
the Father, whose mercy is infinite, far exceeding thy sins, will
show great mercy to thee, and will add likewise many graces
thereto.” At this answer St. Francis, sweetly angry and
meekly perturbed, said to Friar Leo, “ Wherefore hast thou had
the presumption to act counter to obedience, and so many times
hast answered the contrary of what I told thee and charged
thee? ” Friar Leo answers, with deep humility and reverence,
“ God knoweth, my father; for I have purposed in my heart
each time to answer as thou hast commanded me; but God
maketh me to speak as it pleaseth Him, and not as it pleaseth
me.” Whereat St. Francis marvelled, and said to Friar Leo,
“ I pray thee most dearly, answer me this once as I have
charged thee.” Said Friar Leo, “ Say on, in God’s name, for
of a surety this time I will answer as thou desirest.” And
St. Francis said, in tears, “ O Friar Francis, little wretch,
thinkest thou God will have mercy on thee? ” et cetera. And
briar Leo answers, “ Nay, rather great grace shalt thou receive
of God, and He will exalt thee and glorify thee everlastingly,
because he that humbleth himself shall be exalted; and naught
else can I say, for God speaketh by my mouth.” And so in this
lowly disputation, with many tears and much spiritual consola¬
tion, they watched until the dawn.


CHAPTER X

IIOW FRIAR MASSEO, HALF IN JEST, SAID TO ST. FRANCIS THAT
THE WHOLE WORLD WAS FOLLOWING AFTER HIM; AND
ST. FRANCIS ANSWERED THAT BY GOD’S GRACE IT WAS SO
TO THE CONFUSION OF THE WORLD

While St. Francis was abiding at the friary of the Porziuncula
with Friar Masseo of Marignano, a man of great holiness and
discernment and grace in discoursing of God, and therefore
much beloved of him, he was returning one day from prayer in
the wood, and was already on the point of issuing therefrom,
when Friar Masseo, desiring to prove his humility, made towards
him and said, half jestingly, “ Why after thee? Why after


Friar Masseo 19

thee? Why after thee? ” And St. Francis answered, “ What
meanest thou? ” Said Friar Masseo, “ I mean why doth all
the world follow after thee, and why doth every man desire to
see thee and to hear thee and to obey thee? Thou art not fair
to look upon; thou art not a man of great parts; thou art not
of noble birth. Whence cometh it, then, that all the world
followeth after thee? ” When St. Francis heard this he re¬
joiced exceedingly in spirit, and raising his face to hea ven,
remained for a great space with his soul uplifted to God. And
then, returning to himself, he knelt down and gave praise and
thanks to God. Then with great fervour of spirit he turned to
Friar Masseo and said, “ Wouldst thou know why after me?
Wouldst thou know why after me? Wouldst thou know why
after me? Know that this I have from those eyes of the most
high God, that everywhere behold the righteous and the wicked,
and forasmuch as those most holy eyes have beheld among
sinners none more vile, more imperfect, nor a greater sinner than
I therefore since He hath found no viler creature on earth to
accomplish the marvellous work He intendeth, He hath chosen
me to confound the nobility, the majesty, the might, the beauty,
and the wisdom of the world; in order to make manifest that
every virtue and every good thing cometh from Him the Creator,
and not from the creature, and that none may glory before
Him: but that he that glories shall glory in the Lord, to whom
belong all glory and all honour for ever and ever. Then friar
Masseo waxed sore afraid at this lowly answer given with great
fervour, and knew of a surety that St. Francis was grounded m
humility.


CHAPTER XI

HOW ST. FRANCIS MADE FRIAR MASSEO TURN ROUND AND ROUND
MANY TIMES, AND THEN WENT HIS WAY TO SIENA

On a day as St. Francis was journeying with Friar Masseo, the
said Friar Masseo went a little in front of him; and when they
reached a point where three ways met—one leading to Florence,
another to Siena, and a third to Arezzo—Friar Masseo said,
“ Father, which road ought we to follow? St. Francis
answered, “That which God willeth.” Said Friar Masseo,
“And how shall we know the will of God?” St. Francis
answered, “ By the token I shall show thee: wherefore I com-


20 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

mand thee by the merit of holy obedience that at this parting of
the ways, and on the spot where thou now standest, thou shalt
turn round and round as children do, and shalt not cease turn¬
ing until I bid thee.” Then Friar Masseo began to turn round
and round, and continued so long that by reason of the giddiness
which is wont to be begotten by such turning, he fell many
times to the ground; but, as St. Francis did not bid him stay,
he rose up again, for faithfully he desired to obey him. At
length, when he was turning lustily, St. Francis cried, “ Stay;
stir not!” And he stayed. Then St. Francis asked him,
“ Towards which part is thy face turned?” Friar Masseo
answers, “ Towards Siena.” Said St. Francis, “ That is the
road God wills we should go.” And as they walked by the way,
Friar Masseo marvelled that St. Francis had made him turn
around and around even as a child doth, in the presence of
secular folk that were passing by: yet for very reverence he
dared say naught thereof to the holy father. As they drew
nigh to Siena the people of that city, hearing of the advent of
the saint, made towards him; and in their devotion they carried
the saint and his companion shoulder high as far as the bishop’s
house, so that they never touched ground with their feet. Now
in that same hour certain men of Siena were fighting among
themselves, and already two of them had been slain. When
St. Francis came among them he preached with such great
devotion and sanctity that he brought the whole of them to
make peace and to dwell in great unity and concord together.
Wherefore, when the bishop of Siena heard of the holy work
that St. Francis had accomplished, he invited him to his house,
and received him that day and that night also with the greatest
honour. And the following morning St. Francis, who in all his
works sought but the glory of God, arose betimes and with true
humility departed with his companion without the knowledge
of the bishop. Wherefore the said Friar Masseo went murmur¬
ing within himself by the way, and saying, “ What is this that
holy man hath done? Me he made to turn round and round
as a child, and to the bishop who did him so much honour he
said naught, not even a word of thanks: ” and it seemed to
Friar Masseo that St. Francis had borne himself indiscreetly.
But soon, by divine inspiration, Friar Masseo bethought him
and reproved himself in his heart, and said, “ Friar Masseo, thou
art over-proud, thou that judgest the ways of God, and for
thy indiscreet pride art worthy of hell. For yesterday Friar
Francis wrought such holy works, that they could not have been


21


Friar Masseo

more marvellous if the angel of God had done them. Where¬
fore if he should command thee to cast stones, thou shouldst
obey him; for what he hath wrought in this city hath been by
divine operation, even as is manifest in the good that followeth
thereafter; because had he not made peace among those that
were fighting, not only would many bodies have been slain by
the knife (even as had already begun to come to pass), but many
souls likewise would have been dragged to hell by the deviL
Therefore art thou very foolish and proud, thou that murmurest
at these things which manifestly proceed according to the will of
God. ,, Now all these things that this friar was saying in his
heart were revealed by God to St. Francis, wherefore St. Francis
drew nigh to him and said, “ Hold fast to those things thou art
now thinking, for they are good and profitable, and inspired by
God; but thy first murmurings were blind and vain and proud,
and instigated by the evil one.” Then did Friar Masseo per¬
ceive clearly that St. Francis knew the secrets of his heart, and
he understood that of a surety the Spirit of divine wisdom
governed the holy father in all his works,


CHAPTER XII

HOW ST. FRANCIS APPOINTED FRIAR MASSEO TO BE DOORKEEPER,
ALMONER, AND COOK: THEN AT THE ENTREATIES OF THE
OTHER FRIARS REMOVED HIM

St. Francis, desiring to humble Friar Masseo in order that by
reason of the many gifts and graces God had bestowed on him
he should not be puffed up with vainglory, but by virtue of
humility should increase from virtue to virtue, said to him on a
day when he was dwelling with his first companions in a solitary
pl ace —those truly holy companions whereof Friar Masseo was

on6) _“ 0 Friar Masseo, all these thy companions have the gift of

contemplation and of prayer; but thou hast the gift of preach¬
ing the word of God to the satisfaction of the people. Therefore
I desire that thou take upon thee the offices of doorkeeper, of
almoner, and of cook, in order that thy companions may give
themselves up to contemplation; and when the other friars are
eating, thou shalt eat outside the door of the friary, so that thou
mayst satisfy with some sweet words of God those who come to
the convent, ere they knock; and so that no other friar than
thou have need to go outside. And this do through the merit


22 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

of holy obedience.” Then Friar Masseo drew back his cowl and
inclined his head and humbly received and fulfilled this com¬
mand, and for many days he discharged the offices of doorkeeper,
and almoner, and cook. Whereat the companions, even as men
illumined by God, began to feel great remorse in their hearts,
considering that Friar Masseo was a man of as great perfection
as they were, or even greater; and yet on him was laid the whole
burden of the convent, and not on them. Wherefore, moved
by one desire, they went with one accord and entreated the holy
father to be pleased to distribute those offices among them; for
in no wise could they endure in their conscience that Friar
Masseo should bear so many burdens. When St. Francis heard
this he gave heed to their prayers and consented to their desire,
and calling Friar Masseo he thus spake to him, “ Friar Masseo,
thy companions would have a share in the offices wherewith I
have charged thee: it is therefore my will that the said offices
be divided.” Says Friar Masseo, with great humility and
meekness, “ Father, whatsoever thou layest upon me, either
all or part, that I hold to be wholly done of God.” Then St.
Francis, beholding the love of them and the humility of Friar
Masseo, preached a wondrous sermon touching most holy
humility, admonishing them that the greater the gifts and
graces that God bestows upon us, the greater ought our humility
to be; for without humility no virtue is acceptable to God.
And when he had made an end of his sermon he apportioned
the offices among them with the greatest loving-kindness.


CHAPTER XIII

HOW ST. FRANCIS AND FRIAR MASSEO SET DOWN THE BREAD
THEY HAD BEGGED ON A STONE BESIDE A SPRING, AND
ST. FRANCIS GREATLY PRAISED POVERTY. THEN HE PRAYED
UNTO GOD AND ST. PETER AND ST. PAUL THAT THEY WOULD
INSPIRE HIM WITH THE LOVE OF HOLY POVERTY; AND HOW
ST. PETER AND ST. PAUL APPEARED TO HIM

The wondrous servant and follower of Christ, to wit, St. Francis,
to the end that he might conform himself to Christ perfectly
in all things (who, according to the gospel, sent His disciples
two by two unto all those cities and places whither He was to
go), gathered together twelve companions and sent them forth
after the example of Christ two by two to preach throughout


Friar Massco 23

the world. And St. Francis, that he might give them an
example of true obedience, himself set forth first, after the
example of Christ, who began to do before He began to teach.
Wherefore, having assigned to his companions the other quarters
of the world, he took Friar Masseo with him as his companion
and went his way towards the land of France. And journeying
one day they came to a city sore a-hungered, and went, according
to the Rule, begging bread for love of God: and St. Francis took
one street and Friar Masseo another. But forasmuch as St<
Francis was a man of mean appearance and short of stature,
and therefore looked down upon as a poor vile creature by those
who knew him not, he collected naught save a few mouthfuls of
dry crusts; but to Friar Masseo many large pieces of bread and
even whole loaves were given, for he was fair and tall of body.
And after they had begged their food, they met to eat together
at a place outside the city where was a fair fountain, and beside
it a fair broad stone, whereon each laid the alms he had collected.
Now when St. Francis saw that the bread and loaves brought
bv Friar Masseo were finer and larger than his own, he showed
forth joy exceeding great, and spake thus, “ O Friar Masseo,
we are not worthy of so great a treasure.” And having re¬
peated these words many times, Friar Masseo answered,
“ Dearest father, how can that be called a treasure where there
is poverty so great and such lack of needful things? Here is
neither cloth, nor knife, nor trencher, nor bowl, nor house, nor
table, nor man-servant, nor maid-servant. Then said bt,
Francis, “ And this is what I hold to be a great treasure: where
there is no dwelling made by human hands, but all is prepared
for us by divine providence, even as is made manifest by the
bread we have collected on this table of stone so fair and this
fountain so clear. Therefore I desire that we pray unto God
that He may make us love with all our hearts this noble treasure
of holy poverty that hath God for its servitor.” After these
words they refreshed their bodies, and having made their prayer,
rose up and journeyed on to France. And when they came to
a church, St. Francis said to his companion, “ Let us enter into
this church to pray.” And St. Francis goes behind the altar
and kneels down in prayer. And as he prayed he was inspired
by the divine presence with fervour so exceeding great that his
whole soul was inflamed with love for holy poverty; in such
wise that what with the hue of his face and the strange yawning
of his mouth, it seemed as if flames of love were bursting from
him. And coming thus aflame towards his companion, he spake


24 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

thus to him, “ Ah, ah, ah, Friar Masseo; give thyself to me.”
And this he said thrice; and the third time St. Francis lifted
up Friar Masseo into the air with his breath, and cast him away
from him the length of a tall spear; whereat Friar Masseo was
filled with great amaze. And he afterwards related to his
companions that when St. Francis thus lifted him up and cast
him from him with his breath, he felt such great sweetness in
his soul, and such deep consolation from the Holy Spirit, that
never in his life had he felt the like. This done, St. Francis
said, “ Dearest companion, go we now to St. Peter and St. Paul
and pray them to teach us and aid us to possess this boundless
treasure of holiest poverty; for it is a treasure of such exceeding
worth and so divine that we are unworthy to possess it in our
vile vessels. Yea! this is that celestial virtue whereby all
earthly and transitory things are trodden under foot and whereby
every hindrance is removed from the soul that she may be
freely conjoined with the eternal God. This is the virtue that
maketh the soul, while yet on earth, have communion with the
angels in heaven; that companioned Christ on the cross; with
Christ was buried; with Christ rose again, and with Christ
ascended into heaven. It is this virtue also that easeth the
flight into heaven of those souls that love it; for it guards the
armour of true humility and charity., Therefore let us pray
unto the most holy Apostles of Christ, who were perfect lovers
of this pearl evangelical, to obtain for us this grace from our
Lord Jesus Christ: that He in His holy mercy may vouchsafe
to us to grow worthy to be true lovers and followers and humble
disciples of the most precious and most lovable gospel poverty.”
Thus discoursing, they came to Rome and entered St. Peter’s
Church; and St. Francis set himself to pray in one corner of
the church, and Friar Masseo in another. And as St. Francis
remained in prayer a long while, with many tears and great
devotion, the holy Apostles Peter and Paul appeared to him in
great splendour, and said, “ Forasmuch as thou askest and
desirest to serve that which Christ and His holy Apostles served,
our Lord Jesus Christ sendeth us to thee to announce that thy
prayer is heard, and that God granteth to thee and to thy
followers the perfect treasure of holiest poverty. And from
Him also we say unto thee, that whosoever, following thy
example, shall pursue this desire perfectly, he is assured of the
blessedness of life eternal; and thou and all thy followers shall
be blessed of God.”. These words said, they vanished, leaving
St. Francis filled with consolation; who, rising from prayer.


Apparition of the Blessed Christ 25

returned to his companion and asked him if God had revealed
aught to him; and he answered, “Nay.” Then St. Francis
told him how the holy apostles had appeared to him, and what
they had revealed. Whereupon each of them, filled with joy,
purposed to return to the vale of Spoleto, and renounce the
journey into France.


CHAPTER XIV

HOW, WHILE ST. FRANCIS AND HIS FRIARS WERE DISCOURSING
OF GOD, HE APPEARED IN THEIR MIDST

In the early days of the Order, as St. Francis was communing
with his companions and discoursing of Christ, he, in fervour
of spirit, bade one of them open his lips in God’s name and
speak what the Holy Ghost would inspire him to say concerning
God. This friar having fulfilled his behest and discoursed
wondrously of God, St. Francis laid silence upon him, and gave
a like command to another friar. He also having obeyed and
spoken subtly of God, St. Francis in like manner laid silence
upon him, and bade a third speak of God; and he likewise began
to discourse so profoundly of the hidden things of God that
St. Francis knew of a surety that he, together with the other
two, had spoken by the Holy Ghost; and this was shown forth
also by ensample and by a clear token; for while they were thus
speaking the blessed Christ appeared in the midst of them in
the similitude and form of a most fair youth, and blessed them
and filled them with so much grace and sweetness that they all
were rapt out of themselves, and lay as though dead and
insensible to the things of this world. And when they returned
to themselves, St. Francis said to them, “ Brothers mine, most
dear, give thanks to God, who hath willed to reveal the treasures
of divine wisdom through the lips of the simple; for God is He
that openeth the mouths of the dumb, and the tongues of the
simple He maketh to speak great wisdom.”


26 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER XV

HOW STw CLARE ATE WITH ST. FRANCIS AND HIS FELLOW-
FRIARS AT ST. MARY OF THE ANGELS

When St. Francis was at Assisi he visited St. Clare many times
and gave her holy instruction, and she having great desire to
eat once with him did entreat him thereof many times, but
never would he grant her this consolation. Whereupon his
companions, beholding St. Clare’s desire, spake to St. Francis
and said, “ Father, it seemeth to us too severe a thing and not
in accord with divine charity that thou grantest not the prayer
of Sister Clare, that is a virgin so holy and so beloved of God, in
so small a grace as to eat with thee; above all, when we consider
that through thy preaching she forsook the pomps and riches of
this world. Nay, had she asked even greater grace of thee thou
shouldst grant it to her, thy spiritual plant.” Then St. Francis
answered, “ Doth it seem good to you that I should grant her
prayer?” His companions made answer, “ Father, even so,
for it is meet that thou grant her this grace and give her consola¬
tion.” Then said St. Francis, “ Since it seemeth good to you,
even so it seemeth good to me. But that she may be the more
consoled, I desire that this repast be made in St. Mary of the
Angels; for long hath she been shut up in St. Damian’s, and it
will profit her to behold the friary of St. Mary, where her hair was
shorn and she became the spouse of Jesus Christ: there will we
break bread together in the name of God.” And when the ap¬
pointed day came, St. Clare came forth from the convent with
one companion, and accompanied by the companions of St.
Francis, journeyed to St. Mary of the Angels; and having
devoutly saluted the Virgin Mary, before whose altar she had
been shorn and veiled, the companions conducted her around
to see the friary of St. Mary’s until the hour of the repast was
come. Meanwhile St. Francis made ready the table on the bare
ground, as he was wont to do. And the hour for dinner being
come, St. Francis and St. Clare, and one of the companions of
St. Francis and the companion of St. Clare, seated themselves
together; and all the other companions of St. Francis then
humbly took their places at the table. And for the first dish
St. Francis began to discourse of God so sweetly, so loftily, and
so wondrously that a bounteous measure of divine grace de-


Visit to St. Clare 27

scended upon them and they were all rapt in God. And being
thus ravished^ with eyes and hands lifted up to heaven, the men
of Assisi and of Bettona, and the men of the country round
about, beheld St. Mary of the Angels and the whole friary and
the wood that was around about it brightly flaming; and it
seemed as ’twere a great fire that was devouring the church and
the friary and the wood together: wherefore the men of Assisi,
verily believing that everything was in flames, ran down thither
with great haste to quench the fire. But when they came to the
friary and found nothing burning, they entered within and
beheld St. Francis with St. Clare and all their companions
seated around that humble table and rapt in the contemplation
of God. Wherefore they understood that truly the fire had
not been a material fire, but a divine fire which God had miracu¬
lously made to appear in order to show forth and signify the
fire of divine love wherewith the souls of these holy friars and
holy nuns did bum: and they departed with great consolation
in their hearts and with holy edification. Then after a long
space St. Francis|and St. Clare, together with the companions,
returned to themselves, and feeling well comforted with spiritual
food, took little heed of corporeal food; and thus that blessed
repast being ended, St. Clare, well companioned, returned to. St.
Damian's. And when the sisters beheld her they had great joy,
for they feared lest St. Francis had sent her to rule over some
other convent, -even as he had already sent Sister Agnes, her
holy sister, to -rule, as abbess, over the convent of Monticelli at
Florence. For on a time St. Francis had said to St. Clare,
“ Make thee ready if it so be that I must needs send thee to
another convent." And she, even as a daughter of holy obedi¬
ence, had answered, “ Father, behold I am ever ready to go
whithersoever thou wilt send me.” Therefore the sisters re¬
joiced greatly when they had her back again, and thenceforth
St. Clare abode there much consoled.


28 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER XVI

HOW ST. FRANCIS HAD COUNSEL FROM ST. CLARE AND FROM THE
HOLY FRIAR SILVESTER, TO WIT, THAT HE WAS TO CONVERT
MUCH PEOPLE : AND HOW HE STAB LI SHED THE THIRD
ORDER AND PREACHED TO THE BIRDS AND MADE THE
SWALLOWS HOLD THEIR PEACE

St. Francis, humble servant of God, short time after his con¬
version, having gathered together many companions and
received them into the Order, fell into great perplexity and
doubt touching what it behoved him to do—whether to be
wholly intent on prayer, or sometimes to preach. And greatly
he desired to know the will of God touching these things. But
since the holy humility wherewith he was filled suffered him not
to lean overmuch on his own judgment, nor on his own prayers,
he bethought him to seek the divine will through the prayers
of others. Wherefore he called Friar Masseo to him and spake
to him thus, 1 Go to Sister Clare and bid her from me that she
and some of the most spiritual of her companions pray devoutly
unto God, that He may be pleased to reveal to me which is the
more excellent way: whether to give myself up to preaching or
wholly to prayer; then go to Friar Silvester and bid him do the
like/’ Now he had been in the world and was that same Friar
Silvester that beheld a cross of gold issue from the mouth of
St. Francis, the length whereof was high as heaven, and the
breadth whereof reached to the uttermost parts of the earth.
And this Friar Silvester was a man of such great devotion and
holiness that whatsoever he asked of God he obtained, and the
same was granted to him; and ofttimes he spake with God
wherefore great was the devotion of St. Francis to him. Friar
Masseo went forth and gave his message first to St. Clare, as St
Francis had commanded, and then to Friar Silvester, who no
sooner had heard the command than he straightway betook
himself to prayer, and when he had received the divine answer
he returned to Friar Masseo and spake these words, “ Thus
saith the Lord God, ‘ Go to Friar Francis and say unto him that
God hath not called him to this state for himself alone, but that
he may bring forth fruit of souls and that many through him
may be saved. Friar Masseo, having received this answer
returned to Sister Clare to learn what answer she had obtained


The Third Order 29

of God; and she answered that she and her companions had
received the selfsame response from God that Friar Silvester
bad. And Friar Masseo returned with this answer to St. Francis,
who greeted him with greatest charity, washing his feet and
setting meat before him. And St. Francis called Friar Masseo,
after he had eaten, into the wood, and there knelt down before
bim, drew back his cowl, and making a cross with his arms,
asked of him, “ What doth my Lord Jesus Christ command? ”
Friar Masseo answers, “ Thus to Friar Silvester and thus to
Sister Clare and her sisterhood hath Christ answered and re¬
pealed His will: that thou go forth to preach throughout the
world, for He hath not chosen thee for thyself alone, but also
For the salvation of others.” Then St. Francis, when he had
beard these words and learned thereby the will of Christ, rose
jp and said with great fervour, “ Let us then go forth in God’s
name.” And with him he took Friar Masseo and Friar Agnolo,
holy men both, and setting forth with great fervour of spirit
and taking heed neither of road nor path, they came to a city
:alled Saburniano. And St. Francis began to preach, first
:ommanding the swallows to keep silence until his sermon were
snded; and the swallows obeying him, he preached with such
seal that all the men and women of that city desired in their
devotion to follow after him and forsake the city. But St.
Francis suffered them not, saying, " Be not in haste to depart,
for I will ordain what ye shall do for the salvation of your
souls.” And then he bethought him of the third Order which
be stablished for the universal salvation of all people. And so,
leaving them much comforted and well disposed to penitence, he
departed thence and came to a place between Cannara and
Bevagna. And journeying on in that same fervour of spirit, he
lifted up his eyes and beheld some trees by the wayside whereon
were an infinite multitude of birds; so that he marvelled and
said to his companions, “ Tarry here for me by the way and I
will go and preach to my little sisters the birds.” And he
entered into the field and began to preach to the birds that were
on the ground; and anon those that were on the trees flew down
to hear him, and all stood still the while St. Francis made an end
of his sermon; and even then they departed not until he had
given them his blessing. And according as Friar Masseo and
Friar James of Massa thereafter related, St. Francis went among
them, touching them with the hem of his garment, and not one
stirred. And the substance of the sermon St. Francis preached
was this, “ My little sisters the birds, much are ye beholden to


30 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

God your Creator, and alway and in every place ye ought t»
praise Him for that He hath given you a double and a tripl
vesture; He hath given you freedom to go into every place, am
also did preserve the seed of you in the ark of Noe, in order tha
your kind might not perish from the earth. Again, ye ar
beholden to Him for the element of air which He hath appointe<
for you; moreover, ye sow not, neither do ye reap, and Go<
feedeth you and giveth you the rivers and the fountains fo
your drink; He giveth you the mountains and the valleys fo
your refuge, and the tall trees wherein to build your nests, an<
forasmuch as ye can neither spin nor sew God clotheth you, yoi
and your children: wherefore your Creator loveth you tnudi
since He hath dealt so bounteously with you; and therefor
beware, little sisters mine, of the sin of ingratitude, but eve
strive to praise God.” While St. Francis was uttering tbes
words, all those birds began to open their beaks, and stretcl
their necks, and spread their wings, and reverently to bow thei
heads to the ground, showing by their gestures and songs tha
the holy father’s words gave them greatest joy: and St. Franci
was glad and rejoiced with them, and marvelled much at s<
great a multitude of birds and at their manifold loveliness, an<
at their attention and familiarity; for which things he devoutt
praised the Creator in them. Finally, his sermon ended, St
Francis made the sign of holy cross over them and gave then
leave to depart; and all those birds soared up into the air in On
flock with wondrous songs, and then divided themselves int<
four parts after the form of the cross St. Francis had made ove
them; and one part flew towards the east; another toward
the west; the third towards the south, and the fourth toward
the north. And each flock sped forth singing Wondrously, be
tokening thereby that even as St. Francis, standard-bearer o
the cross of Christ, had preached to them and had made the sigi
of the cross over them, according to which they had dividet
themselves, singing, among the four quarters of the world, s<
the preaching of Christ’s cross, renewed by St. Francis, was
through him and his friars, to be borne throughout the whol
world; the which friars possessing nothing of their own in thi
world, after the manner of birds, committed their lives wholh
to the providence of God,


The Boy Friar


3 1


CHAPTER XVII

HOW A LITTLE BOY FRIAR, WHILE ST. FRANCIS WAS PRAYING BY
NIGHT, BEHELD CHRIST AND THE VIRGIN MARY AND MANY
OTHER SAINTS DISCOURSING WITH HIM

A boy most pure and innocent was received into the Order,
during the life of St. Francis, in a convent so small that the
friars were of necessity constrained to sleep two in a bed. And
St. Francis once came to the said convent, and at even, after
compline, lay down to rest that he might rise up to pray in the
night while the other friars slept, as he was wont to do. The said
boy having set his heart on spying out diligently the ways of
St. Francis, lay down to sleep beside St. Francis that he might
understand his holiness, and chiefly what he did by night when
he rose up; and in order that sleep might not beguile him, he
tied his own cord to the cord of St. Francis, that he might feel
when he stirred: and of this St. Francis perceived naught.
But by night, during the first sleep, when all the friars were
slumbering, St. Francis arose and found his cord thus tied; and
he loosed it so gently that the boy felt it not, and went forth
alone into the wood near the friary, and entered into a little cell
there and betook himself to prayer. After some space the boy
awoke, and finding his cord loosed, and St. Francis risen, he
rose up likewise and went seeking him, and finding the door
open which led to the wood, he thought St. Francis had gone
thither, and he entered the wood. And coming nigh unto the
place where St. Francis was praying, he began to hear much
talking; and as he drew closer to see and understand what he
heard, he beheld a wondrous light that encompassed St. Francis,
wherein were Christ and the Virgin Mary, and St. John the
Baptist, and the Evangelist, and an infinite multitude of angels
that were speaking with St. Francis. Seeing and hearing this,
the boy fell lifeless to the earth. And the mystery of that holy
apparition being ended, St. Francis, as he returned to the house,
stumbled with his foot against the boy, who lay as one dead, and
in compassion lifted him up and carried him in his arms, even
as the good shepherd doth his sheep. And then learning from
him how he had beheld the said vision, St. Francis commanded
him to tell it to no man, to wit, so long as he should live, and the


3 2 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

boy increasing daily in the great grace of God and in devotion to
St. Francis, became a valiant man in the Order, and after the
death of St. Francis revealed the said vision to the friars.


CHAPTER XVIII

OF THE WONDROUS CHAPTER THAT ST. FRANCIS HELD AT ST. MARY
OF THE ANGELS, WHERE MORE THAN FIVE THOUSAND FRIARS
WERE ASSEMBLED

Francis, faithful servant of Christ, once held a Chapter-General
at St. Mary of the Angels, where more than five thousand friars
were gathered together. Now St. Dominic, head and founder
of the Order of preaching friars, who was then journeying from
Burgundy to Rome, came thither, and hearing of the congrega¬
tion of the Chapter that St. Francis was holding in the plain of
St. Mary of the Angels, he went with seven friars of his Order to
see. And there was likewise at the said Chapter a cardinal who
was most devoted to St. Francis, the which cardinal he had
foretold should one day become pope : 1 even as it came to pass*
This cardinal had journeyed diligently to Assisi from Perugia,
where the papal court was, and every day he came to behold
St. Francis and his friars, and sometimes sang the mass, and
sometimes preached the sermon to the friars in Chapter; and
the said cardinal was filled with the greatest joy and devotion
when he came to visit that holy college. And beholding the
friars sitting on that plain, around St. Mary’s, company by com¬
pany, here forty, there a hundred, there eighty together, all
engaged in discoursing of God, or at prayer, or in tears, or in
works of charity, and all so silent and so meek that no sound
nor discord was heard, and marvelling at so great and orderly
a multitude, he said with great devotion and tears, “ Verily this
is the camp and the army of the knights of God.” In so mighty
a host was heard neither vain words nor jests, but wheresoever
a company of friars was assembled together, there they prayed,
or said the office, or bewailed their sins, or the sins of their bene¬
factors, or discoursed of the salvation of souls. For shelter they
made them little wicker cots of willow and of rush matting,
divided into groups according to the friars of the divers pro¬
vinces: and therefore that Chapter was called the Chapter of the
wicker cots or of the mats. Their couch was the bare earth,

1 Cardinal Hugolin, who became Gregory IX.


Chapter of the Mats 33

with a little straw for some: their pillows were blocks of stone
or of wood. For which cause so great was the devotion of who¬
soever heard or saw them, so great the fame of their sanctity,
that many counts and barons, and knights and other noblemen,
and many priests likewise, and cardinals and bishops, and
abbots and other clerks, came from the papal court, which then
was at Perugia, and from the vale of Spoleto, to behold that
great assembly, so holy and so humble, and so many saintly men
together, the like whereof the world had never known before.
And chiefly they came to behold the head and most holy father
of that saintly folk, who had snatched so fair a prey from the
world, and had gathered together so fair and devout a flock to
follow the footprints of the true Shepherd Jesus Christ. The
Chapter-General then being assembled together, St. Francis,
holy father of all and general minister, expounded the word of
God in fervour of spirit and preached unto them in a loud voice
whatsoever the Holy Spirit put into his mouth. And for the
text of his sermon he took these words, “My children, great
things have we promised unto God: things exceeding great hath
God promised unto us, if we observe those we have promised
unto Him: and of a surety do we await those things promised
unto us. Brief is the joy of this world; the pain that cometh
hereafter is everlasting: small is the pain of this life; but the
glory of the life to come is infinite.” And on these words he
preached most devoutly, comforting the friars and moving them
to obedience and to reverence of holy mother church, to brotherly
love and to pray to God for all men, to be patient under the
adversities of this world, temperate in prosperity, observant of
purity and angelic chastity, to live in peace and concord with
God and with men and with their own conscience, and in the
love and practice of most holy poverty. And then he spake
and said, “ I command you by the merit of holy obedience, all
you that are here assembled, that none of you have care nor
solicitude for what he shall eat nor what he shall drink, nor for
aught necessary for the body, but give ye heed solely to prayer
and to the praise of God: lay upon Him all solicitude for your
body, for He hath special care of you.” And all and sundry
received this commandment with glad hearts and with joyful
countenances: and the sermon of St. Francis being ended, all
prostrated themselves in prayer. Whereat St. Dominic, that
was present at all these things, marvelled mightily at the com¬
mandment of St. Francis and deemed it rash; for he knew not how
so great a multitude could be governed while taking no thought


34 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

or care for the things necessary to the body. But the chief
Shepherd, Christ the blessed, being willed to show what care He
hath for His sheep and His singular love for His poor ones, anon
moved the hearts of the people of Perugia, of Spoleto, of Foligno,
of Spello, and of Assisi, and of the other cities round about, to
bring wherewithal to eat and to drink to that holy congregation*
And lo, there came quickly from the aforesaid cities, men with
sumpter mules and horses and carts, loaded with bread and wine,
with beans and cheese and other good things to eat, according
to the needs of Christ’s poor ones. Besides this they brought
napery and pitchers, and bowls and glasses, and other vessels
needful for so great a multitude; and blessed he that could bring
the heaviest load or serve most diligently, so that knights and
barons also and other noblemen, who had come to look on,
served them with great humility and devotion. Wherefore St,,
Dominic, beholding all these things and knowing of a truth that
divine providence wrought in them, humbly owned that he had
falsely judged St. Francis of rashness, and drawing nigh to him
knelt down and humbly confessed his fault, and added, “ Verily,
God hath especial care of these His poor little ones, and I knew
it not: henceforth I promise to observe holy gospel poverty, and
in God’s name do curse all the friars of my Order that shall dare
to possess things of their own.” And St. Dominic was much
edified by the faith of the most holy St. Francis, and by the
obedience and poverty of so great and well ordered an assembly,
and by the divine providence and the rich abundance of all good
things. Now in that same Chapter it was told St. Francis that
many friars were wearing breastplates of iron 1 next their skins,
and iron rings, whereby many grew sick even unto death and
were hindered in their prayers. Whereat St. Francis, as a wise
father, commanded by holy obedience that whosoever had these
breast-plates or iron rings should remove them and lay them

1 Cuoretio. The sense of this word is doubtful. A note to Cesari’s text
interprets “ a kind of metal cilice in the form of a heart.” The Upton
fathers render “ leather bands with sharp points; ” Cardinal Manning
has “ small hearts of iron.” Prof. Arnold in his admirable translation
gives “ shirts of mail.” A shirt of mail was, however, an expensive
harness in the Middle Ages, and a gathering of mendicant friars, 500 of
whom were possessed of shirts of mail, is hardly credible. Petrocchi,
Nuovo diz. universale, interprets, specie di cilixio, “ a kind of cilice,” and
Johann Jorgensen, the Danish translator, has Bodsskjorte , “ penitential
shirt.” A reference to the Latin original gives loricam, and since a
well-known eleventh - century Italian hermit, S. Domenico lorato, was
thus called by reason of the iron cuirass he wore next his skin, I have
small doubt that cuoretio should be rendered “ breastplate.” The friars
could easily have begged old breast-plates for penitential purposes.


St. Francis at Rieti 35

before him, and thus did they; and there were numbered full
five hundred breast-plates, and many more rings, either for the
arm or for the loins, so that they made a great heap; and St.
Francis bade them be left there. After the Chapter was ended
St. Francis heartened them all to good works, and taught them
'now they should escape without sin from this wicked world;
then dismissed them with God’s blessing and his own to their
provinces, all consoled with spiritual joy.


CHAPTER XIX

HOW THE VINEYARD OF THE PARISH PRIEST OF RIETI, IN WHOSE
HOUSE ST. FRANCIS PRAYED, WAS STRIPPED OF ITS GRAPES
BY REASON OF THE MULTITUDE OF PEOPLE THAT CAME TO SEE
HIM; AND HOW THAT VINEYARD BROUGHT FORTH MIRACU¬
LOUSLY MORE WINE THAN EVER BEFORE, ACCORDING TO THE
PROMISE OF ST. FRANCIS. AND HOW GOD REVEALED TO ST.
FRANCIS THAT PARADISE SHOULD BE HIS PORTION WHEN HE
DEPARTED THIS LIFE

St. Francis being on a time sorely afflicted in his eyes, was
invited by a letter from Cardinal Hugolin, protector of the
Order, to come to Rieti, where excellent physicians for the eyes
then dwelt, for he loved him tenderly. When St. Francis re¬
ceived the cardinal’s letter he went first to St. Damian s, where
St. Clare, the most devout spouse of Christ was, to give her some
consolation; then he would go his way to the cardinal at Rieti.
And the night after he came thither his eyes worsened so that
he saw no light at all. Wherefore, being unable to depart, St.
Clare made him a little cell of reeds whereon he might the better
find repose. But St. Francis, what with the pain of his eyes
and what with the multitude of mice that tormented him, could
not rest a moment night or day. And after enduring that pain
and tribulation many days, he began to bethink him and to
understand that this was a divine scourge for his sins; and he
began to thank God with all his heart and with his mouth, and
then crying with a loud voice, said, “My Lord, worthy am I of all
this and far worse. My Lord Jesus Christ, good Shepherd, that
in Thy mercy hast laid upon us sinners divers corporeal pains and
anguish, grant to me, Thy little sheep, such virtue and grace that
for no sickness or anguish or suffering I may depart from Thee.”


2 6 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

And as he prayed there came to him a voice from heaven saying,
“ Francis, answer Me: If all the earth were gold, and all the sea
and fountains and rivers were balm, and all the mountains and
hills and rocks were precious stones, and thou shouldst find
another treasure as much nobler than these things as gold is
nobler than clay, and balm than water, and precious stones than
mountains and rocks, and if that nobler treasure were given thee
for thine infirmity, oughtest thou not to be right glad and right
joyful? ” St. Francis answers, “ Lord, I am unworthy of so
precious a treasure.” And the voice of God said to him, “ Re¬
joice, Francis, for that is the treasure of life eternal, which I
have laid up for thee, and from this hour forth I do invest thee
therewith: and this sickness and affliction is a pledge of that
blessed treasure.” Then St. Francis with exceeding great joy
called his companion and said, “ Go we to the cardinal.” And
first consoling St. Clare with holy words and humbly taking
leave of her, he went his way towards Rieti. And when he drew
nigh to the city, so great a multitude of people came forth to
meet him that he would not enter therein, but went to a church
that was perchance two miles distant therefrom. When the
citizens heard that he was at the said church, they ran thither
to behold him in such numbers that the vineyard of the said
church was utterly despoiled, and all the grapes were plucked:
whereat the priest, sorely grieved in his heart, repented that he
had received St. Francis in his church. Now that priest’s
thoughts being revealed by God to St. Francis, he called him
aside and said to him, “ Dearest father, how many measures of
wine doth this vineyard yield thee a year when the yield is
highest?” He answered, “Twelve measures.” Says St,
Francis, “ Prithee, father, suffer me patiently to sojourn here
yet a few days, for I find much repose here; and for the love of
God and of me, poor little one, let every man gather grapes from
thy vineyard, and I promise thee, in the name of my Lord Jesus
Christ, that every year thy vineyard shall yield thee twenty
measures of wine.” And St. Francis tarried there because of
the great harvest of souls manifestly gathered from the folk
that came thither; whereof many departed inebriated with
divine love and forsook the world. The priest had faith in the
promise of St. Francis, and surrendered the vineyard freely to
those that came thither: and the vineyard was all wasted and
stripped, so that scarce a bunch of grapes remained. Marvellous
to tell, the vintage season comes, and lo, the priest gathers the
few bunches that were left and casts them into the wine-press


A Wondrous Vision 37

and treads them, and, according to the promise of St, Francis,
he harvested twenty measures of excellent wine. In this
miracle was manifestly seen that, since by the merits of St,
Francis the vineyard, stripped of its grapes, gave forth abun¬
dance of wine, so Christian folk, barren of virtue through sin,
ofttimes abounded in good fruit of penitence through the merits
and teaching of St. Francis.


CHAPTER XX

TOUCHING A MOST BEAUTIFUL VISION THAT A YOUNG FRIAR SAW,
WHO SO HATED HIS HABIT THAT HE WAS MINDED TO CAST
IT OFF AND FORSAKE THE ORDER

A youth of very noble birth and gently nurtured entered the
Order of St. Francis; and after some days, at the instigation of
the devil, began to hold the habit he wore in such abomination
that it seemed to him of vilest sackcloth. The sleeves thereof
he held in horror; he hated the cowl, and the length and coarse¬
ness thereof seemed to him an intolerable burden. And his
dislike of the Order increasing also, he finally determined to quit
the habit and return to the world. Now he was already wonted,
even as he had been taught by his master, to kneel down with
great reverence and draw off his cowl and cross his arms on his
breast and prostrate himself whensoever he passed before the
altar of the friary, where the body of Christ was reserved. Now
it befell on the night when he was minded to depart and leave
the Order, that it behoved him to pass before the altar of the
convent: and passing there he knelt down as was his wont and
did reverence. And suddenly he was rapt in spirit, and a
wondrous vision was shown him by God; for he beheld, as
Twere, a countless multitude of saints pass before him, after
the manner of a procession, two by two, clad in most fair and
precious raiment; and the countenances and hands of them
shone like the sun; and they paced to the chants and music of
angels. And amid these saints were two more nobly arrayed
and adorned than all the others; and they were encompassed
with such brightness that he who beheld them was filled with
great amaze; and well-nigh at the end of the procession he
beheld one adorned so gloriously that he seemed a new-made
knight, more honoured than the others. This youth, beholding
the said vision, marvelled greatly, and knew not what that


38 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

procession betokened, yet dared not ask, and remained dazed
with the sweetness thereof. And, nevertheless, when all the
procession was passed, he took courage and ran after the last
of them, and asked, saying,“ 0 beloved, prithee of your courtesy
tell me who be they so marvellously arrayed that walk in this
venerable procession? ” They answered, “ Know, my son,
that we are all friars minor, who now are coming from the glory
of paradise.” Then asked he thus, “Who be those two that
shine more brightly than the others ? ” They answered, “ Those
are St. Francis and St. Anthony; and he the last of all whom
thou sawest thus honoured is a holy friar that newly died, whom
we are leading in triumph to the glory of paradise, for that he
hath fought valiantly against temptation and persevered unto
the end; and these fair garments of fine cloth we wear, are given
to us by God in lieu of the coarse tunics we wore in the Order;
and the glorious brightness that thou beholdest is given to us
by God for the humility and patience, and for the holy poverty
and obedience and chastity we kept even to the last. Therefore,
my son, be it not hard to thee to wear the sackcloth of the
Order, that is so fruitful, because, if clothed in the sackcloth
of St. Francis, thou for love of Christ despise the world and
mortify thy flesh and valiantly fight against the devil, thou,
with us, shalt have a like raiment and exceeding brightness of
glory.” These words said, the youth returned to himself, and
heartened by this vision, cast away from him all temptation,
and confessed his fault before the warden and the friars; andi
thenceforth he desired the bitterness of penitence and the
coarseness of the habit, and ended his life in the Order in great
sanctity#


CHAPTER XXI

OF THE MOST HOLY MIRACLE THAT ST. FRANCIS WROUGHT WHEN
HE CONVERTED THE FIERCE WOLF OF GUBBIO

In the days when St. Francis abode in the city of Gubbio, a
huge wolf, terrible and fierce, appeared in the neighbourhood,
and not only devoured animals but men also; in such wise that
ail the citizens went in great fear of their lives, because ofttimes
the wolf came close to the city. And when they went abroad,
all men armed themselves as were they going forth to battle;
and even so none who chanced on the wolf alone could defend


Conversion of the Wolf of Gubbio 39

himself; and at last it came to such a pass that for fear of this
wolf no man durst leave the city walls. Wherefore St. Francis
had great compassion for the men of that city, and purposed
to issue forth against that wolf, albeit the citizens, with one
accord, counselled him not to go. But he, making the sign of
holy cross, and putting all his trust in God, set forth from the
city with his companions; but they, fearing to go farther,
St. Francis went his way alone towards the place where the
wolf was. And lo! the said wolf, in the sight of much folk that
had come to behold the miracle, leapt towards St. Francis with
gaping jaws; and St. Francis, drawing nigh, made to him the
sign of most holy cross and called him, speaking thus, “ Come
hither, friar wolf; I command thee in the name of Christ that
thou do hurt neither to me nor to any man.” Marvellous to
tell! no sooner had St. Francis made the sign of holy cross than
the terrible wolf closed his jaws and stayed his course; no sooner
was the command uttered than he came, gentle as a lamb, and
laid himself at the feet of St. Francis. Then St. Francis speaks
to him thus, “ Friar wolf, thou workest much evil in these parts,
and hast wrought grievous ill, destroying and slaying God’s
creatures without His leave; and not only hast thou slain and
devoured the beasts of the field, but thou hast dared to destroy
and slay men made in the image of God; wherefore thou art
worthy of the gallows as a most wicked thief and murderer:
all folk cry out and murmur against thee, and all this city is
at enmity with thee. But, friar wolf, fain would I make peace
with them and thee, so that thou injure them no more; and
they shall forgive thee all thy past offences, and neither man
nor dog shall pursue thee more.” Now when St. Francis had
spoken these words, the wolf, moving his body and his tail and
his ears, and bowing his head, made signs that he accepted what
had been said, and would abide thereby. Then said St. Francis,
u Friar wolf, since it pleaseth thee to make and observe this
peace, I promise to obtain for thee, so long as thou livest, a
continual sustenance from the men of this city, so that thou
shalt no more suffer hunger, for well I ween that thou hast
wrought all this evil to satisfy thy hunger. But after I have
won this favour for thee, friar wolf, I desire that thou promise
me to do hurt neither to man nor beast. Dost thou promise
me this ? ” And the wolf bowed his head and gave clear token
that he promised these things. And St. Francis said, “ Friar
wolf, I desire that thou pledge thy faith to me to keep this
promise, that I may have full trust in thee.” And when St,


40 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

Francis held forth his hand to receive this pledge, the wolf lifted
up his right paw and gently laid it in the hand of St. Francis,
giving him thereby such token of good faith as he could. Then
said St. Francis, “ Friar wolf, I command thee in the name of
Jesus Christ to come with me; fear naught, and we will go and
confirm this peace in the name of God.” And the wolf, obedient,
set forth by his side even as a pet lamb; wherefore, when the men
of the city beheld this, they marvelled greatly. And anon this
miracle was noised about the whole city, and all folk, great and
small, men and women, old and young, flocked to the market¬
place to see the wolf with St. Francis. And when all the people
were gathered together there, St. Francis stood forth and
preached to them, saying, among other things, how that for
their sins God had suffered such calamities to befall them, and
how much more perilous were the flames of hell which the
damned must endure everlastingly than was the ravening of a
wolf that could only slay the body; and how much more to be
feared were the jaws of hell, since that for fear of the mouth of
a small beast such multitudes went in fear and trembling.
“ Turn ye, then, dearest children, to God, and do fitting penance
for your sins, and so shall God free you from the wolf in this
world and from eternal fire in the world to come.” And having
made an end of his sermon, St. Francis said, “ Hark ye, my
brethren, friar wolf, here before you, hath promised and pledged
his faith to me never to injure you in anything whatsoever, if
you will promise to provide him daily sustenance; and here
stand I, a bondsman for him, that he will steadfastly observe this
pact of peace.” Then the people with one voice promised to
feed him all his days. And St. Francis, before all the people,
said to the wolf, “ And thou, friar wolf, dost promise to observe
the conditions of this peace before all this people, and that thou
wilt injure neither man nor beast nor any iiving creature? ”
And the wolf knelt down and bowed his head, and with gentle
movements of tail and body and ears, showed by all possible
tokens his will to observe every pact of peace. Says St. Francis,
“ I desire, friar wolf, that even as thou didst pledge thy faith
to me without the city gates to hold fast to thy promise, so
here, before all this people, thou shalt renew thy pledge, and
promise thou wilt never play me, thy bondsman, false.” Then
the wolf, lifting up his right paw, placed it in the hand of St.
Francis. Whereat, what with this act and the others aforesaid,
there was such marvel and rejoicing among all the people—not
only at the strangeness of the miracle, but because of the peace


St. Francis and the Doves 41

made with the wolf—that they all began to cry aloud to heaven,
praising and blessing God, who had sent St. Francis to them,
by whose merits they had been freed from the cruel wolf. And
the said wolf lived two years in Gubbio, and was wont to enter
like a tame creature into the houses from door to door, doing
hurt to no one and none doing hurt to him. And he was kindly
fed by the people; and as he went about the city never a dog
barked at him. At last, after two years, friar wolf died of old
age; whereat the citizens grieved much, for when they beheld
him going thus tamely about the city, they remembered better
the virtues and holiness of St. Francis.


CHAPTER XXII

HOW ST. FRANCIS TAMED THE WILD TURTLE DOVES

A certain youth one day, having snared many turtle doves,
was taking them to market when St. Francis met him. And
St. Francis, who ever had singular compassion for gentle
creatures, gazed upon those doves with a pitying eye, and said
to the youth, “ 0 good youth, prithee give them to me, lest
birds so gentle, that chaste, humble, and faithful souls are
compared to them in the scriptures, fall into the hands of cruel
men who would kill them.” Straightway the youth, inspired by
God, gave them all to St. Francis, who received them into his
bosom and began to speak sweetly to them, “ 0 my little sisters,
ye simple doves, innocent and chaste, wherefore suffer your¬
selves to be caught? Now will I rescue you from death, and
make nests for you, that ye may be fruitful and multiply,
according to the commandments of our Creator. ,, And St.
Francis went and made nests for them all; and they took to
the nests and began.to lay eggs and rear their young before
the eyes of the friars: and thus they abode tamely and grew
familiar with St. Francis and the other friars, as if they had been
chickens ever fed by their hands: nor did they depart until
St. Francis gave them leave with his blessing. And he said to
the youth that had given them to him, “ Son, thou shalt yet be
a friar in this Order and serve Jesus Christ in grace. ,, And so
it befell, for the said youth became a friar and lived in the Order
with great holiness.


c 485


42 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER XXIII

HOW ST. FRANCIS DELIVERED A SINFUL FRIAR FROM THE
POWER OF THE DEVIL

It fell out on a time as St. Fra.ncis was at prayer in the friary
of the Porziuncula, that he beheld by divine revelation the whole
house surrounded and besieged by devils in the similitude of a
mighty army. But they could not enter within because those
friars were of such holiness that no evil spirit could come nigh
them. And as the enemy lay in wait, one of the friars on a day
quarrelled with another, and thought in his heart how he might
accuse him and be avenged. Wherefore, while he nursed this
evil thought, the devil saw the way open and entered into the
friary and sat on the friar's shoulder. But the compassionate
and vigilant shepherd that ever watched over his flock, seeing
the wolf had entered the fold to devour his lamb, let that friar
be called to him, and commanded him straightway to reveal
the venom of hatred he had conceived towards his neighbour,
whereby he had fallen into the power of the enemy of mankind.
The friar, affrighted when he perceived that the holy father
had thus read his heart, revealed all the venom and malice he
had borne in his breast, and confessed his sin and humbly craved
mercy and penance. This done, and his penance being accepted,
he was assoiled of his sin, and straightway the devil departed in
the presence of St. Francis. And the friar, thus delivered from
the power of the cruel fiend through the loving-kindness of the
good shepherd, gave thanks to God, and returned chastened
and admonished to the fold of the holy pastor, and ever after
lived in great sanctity*


CHAPTER XXIV


HOW ST. FRANCIS CONVERTED THE SOLDAN OF BABYLON
TO THE TRUE FAITH

St. Francis, stirred by zeal for the faith of Christ and by the
desire of martyrdom, voyaged on a time over the seas with
twelve of his holiest companions, to fare straight to the Soldan
of Babylon; 1 and when they came to the land of the Saracens,
1 Old Cairo.


Conversion of Soldan of Babylon 43

where the passes were guarded by certain men so cruel that
never a Christian who journeyed that way escaped death at
their hands, by the grace of God they escaped, and were not
slain; but seized and beaten, they were led in bonds before the
Soldan. And standing before him, St. Francis, taught by the
Holy Ghost, preached the faith of Christ so divinely that for
his faith's sake he even would have entered the fire. Whereat
the Soldan began to feel great devotion towards him, as much
for the constancy of his faith as for his contempt of the world
(for albeit he was very poor, he would accept no gift), and also
for the fervour of martyrdom he beheld in him. From that
time forth the Soldan heard him gladly, and entreated him many
times to come back, granting to him and to his companions
freedom to preach wheresoever it might please them; and he
gave them also a token, so that no man should do them hurt.
Having therefore received this licence, St. Francis sent forth
those chosen companions, two by two, in divers parts, to preach
the faith of Christ to the Saracens. And himself, with one of
them, chose a way, and journeying on he came to an inn to rest.
And therein was a woman, most fair in body but foul in soul,
who, accursed one, did tempt him to sin. And St. Francis,
saying he consented thereto, she led him into a chamber. Said
St. Francis, “ Come with me.” And he led her to a fierce fire
that was kindled in that chamber, and in fervour of spirit
stripped himself naked and cast himself beside that fire on the
burning hearth; and he invited her to go and strip and lie with
him on that bed, downy and fair. And when St. Francis had
lain thus for a great space, with a joyous face, being neither
burned nor even singed, that woman, affrighted and pierced to
the heart, not only repented of her sin and of her evil intent,
but likewise was wholly converted to the faith of Christ; and
she waxed so in holiness that many souls were saved through her
in those lands.

At last, when St. Francis saw he could gather no more fruit
in those parts, he prepared by divine admonition to return to
the faithful with all his companions; and having assembled
them together, he went back to the Soldan and took leave of
him. Then said the Soldan to him, “ Friar Francis, fain would
I convert me to the faith of Christ, but I fear to do so now, for
if this people heard thereof they would surely slay thee and me
and all thy companions; and forasmuch as thou canst yet work
much good, and as I have certain affairs of great moment to
despatch, I will not be the cause of thy death and of mine. But


44 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

teach me how I may be saved; lo, I am ready to do whatsoever
thou layest upon me.” Then said St. Francis, “ My lord, now
must I depart from you, but after I am returned to mine own
country and by the grace of God have ascended to heaven, after
my death, as it may please God, I will send thee two of my friars,
at whose hands thou shalt receive the holy baptism of Christ and
be saved, even as my Lord Jesus Christ hath revealed to me.
And do thou meanwhile get thee free from all hindrance, so that
when the grace of God shall come upon thee thou shalt find
thyself well disposed to faith and devotion.” Thus he promised
and thus he did. This said, St. Francis returned with that
venerable college of his holy companions, and after some years
he gave up his soul to God by the death of the body. And the
Soldan, being fallen sick, awaits the promise of St. Francis, and
stations guards at certain of the passes, and commands them
that if two friars appear in the habit of St. Francis, they shall
straightway be led before him. At that very hour St. Francis
appeared to two friars, and bade them tarry not, but hasten
to the Soldan and compass his salvation, according as he had
promised. And anon the friars set forth, and having crossed
the pass, were led by the said guards before the Soldan. And
when the Soldan beheld them he was filled with great joy, and
said, “ Now do I truly perceive that God hath sent his servants
to me for my salvation, according to the promise St. Francis
made to me by divine inspiration.” And when he had received
instruction from those friars in the faith of Christ and holy
baptism, he, being born again in Christ, died of that sickness,
and his soul was saved through the merits and the prayers of
St. Francis,


CHAPTER XXV

HOW ST. FRANCIS MIRACULOUSLY HEALED A LEPER, BODY AND
SOUL, AND WHAT THAT SOUL SAID TO HIM ON HER WAY
TO HEAVEN

St. Francis, true disciple of Christ, while he lived in this
miserable life, strove with all his might to follow Christ, the
perfect Master; wherefore it befell many times, by divine
power, that the souls of those, whose bodies he healed, were also
healed' at the selfsame hour, even as we read of Christ. And
he not only served lepers gladly, but had also ordained that
the friars of his Order, as they went about the world, should


serve lepers for love of Christ, who for our sakes was willing to
be accounted a leper. Now it befell on a time, in a friary nigh
unto where St. Francis then was dwelling, that the friars were
serving lepers and other sick folk in a lazar-house, among whom
was a leper, so froward, so intolerable, and so insolent, that all
believed of a surety he was possessed of the devil; and so in
sooth it was, for he reviled so shamefully with words, and
belaboured whosoever was tending him, and, what is worse, did
foully blaspheme the blessed Christ and His most holy Mother
the Virgin Mary, so that in no wise could one be found willing
or able to serve him. And albeit the friars strove to bear
patiently the injuries and insults heaped upon themselves, in
order to increase the merit of their patience, nevertheless, their
consciences were unable to endure those uttered against the
Christ and His Mother: so they resolved to forsake the said
leper, but would not until they had signified all things in due
order to St. Francis, who was then dwelling in a friary hard by.
And when they had signified these things to him, St. Francis
came to this perverse leper, and drawing nigh, gave him saluta¬
tion, saying, “ God give thee peace, my dearest brother.” The
leper answers, “ What peace can I have from God, who hath taken
peace from me and all good things, and hath made me all
rotten and stinking? ” And St. Francis said, “ My son, have
patience, for the infirmities of the body are given to us by God
in this world for the salvation of souls; inasmuch as they are of
great merit when they are endured patiently.” The sick man
answers, “ And how can I bear patiently this continual pain
that afflicts me day and night? And not only am I afflicted
by my sickness, but the friars thou gavest to serve me do even
worse, and serve me not as they ought.” Then St. Francis,
knowing by divine revelation that this leper was possessed of
the evil spirit, went aside and betook himself to prayer, and
devoutly prayed God for him. His prayer ended, he returns
to the leper and bespeaks him thus, “ My son, I will serve thee,
even I, since thou art not content with the others.” And the
leper answers, “ So be it; but what canst thou do more than the
others?” St. Francis answers, “Whatsoever thou wilt, that
will I do.” Says the leper, “ I will that thou wash me all over,
for I stink so foully that I cannot abide myself.” Then St,
Francis made quickly water boil, with many sweet-smelling
herbs therein; then did strip the leper and began to wash him
with his own hands, while another friar poured water over him.
And by miracle divine, wherever St. Francis touched him with


46 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

his holy hands the leprosy departed, and the flesh became
perfectly whole. And even as the flesh began to heal, the soul
began to heal also; whereupon the leper, seeing the leprosy on
the way to leave him, began to have great compunction and
repentance for his sins; and bitterly he began to weep; so that
while the body was outwardly cleansed of the leprosy by the
washing with water, the soul within was cleansed of sin by
amendment and tears. And being wholly healed, as well in
body as in soul, he humbly confessed his sins, and weeping, said
with a loud voice, “ Woe unto me, who am worthy of hell for
the insults and injuries I have put upon the friars in word and
deed, and for my perversity and blasphemies against God.”
Wherefore a fortnight long he persevered in bitter weeping for
his sins and in craving mercy of God, confessing himself unto
the priest with a whole heart. And when St. Francis beheld so
clear a miracle that God had wrought by his hands, he gave
thanks to God, and departing thence, journeyed into a very far
country; for through humility he desired to flee all vainglory,
and in all his works sought the honour and glory of God, and
not his own. Then as it pleased God, the said leper, being
healed in body and soul, fell sick of another infirmity a fort¬
night after his repentance; and, armed with the sacraments of
the church, died a holy death. And his soul, on her way to
paradise, appeared in the air to St. Francis, who was at prayer
in a wood, and said to him, “ Knowest thou me? ” “ Who

art thou? ” said St. Francis. “ I am the leper whom the blessed
Christ healed through thy merits, and this day am going to life
everlasting; wherefore I render thanks to God and to thee.
Blessed be thy soul and thy body; blessed thy holy words and
deeds, because through thee many souls shall be saved in the
world: and know that not a day passeth in the world but that
the holy angels and the other saints give thanks to God for the
holy fruits that thou and thy Order bring forth in divers parts
of the world. Therefore be comforted, and give thanks to God
and abide with His blessing.” These words said, the soul passed
into heaven, and St, Francis remained much comforted.


Conversion of Three Robbers


47


CHAPTER XXVI

HOW ST. FRANCIS CONVERTED THREE MURDEROUS ROBBERS THAT
BECAME FRIARS; AND OF THE MOST NOBLE VISION THAT ONE
OF THEM BEHELD WHO WAS A MOST HOLY FRIAR

St. Francis on a time was journeying through the wilderness
ot Forgo San Sepolcro, and as he passed by a stronghold, called
Monte Casale, a noble and delicate youth came to him and said
Father,^ fain would I become one of your friars.” St. Francis
answers, “ Son, thou art but a delicate youth and of noble birth
peradventure thou couldst not endure our poverty and our
hardships.” And the youth said, “ Father, are ye not men as
1 am? Since ye then endure these things, even so can I by
the grace of Jesus Christ.” St. Francis, well pleased with this
answer, gave him his blessing, and anon received him into the
Order, and gave him for name Friar Angel. And this youth
waxed so in grace that short time after St. Francis made him
warden of the friary called of Monte Casale. Now in those days
three famous robbers who infested that country and wrought
much evil therein, came to the said friary and besought the
said warden, Friar Angel, to give them food to eat; and the
warden answered them in this wise, rebuking them harshly
Ye robbers and cruel manslayers, are ye not ashamed to steal
the fruit of others’ labours, but, frontless and insolent, would
seek likewise to devour the alms bestowed on God’s servants?
Ye are not worthy even to walk this earth, for ye reverence
neither man nor the God that created you; get ye gone then
and be seen here no more.” Whereat they, perturbed, departed’
m great fury. And lo, St. Francis appeared outside the friary
his wallet filled with bread, and carrying a small vessel of wine’
that he and his companion had begged. And when the warden
related to him how he had driven the robbers away, St. Prancis
chid him severely, saying he had borne himself cruelly since
sinners were better drawn to God by gentleness than by cruel
reproof. “ Wherefore our Master, Jesus Christ, whose gospel
we have promised to observe, saith, that the whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick, and that He had not come
to call the just but sinners to repentance; and therefore manv
times He ate with them. Forasmuch as thou hast done contrary


48 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

to charity and contrary to Christ’s holy gospel, I command thee
by holy obedience that thou straightway take this wallet of
bread that I have begged and this vessel of wine, and go diligently
after them over hill and valley until thou find them, and give
them all this bread and wine from me: then kneel thee down
before them and confess humbly thy fault of cruelty, and
entreat them for my sake to work evil no more, but to fear God
and offend Him no more; and say that if they will do this I
promise to provide for all their needs, and give them continually
enough to eat and to drink. And when thou hast done this,
return humbly hither.” While the said warden went to do this
bidding, St. Francis betook himself to prayer, and besought God
that He would soften the hearts of those robbers and convert
them to repentance. The obedient warden overtakes them
and gives them the bread and wine, and does and says what
St. Francis had commanded him. And it pleased God that
those robbers, as they ate of the alms of St. Francis, began to
say to one another, “ Woe unto us, wretched and hapless! what
hard torments await us in hell! For we go about not only
robbing our neighbours, beating and wounding them, but do
slay them likewise; and so many evil deeds and wicked works
notwithstanding, we have neither remorse of conscience nor
fear of God; and lo, this holy friar hath come to us, and for a
few words wherewith he justly rebuked our wickedness, hath
humbly confessed to us his fault; and moreover, hath brought
us bread and wine and promise so bounteous from the holy
father: verily these are God’s holy friars that merit His
paradise, and we are children of eternal wrath that deserve the
pains of hell, and each day do increase our doom; yea, we
know not whether for the sins we have committed to this day
we may return to the mercy of God.” These and the like words
being spoken by one of them, the others said, Of a surety thou
speakest sooth, but look ye, what must we do?” “Go we,”
said one, “ to St. Francis, and if he give us hope that we may find
mercy from God for our sins, let us do whatsoever he command
us and so may we deliver our souls from the torments of hell.”
Now this counsel was pleasing to the others, and thus all three
being in accord, they came in haste to St. Francis and spake to
him thus, “ Father, we for our many wicked sins believe we
cannot return to the mercy of God; but if thou have some hope
that God in His mercy will receive us, lo, we are ready to do thy
bidding and to do penance with thee.” Then St. Francis
received them with loving-kindness and comforted them with


Conversion of Three Robbers 49

many ensamples, and made them confident of God’s mercy,
promising he would surely obtain it for them from God. He
told them that the mercy of God was infinite, and that, according
to the gospel, even if our sins were infinite, His mercy was yet
greater than our sins; and that the Apostle St. Paul hath said,
“Christ the blessed came into the world to save sinners.”
Hearing these words and the like teachings, the said three
robbers renounced the devil and all his works, and St. Francis
received them into the Order, and they began to do great
penance. And two of them lived but a brief space after their
conversion and went to paradise; but the third lived on, and,
pondering on his sins, gave himself up to do such penance
during fifteen unbroken years that, besides the common lenten
fasts which he kept with the other friars, he fasted three days
of the week on bread and water; he went ever barefoot, with
naught on his back but a single tunic, nor ever slept after
matins. In the meantime St. Francis passed from this miserable
life; and this friar through many years continued his penance,
when lo, one night after matins, so sore a temptation to sleep
came upon him, that in no wise could he resist it, nor watch as
he was wont to do. At length, unable to overcome his drowsi¬
ness, or to pray, he lay on his bed to sleep. No sooner had he
laid down his head than he was rapt and led in spirit to the
top of a very high mountain over a steep place, and on this side
and on that were broken and jagged rocks and monstrous crags
that jutted forth from the rocks; wherefore this steep place
was frightful to behold. And the angel that was leading this
friar pushed him and flung him down that steep place; and as
he fell he was dashed from rock to rock and from crag to crag
until he fell to the bottom of the abyss, his limbs all broken
and shattered to pieces, according as it seemed to him. And
lying thus mangled on the ground, he that led him said, “ Rise
up, for it behoves thee to go a yet greater journey.” The friar
answered, “ Methinks thou art a most foolish and cruel man;
for thou seest I am well-nigh dead of my fall, which has dashed
me to pieces, and thou yet biddest me rise up.” And the
angel drew nigh and, touching him, made all his members whole
again and healed his wounds. And then he showed him a great
plain, full of sharp and pointed stones and thorns and briars,
and told him he must needs run across all this plain and pass over
it with naked feet until he came to the end; there he would
behold a fiery furnace wherein he must enter. And the friar
having passed over all the plain with great pain and anguish,


50 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

the angel said to him, “ Enter yon furnace, for this it behoves
thee now to do.” He answers, “ Alas! how cruel a guide art
thou, that seest I am nigh unto death, because of this horrible
plain; and now for repose thou biddest me enter this fiery
furnace.” And as he gazed, he beheld many devils around the
furnace with iron forks in their hands, wherewith, seeing him
slow to enter, they thrust him into the furnace. Having entered
the furnace, he gazed around and beheld one that had been his
boon companion, who was all a-burning; and he asked of him,
“0 hapless comrade, how earnest thou here?” And he
answered and said, “ Go a little farther and thou shalt find my
wife, thy gossip; she will tell thee the cause of our damnation.”
And as the friar passed on, lo, the said gossip appeared, all
aflame and enclosed in a fiery measure of corn; and he asked
her, saying, “ 0 gossip, hapless and wretched, why art thou in
so cruel a torment? ” And she answered, “ Because at the
time of the great famine that St. Francis had foretold, my
husband and I gave false measure of com and wheat; therefore
do I bum in this measure.” These words said, the angel who
was leading the friar thrust him out of the furnace and said to
him, “Make thee ready for a horrible journey thou hast to
take.” And he, lamenting, said, “ 0 guide most cruel, that
hast no compassion on me, thou seest I am well-nigh all burned
in this furnace, and yet wouldst lead me on a perilous and
horrible journey.” And the angel touched him, and made him
whole and strong. Then he led him to a bridge, which could
not be crossed without great peril, for it was very frail and
narrow and slippery and without a rail at the sides; and beneath
it flowed a terrible river, filled with serpents and dragons and
scorpions, that it gave forth a great stench. And the angel said
to him, “ Pass over this bridge; at any cost thou must, pass
over.” And the friar answers, “ And how shall I cross without
falling into this perilous river? ” Says the angel, “ Follow after
me, and set thy foot where thou seest me place mine; so shalt
thou pass over well.” This friar passes behind the angel as he
had shown him, until he reached the middle of the bridge, and
as he stood thus on the crown of the bridge the angel flew away,
and departing from him, went to the top of a most high moun¬
tain far away beyond the bridge. And the friar considered well
the place whither the angel had flown: but, left without a guide
and gazing below him, he beheld those terrible beasts with
their heads out of the water and with open jaws ready to devour
him if peradventure he should fall; and he trembled so that in


Conversion of Three Robbers 51

no wise knew he what to do, nor what to say; for he could
neither turn back nor go forward. Wherefore, beholding himself
in such great tribulation, and that he had no other refuge save
in God, he stooped down and clasped the bridge, and with his
whole heart and in tears he commended himself to God, and
prayed that of His most holy mercy he would succour him.
His prayer ended, himseemed to put forth wings, whereat with
great joy he waited until they grew, that he might fly beyond
the bridge whither the angel had flown. But after a while, by
the great desire he had to pass beyond this bridge, he set himself
to fly, and because his wings were not yet fully grown, he fell
upon the bridge and his wings dropped from him; whereat he
clasped the bridge again, and commended himself as before to
God. And his prayer ended, again himseemed to put forth
wings; but, as before, he waited not until they had fully grown,
and setting himself to fly before the time, he fell again on the
bridge, and his wings dropped. Wherefore, seeing these things,
and that he had fallen, through his untimely haste to fly, he
began to say within himself, “ Of a surety, if I put forth wings
a third time, I will wait until they be so great that I may fly
without falling again.” And pondering these things, lo, him¬
seemed yet a third time to put forth wings; and waiting a great
space, until they were w’ell grown, himseemed with the first
and second and third putting forth of wings that he had waited
full a hundred, and fifty years or more. At length he lifted
him up this third time, and with all his might took wing and
flew on high as far as the place whither the angel had flown.
And knocking at the door of the palace wherein the angel was,
the doorkeeper asked of him, “ Who art thou that comest here? ”
He answered, “ I am a friar minor.” Says the doorkeeper,
“ Tarry a while, for I will bring St. Francis hither, to see if he
know thee.” As he went his way to St. Francis, this friar
began to gaze on the marvellous walls of the palace; and lo,
these walls appeared translucent and of such exceeding bright¬
ness that he beheld clearly the choirs of the saints and all that
was doing within. And standing thus amazed at this vision,
lo, St. Francis cometh, and Friar Bernard, and Friar Giles;
and after these, so great a multitude of sainted men and women
that had followed the example of his life, that they seemed well-
nigh countless; and St. Francis came forth and said to the
doorkeeper, “ Let him enter, for he is one of my friars.” And
no sooner had he entered therein than he felt such great con¬
solation and such sweetness that he forgot all the tribulations


52 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

he had suffered, even as if they had not been. And then St.
Francis led him in and showed him many marvellous things,
and thus bespake him, “ Son, needs must thou return to the
world and abide there seven days, wherein thou shalt make
thee ready diligently and with great devotion; for after these
seven days I will come for thee, and then shalt thou enter with
me this abode of the blessed.” Now St. Francis was arrayed
in a wondrous garment, adorned with fairest stars, and his five
stigmas were like unto five beauteous stars, of such exceeding
splendour that the whole palace was illumined with their beams.
And Friar Bernard’s head was crowned with fairest stars, and
Friar Giles was aureoled with wondrous light; and many other
friars he knew among them that in the world he had never seen.
Then taking leave of St. Francis he returned, albeit with laggard
steps, to the world again. And when he awoke and returned
to himself and came to his wits again, the friars were chanting
prime; so that he had been in that vision but from matins to
prime, albeit it had seemed to him that he had remained therein
many years. And having related to the warden all this vision
in due order, he began, within seven days, to sicken of a fever;
and on the eighth day St. Francis came for him, according to
his promise, with a great multitude of glorious saints, and led
his soul to life everlasting in the realms of the blessed.


CHAPTER XXVII

HOW ST. FRANCIS CONVERTED TWO SCHOLARS AT BOLOGNA THAT
BECAME FRIARS, AND THEN DELIVERED ONE OF THEM FROM
A GREAT TEMPTATION

Once on a time when St. Francis came to the city of Bologna
all the people of the city ran forth to behold him, and so great
was the press that the folk could with great difficulty reach the
market-place; and the whole place being filled with men and;
women and scholars, lo, St. Francis stood up on high in the
midst of them and began to preach what the Holy Ghost taught
him. And so wondrously he preached that he seemed to speak
with the voice of an angel rather than of a man; his celestial
words seemed to pierce the hearts of those that heard them,
even as sharp arrows, so that during his sermon a great multi¬
tude of men and women were converted to repentance. Among


Friar Pellegrino and Friar Rinieri 53

whom were two students of noble birth from the Marches of
Ancona, the one named Pellegrino, the other Rinieri: and being
touched in their hearts by divine inspiration through the said
sermon, they came to St. Francis saying they desired wholly to
forsake the world and be numbered among his friars. Then St,
Francis, knowing by divine revelation that they were sent of
God and were to lead a holy life in the Order, and considering
their great fervour, received them joyfully, saying, “ Thou,
Pellegrino, keep the way of humility in the Order, and do thou.
Friar Rinieri, serve the friars;” and thus it was: for Friar
Pellegrino would never go forth as a priest but as a lay brother,
albeit he was a great clerk and learned in the canon law. And
by reason of this humility he attained to great perfection of
virtue; in such wise that Friar Bernard, first-born of St. Francis,
said of him, that he was one of the most perfect friars in this
world. Finally, the said Friar Pellegrino passed from his blessed
life, full of virtue, and wrought many miracles before his death
and after. And the said Friar Rinieri, devoutly living in great
holiness and humility, faithfully served the friars, and was much
beloved of St. Francis. Being afterwards chosen minister of the
province of the Marches of Ancona, he ruled it a long time with
great peace and discretion. After a while God suffered a sore
temptation to arise in his soul; whereat, in anguish and tribu¬
lation, he afflicted himself mightily with fastings and scourgings,
with tears and prayers, both day and night. Nevertheless, he
could not banish that temptation, but ofttimes was in great
despair because he deemed himself forsaken by God. In this
great despair he resolved, as a last remedy, to go to St. Francis,
thinking thus within himself, “ If St. Francis meet me with a
kindly countenance, and show me affection, as he is wont to do,
I believe that God will yet have compassion on me: but if not
it shall be a token that I am forsaken of God.” Thereupon he
set forth and went to St. Francis, who at that time lay grievously
sick in the bishop’s palace at Assisi; and God revealed to him
all the manner of that temptation, and of the state of the said
Friar Rinieri, and his coming. And straightway St. Francis
calls Friar Leo and Friar Masseo, and says to them, “ Go ye
quickly and meet my most dear son, Friar Rinieri, and embrace
him for me and salute him, and say unto him that among all the
friars that are in the world, him I love with singular love,” They
go forth and find Friar Rinieri by the way and embrace him,
saying unto him what St. Francis had charged them to say.
^hereupon such great consolation and sweetness filled his soul


54 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

that he was well-nigh beside himself with joy, and giving thanks
to God with all his heart he journeyed on and reached the place
where St. Francis lay sick. And albeit St. Francis was griev¬
ously sick, nevertheless, when he heard Friar Rinieri coming, he
rose up from his bed and went towards him and embraced him
most sweetly and spake to him thus, “ Friar Rinieri, dearest son,
thee I love above all the friars in this world; thee I love with
singular love: ” and these words said, he made the sign of most
holy cross on his brow and there did kiss him Then he said to
him, “ Son most dear, God hath suffered this sore temptation to
befall thee for thy great gain of merit: but if thou desire this
gain no longer, have it not.” Marvellous to tell! no sooner had
St. Francis uttered these words than all temptation departed
from him, even as if he ne’er had felt it in his life: and he
remained fully comforted.


CHAPTER XXVIII

OF THE DIVINE ECSTASY THAT CAME TO FRIAR BERNARD WHEREBY
HE REMAINED FROM MORN TO NOON INSENSIBLE TO OUT¬
WARD THINGS

How large a measure of grace God oft bestowed on poor
followers of the gospel that forsook the world for love of Christ
was shown forth in Friar Bernard of Quintavalle, who, after
having put on the habit of St. Francis, was rapt many times in
God through contemplation of celestial things. Among others,
it befell on a time that when he was in church hearing mass, and
with his whole mind lifted up to God, he became so absorbed
and rapt in God that he perceived not when the body of Christ
was elevated, nor knelt down, nor drew off his cowl as the other
friars did: but without moving his eyes, stood with fixed gaze,
insensible to outward things from mom till noon. And after
noon, returning to himself, he went about the friary crying with
a voice of wonder, “ 0 friars, 0 friars, O friars, there is no man
in this country, were he ever so great or so noble, but if he were
promised a beautiful palace filled with gold would not find it
easy to carry a sack full of dung in order to win that treasure so
noble.” To this celestial treasure, promised to those that love
God, the aforesaid Friar Bernard had his mind so lifted up that
for full fifteen years he ever went with his mind and his coun-


Temptation of Friar Ruffino 55

tenance raised to heaven; during which time he never satisfied
his hunger at table, albeit he ate a little of that which was placed
before him: for he was wont to say that perfect abstinence did
not consist in foregoing that which a man did not relish, but that
true abstinence lay in using temperance in those things that
were of pleasant savour in the mouth; and thereby he attained
to such degree of clearness and light of understanding that even
great doctors had recourse to him for the solution of the knottiest
questions and of difficult passages in the Scriptures, and he
resolved all their difficulties. And forasmuch as his mind was
wholly loosed and detached from earthly things, he, like the
swallows, soared high by contemplation: wherefore, sometimes
twenty days, sometimes thirty, he dwelt alone on. the tops
of the highest mountains, contemplating divine things. For
which cause Friai Giles was wont to say of him, that on no other
man was this gift bestowed as it was on Friar Bernard; to wit,
that he should feed flying, as the swallows did. And for this
excellent grace that he had from God, St. Francis willingly and
oft spake with him, both day and night; so that sometimes they
were found together in the wood, rapt in God, the whole night
long, whither they had both withdrawn to discourse of God.


CHAPTER XXIX

HOW THE DEVIL IN THE FORM OF THE CRUCIFIED APPEARED MANY
TIMES TO FRIAR RUFFINO AND TOLD HIM HE WAS LOSING THE
GOOD HE WAS PRACTISING BECAUSE IIE WAS NOT OF THE
ELECT. WHEREAT ST. FRANCIS, KNOWING THIS BY REVELA¬
TION FROM GOD, MADE FRIAR RUFFINO WARE OF THE ERRORS
WHERETO HE HAD GIVEN CREDENCE

Friar Ruffino, one of the noblest gentlemen of the city of
Assisi, and the companion of St. Francis, a man of great holiness,
was once mightily assailed and tempted in soul touching pre¬
destination; whereby he became full of sadness and melancholy;
for the devil put it into his heart that he was damned, and not
among those predestined to eternal life; and that he was losing
all his work in the Order. And this temptation lasting many
days, he, for very shame, did not reveal it to St. Francis; never¬
theless he ceased not to pray nor to observe the usual fasts:
whereat the enemy began to heap trial upon trial upon him, and


56 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

ever and above the battle within did likewise assail him out-
wardly with false visions. Wherefore he appeared to him once
in the form of the Crucified, and said to him, “ 0 Friar Ruffino,
wherefore afflict thyself with penance and prayer, seeing thou
art not among those predestined to life eternal? Believe me,
for I know whom I have elected and predestined, and heed not
the son of Peter Bernadone if he tell thee contrary; and more¬
over, question him not concerning this matter, for neither he
nor any man knoweth; none save Me, that am the Son of God:
therefore believe that of a surety thou art numbered among the
damned; and the son of Peter Bernadone, thy father, and his
father also are damned, and whosoever followeth him is be¬
guiled.” These words said, Friar Ruffino began to be so over¬
cast by the prince of darkness that already he lost all the faith
and love he had had for St. Francis, and cared not to tell him
aught of his condition. But that which Friar Ruffino told not
the holy father was revealed to him by the Holy Spirit;
whereat St. Francis, beholding in spirit the great peril of the
said friar, sent Friar Masseo for him; to whom Friar Ruffino
answered, murmuring, “ What have I to do with Friar Francis ?”
Then Friar Masseo, filled with divine wisdom, and knowing the
wiles of the devil, said, “ 0 Friar Ruffino, knowest thou not that
St. Francis is like unto an angel of God that hath illumined so
many souls in this world and from whom we have received the
grace of God ? Therefore I desire that thou, by all means, come
with me to him, for clearly do I perceive thou art beguiled by
the devil.” This said, lo. Friar Ruffino set forth and went to
St. Francis; and St. Francis beholding him coming from afar,
began to cry, “ O naughty Friar Ruffino, to whom hast thou
given credence? ” And when Friar Ruffino was come to him,
St. Francis related all the temptation he had suffered from the
devil in due order, both within and without, and showed to him
clearly that he who had appeared to him was the devil and not
Christ, and that in no wise should he consent unto his sugges¬
tions; but that “ whenever the devil saith again to thee: 'Thou
art damned/ answer him thus: ‘ Open thy mouth and I will
drop my dung therein.’ And let this be a token to thee that he
is the devil and not Christ; and when thou hast thus answered
he will forthwith flee from thee. By this token also shalt thou
know that it was the devil: for that he hardened thy heart
against all good, which thing is his own proper office; but the
blessed Christ never hardeneth the heart of the man of faith,
rather doth He soften it according as He speaketh by the mouth


Temptation of Friar Ruffino 57

of the prophet: ‘ I will take away the stony heart out of their
flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh.’ ” Then Friar Ruffino,
seeing that St. Francis had told him all the circumstance of his
temptation, was melted by his words, and began to weep
bitterly and to give praise to St. Francis, humbly confessing his
fault in that he had hidden his temptation from him. And thus
he remained fully consoled and comforted by the holy father’s
admonitions and wholly changed for the better. Then at the
last St. Francis said to him, “ Go, my son, confess thee, and
cease not the exercise of thy wonted prayers, and know of a
surety that this temptation shall be of great profit and consola¬
tion to thee, and in brief time shalt thou prove it.” Friar
Ruffino returns to his cell in the wood, and being at prayer with
many tears, lo, the enemy comes in the form of Christ, according
to outward similitude, and saith to him, “ 0 Friar Ruffino, did
I not tell thee thou shouldst not believe the son of Peter Berna-
done, and shouldst not weary thee in tears and prayers, seeing
thou art damned? What doth it profit thee to afflict thyself
while thou art yet alive, seeing that when thou diest thou shalt
be damned ? ” And anon Friar Rufflno answered the devil and
said, “ Open thy mouth and I will drop my dung therein.”
Whereupon the devil straightway departed in great wrath, and
with such tempest and ruin of Atones from Mount Subasio hard
by, that the thunder of the falling rocks endured a great space;
and so mightily did they smite one against the other as they
rolled down that they kindled horrible sparks of fire through
the vale below: and at the terrible noise they made, St. Francis
and his companions issued forth from the friary in great amaze
to behold what strange thing had befallen; and to this very
day that mighty ruin of rocks may be seen. Then did Friar
Rufflno manifestly perceive that he who had beguiled him was
the devil, and returning to St. Francis flung himself again on the
ground and confessed his fault. And St. Francis comforted
him with sweet words, and sent him forth all consoled to his
cell; wherein, while he remained in devoutest prayers, the blessed
Christ appeared to him and kindled his whole soul with divine
love, and said, “ Well didst thou, My son, to believe in Friar
Francis; for he who afflicted thee was the devil; but I am Christ
thy Master, and to make thee full sure I give thee this token:
that while thou livest thou shalt feel neither sadness nor melan¬
choly.” This said, Christ departed, leaving him in such gladness
and sweetness of spirit and elevation of mind, that day and
night he was absorbed and rapt in God. And thenceforth was


58 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

he so confirmed in grace and in certainty of salvation that he
became wholly changed into another man, and would have
remained both day and night in prayer and in contemplation of
divine things, if the friars had suffered him. Wherefore St.
Francis said of him, that Friar Ruffino was canonised by Christ
in this life, and that save in his presence he would not hesitate
to call him Saint Ruffino, albeit he still was living on the earth.


CHAPTER XXX

OF THE FAIR SERMON THAT ST. FRANCIS AND FRIAR
RUFFINO PREACHED AT ASSISI

The said Friar Ruffino was by his continual contemplation so
absorbed in God that he grew dumb and almost insensible to
outward things, and spake very seldom, and, moreover, had no
longer grace, nor courage, nor eloquence in preaching. None
the less St. Francis on a time bade him go to Assisi and preach
to the people what God should inspire him to say. Whereat
Friar Ruffino answered and said, 4 4 Reverend father, prithee
forgive me and send me not, for thou knowest I lack the gift
of preaching, and am simple and unleamed. ,, Then said St*
Francis, 44 Forasmuch as thou hast not obeyed quickly, I com¬
mand thee by holy obedience that thou go to Assisi naked, and
clothed only in thy breeches, and enter into a church and preach
to the people.” At his command Friar Ruffino strips himself
and goes forth to Assisi and enters a church; and having made
his reverence to the altar ascends the pulpit and begins to preach.
Whereat the children and the men of Assisi began to laugh and
said, 44 Now look ye, these friars do such penance that they
grow foolish and lose their wits.” Meanwhile, St. Francis,
bethinking him of the ready obedience of Friar Ruffino, that
was one of the noblest gentlemen of Assisi, and of the hard
command he had laid upon him, began to upbraid himself,
saying, 44 Whence, O son of Peter Bemadone, thou sorry churl,
whence such great presumption that thou commandest Friar
Ruffino, one of the noblest gentlemen of Assisi, to go and preach
to the people like a crazy man? By God’s grace thou shalt
prove in thyself what thou commandest others to do.” And
straightway in fervour of spirit he stripped himself in like manner
and set forth for Assisi; and with him he took Friar Leo,
who carried his and Friar Ruffino’s habits. And the men of


St. Francis at Assisi 59

Assisi, beholding him in like plight, mocked him, deeming that
he and Friar Ruffino were crazy from excess of penance. St.
Francis enters the church, where Friar Ruffino was preaching
thus, “ O dearest brethren, flee from the world and forsake sin,
make restoration to others if ye would escape from hell; keep
God’s commandments and love God and your neighbour if ye
would go to heaven; do penance if ye would possess the kingdom
of heaven.” Then St. Francis mounted the pulpit and began
to preach so wondrously of the contempt of the world, of holy
penance, of voluntary poverty, and of the desire for the
heavenly kingdom, and of the nakedness and shame of the
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all they that were present
at the sermon, men and women, in great multitudes, began to
weep bitterly with wondrous devotion and contrition of heart;
and not only there, but throughout the whole of Assisi, was
such bewailing of the passion of Christ that the like had never
been known before. And the people being thus edified and con¬
soled by this act of St. Francis and of Friar Ruffino, St. Francis
clothed himself and Friar Ruffino again; and thus re-clad they
returned to the friary of the Porziuncula, praising and glorifying
God, who had given them the grace to vanquish themselves by
contempt of self, and to edify Christ’s little sheep by good
example, and to show forth how much the world is to be
despised. And on that day the devotion of the people towards
them increased so greatly that he who could touch the hem of
their garments deemed himself blessed.


CHAPTER XXXI

HOW ST. FRANCIS KNEW THE SECRETS OF THE CONSCIENCES
OF HIS FRIARS IN ALL THINGS

Even as our Lord Jesus Christ saith in the gospel, “ I know My
sheep, and Mine own know Me,” etc., so the blessed father St.
Francis, like a good shepherd, knew all the merits and the
virtues of his companions by divine revelation, and likewise
their failings: by which means he knew how to provide the best
remedy for each, to wit, by humbling the proud, exalting the
humble, reproving vice, and praising virtue, even as may be
read in the wondrous revelations he had, touching his first house¬
hold. Among which it is found that St. Francis being on a
time with his household in a friary discoursing of God, and


60 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

Friar Ruffino not being with them during that discourse, but in
the wood absorbed in contemplation, lo, while they continued
in their discourse of God, Friar Ruffino came forth from the
wood and passed by somewhat afar from them. Then St.
Francis, beholding him, turned to his companions and asked of
them, saying, “ Tell me, who think ye is the saintliest soul God
hath in this world ? ” And they answered him, saying, they
believed it was his own; and St. Francis said to them, “ Dearest
friars, I am of myself the most unworthy and vilest of men that
God hath in this world; but, behold yon Friar Ruffino, that
now cometh forth from the wood! God hath revealed to me
that his soul is one of the three saintliest souls in this world:
and truly I say unto you, that I would not doubt to call him St.
Ruffino even while he yet liveth, for his soul is confirmed in
grace, and sanctified and canonised in heaven by our Lord Jesus
Christ.” But these words St. Francis never spoke in the
presence of the said Friar Ruffino. Likewise, how that St.
Francis knew the failings of his friars is clearly manifest in
Friar Elias, whom many times he chid for his pride; and in
Friar John della Cappella, to whom he foretold that he was to
hang himself by the neck; and in that friar whom the devil held
fast by the throat when he was corrected for his disobedience;
and in many other friars whose secret failings and virtues he
clearly knew by revelation from Christ.


CHARTER XXXII

HOW FRIAR MASSEO CRAVED FROM CHRIST THE
VIRTUE OF HUMILITY

The first companions of St. Francis strove with all their might
to be poor in earthly things and rich in virtue, whereby they
attained to true celestial and eternal riches. It befell one day
that while they were gathered together discoursing of God, a
friar among them spake thus by way of ensample, “ One there
was, a great friend of God, that had much grace both for the
active and for the contemplative life, and withal he was of such
exceeding humility that he deemed himself the greatest of
sinners. And this humility confirmed and sanctified him in
grace and made him increase continually in virtue and in divine
gifts, and never suffered him to fall into sin.” Now Friar
Masseo, hearing such wondrous things of humility, and knowing


Friar Masseo


61


it to be a treasure of life eternal, began to be so kindled with
love and with desire for this virtue of humility, that in great
fervour of spirit he lifted up his face to heaven and made a vow
and steadfast aim never to rejoice again in this world until he
felt the said virtue perfectly in his soul: and thenceforth he
remained well-nigh continually secluded in his cell, mortifying
himself with fasts, vigils, prayer, and bitter tears before God to
obtain that virtue from Him, failing which he deemed himsel
worthy of hell—the virtue wherewith that friend of God of
whom he had heard was so bounteously dowered. And ^rjar
Masseo, being thus for many days filled with this desire, it fell
out on a day that he entered the wood, and in fervour of spirit
roamed about giving forth tears, sighs, and cries, and craving
this virtue from God with fervent desire: and since God willingly
granteth the prayers of humble and contrite hearts, there came
a voice from heaven to Friar Masseo, as he thus ^strove, and
called him twice, “Friar Masseo, Friar Masseo 1 And he,
knowing in spirit that it was the voice of Christ, answered thus,
“ Lord.” And Christ said to him, What wouldst thou
give to possess the grace thou askest ? ” Friar Masseo answered,
“ Lord I would give the eyes out of my head. And Christ
said to him, “ And I will that thou have this grace and thine
eyes also.” This said, the voice vanished, and Friar Masseo
remained filled with such grace of the yearned-for virtue of
humility, and of the light of God, that from thenceforth he was
ever blithe of heart. And many times he made a joyous sound
like the cooing of a dove, “ Coo, coo, coo. And with glad
countenance and jocund heart he dwelt thus in contemplation;
and withal, being grown most humble, he deemed himself the
least of men in the world. Being asked by Friar James of
Falterone wherefore he changed not his note in these his jubila¬
tions, he answered with great joyfulness, that when we find full
contentment in one song there is no need to change the tune.


62 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER XXXIII

HOW ST. CLARE, BY COMMAND OF THE POPE, BLESSED THE BREAD
THAT LAY ON THE TABLE, WHEREUPON THE SIGN OF THE
HOLY CROSS APPEARED ON EVERY LOAF

St. Clare, most devout disciple of the cross of Christ and noble
plant of St. Francis, was so filled with holiness that not only
bishops and cardinals but the pope also, with great affection,
desired to behold and to hear her, and ofttimes visited her in
person. Among other times, the holy father once went to her
convent to hear her discourse of divine and celestial things: and
being thus together, holding divers discourses, St. Clare had
the table laid and set loaves of bread thereon that the holy
father might bless them. Whereupon, the spiritual discourse
being ended, St. Clare knelt down with great reverence and
besought him to be pleased to bless the bread placed on the
table. The holy father answers, “ Sister Clare, most faithful
one, I desire that thou bless this bread, and make over it the
sign of the most holy cross of Christ, to which thou hast wholly
devoted thyself.” And St. Clare saith, “Most holy father,
pardon me, for I should merit too great reproof if, in the presence
of the vicar of Christ, I, that am a poor, vile woman, should
presume to give such benediction.” And the pope gives
answer, “ To the end that this be not imputed to thy presump¬
tion, but to the merit of obedience, I command thee, by holy
obedience, that thou make the sign of the most holy cross over
this bread, and bless it in the name of God.” Then St. Clare,
even as a true daughter of obedience, devoutly blessed the
bread with the sign of the most holy cross. Marvellous to tell!
forthwith on all those loaves the sign of the cross appeared
figured most beautifully. Then, of those loaves, a part was
eaten and a part preserved, in token of the miracle. And the
holy father, when he saw this miracle, partook of the said
bread and departed, thanking God and leaving his blessing with
St. Clare. In that time Sister Ortolana, mother of St. Clare,
abode in the convent, and Sister Agnes, her own sister, both
of them, together with St. Clare, full of virtue and of the Holy
Spirit, and with many other nuns, to whom St. Francis sent
many sick persons; and they, with their prayers and with the
sign of the most holy cross, restored health to all of them.


St. Louis Visits Friar Giles


63


CHAPTER XXXIV

HOW ST. LOUIS, KING OF FRANCE, WENT IN PERSON, IN THE
GUISE OF A PILGRIM, TO PERUGIA TO VISIT THE SAINTLY
FRIAR GILES

St. Louis, King of France, went on a pilgrimage to visit the
holy places throughout the world, and hearing of the far-
famed holiness of Friar Giles, who had been one of the first
companions of St. Francis, purposed and set his heart wholly
on visiting him in person: for which thing he came to Perugia,
where the said friar then dwelt. And coming to the door of
the friary as a poor unknown pilgrim, with but few companions,
he asked with great importunity for Friar Giles, telling not the
doorkeeper who he was. So the doorkeeper goes to Friar Giles
and says, “ There is a pilgrim at the door that asketh for you.”
And God inspired and revealed to him that this was the King
of France. Whereat, anon he comes forth from his cell with
great fervour and runs to the door; and asking naught, and
never having seen each other before, they knelt down with
great devotion, and embraced each other, and kissed with such
affection as if for a long space they had been great friends
together;, yet, through all this, neither one nor the other spake,
but they remained silently locked in each other’s arms with
those outward signs of loving charity. And after they had
remained thus a great space, saying no word each to other, they
both departed: St. Louis went his way and Friar Giles returned
to his cell. Now as the king was setting forth, a friar asked of
one of the king’s companions who he might be that had so long
embraced Friar Giles, and answer was made that he was Louis,
King of France, who had come to see Friar Giles. And when
the "friar told this to the others they waxed mightily afflicted
that Friar Giles had spoken no word with the king, and, making
complaint, they cried, “ 0 Friar Giles, wherefore hast thou been
so churlish as to speak no word to so great and saintly a king,
that hath come from France to see thee and to hear some good
word from thee? ” Friar Giles answered, “ Dearest friars,
marvel not thereat, for neither I to him nor he to me could utter
one word; since, no sooner had we embraced together, than
the light of wisdom revealed and manifested his heart to me
and mine to him, and thus, by divine power, as we looked in


64 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

each other’s breasts, we knew better what I would say to him
and he to me than if we had spoken with our mouths; and
greater consolation had we than if we had sought to explain
with our lips what we felt in our hearts. For, because of the
defect of human speech, that cannot express clearly the mys¬
teries and secrets of God, words would have left us disconsolate
rather than consoled; know, therefore, that the king departed
from me marvellously glad and consoled in spirit.”


CHAPTER XXXV

HOW ST. CLARE, BEING SICK, WAS MIRACULOUSLY BORNE ON
CHRISTMAS EVE TO THE CHURCH OF ST. FRANCIS, AND THERE
HEARD THE OFFICE

St. Clare, being on a time grievously sick, so that she could
in no wise go to say the office in church with the other nuns,
and seeing that when the feast of the Nativity of Christ came
all the others went to matins, while she remained in bed, grew
ill at ease that she could not go with them and enjoy that
spiritual consolation. But Jesus Christ, her spouse, not willing
to leave her thus disconsolate, caused her to be miraculously
borne to the church of St. Francis and to be present at the whole
office of matins, and at the midnight mass; and moreover, she
received the holy communion, and then was borne back to her
bed. When the nuns returned to St. Clare, after the office at
St. Damian’s was over, they spake to her thus, “ O Sister
Clare, our mother, what great consolation have we had on this
holy feast of the Nativity; would now it had pleased God that
you had been with us!” And St. Clare answered, “Thanks
and praise do I render to our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, my
sisters, and dearest daughters, for at all the solemn offices of
this most holy night, yea, and at even greater festivals have
I been present with great consolation of soul, than ye have
seen, for by the solicitude of my father, St. Francis, and by
the grace of Jesus Christ, have I been present in the church of
my venerable father, St. Francis; and with my bodily and
spiritual ears have I heard all the office and the music of the
organs that were played there, and in that same church have
I partaken of the most holy communion. Wherefore rejoice
ye that such grace hath been vouchsafed to me and praise our
Lord Jesus Christ.”


Friar Leo’s Vision


65


CHAPTER XXXVI

HOW ST. FRANCIS INTERPRETED A FAIR VISION THAT FRIAR
LEO HAD SEEN

On a time when St. Francis lay grievously sick and Friar Leo
was tending him, the said friar, being in prayer by the side of
St. Francis, was rapt in ecstasy and led in spirit to a mighty
torrent, wide and raging. And as he stood gazing on those who
were crossing it, he beheld certain friars, bearing burdens, enter
into this stream that anon were overthrown by the fierce buffet-
ings of the waves and drowned; some reached as far as a third
of the way across; others as far as the middle; yet others
reached nigh over unto the shore. But all of them, by reason
of the fury of the waters and the heavy burdens they bore on
their backs, fell at last and were drowned. Friar Leo, beholding
this, had compassion on them exceeding great, and straight¬
way, as he stood thus, lo, there comes a great multitude of
friars, bearing no burdens or load of any kind, in whom shone
forth the light of holy poverty: and they entered this stream
and passed over to the other side without peril: and when he
had seen this, Friar Leo returned to himself. Then St. Francis,
feeling in spirit that Friar Leo had seen a vision, called him
to himself and asked touching the vision he had seen.. And
as soon as the aforesaid Friar Leo had told his vision in due
order, St. Francis said, “ What thou hast seen is true. The
mighty stream is this world; the friars that were drowned
therein are they that followed not the teachings of the gospel,
and especially in regard to most high poverty; but they that
passed over without peril are those friars that seek after no
earthly or carnal thing, nor possess aught in this world; but,
temperate in food and clothing, are glad, following Christ
naked on the cross, and bear joyously and willingly the burden
and sweet yoke of Christ and of most holy obedience. There¬
fore they pass with ease from this temporal life to life eternal.”


66 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER XXXVII

HOW JESUS CHRIST THE BLESSED, AT THE PRAYER OF ST. FRANCIS,
CAUSED A RICH AND NOBLE KNIGHT TO BE CONVERTED AND
BECOME A FRIAR \ WHICH KNIGHT HAD DONE GREAT HONOUR
AND HAD MADE MANY GIFTS UNTO ST. FRANCIS

St. Francis, servant of Christ, coming late at eve to the house
of a great and potent nobleman, was received and entertained
by him, both he and his companion, as had they been angels of
God, with the greatest courtesy and devotion; wherefore St.
Francis loved him much, considering that on entering the house
he had embraced him and kissed him affectionately; then had
washed his feet and wiped them and humbly kissed them; and
had kindled a great fire and made ready the table with many
good viands; and while he ate, did serve him zealously with
joyful countenance. Now when St. Francis and his companion
had eaten, this nobleman said, “ Lo, my father, I proffer myself
and my goods to you; how many times soever you have need
of tunic or cloak or aught else, buy them and I will pay for you;
nay, look you, I am ready to provide for all your needs, for
by God’s grace I am able so to do, inasmuch as I have abundance
of all worldly goods; therefore, for love of God, that hath
bestowed them on me, I willingly do good to His poor.” St.
Francis, beholding such great courtesy and loving-kindness in
him, and his bounteous offerings, conceived for him love so
great that when he afterwards departed from him he spake
thus to his companion as they journeyed together, “ Verily
this noble gentleman, that is so grateful and thankful to God
and so kind and courteous to his neighbour and to the poor,
would be a good companion for our Order. Know, dearest
friar, that courtesy is one of the attributes of God, who of His
courtesy giveth His sun and His rain to the just and to the
unjust : and courtesy is sister to charity, that quencheth hatred
and kmdleth love. And since I have found in this good man
such divine virtue, fain would I have him for companion:
therefore I will that one day we return to him, if haply God
may touch his heart and bend his will to accompany us in the
service of God. Meanwhile, pray we unto God that He may
set this desire in his heart and give him grace to attain thereto.”
Marvellous to tell 1 a few days after St. Francis had made this


Conversion of a Noble Knight 67

prayer, God put these desires into this nobleman’s heart, and
St. Francis said to his companion, “ Let us go, my brother, to
the abode of that courteous gentleman, for I have a certain hope
in God that, with the same bounty he hath shown in temporal
things, he will give himself also, and will be our companion.”
And they went. And coming nigh unto his house, St. Francis
said to his companion, “ Tarry a while for me; I desire first to
pray to God that He may prosper our way, and that it may
please Jesus Christ to grant unto us, poor and weak men, the
noble prey we think to snatch from the world by virtue of His
most holy Passion.” This said, he went forth to pray in a
place where he might be seen of that same courteous gentleman.
Now, as it pleased God, he, looking hither and thither, had
perceived St. Francis most devoutly in prayer before Jesus
Christ, who with great splendour had appeared to him and stood
before him during the said prayer; and as he thus gazed he
beheld St. Francis lifted up a great space bodily from the earth.
Whereat he was so touched by God and inspired to forsake the
world that he straightway came forth from his mansion and ran
in fervour of spirit towards St. Francis, and coming to him,
who still remained in prayer, knelt down at his feet, and with
great instance and devotion prayed that it might please him
to receive him and do penance with him together. Then St.
Francis, seeing his prayer was heard of God, and that what he
himself desired, that noble gentleman was craving with much
importunity, lifted himself up, and in fervour and gladness of
heart embraced and kissed him, devoutly giving thanks to God,
who had increased his company by so great a knight. And that
gentleman said to St. Francis, “ What dost thou command me
to do, my father? Lo, I am ready to do thy bidding and give all
I possess to the poor, and thus disburdened of all worldly things
to follow Christ with thee.” Thus did he, according to the
counsel of St. Francis, for he distributed all his goods among
the poor, and entered the Order and lived in great penitence
and holiness of life and godly conversation.


68 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER XXXVIII

HOW ST. FRANCIS KNEW IN SPIRIT THAT FRIAR ELIAS WAS DAMNED
AND WAS TO DIE OUTSIDE THE ORDER: WHEREFORE, AT
THE PRAYER OF FRIAR ELIAS, HE BESOUGHT CHRIST FOR
HIM AND WAS HEARD

On a time when St. Francis and Friar Elias were dwelling in a
friary together, it was revealed by God to St. Francis that
Friar Elias was damned, and was to become a runagate and in
the end, die outside the Order. Whereat St. Francis conceived
so great a displeasure towards him that he never spake nor held
converse with him; and if it befell that Friar Elias came towards
him at any time, he turned aside and went another way that he
might not encounter him; whereby Friar Elias began to per¬
ceive and comprehend that St. Francis was displeased with him.
And desiring one day to know the cause thereof, he accosted
St. Francis and would speak with him; and as St. Francis
turned from him he gently held him back by force, and began
to entreat him earnestly to be pleased to signify to him the
reason why he thus shunned his company and forbore to speak
with him. And St. Francis answered, “ The cause is this: It
hath been revealed to me by God that thou, for thy sins, shalt
become a runagate and shalt die outside the Order; and God
hath likewise revealed to me that thou art damned.” Hearing
these words, Friar Elias spake thus, “My reverend father, I
pray thee for the love of Jesus Christ that for this cause thou
shun me not, nor cast me from thee; but as a good shepherd,
after the example of Christ, thou seek out and receive again the
sheep that will perish except thou aid him, and that thou wilt
pray to God for me, if haply He may revoke the sentence of my
damnation; for it is written that God will remit the sentence,
if the sinner amend his ways; and I have such great faith in thy
prayers, that if I were in the midst of hell, and thou didst pray
to God for me, I should feel some refreshment: wherefore yet
again I beseech thee that thou commend me, a sinner, unto God,
who came to save sinners, that He may receive me to His mercy-
seat.” This, Friar Elias said with great devotion and tears;
whereat St. Francis, even as a compassionate father, promised
he would pray for him. And praying most devoutly to God for
him, he understood by revelation that his prayer was heard of


Friar Elias 69

God in so far as concerned the revocation of the sentence of
damnation passed on Friar Elias, and that at the last his soul
should not be damned; but that of a surety he would forsake
the Order and, outside the Order, would die. And so it came to
pass. For when Frederick, King of Sicily, rebelled against the
church and was excommunicated by the pope, he and whosoever
gave him aid or counsel, the said Friar Elias, that was reputed one
of the wisest men in the world, being entreated by the said King
Frederick, went over to him, and became a rebel to the church
and a runagate from the Order. Wherefore he was banned by
the pope and stripped of the habit of St. Francis. And being
thus excommunicate, behold he fell grievously sick; and his
brother, a lay friar who had remained in the Order, and was a
man of good and honest life, went to visit him, and among
other things spake to him thus, u Dearest brother mine, it
grieveth me sorely that thou art excommunicate and cast out
of thine Order and even so shall die: but if thou seest any way
or means whereby I may deliver thee from this peril, willingly
will I undertake any toil for thee.” Friar Elias answered,
“ Brother mine, no other way do I see but that thou repair to
the pope and beseech him, for the love of God and of St. h rancis
His servant, at whose teachings I forsook the world, that he
assoil me from his ban and restore to me the habit of the Order.
And his brother answered that willingly would he labour for
his salvation: and departing from him he went to the footstool
of the holy father and humbly besought him that he would
grant this grace to his brother, for love of Christ and of St.
Francis His servant. And as it pleased God, the pope con¬
sented that he should return; and that if he found Friar Elias
yet living, he should assoil him in his name from the ban and
restore the habit to him. Whereat he departed joyfully, and
returned in great haste to Friar Elias, and, finding him alive,
but well-nigh at the point of death, assoiled him from the ban;
and Friar Elias, putting on the habit again, passed from this
life, and his soul was saved by the merits of St. Francis and by
his prayers, wherein Friar Elias had placed hope so great.


7 ° The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER XXXIX

OF THE MARVELLOUS SERMON THAT ST. ANTHONY OF PADUA, A
FRIAR MINOR, PREACHED IN THE CONSISTORY

That wondrous vessel of the Holy Spirit, St. Anthony of Padua,
one of the chosen disciples and companions of St. Francis, he
t lat St. Francis called his vicar, was once preaching in the
consistory before the pope and the cardinals, in which con¬
sistory were men of divers nations, to wit, French, Germans,
Sclavonians, and English, and divers other tongues throughout
the world. Inflamed by the Holy Spirit, he expounded the
word of God so effectually, so devoutly, so subtly, so sweetly,
so clearly and so wisely, that all they that were in the con-
sistory, albeit they were of divers nations, clearly understood
all his words distinctly, even as though he had spoken to each
one of them in his native tongue; and all were filled with
wonder for it seemed that that miracle of old were renewed
when the Apostles, on the day of Pentecost, spake, by the
power of the Holy Spirit, in every tongue. And marvelling,
they said one to another, “ Is not he that preacheth a Spaniard?
How then hear we all the tongue of our native land in his
speech? The pope likewise, considering and marvelling at the
depth of his words, said, “ Verily this friar is the ark of the
covenant and the treasury of divine scriptures.”


CHAPTER XL

OF THE MIRACLE THAT GOD WROUGHT, WHEN ST. ANTHONY
BEING AT RIMINI, PREACHED TO THE FISHES IN THE SEA '

Christ the blessed, being pleased to show forth the great holiness
of His most faithful servant, St. Anthony, and with what
devotion his preaching and his holy doctrine were to be heard
one time among others, rebuked the folly of infidel heretics by
means of creatures without reason, to wit, the fishes; even as
m days agone, in the Old Testament, he rebuked the ignorance
of Balaam by the mouth of an ass. Wherefore it befell, on a
time when St. Anthony was at Rimini, where was a great multi-
tude of heretics whom he desired to lead to the light of the


St. Anthony Preaches to the Fishes 71

true faith and to the paths of virtue, that he preached for many
days and disputed with them concerning the faith of Christ and
of the Holy Scriptures: yet they not only consented not unto
his words, but even hardened their hearts and stubbornly
refused to hear him. Wherefore St. Anthony, by divine inspira¬
tion, went one day to the bank of the river, hard by the sea¬
shore, and standing there on the bank of the river, between it
and the sea, began to speak to the fishes after the manner of
a preacher sent by God, “ Hear the word of God, ye fishes of
the sea and of the river, since the miscreant heretics scorn to
hear it.” And when he had thus spoken, anon there came
towards the bank such a multitude of fishes, great and small,
and middling, that never before in those seas, nor in that river,
had so great a multitude been seen; and all held their heads
out of the water in great peace and gentleness and perfect order,
and remained intent on the lips of St. Anthony: for in front of
him and nearest to the bank were the lesser fishes; and beyond
them were those of middling size; and then behind, where the
water was deepest, were the greater fishes. The fishes being
then mustered in such order and array, St. Anthony began to
preach to them solemnly, and spake thus, “Ye fishes, my
brothers, much are ye held, according to your power, to thank
God our Creator, who hath given you so noble an element for
your habitation; for at your pleasure have ye waters, sweet and
salt, and He hath given you many places of refuge to shelter
you from the tempests; He hath likewise given you a pure
and clear element, and food whereby ye can live. God, your
Creator, bountiful and kind, when He created you, commanded
you to increase and multiply, and gave you His blessing; then,
in the universal deluge and when all other animals were perish¬
ing, you alone did God preserve from harm. Moreover, He hath
given you fins that ye may fare whithersoever it may please
you. To you was it granted, by commandment of God, to
preserve Jonah the prophet, and after the third day to cast him
forth on dry land, safe and whole. Ye did offer the tribute
money to Christ our Lord, to Him, poor little one, that had not
wherewithal to pay. Ye, by a rare mystery, were the food of
the eternal King, Christ Jesus, before the resurrection and after*
For all those things much are ye held to praise and bless God,
that hath given you blessings so manifold and so great; yea,
more even than to any other of His creatures.” At these and
the like words and admonitions from St. Anthony, the fishes
began to open their mouths and bow their heads, and by these


J2 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

and other tokens of reverence, according to their fashion and
power, they gave praise to God. Then St. Anthony, beholding
in. the fishes such great reverence towards God their Creator,
rejoiced in spirit, and said with a loud voice, “ Blessed be God
eternal, since the fishes in the waters honour Him more than do
heretic men; and creatures without reason hear His word better
than infidel men.” And the longer St. Anthony preached, the
greater the multitude of fishes increased, and none departed
from the place he had taken. And the people of the city began
to run to behold this miracle, among whom the aforesaid heretics
were also drawn thither; and when they beheld a miracle so
marvellous and manifest, they were pricked in their hearts, and
cast themselves all at the feet of St. Anthony to hear his words.
Then St. Anthony began to preach the catholic faith, and so
nobly did he expound the faith that he converted all those
heretics, and they turned to the true faith of Christ; and all the
faithful were comforted and filled with joy exceeding great,
and were strengthened in the faith. This done, St. Anthony
dismissed the fishes, with God's blessing, and all they departed
with wondrous signs of gladness, and the people likewise. And
then St. Anthony sojourned in Rimini many days, preaching
and gathering much spiritual fruit of souls.


CHAPTER XLI

HOW THE VENERABLE FRIAR SIMON DELIVERED A FRIAR FROM
A GREAT TEMPTATION WHO FOR THIS CAUSE HAD DESIRED
TO LEAVE THE ORDER

In the early days of the Order of St. Francis, and while the saint
was yet alive, a youth of Assisi came to the Order that was called
Friar Simon, whom God adorned and endowed with such grace
and such contemplation and elevation of mind that all his life
he was a mirror of holiness, even as I heard from those that were
with him a long time. Very seldom was he seen outside his cell,
and if at any time he was seen with the friars, he was ever dis¬
coursing of God. He had never been through the schools, yet
so profoundly and so loftily spake he of God, and of the love
of Christ, that his words seemed supernatural; wherefore one
evening being gone into the wood with. Friar James of Massa to
speak of God, they spent all the night in that discourse; and
when the dawn came it seemed to them they had been together


Friar Simon 73

but for a very brief space of time, as the said Friar James related
to me. And the said Friar Simon received the divine and loving
illuminations of God to such a degree of pleasantness and sweet¬
ness that ofttimes when he felt them coming he lay down on his
bed; for the gentle sweetness of the Holy Spirit required of him,
not only rest of soul, but also of body, and in divine visitations,
such as these, he was many times rapt in God and became
insensible to corporeal things. Wherefore on a time when he
was thus rapt in God and insensible to the world, and burning
inwardly with divine love, so that he felt naught of outward
things with his bodily senses, a friar, desiring to have experience
thereof and prove if it were verily as it seemed to be, went and
took a coal of fire and laid it on his naked foot. And Friar
Simon felt naught, nor made it any scar on the foot, albeit it
remained there a great space, so great that it went out of itself.
The said Friar Simon, when he sat down at table, before he par¬
took of bodily food was wont to take to himself and give to
others spiritual food, discoursing of God. By his devout speech
a young man of San Severino was once converted, that in the
world was a most vain and worldly youth, and of noble blood
and very delicate of body; and Friar Simon receiving this youth
into the Order, put aside his worldly vestments and kept them
near himself, and he abode with Friar Simon to be instructed
by him in the observances of the Order. Whereat the devil, that
ever seeketh to thwart every good thing, set within him so
mighty a thorn and temptation of the flesh that in no wise could
he resist; wherefore he repaired to Friar Simon and said to him,
“ Restore to me my clothes that I brought from the world, for I
can no longer endure the temptation of the flesh.” And Friar
Simon, having great compassion on him, spake to him thus,
‘‘ Sit thou here, my son, a while with me.” And he began to
discourse to him of God, in such wise that all temptation left
him; then after a time the temptation returned, and he asked
for his clothes again, and Friar Simon drave it forth again by
discoursing of God. This being done many times, at last the
said temptation assailed him so mightily one night, even more
than it was wont to do, that for naught in this world was he able
to resist it; and he went to Friar Simon and demanded from
him yet again all his worldly clothes, for in no wise could he
longer remain. Then Friar Simon, according as he was wont
to do, made him sit beside him; and as he discoursed to him of
God, the youth leaned his head on Friar Simon’s bosom for very
woe and sadness. Then Friar Simon, of his great compassion,

D 485


74 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

lifted up his eyes to heaven and made supplication to God; and
as he prayed most devoutly for him, the youth was rapt in God
and Friar Simon’s prayers were heard: wherefore the youth
returning to himself was wholly delivered from that temptation,
even as though had he never felt it: yea, the fire of tempta¬
tion was changed to the fire of the Holy Spirit, forasmuch as he
had sat beside that burning coal, Friar Simon, who was all in¬
flamed with the love of God and of his neighbour, in such wise
that on a time, when a malefactor was taken that was to have
both his eyes plucked out, the said youth for very pity went
boldly up to the governor, and in full council and with many
tears and devout prayers entreated that one of his own eyes
might be plucked out, and one of the malefactor’s, in order that
the wretch might not be deprived of both. But the governor
and his council, beholding the great fervour and charity of the
friar, pardoned both of them. One day as Friar Simon was in
the wood at prayer, feeling great consolation in his soul, a flock
of rooks began to do him much annoy by their cawing: whereat
he commanded them in the name of Jesus to depart and return
no more; and the said birds departing thence were no more
seen nor heard, neither in the wood nor in all the country round
about. And the miracle was manifest over all the custody^ of
Fermo wherein the said friary stood.


CHAPTER XLII

OF THE FAIR MIRACLES GOD WROUGHT THROUGH HIS HOLY FRIARS,
FRIAR BENTIVOGLIA, FRIAR PETER OF MONTI CELLO, AND
FRIAR CONRAD OF OFFIDA ; AND HOW FRIAR BENTIVOGLIA
CARRIED A LEPER FIFTEEN MILES IN A VERY BRIEF TIME;
AND HOW THE OTHER FRIAR SPAKE WITH ST. MICHAEL, AND
HOW TO THE THIRD CAME THE VIRGIN MARY AND LAID HER
SON IN HIS ARMS

The province of the Marches of Ancona was adorned of old,
after the manner of the starry firmament, with holy and exem¬
plary friars who, like the shining lights of heaven, have adorned
and illumined the Order of St. Francis and the world by their
example and doctrine. Among others there was, in.the early
days, Friar Lucido Antico, that was truly lucent by his holiness
and burning with divine charity, whose glorious tongue, in¬
formed of the Holy Spirit, brought forth marvellous fruit by his


Holy Friars of Ancona 75

preaching. Another was Friar Bentivoglia of San Severino,
who was seen by Friar Masseo to be lifted up in the air for a
great space while he was at prayer in the wood; for which
miracle the devout Friar Masseo, being then a parish priest, left
Ins parish and became a friar minor; and he was of holiness so
great that he wrought many miracles during his life and after
his death, and his body lies at Murro. The aforesaid Friar
Bentivoglia, when he sojourned alone at Ponte della Trave,
tending and serving a leper, was commanded by his superior
to depart thence and go to another friary that was fifteen miles
away; and not being willing to forsake the leper, he laid hold
of him, and with great fervour of charity lifted him on to his
shoulder and carried him between dawn and sunrise the whole
of those fifteen miles as far as the place whither he was sent, that
was called Monte Sancino: which distance, even had he been
an eagle, he could not have flown in so short a time; and in all
that country was much wonder and amazement at this divine
miracle. Another was Friar Peter of Monticello, who was seen
by Friar Servodio of Urbino, then warden of the old friary of
Ancona, to be lifted bodily up from the ground full five or six
cubits, as far as the foot of the crucifix before which he was in
prayer. And this Friar Peter, while keeping the forty days’
fast of St. Michael the Archangel with great devotion, and being
m church at prayer on the last day of that fast, was heard by a
young friar speaking with St. Michael the Archangel, for he had
hidden himself under the high altar to behold somewhat of his
sanctity; and the words he spake were these. Said St. Michael,
Friar I eter, thou hast faithfully travailed for me, and in many
ways hast afflicted thy body: lo, I am come to comfort thee,
and that thou mayest ask whatsoever grace thou desires11 will
promise to obtain it of God.” Friar Peter answered, “ Most
holy prince of the host of heaven, and faithful zealot of divine
love and compassionate protector of souls, this grace do I ask
of thee, that thou obtain from God the pardon of my sins.”
St. Michael answered, “ Ask some other grace, for this shall* I
obtain for thee right easily.” But Friar Peter asking naught
else, the archangel made an end, saying, “For the faith and
devotion thou hast in me I will obtain this grace for thee and
many others.” And their discourse being ended, that endured
a great space, the archangel Michael departed, leaving him
comforted exceedingly. In the days of this holy Friar Peter
lived the holy Friar Conrad of Offida, who, dwelling with him
together at the friary of Forano in the custody of Ancona, went


j6 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

forth one day into the wood for divine contemplation; and
Friar Peter secretly followed after him to see what should befall
him. And Friar Conrad betook himself to prayer and most
devoutly besought the Virgin Mary, of her great compassion,
that she would obtain this grace from her blessed Son: to wit,
that he might feel a little of that sweetness that St. Simeon felt
on the day of Purification when he bore Jesus the blessed Saviour
in his arms. And his prayer ended, the merciful Virgin Mary
granted it. And lo, the Queen of Heaven appeared with re¬
splendent clarity of light, with her blessed Son in her arms, and
drawing nigh to Friar Conrad, laid her blessed Son in his arms,
who, receiving Him, devoutly embraced and kissed Him, then
clasping Him to his breast, was wholly melted and dissolved in
love divine and unspeakable consolation: and Friar Peter like¬
wise, who secretly beheld all these things, felt great sweetness
and consolation in his soul. And when the Virgin Mary had
departed from Friar Conrad, Friar Peter returned in haste to
the friary that he might not be seen of him. But thereafter
when Friar Conrad returned, all joyous and glad, Friar Peter
said to him, “ 0 celestial soul, great consolation hast thou had
this day.” Said Friar Conrad, “ What sayest thou, ^Friar
Peter? How knowest thou what I may have had? ” “ Full

well I know, full well I know,” said Friar Peter, “that the
Virgin Mary with her blessed Son hath visited thee.” Then
Friar Conrad, who with true humility desired that this grace of
God should be hidden, besought him to speak no word of these
things. And so great thenceforth was the love between these
two friars that they seemed to be of one heart and one mind m
all things. And the said Friar Conrad on a time in the friary of
Siruolo delivered a woman possessed of a devil by praying for
her the whole night through, and being seen of her mother on
the morrow, he fled lest he might be found and honoured by
the people.


Friar Conrad of Offida


77


CHAPTER XLIII

HOW FRIAR CONRAD OF OFFIDA CONVERTED A YOUNG FRIAR THAT
WAS A STUMBLING-BLOCK TO THE OTHER FRIARS. AND HOW
AFTER THE SAID YOUNG FRIAR DIED HE APPEARED TO THE
SAID FRIAR CONRAD AND ENTREATED HIM TO PRAY FOR
HIM; AND HOW HE DELIVERED HIM BY HIS PRAYERS FROM
THE MOST GRIEVOUS PAINS OF PURGATORY

The said Friar Conrad of Offida, wondrous zealot of gospel
poverty and of the Rule of St. Francis, was of so religious a life,
and of such great merit before God, that Christ the blessed,
honoured him in his life and after his death with many miracles,
among which, being come on a time to the friary of Offida as
a guest, the friars prayed him for love of God and of his charity
to admonish a young friar that was in the settlement, who
bore himself so childishly, so disorderly and dissolutely, that he
disturbed both old and young of that community during the
divine offices, and recked little or naught of the observances of
the Rule. Whereupon Friar Conrad, in compassion for that
youth, and at the prayers of the friars, called the said youth
apart one day, and in fervour of charity spake to him words of
admonition, so effectual and so divine, that by the operation of
divine grace he straightway became changed from a child to an
old man in manners, and grew so obedient and benign and dili¬
gent and devout, and thereafter so peaceful and obedient, and so
studious of every virtuous thing, that even as at first the whole
community were perturbed because of him, so now all were con¬
tent with him, and comforted, and greatly loved him. And it
came to pass, as it pleased God, that some time after this con¬
version, the said youth died, whereat the said friars mourned;
and a few days after his death, his soul appeared to Friar
Conrad, while he was devoutly praying before the altar of the
said friary, and saluted him devoutly as a father; and Friar
Conrad asked him, “ Who art thou? ” And he answered and
said, “ I am the soul of that young friar that died these latter
days.” And Friar Conrad said, “ 0 my dearest son, how is it
with thee? ” He answered, “ By God’s grace, and your teach-
ing, ’tis well; for I am not damned, but for certain of my sins,
whereof I lacked time to purge me sufficiently, I suffer grievous
pains in purgatory; but I pray thee, father, that as of thy com-


jS The Little Flowers of St. Francis

passion thou didst succour me while I lived, so may it please
thee to succour me now in my pains, and say some paternosters
forme; for thy prayers are very acceptable before God.” Then
Friar Conrad consented kindly to his prayers and recited the
paternoster, with the requiem ceternum , once for him. Said that
soul, “ 0 dearest father, what great good and what great
refreshment do I feel! Now, prithee recite it once again.” And
Friar Conrad recited it, and when it was repeated again, that
soul said, “ Holy father, when thou prayest for me I feel all my
pains lightened, wherefore I beseech thee that thou stay not thy
prayers for me.” Then Friar Conrad, beholding his prayers
availed that soul so much, said a hundred paternosters for her.
And when they were recited, that soul said, “ I thank thee,
dearest father, in God's name, for the charity thou hast had for
me: for by thy prayers am I freed from all the pains of purga¬
tory, and am on my way to the kingdom of heaven.” This said,
the soul departed. Then Friar Conrad, to give joy and comfort
to the friars, related to them all this vision in order; and thus
the soul of that youth went to paradise through the merits of
Friar Conrad.


CHAPTER XLIV

HOW THE MOTHER OF CHRIST AND ST. JOHN THE EVANGELIST
APPEARED TO FRIAR PETER AND TOLD HIM WHICH OF THEM
SUFFERED GREATEST PAIN AT THE PASSION OF CHRIST

In the days when the aforesaid Friar Conrad and Friar Peter
abode together at the friary of Forano, in the district of Ancona
—those two friars that were bright twin stars in the province
of the Marches, and two most godly men—forasmuch as they
seemed of one heart and one mind, they, in their love and
charity, bound themselves together in this covenant: That
they would reveal to each other in charity every consolation
that God in His mercy bestowed on them. This covenant being
made between them, it befell on a day when Friar Peter was at
prayer and pondering most devoutly on the Passion of Christ,
and how that the most blessed Mother of Christ, and John the
Evangelist, the most beloved disciple, and St. Francis, were all
painted at the foot of the cross, crucified in dolour of soul with
Christ, a desire came upon him to know which of those three
had suffered greatest sorrow in theTassion of Christ—the Mother


Friar John of La Penna 79

that had begotten Him, or the disciple that had slept on His
breast, or St. Francis, crucified with the wounds of Christ. And
being thus absorbed in meditation, the Virgin Mary appeared
to him, with St. John the Evangelist and St. Francis, clothed
in noblest raiment of beatific glory; but St. Francis seemed
arrayed in a fairer garment than St. John. And Peter being
sore afeard at this vision, St. John comforted him and said to
him, “ Fear not, dearest brother, for we are come to console thee
in thy doubt. Know then that the Mother of Christ and I
sorrowed above all other creatures at the Passion of Christ; but
after us St. Francis felt greater sorrow than any other: therefore
thou seest him in such glory.” And Friar Peter asked, “ 0
holiest Apostle of Christ, wherefore doth the raiment of St.
Francis seem fairer than thine?” St. John answered, “The
reason is this: that in the world he wore viler garments than I.”
These words said, St. John gave Friar Peter a glorious robe that
he bore in his hand, and said to him, “ Take this robe which I
have brought to give thee.” And when St. John was about to
clothe him with it, Friar Peter fell dazed to the ground and began
to cry, “Friar Conrad, dearest Friar Conrad, succour me
quickly; come and behold marvellous things.” And at these
holy words the saintly vision vanished. Then when Friar
Conrad came he told him all things in order, and they gave
thanks to God.


CHAPTER XLV

OF THE CONVERSION, LIFE, MIRACLES, AND DEATH OF THE
HOLY FRIAR JOHN OF LA PENNA

One night, in the province of the Marches, a child, exceeding
fair, appeared to Friar John of La Penna, when he was yet a
lad in the world, and called him, saying, “ John, go to the church
of St. Stephen, where one of my friars minor is preaching;
believe in his teaching and give heed to his words, for I have
sent him thither; this done, thou shalt take a long journey and
thou shalt come to me.” Whereat, anon he rose up, and felt a
great change in his soul, and going to St. Stephen’s, he found a
great multitude of men and women that were assembled there
to hear the sermon. And he that was to preach there was a
friar, called Friar Philip, who was one of the first friars that had
come to the Marches of Ancona; and as yet few friaries were


8o The Little Flowers of St. Francis

established in the Marches. Up climbs this Friar Philip to
preach, and preaches most devoutly, and not in words of human
wisdom; but by virtue of the spirit of Christ he announced
the kingdom of life eternal. The sermon ended, the lad went
to the said Friar Philip and said to him, “ Father, an it please
you to receive me into the Order, fain would I do penance and
serve our Lord Jesus Christ.” Friar Philip, beholding and
knowing the wondrous innocence of the said lad and his ready
will to serve God, spake to him thus, “ Thou shalt come to me
on such a day at Ricanati, and I will have thee received.” Now
the provincial Chapter was to be held in that city, wherefore the
lad, being very guileless, thought this was the great journey he
was to make, according to the revelation he had had, and then
was to go to paradise; and this he thought to do straightway
after he was received into the Order. Therefore he went and
was received: and then, seeing his thought was not fulfilled,
and hearing the minister say in the Chapter that whosoever
would go to the province of Provence, through the merit of holy
obedience, he would freely give him leave, there came to him a
great desire to go thither, believing in his heart that that was
the great journey he must take ere he went to paradise. But
he was ashamed to say so, and confided at last in the aforesaid
Friar Philip, that had had him received into the Order, and
gently prayed him to obtain that grace for him, to wit, that he
should go to the province of Provence. Then Friar Philip,
beholding his innocency and his holy intent, obtained leave for
him to go; whereupon Friar John set forth on his way with great
joy, believing that, the journey accomplished, he would go to
paradise. But it pleased God that he should remain in the
said province five-and-twenty years in this expectancy and
desire, a pattern of sanctity and walking in great godliness; and
increasing ever in virtue and in the favour of God, and of the
people, he was greatly loved by the friars and by the world.
And Friar John, being one day devoutly in prayer, weeping and
lamenting that his desire was not fulfilled and that his earthly
pilgrimage was too prolonged, the blessed Christ appeared to
him, at whose aspect his soul was all melted, and said to him,
“ My son, Friar John, ask of Me what thou wilt.” And he
answered, “ My Lord, I know not what to ask of Thee save
Thyself, for naught else do I desire; this alone I pray—that Thou
forgive me all my sins, and give me grace to behold Thee once
again when I may have a greater need of Thee.” Said Christ,
“ Thy prayer is granted.” After these words He departed,


Friar John of La Penna 81

and Friar John remained all comforted. At last the friars of
the Marches, hearing of the fame of his holiness, wrought so
with the general of the Order that he bade him by obedience
return to the Marches; and when Friar John received this
command, joyously he set forth on his way, thinking that this
journey being accomplished he should go to heaven, according
to the promise of Christ. But when he was returned to the
province of the Marches, he abode there yet thirty years, and
none of his kinsfolk knew him: and every day he waited for the
mercy of God and that He should fulfil the promise made to
him. And during these years he filled the office of warden
many times with great discretion, and through him God wrought
many miracles. Now among other gifts he had of God was the
spirit of prophecy. Wherefore, on a time when he was gone
forth from the friary, one, his novice, was assailed by the devil
and tempted so mightily that he consented to the temptation,
and purposed within himself to leave the Order as soon as
Friar John had returned. But this temptation and purpose
being known to Friar John by the spirit of prophecy, he straight¬
way returned to the friary and called the said novice to him and
bade him confess: and before he confessed he related all the
temptation to him in order, even as God had revealed it to him,
and ended thus, “ Son, forasmuch as thou didst wait for me,
and wouldst not depart without my blessing, God hath granted
thee this grace—that thou shalt never issue forth from this
Order, but by divine grace shalt die in the Order.” Then the
said novice was strengthened in his good will, and remaining in
the Order, became a holy friar. And all these things Friar
Hugolin related to me. The said Friar John, that was a man
of joyful and tranquil mind, spake but rarely, and was given to
great meditation and devotion: and above all, after matins he
never returned to his cell, but remained in church at prayer
until the day broke. And he, being at prayer one night after
matins, the angel of God appeared to him and said, “ Friar
John, thy journey is accomplished for which thou hast waited
so long: therefore I announce to thee in God's name that thou
mayst ask whatsoever grace thou desirest. And likewise I
announce to thee that thou mayst choose which thou wilt—
either one day in purgatory or seven days' pain on earth.” And
Friar John, choosing rather seven days' pain on earth, anon
fell sick of divers infirmities; for a violent fever took him, and
gout in his hands and feet, and colic, and many other ills; but
what wrought him greatest pain was, that a devil stood before


82 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

him, holding in his hand a great scroll, whereon were written
all the sins he had ever done or thought, and spake to him thus,
“For those sins that thou hast done, either in thought, or word,
or deed, thou art damned to the lowest depths of hell.” And
he remembered naught of good that he had ever done, nor that
he was in the Order, nor ever had been therein; but he believed
he was thus damned, even as the devil told him. Wherefore,
when he was asked how it went with him, he answered, “ Ill,
for I am damned.” The friars, seeing this, sent for an aged
friar, whose name was Friar Matthew of Monte Rubbiano, that
was a holy man and dear friend of this Friar John: and the
said Friar Matthew, being come to him on the seventh day of
his tribulation, gave him salutation and asked how it was with
him. He answered, that it fared ill with him because he was
damned. Then said Friar Matthew, “ Rememberest thou not
that many times thou hast confessed to me, and I have wholly
assoiled thee of thy sins? Rememberest thou likewise that
thou hast ever served God in this holy Order many years?
Moreover, rememberest thou not that God’s mercy exceedeth
all the sins of this world, and that Christ, our blessed Saviour,
paid an infinite price to redeem us ? Therefore be of good hope,
for of a surety thou art saved; ” and with these words, foras¬
much as the term of his purgation was accomplished, temptation
vanished and consolation came. And with great gladness Friar
John said to Friar Matthew, “ Because thou art weary and the
hour is late, I pray thee, go to rest.” And Friar Matthew
would not leave him; but at last, at his urgent prayers, he
departed from him and went to rest: and Friar John remained
alone with the friar that tended him. And lo, Christ the
blessed came, in great splendour and in fragrance of exceeding
sweetness, even as He had promised to appear to him again when
he should have greater need, and healed him perfectly from all
his infirmities. Then Friar John, with clasped hands giving
thanks to God that he had accomplished the great journey of
this present miserable life with so good an end, commended
his soul to the hands of Christ and rendered it up to God, passing
from this mortal life to life eternal with Christ the blessed, that
he so long a time had desired and waited to behold. And the
said Friar John is laid to rest in the friary of La Penna di San
Giovanni,


Friar Paciftco and Friar Umile 83


CHAPTER XLVI

HOW FRIAR PACIFICO, BEING AT PRAYER, BEHELD THE SOUL
OF FRIAR UMILE, HIS BROTHER, ASCENDING TO HEAVEN

In the said province of the Marches there lived two brothers
in.the Order, after the death of St. Francis, the one called
Friar Umile, the other Friar Pacifico, and they were men of
the greatest holiness and perfection. And one, to wit, Friar
Umile, was in the friary of Sofhano, and there died; the other
belonged to the community of another friary in a far country.
It pleased God, that as Friar Pacifico was at prayer one day,
in a solitary place, he was rapt in ecstasy and saw the soul of his
brother. Friar Umile, which but then had left his body, ascend¬
ing straight to heaven without any let or hindrance. It befell
that after many years this Friar Pacifico, who was left on earth,
went to the community of the said friary of Soffiano, where his
brother had died; and in those days the friars, at the petition
of the lords of Bruforte, moved from the said friary to another;
and among other things, they translated the relics of the holy
friars that had died there. And Friar Pacifico, coming to the
sepulchre of Friar Umile, took away his bones and washed them
with good wine and then wrapped them in a white napkin,
and with great reverence and devotion kissed them, weeping.
Whereat the other friars marvelled and held it no good example,
for he, being a man of great holiness, did seem, out of carnal
and worldly affection, to weep for his brother, and show forth
more devotion for his relics than for those of the other friars
that had been of no less sanctity than Friar Umile, and were as
much worthy of reverence as his. And Friar Pacifico, knowing
the sinister imaginings of the friars, satisfied them humbly, and
said to them, “ Friars mine, most dear, marvel not if I have
done this to the bones of my brother and have done it not to the
others, because, blessed be God, carnal affection hath not urged
me to this, as ye believe, for when my brother passed from this
life, I was at prayer in a desert place far away from him, and I
beheld his soul ascend by a straight way into heaven: therefore
am I sure that his bones are holy and ought to be in paradise.
And if God had vouchsafed to me such certainty of the other
friars, that selfsame reverence would I have shown to their


84 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

bones.” Wherefore the friars, seeing his holy and devout
intent, were much edified by him, and praised God that worketh
such wondrous things for His holy friars.


CHAPTER XLVII

TOUCHING THAT HOLY FRIAR TO WHOM THE MOTHER OF CHRIST
APPEARED WHEN HE LAY SICK AND BROUGHT HIM THREE
BOXES OF ELECTUARY

In the aforesaid friary of Soffiano there was of old a friar minor
of such great holiness and grace that he seemed wholly divine,
and ofttimes was rapt in God. This friar, being on a time
wholly lifted up and ravished in God, for he had notably the
grace of contemplation, certain birds of divers kinds came to
him and settled themselves tamely upon his shoulders, upon his
head, and in his arms, and in his hands, and sang wondrously.
Now this friar loved solitude and spake but seldom; yet, when
aught was asked of him, he answered so graciously and so wisely
that he seemed an angel rather than a man; and he excelled in
prayer and in contemplation, and the friars held him in great
reverence. The friar, having run the course of his virtuous
life, according to divine disposition, fell sick unto death, so that
he could take naught; and withal he would receive no carnal
medicine, but all his trust was in the heavenly physician, Jesus
Christ the blessed, and in his blessed Mother, by whom, through
divine clemency, he was held worthy to be mercifully visited
and healed. Wherefore, lying on a time in his bed, and prepar¬
ing for death with all his heart, the glorious Virgin Mary, Mother
of Christ, appeared to him in wondrous splendour, with a great
multitude of angels and holy virgins, and drew nigh to his bed;
and he, gazing at her, took great comfort and joy, both of soul
and body; and he began to make humble supplication that she
would pray her beloved Son to deliver him, through His merits,
from the prison of this miserable flesh. And persevering in this
supplication, with many tears, the Virgin Mary answered him,
calling him by name, and said, “ Fear not, my son, for thy
prayer is heard, and I am come to comfort thee a while ere thou
depart from this life.” Beside the Virgin Mary were three holy
virgins that bore three boxes in their hands of an electuary of
surpassing fragrance and sweetness. Then the glorious Virgin
took one of these boxes and opened it, and the whole house was


Vision of Friar James 85

filled with fragrance; then, taking of that electuary with a
spoon, she gave it to the sick friar. And no sooner had the sick
man savoured it than he felt such comfort and such sweetness
that it seemed as though his soul could not remain in his body.
Wherefore he began to say, “No more, O most holy and blessed
Virgin Mother; 0 blessed physician and saviour of human kind,
no more, for I cannot endure such sweetness.” But the com¬
passionate Mother and kind, again and again offering of that
electuary to the sick man and making him partake thereof,
emptied the whole box. Then the first box being void, the
blessed Virgin takes the second and puts the spoon therein to
give him thereof, whereat he, complaining, saith, “0 most
blessed Mother of God, if my soul is well-nigh all melted with
the ardour and sweetness of the first electuary, how shall I endure
the second? I pray thee, 0 thou blessed above all the other
saints and above all the angels, that thou wilt give me no more.
The glorious Virgin Mary makes answer, “ Taste, my son, taste
yet a little of this second box,” and giving him a little thereof,
she said to him, “ This day, son, thou hast enough to satisfy
thee- be of good cheer, for soon will I come for thee and lead
thee to the kingdom of my Son, that thou hast ever sought
after and desired.” This said, and taking leave of him, she
departed, and he remained so comforted and consoled, through
the sweetness of this confection, that for many days he lived on,
sated and strong, without any corporeal food. And some days
thereafter, while blithely speaking with the friars, he passed
from this miserable life in great jubilation and gladness.


CHAPTER XLVIII

HOW FRIAR JAMES OF LA MASSA SAW IN A VISION ALL THE FRIARS
MINOR IN THE WORLD IN THE SIMILITUDE OF A TREE, AND
KNEW THE VIRTUES AND THE MERITS AND THE SINS OF
EACH ONE OF THEM

Friar James of La Massa, to whom God opened the door of
His mysteries and gave perfect knowledge and understanding
of the divine scripture and of future things, was of such sanctity
that Friar Giles of Assisi, and Friar Mark of Montino, and Friar
Juniper and Friar Lucido, said of him, that they knew no one in
the world greater in the sight of God than this Friar James. I
had great desire to behold him; for on praying Friar John, the


86 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

companion of the said Friar Giles, to expound to me certain
spiritual things, he answered, “ If thou wouldst be well informed
in matters of the spiritual life, strive to speak with Friar James
of La Massa (for Friar Giles was fain to be instructed by him),
and to his words naught can be added nor taken away; for his
mind hath penetrated the mysteries of heaven, and his words
are words of the Holy Ghost, and there is no man on earth that
I have so great a desire to see.” This Friar James, when Friar
John of Parma took up his office as minister of the Order, was
rapt in God while at prayer, and remained thus rapt in ecstasy
three days, bereft of all bodily senses, and was so insensible that
the friars doubted lest he were truly dead: and in this ecstasy
it was revealed to him by God what things were to come to pass
in our Order. Wherefore, when Friar Giles said those words,
my desire to hear him and to speak with him increased within
me. And when it pleased God that I should have opportunity
to speak with him, I besought him thus, “ If this that I have
heard tell of thee be true, prithee keep it not hidden from me.
I have heard that when thou remained well-nigh dead for three
days, God revealed to thee, among other things, what should
come to pass in this our Order; for this was related to me by
Friar Matthew, minister of the Marches, to whom thou didst
reveal it by obedience.” Then Friar James confessed to him,
with great humility, that what Friar Matthew said was true.
And his words, to wit, the words of Friar Matthew, minister of
the Marches, were these, “ I know a friar to whom God hath
revealed what shall hereafter come to pass in our Order; for
Friar James of La Massa hath made known to me and said, that
after many things God revealed to him touching the state of
the Church Militant, he beheld in a vision a tree, fair and very
great, whose roots were of gold, and whose fruits were men, and
all they were friars minor; and the chief branches thereof were
marked out according to the number of the provinces of the
Order, and each branch had as many friars as there were in the
province marked on that branch. And so he knew the numbers
of all the friars in the Order, and of each province, and likewise
their names, and the ages and the conditions and the high offices
and the dignities and the graces of all, and their sins. And he
beheld Friar John of Parma in the highest place on the mid¬
most branch of this tree; and on the top of the branches that
were round about this branch were the ministers of all the
provinces. And thereafter he beheld Christ seated on a pure
white throne exceeding great, whereunto Christ called St. Francis


Vision of Friar James 87

and gave him a cup, full of the spirit of life, and sent him forth,
saying “ Go and visit thy friars and give them to drink of this
cup of the spirit of life; for the spirit of Satan shall rise up
against them and shall smite them, and many of them shall fall
and not rise again.” And Christ gave two angels to St. Francis
to bear him company. And then St. Francis came and held
forth the cup of life to his friars: and he began to hold it forth
first to Friar John of Parma, who, taking it, drank it all devoutly
and in great haste; and forthwith he became all bright and
shining as the sun. And after him St. Francis held it forth to
all the others in due order, and few were they among these that
took it and drank it all with meet reverence and devotion.
They that took it devoutly and drank it all became straightway
bright and shining as the sun; and they that poured it away,
and took it not with devotion, became black or dark and mis¬
shapen and horrible to behold: and they that drank a part and
threw a part away became in part bright and shining, in part
dark and tenebrous, more or less, according to the measure of
their drinking or pouring away the cup. But, resplendent
above all the others, was the aforesaid Friar John, that most
completely had drunk of the cup of life, whereby he had most
deeply fathomed the abyss of the infinite light divine; and
therein he had foreseen the adversity and storms that were to
rise up against the said tree, and buffet it and make the branches
thereof to shake. Wherefore the said Friar John descended
from the top of the branch whereon he was, and climbed down
all the branches and hid himself beneath them against the
knotted bole of the tree, and there remained deep in thought
And a friar that had drunken part of the cup and part had
poured away, climbed up that branch and to that place whence
Friar John had descended. And while he stood in that place
the nails of his fingers became of steel, sharp and cutting as
razors; whereat he came down from that place whither he had
climbed, and with rage and fury would have flung himself
against Friar John to do him hurt. But Friar John, beholding
this cried out amain and commended himself to Christ that was
seated on the throne: and Christ, at his cries, called St. Francis
to him and gave him a sharp flintstone, and said to him, Go,
and with this stone cut the nails of that friar, wherewith he would
fain rend Friar John, so that they may do him no hurt.” Then
St. Francis came and did as Christ had commanded him. This
done, there arose a storm of wind and smote against the tree so
mightily that the friars fell to the ground; and first fell they


88 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

that had poured out all the cup of the spirit of life, and were
carried away by devils into places of darkness and torment.
But Friar John, together with those others that had drunk all
the cup, were translated by angels into a place of eternal life and
light and beatific splendour. And the aforesaid Friar James,
that beheld the vision, discerned and understood particularly
and distinctly all he saw touching the names and conditions and
state of each one, and that clearly. And so mightily did that
storm prevail against the tree that it fell: and the wind bore it
away. And then, no sooner had the storm ceased, than from
the root of this tree, which was all of gold, another tree sprung
up all of gold, that put forth golden leaves and flowers and fruit.
Touching which tree and the growth and the deep roots thereof,
the beauty and fragrance and virtue, ’twere fitter to keep silence
than to tell thereof at this season.


CHAPTER XLIX

HOW CHRIST APPEARED TO FRIAR JOHN OF LA VERNA

Among the other wise and holy friars and sons of St. Francis
who, according as Solomon saith, are the glory of their father,
there lived in our time in the province of the Marches the
venerable and holy Friar John of Fermo; and he, for that he
sojourned a long time in the holy place of La Verna and there
passed from this life, was likewise called Friar John of La Verna;
■ and he was a man of great and singular holiness of life. This
Friar John, while yet a boy in the world, desired with all his
heart to follow the ways of penance, that ever preserveth the
purity of the body and of the soul. Wherefore, when he was
quite a little child, he began to wear a breastplate of mail 1 and
iron rings on his naked flesh, and to practise great abstinence;
and above all, when he abode with the canons of St. Peter’s
at Fermo, who fared sumptuously, he eschewed all carnal
delights, and mortified his body with great and severe fastings;
but his companions, being much set against these things, took
from him his breastplate and thwarted his abstinence in divers
ways; wherefore he purposed, being inspired of God, to forsake
the world and those that loved worldly things and cast himself
wholly into the arms of the Crucified with the habit of the
crucified St. Francis; and this he did. And being thus received

1 See note, p. 34.


Friar John of La Verna 89

into the Order while yet a boy, and committed to the care of
the master of the novices, he became so spiritual and devout,
that hearing the master once discoursing of God, his heart was
melted as wax before a fire; and with such exceeding sweetness
of grace was he kindled by divine love, that unable to remain
still and endure such great sweetness, he arose, and as one
inebriated with spiritual things, ran hither and thither, now in
the garden, now in the wood, now in the church, according as
the fire and spur of the spirit drave him. Then in process of
time this angelic man, by divine grace, so continually increased
from virtue to virtue, and in celestial gifts and divine exaltation
and rapture, that at one time his soul was lifted up to the
splendours of the cherubim, at another to the flaming seraphim,
yet another to the joys of the blessed; yea, even to the loving
and ineffable embraces of Christ. And notably, on a time, his
heart was so mightily kindled by the flames of love divine, that
this flame endured full three years, in which time he received
wondrous consolations and divine visitations, and ofttimes was
he rapt in God; and for a brief space, in the said time, he seemed
all aflame and burning with the love of Christ; and this was
on the holy mount of La Verna. But forasmuch as God hath
singular care of His children, and giveth them according to
divers seasons, now consolation, now tribulation, now prosperity,
now adversity, even as He seeth their need, either to strengthen
them in humility, or to kindle within them greater desire for
celestial things; now it pleased divine goodness to withdraw,
after three years, from the said Friar John this ray and this
flame of divine love, and to deprive him of all spiritual consola¬
tion. Whereat Friar John remained bereft of the light and the
love of God, and all disconsolate and afflicted and sorrowing.
Wherefore, in this anguish of heart, he wandered about the
wood, running to and fro, calling with a loud voice and with
tears and sighs on the beloved spouse of his soul, who had
withdrawn and departed from him, and without whose presence
his soul found neither peace nor rest. But in no place nor in
any wise could he find the sweet Jesus again, nor taste again, as
he was wont to do, of those sweetest spiritual savours of the
love of Christ. And the like tribulation he endured many days,
wherein he persevered continually in tears and sighs, and in
supplication to God, that of His pity He would restore to him
the beloved spouse of his soul. At the last, when it had pleased
God to prove his patience enough and fan the flame of his
desire, one day, as Friar John was wandering about the said


90 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

wood, thus afflicted and tormented, he sat him down a-wearied
and leaned against a beech tree, and with his face all bathed in
tears gazed towards heaven; and behold, Jesus Christ appeared
suddenly nigh to him, in the path whereby this Friar John had
come, but spake no word. And Friar John, beholding Him
and knowing full well that it was the Christ, straightway flung
himself at His feet, and with piteous tears entreated Him most
humbly and said, “ Help me, my Lord, for without Thee, 0 my
sweetest Saviour, I wander in darkness and in tears; without
Thee, most gentle Lamb, I dwell in anguish and in torments and
in fear; without Thee, Son of God, most high, I remain in
shame and confusion; without Thee I am stripped of all good,
and blind, for Thou art Christ Jesus, true light of souls; without
Thee I am lost and damned, for Thou art the Life of souls and
Life of life; without Thee I am barren and withered, for Thou
art the fountain of every good gift and of every grace; without
Thee I am wholly disconsolate, for Thou art Jesus our Re¬
deemer, our love and our desire, the Bread of consolation and
the Wine that rejoiceth the hearts of the angels and of all the
saints. Let Thy light shine upon me, most gracious Master,
and most compassionate Shepherd, for I am Thy little sheep,
unworthy tho’ I be.” But because the desires of holy men,
which God delayeth to grant, kindle them to yet greater love
and merit, the blessed Christ departed without hearing him,
without uttering one word, and went away by the said path.
Then Friar John rose up and ran after Him, and again fell at
His feet, and with holy importunity held Him back and en¬
treated Him, with devoutest tears, saying, “ O Jesus Christ,
most sweet, have mercy on me in my tribulation; hear me by
the multitude of Thy mercies, and by the verity of Thy salva¬
tion restore to me the joy of Thy countenance and of Thy pitying
eye, for all the earth is full of Thy mercy.” And again Christ
departed and spake him no word, nor gave aught of consolation,
and did after the way of a mother with her child, when she
maketh him to yearn for the breast, and causeth him to follow
after her weeping, that he may take it the more willingly.
Whereupon Friar John, yet again, with greater fervour and
desire, followed Christ, and no sooner had he come up to Him
than the blessed Christ turned round to him, and looked upon
him with joyful and gracious countenance; then, opening His
most holy and most merciful arms. He embraced him very
sweetly, and as He thus opened His arms, Friar John beheld
rays of shining light coming from the Saviour’s most holy


Friar John of La Verna 91

breast, that illumined all the wood, and himself likewise, in soul
and body. Then Friar John kneeled down at the feet of Christ;
and the blessed Jesus, even as He did to the Magdalen, graciously
held forth His foot that he might kiss it; and Friar John,
taking it with highest reverence, bathed it with so many tears
that he verily seemed to be a second Magdalen, and devoutly
said, “ I pray Thee, my Lord, that Thou regard not my sins,
but by Thy most holy Passion, and by the shedding of Thy
most holy and precious blood, Thou mayst make my soul to
live again in the grace of Thy love, forasmuch as this is Thy
commandment: that we love Thee with all our hearts and all
our affections, which commandment none can keep without
Thy aid. Help me, then, most beloved Son of God, that I may
love Thee with all my heart and with all my might.” And
Friar John, standing as he thus spake at the feet of Christ, was
heard of Him, and he regained the former state of grace, to wit,
the flame of divine love, and he felt himself all consoled and
renewed; and when he knew that the gift of divine grace was
restored to him, he began to give thanks to Christ the blessed
and to kiss His feet devoutly. And then, rising up to gaze on
the face of Christ, Jesus Christ stretched forth and offered him
His most holy hands to kiss. And when Friar John had kissed
them, he drew nigh and leaned on Christ’s bosom and em¬
braced Him and kissed Him, and Christ likewise embraced and
kissed him. And in these embraces and kisses Friar John
perceived such divine fragrance, that if all the sweet-smelling
graces and all the most fragrant things in the world had been
gathered together, they would have seemed but a stink com¬
pared with that fragrance; and thereby was Friar John ravished
and consoled and illumined; and that fragrance endured in his
soul many months. And thenceforward there issued from his
mouth, that had drunk at the fountain of divine wisdom in the
sacred breast of the Saviour, words so wondrous and so heavenly,
that they changed all hearts and brought forth great fruit in
the souls of those that heard him. And in the pathway of the
wood, whereon the blessed feet of Christ had trod, and for a
good space round about, Friar John perceived that same
fragrance and beheld that splendour for a long time thereafter,
whensoever he went thither. And Friar John, coming to him¬
self after that rapture and after the bodily presence of Christ
had vanished, remained so illumined in his soul and in the
abyss of the divine nature, that albeit he was not a learned man,
by reason of human study, nevertheless, he solved wondrously


92 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

and made plain the most subtle and lofty questions touching
the divine Trinity and the profound mysteries of the Holy
Scriptures. And many times thereafter, when speaking before
the pope and the cardinals and the king, and barons and masters
and doctors, he set them all in great amaze at the lofty words
and most profound judgments he uttered.


CHAPTER L

HOW FRIAR JOHN OF LA VERNA, WHILE SAYING MASS ON ALL
SOULS' DAY, BEHELD MANY SOULS SET FREE FROM
PURGATORY

On a time when Friar John was saying mass, the day after
All Saints, for the souls of all the dead, according as the church
hath ordained, he offered up with such great affection and
charity and with such pitying compassion that most high
sacrament (which, by reason of its efficacy, the souls of the dead
desire above all other benefits we can bestow upon them), that
he seemed all melted with the sweetness of pity and of brotherly
love. Wherefore, as he devoutly elevated the body of Christ in
that mass and offered it up to God the Father, and prayed that,
for love of His beloved Son, Jesus Christ, who was nailed on
the cross to redeem souls, He would be pleased to deliver from
the pains ot purgatory the souls of the dead by Him created and
redeemed, he straightway beheld a multitude of souls, well-nigh
infinite, come forth from purgatory, after the manner of count¬
less sparks issuing from a fiery furnace; and he beheld them
ascend to heaven through the merits of Christ's Passion, that
each day is offered up for the living and the dead in that
most sacred Host which is worthy to be worshipped world
without end.


Friar James of Falterone


93


CHAPTER LI

OF THE HOLY FRIAR JAMES OF FALTERONE, AND HOW AFTER HIS
DEATH HE APPEARED TO FRIAR JOHN OF LA VERNA

At the time when Friar James of Falterone, a man of great
holiness, lay grievously sick at the friary of Moliano in the
custody of Fermo, Friar John of La Verna, who then abode in
the friary of La Massa, heard of his sickness; and, for that he
loved him as a dear father, he betook himself to pray for him,
devoutly beseeching God with all his heart that if it were good
for his soul He would restore him to health of body. And
while thus devoutly praying he was rapt in ecstasy, and beheld
in the air, above his cell in the wood, a great host of angels and
saints, of such dazzling splendour that the whole country round
about was illumined thereby; and in the midst of these angels
he beheld this sick Friar James, for whom he was praying, all
resplendent in pure white robes. He saw likewise among them
the blessed father, St. Francis, adorned with the sacred stigmas
of Christ and with much glory. And he beheld also and knew
the saintly Friar Lucido, and the ancient Friar Matthew of
Monte Rubbiano, and many other friars that in this life he had
never seen nor known. And as Friar John was thus gazing,
with great delight, on that blessed company of saints, it was
revealed to him that of a surety the soul of that sick friar was
saved, and that he was to die of that sickness; but that he was
not to ascend straightway after his death to paradise, for that
it behoved him to purge himself a while in purgatory. At this
revelation Friar John felt such exceeding joy because of the
salvation of his soul, that he grieved not for the death of the
body, but with great sweetness of spirit called him within him¬
self, saying, “ Friar James, sweet father mine; Friar James,
sweet brother; Friar James, faithfullest servant and friend of
God; Friar James, companion of the angels and consort of the
blessed! ” and in this certitude and joy he came to himself again.
And anon he departed from that place and went to visit the said
Friar James at Moliano, and finding the sickness so heavily
upon him that scarce could he speak, he announced to him the
death of the body and the salvation and glory of his soul,
according to the certitude he had had by divine revelation.
Whereat Friar James rejoiced gladly in spirit and in coun-


94 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

tenance, and received him with great gladness, and with jocund
mien gave thanks to him for the good tidings he had brought,
commending himself devoutly to him. Then Friar John be¬
sought him dearly that he would return to him after his death
and speak to him of his state: and Friar James promised this,
if God so pleased. These words said, the hour of his passing
away drew nigh, and Friar James began to recite devoutly that
verse from the Psalms: In pace in idipsum dormiam et requiescam ,
which is to say, “ I will both lay me down in peace and sleep.”
This verse said, he passed from this life with glad and joyful
countenance. And after he was buried, Friar John returned to
the friary of La Massa and waited for the promise of Friar
James, that he would return to him on the day he had said.
But while he was at prayer on that day, Christ appeared to him
with a great company of angels and saints, and among them
Friar James was not: whereupon Friar John, marvelling greatly,
commended him devoutly to Christ. Then on the day follow-
ing, as Friar John was praying in the wood, Friar James ap¬
peared to him accompanied by the angels, all glorious and all
glad; and Friar John said to him, “ 0 dearest father, wherefore
hast thou not returned to me the day that thou didst promise? ”
Friar James answered, “ Because I had need of some purgation;
but in that same hour when Christ appeared to thee, and thou
didst commend me to Him, Christ heard thee and delivered me
from all pain. And then I appeared to the holy lay Friar
James of La Massa, that was serving mass, and saw the conse¬
crated Host, when the priest elevated it, converted and changed
into the form of a living child most fair; and I said to him,

4 This day do I go with that child to the realm of life eternal,
whither none can go without him.’ ” These words said, Friar
James vanished and went to heaven with all that blessed com¬
pany of angels; and Friar John remained much comforted.
And the said Friar James of Falterone died on the vigil of St.
James the Apostle, in the month of July, in the aforesaid friary
of Moliano, wherein, through his merits, divine goodness
wrought many miracles after his death.


Friar John of La Verna


95


CHAPTER LII

OF THE VISION OF FRIAR JOHN OF LA VERNA WHEREIN HE KNEW
ALL THE ORDER OF THE HOLY TRINITY

The aforesaid Friar John of La Verna, for that he had wholly
smothered all worldly and temporal joys and consolations, and
in God had placed all his joys and all his hopes, the divine good¬
ness gave him wondrous consolations and revelations, and,
above^all, in the solemn festivals of Christ; wherefore on a time
when the feast of the Nativity was drawing nigh, whereon he
had the expectancy of certain consolation from God in the sweet
humanity of Christ, the Holy Spirit set in his mind such exceed¬
ing great love and fervour for the charity of Christ whereby He
had abased Himself to take our humanity upon Him, that it
verily seemed to him as were his soul ravished from his body,
and that it burned like a furnace. And being unable to endure
this burning, and being in sore distress of soul, he cried out with
a loud voice; for by the power of the Holy Spirit and by the
exceeding fervour of his love he could not withhold his cry.
And at the hour when that consuming fervour came upon him,
there came withal so strong and sure a hope of his salvation,
that in no wise could he believe that, had he then died, he would
need to pass through the pains of purgatory; and this love
endured within him full six months, albeit that excessive fervour
possessed him not continuously, but came upon him only at
certain hours of the day, and then in these times he received
wondrous visitations and consolations from God. And ofttimes
was he rapt in ecstasy, even as that friar saw who first wrote
down these things; among which, one night, he was so lifted up
and rapt in God that he beheld in Him, the Creator, all created
things in heaven and on earth, and all their perfections and
degrees and their several orders. And then he perceived clearly
how every created thing was related to its Creator, and how God
is above, is within, is without, is beside all created things.
Thereafter he perceived one God in three Persons, and three
Persons in one God, and the infinite love that made the Son of
God become flesh in obedience to the Father. And at the last
he perceived, in that vision, how that no other way was there
whereby the soul might ascend to God and have eternal life
save through the blessed Christ, that is the Way, the Truth, an
the Life of the soul.


96 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


CHAPTER LIII

HOW FRIAR JOHN OF LA VERNA, WHILE SAYING MASS,
FELL DOWN AS ONE DEAD

On a time, as the friars that were present were wont to tell a
wondrous case befell the said Friar John in the aforesaid friary
of Moliano; for, on the first night after the octave of St. Law¬
rence, and within the octave of the Assumption of Our Lady,
having said matins in church with the other friars, and the
unction of divine grace falling upon him, he went forth into the
garden to meditate on the Passion of Christ and to prepare him¬
self, with all devotion, to celebrate the mass that it was his turn
to sing that morning.. And while he was meditating on the
words of the consecration of the body of Christ, to wit, while
he was considering the infinite love of Christ, and that He had
been willing to redeem us, not only with His precious blood, but
likewise to leave us His most worthy body and blood for food
of souls, the love of sweet Jesus began so to wax within him,
and with such great fervour and tenderness, that his soul could
no longer endure such sweetness; and he cried out with a loud
voice, and as one inebriate in spirit, ceased not to repeat to
himself, Hoc est corpus meum: for as he spake these words
himseemed Jo behold the blessed Christ, with the Virgin Mother
and a multitude of angels; and he was illumined by the Holy
Spirit in all the deep and lofty mysteries of that most hio-h
sacrament. And when the dawn was come, he went into the
church, with that same fervour of spirit, and with that same
absorption, and believing he was neither heard nor seen of
men, went on repeating those words; but there was a certain
friar at prayer in the choir that saw and heard all. And,
unable to contain himself in that fervour of spirit by reason of
the abundance of grace divine, he cried out with a loud voice,
and so continued until the hour of mass was come. Wherefore
he went to vest himself for the altar. And when he began the
mass, the farther he proceeded the more the love of Christ and
that fervour of devotion increased within him, whereby an
ineffable sense of God’s presence was given to him, which he
could neither comprehend nor thereafter express with his lips.
Wherefore, fearing lest that fervour and sense of God’s presence
should so wax within him that he must needs leave the altar,
he fell into great perplexity, and knew not what he should do—


Friar John of La Verna 97

whether to go on with the mass, or stay and wait. But, foras¬
much as at other times a like case had befallen him, and the
Lord had so far tempered that fervour that he had needed not
to leave the altar, he trusted He might do the like this time;
so he set himself with fear and trembling to go forward with the
mass: and when he came as far as the preface of the “ Our
Lady,” the divine illumination of the gracious sweetness of the
love of God began so to increase within him, that coming to the
Qui pridie, scarce could he endure such ravishing sweetness.
At last, when he came to the act of consecration, and had said
the first half of the words over the Host, to wit, Hoc est , in no
wise could he go farther, but only repeated those selfsame
words, to wit, Hoc est enim. And the cause wherefore he could
go no farther was, that he felt and beheld the presence of Christ,
with a multitude of angels, whose majesty he could not endure.
And he saw that Christ entered not into the Host, or, in sooth,
that the Host would not become changed into the body of
Christ, except he uttered the other half of the words, to wit,
corpus meum. Whereupon, while he stood thus perplexed and
could proceed no farther, the warden and the other friars, and
many lay folk likewise that were in the church hearing mass,
drew nigh to the altar, and were filled with horror when they
beheld and considered the acts of Friar John: and many of them
wept through devotion. At the last, after a great space, to wit,
when it pleased God, Friar John uttered, with a loud voice, Enim
corpus meum ; and straightway the form of the bread vanished,
and Jesus Christ the blessed appeared, incarnate and glorified,
in the Host, and showed forth to him the humility and charity
that made Him become incarnate of the Virgin Mary, and that
every day maketh Him to come into the hands of the priest,
when he consecrateth the Host: for which thing he was the
more exalted in sweetness and contemplation. And no sooner
had he elevated the consecrated Host and cup than he was
ravished out of himself, and his soul, being lifted up above all
bodily senses, his body fell backwards; and had he not been
held up by the warden that stood behind him., he had fallen
supine on the ground. Whereat the friars hastened towards
him, and the lay folk that were in the church, both men and
women; and he was carried into the sacristy as one dead; for
his body had grown cold, and the fingers of his hands were so
tightly clenched that scarce could they be opened or moved.
And in this manner he lay between life and death, or ravished,
until the hour of tierce; for it was summer time. And since I,


98 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

that was present at all these things, desired much to know what
God had wrought in him, I went straightway to him when his
senses had returned to him, and besought him, for love of God,
that he would tell me all things. Wherefore, because he had
great trust in me, he related all to me in order; and, among
other things, he told me that while meditating on the body and
blood of Jesus Christ before him, his heart was melted like
heated wax, and his flesh seemed to be without bones, in such
wise that scarce could he lift up arm or hand to make the sign
of the cross over the Host, or over the cup. He likewise told
me that before he was made a priest, God had revealed to him
that he was to swoon away in the mass; but seeing that he had
since said many masses, and this thing had not befallen him,
he believed the revelation was not of God. And nevertheless,
about fifty days before the Assumption of Our Lady, whereon
the aforesaid case befell him, God had again revealed to him
that this thing was to come to pass about the feast of the
Assumption; but that thereafter he no longer remembered the
said vision, or revelation, made to him by our Lord.

Here endeth the first part of the book of the venerable St. Francis,
and of many of the holy friars his companions . Herefolloweth the
second part concerning the sacred stigmas .


Touching the Sacred and Holy Stigmas of St, Francis
and some Considerations thereon

In this part we will treat, with devout consideration, of the
glorious, sacred, and hallowed stigmas of our blessed father,
St. Francis, that he received from Christ on the holy mount
of La Verna. And forasmuch as the said stigmas were five,
according to the five wounds of our Lord Jesus Christ, this
treatise shall be divided into five considerations.

The first consideration shall be touching the manner of the
coming of St. Francis to the holy mount of La Verna.

The second consideration shall be touching the life he lived,
and the discourse he held with his companions on the said
holy mountain.

The third consideration shall be touching the seraphic vision
and the impression of the most holy stigmas.

The fourth consideration shall be, how that St. Francis came
down from the mount of La Verna after he had received the
sacred stigmas and returned to St. Mary of the Angels.


Roland of Chiusi


99

The fifth consideration shall be touching certain divers visions
and revelations of the said sacred and hallowed stigmas to holy-
friars and other devout persons after the death of St. Francis,

I. Touching the first consideration of the sacred , hallowed
stigmas.

Be it known, touching the first consideration, that when St.
Francis was forty-three years of age, in the year one thousand
two hundred and twenty-four, he was inspired by God to set
forth from the vale of Spoleto and journey into Romagna, with
Friar Leo his companion; and as they went they passed by
the foot of the burg of Montefeltro, wherein a great banquet and
a great procession were made by reason of the knighting of one
of those counts of Montefeltro. And St. Francis, hearing of
this solemn festival and that many noblemen of divers countries
were assembled together there, said to Friar Leo, “ Let us go up
thither to this festival, for with God’s help we shall gather some
good spiritual fruit.” Now among the other nobles that were
come to that festival from the country round about was a certain
rich and mighty nobleman of Tuscany, called Roland of Chiusi
di Casentino, who, because of the wondrous things he had heard
of the holiness and of the miracles of St. Francis, held him in
great devotion, and had a very great desire to behold him and
to hear him preach. And St. Francis came up to that burg and
entered within, and went to the market-place, where all the host
of those nobles was gathered together, and in fervour of spirit
climbed on to a low wall and began to preach, taking for the
text of his sermon these words in the vulgar tongue—

“ A joy to me is every pain.

For I await a greater gain/’

And upon this text he preached so devoutly and so profoundly
by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, proving it by divers pains and
martyrdoms of the holy apostles and the holy martyrs, and by
the hard penances of the holy confessors, and the many tribula¬
tions and temptations of the holy virgins and other saints, that
all the people stood with eyes and minds lifted up towards him,
and hearkened as if an angel of God were speaking. And among
them was the said Roland, who, touched to the heart by God
through the wondrous preaching of St. Francis, was minded to
confer and take counsel with him, after the sermon, touching the
state of his soul. Wherefore, the sermon ended, he drew St.
Francis aside and said to him, “ 0 father, fain would I take
counsel with thee touching the salvation of my soul.” St.


ioo The Little Flowers of St. Francis


Francis answered, “ It pleaseth me well; but go this morning,
honour thy friends that have bidden thee to this feast, and dine
with them, and after thou hast dined, we will speak together as
long as it shall please thee.” Roland therefore went away to
dine, and after he had dined, returned to St. Francis and thus
conferred and discoursed with him fully, touching the state of
his soul. And at last this Roland said to St. Francis, “ I have
a mountain in Tuscany most proper for devout contemplation
that is called the mount of La Verna, and is very solitary and
meet for those that desire to do penance in a place far away
from the world, or to lead a solitary life; and if it so please thee,
fain would I give it to thee and to thy companions for the salva¬
tion of my soul. ,, St. Francis, hearing this bounteous offer of
a thing he so much desired, rejoiced with exceeding great joy,
and praising and giving thanks, first to God and then to Roland,
spake to him thus, “ Roland, when you are returned to your
house I will send some of my companions to you, and you will
show this mountain to them; and if it seem to them a proper
place for prayer and penance, from this time forth I accept your
charitable offer. ,, This said, St. Francis departed, and when he
had made an end of his journey he returned to St. Mary of the
Angels; and Roland likewise, when he had celebrated the end
of that festival, returned to his castle that was called Chiusi,
and was distant a mile from La Verna. And St. Francis, being
returned to St. Mary of the Angels, sent forth two of his com¬
panions to the said Roland, who, when they were come to him,
received them with the greatest joy and charity. And being
fain to show them the mount of La Verna, he sent with them
full fifty men-at-arms to be their defence against the wild beasts;
and these friars, thus escorted, ascended to the top of the moun¬
tain and sought diligently about, and at the last they came to a
part of the mountain that was meet for a holy place and most
proper for contemplation, in which place was an open plain:
this spot they chose for the habitation of them and of St. Francis,
and there, with the help of the men-at-arms that were in their
escort, they made some little cells of the branches of trees. And
thus in the name of God they accepted and took possession
of the mount of La Verna, and of the friary on that
mountain, and departed and returned to St. Francis. And
when they were come to St. Francis they related to him how
and in what manner they had taken a place on the mount of La
Verna most meet for prayer and contemplation. Hearing these
tidings, St. Francis rejoiced greatly, and praising and giving


IOI


St. Francis at La Verna

thanks to God, spake to these friars with a glad countenance,
and said, “ My sons, we are drawing nigh to our lent of St.
Michael the Archangel, and I steadfastly believe that it is God’s
will we should keep this fast on the mount of La Verna, that by
divine providence hath been prepared for us, in order that we
may merit from Christ the joy of consecrating that blessed mount
to the honour and glory of God and of His Mother, the glorious
Virgin Mary, and the holy angels.” This said, St. Francis took
with him Friar Masseo of Marignano d’Assisi, that was a man
of great wisdom and great eloquence; and Friar Angelo Tan-
credi of Rieti, that was a very noble gentleman, and in the world
had been a knight; and Friar Leo, that was a man of great
simplicity and purity, and therefore much beloved of St.
Francis. And St. Francis with these three friars set himself to
pray, and commended himself and the aforesaid companions to
the prayers of the friars that were left behind; and then set
forth, in the name of Jesus Christ crucified, with those three to
go to the mount of La Verna. And as St. Francis went forth,
he called one of those three companions, and he was Friar
Masseo, and spake to him thus, “ Thou, Friar Masseo, shalt be
our warden and our superior on this journey, I say, while we go
and remain together; and thus we will observe our Rule, for
whether we say the office, or discourse of God, or keep silence,
we will take no thought for the morrow, neither what we shall
eat, nor what we shall drink, nor where we shall sleep; but when
the hour of rest cometh we will beg a little bread, and then will
stay our steps and rest ourselves in the place that God shall
prepare for us.” Then did these three companions bow their
heads, and making the sign of the cross, journeyed on; and the
first evening they came to a friary and there lodged. The second
evening, by reason of the bad weather and of being so weary they
were not able to come to a friary, nor to any burg, nor to any
hamlet, and night falling after the bad weather, they took
refuge in a deserted and ruined church and there lay down to
rest. And while his companions were sleeping, St. Francis
betook himself to prayer, and lo, at the first watch of the night
there came a great host of fiercest devils with a great noise and
tumult and began to do him mighty battle and annoy: for one
plucked him here, another there; one pulled him down, another
up; one threatened him with one thing, and one rebuked for
another; and thus in divers ways they strove to disturb his
prayers; but they could not, for God was with him. And when
St. Francis had endured these assaults of the devils a long space.


102 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

he began to cry with a loud voice, “ O ye damned spirits, naught
can ye avail except in so far as the hand of God suffereth you:
therefore in the name of the omnipotent God I say unto you, do
ye unto my body whatsoever is permitted you by God, for I
suffer all willingly, since no greater enemy have I than my body;
therefore, if ye avenge me of mine enemy, ye do me too great a
service.” Then the devils seized him and with great violence
and fury began to drag him about the church and to wreak on
him more grievous hurt and annoy than before. Whereat St.
Francis began to cry aloud and say, “ My Lord Jesus Christ, I
thank Thee for the great love and charity Thou hast shown
toward me; for , tis a token of great love when the Lord well
punisheth His servant for all his faults in this world, in order
that he be not punished in the next. And I am prepared to
endure joyfully every pain and every adversity that Thou, my
God, art willing to send for my sins.” Then the devils, con¬
founded and vanquished by his constancy and patience, de¬
parted, and St. Francis came forth from the church in fervour of
spirit and entered into a wood that was nigh and betook him to
prayer, and with prayers and with tears, and with smitings of
the breast, sought Jesus Christ, the beloved spouse of his soul.

And at last, finding Him in the secret places of his soul, now
he spake with Him reverently as his Lord; now he gave answer
to Him as his Judge; again he besought Him as a father, and
yet again he reasoned with Him as a friend. On that night,
and in that wood, his companions, after they awoke, stood
hearkening and considering what he was doing, and they beheld
and heard him with tears and cries devoutly entreat God’s
mercy for sinners. Then was he heard and seen to bewail, with
a loud voice, the Passion of Christ, even as if he beheld it with
corporeal eyes. And in that selfsame night they saw him
praying with his arms held in the form of a cross, and lifted up
from the ground and suspended for a great space, and sur¬
rounded by a bright and shining cloud. And thus he passed all
that night in these holy exercises, without sleep; and in the morn¬
ing his companions, knowing that St. Francis, by reason of the
fatigues of that night passed without sleep, was very feeble in
body, and would have ill borne to go afoot, went to a poor
peasant of that country-side, and, for love of God, craved the
loan of his. ass for St. Francis, their father, that could not go
afoot. This man, hearing the name of Friar Francis, asked of
them, “ Are ye of those friars of that friar of Assisi whereof so
much good is told? ” The friars answered, “ Yea,” and that


St. Francis at La Verna 103

verily it was for him they craved the sumpter beast. Then
this honest fellow saddled the ass with great devotion and
solicitude, and led him to St. Francis, and with great reverence
bade him mount thereon; and so they went their way, the
peasant with them, behind his ass. And after they had jour¬
neyed on a while, the peasant said to St. Francis, “Tell me,
art thou that Friar Francis of Assisi?” And St. Francis
answered, “ Yea.” “ Now strive, then,” said the peasant, “ to
be as good as thou art held to be by all folk, for many have
great faith in thee; therefore I admonish thee that thou betray
not the hopes men cherish of thee.” St. Francis, hearing these
words, disdained not to be admonished by a peasant, nor said
within himself, “ What beast is this that doth admonish me? ”
as many proud fellows that wear the cowl would say nowadays,
but straightway flung himself off the ass and alighted on the
ground and knelt down before him, and kissed his feet, and
humbly thanked him for that he had deigned to admonish him
thus charitably. Then the peasant, together with the com¬
panions of St. Francis, raised him up from the ground, with
great devotion, and set him again on the ass and journeyed on.
And when they had climbed about half-way up the mountain,
a great thirst came upon this peasant, for the heat was very
great, and toilsome the ascent; whereat he began to cry behind
St. Francis, saying, “ Ah me I I die of thirst, for if I have not
water to drink I shall forthwith choke.” Wherefore St. Francis
got down from the ass and fell to prayer, and so long he knelt,
with hands lifted up to heaven, until he knew by revelation
that his prayer was heard of God. Then said St. Francis
to the peasant, “ Haste; hie thee quickly to that rock, there
shalt thou find running water that Jesus Christ in this hour
hath, in His mercy, made to issue from that rock.” Now runs
he to the place that St. Francis had shown to him, and there
finds a fair spring which St. Francis, by virtue of his prayers,
had made to gush forth from that hard rock; and he drank
thereof abundantly, and was comforted. And well it appeareth
that that spring was made to flow by God miraculously, at the
prayers of St. Francis, for neither before nor after was ever a
spring of water seen in that place, nor running water near that
place for a great distance. This done, St. Francis, with his
companions, and with the peasant, gave thanks to God for the
miracle He had shown them, and then journeyed on. And
when they were come nigh to the foot of the very rock of La
Verna, it pleased St. Francis to rest a while under the oak tree


104 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

that stood by the way, and there standeth to this day; and
resting beneath it, St. Francis began to consider the lay of the
place and of the country round about. And lo, while he was
thus pondering there came a great multitude of birds from
divers parts that, with singing and fluttering of their wings,
showed forth great joy and gladness, and surrounded St. Francis,
in such wise that some settled on his head, some on his shoulders,
and some on his arms, some on his bosom, and some around his
feet. His companions and the peasant, beholding this, mar¬
velled greatly, and St. Francis rejoiced in spirit, and spake thus,
“ I do believe, dearest brothers, that it is pleasing to our Lord
Jesus Christ that we abide on this solitary mountain, since our
sisters and brothers, the birds, show forth such great joy at our
coming.” These words said, they rose up and journeyed on;
and at last they came to the place that his companions had
taken at first. And this is all that concerns the first considera¬
tion, to wit, how St. Francis came to the holy mount of La
Verna.

II. Touching the second consideration of the sacred , hallowed
stigmas .

The second consideration is touching the discourse of St.
Francis with his companions on the said mount of La Verna.
And as for this, be it known that when Roland heard that
St. Francis, with his three companions, had gone up to dwell
on the mount of La Verna, he rejoiced exceedingly, and the day
following set forth with many of his friends, and came to visit
St. Francis; and they brought with them bread and wine, and
other necessaries of life for him and his companions. And when
they came to the top of the mountain they found them at
prayer, and drawing nigh, gave them salutation. Then St.
Francis rose up and received Roland and his company with
great joy and love; and this done, they began to discourse
together. And after they had discoursed a while, and St. Francis
had thanked Roland for the holy mountain he had given them,
and for his coming, he besought him to have a poor little cell
built at the foot of a very fair beech tree that stood about a
stone’s - throw from the friary; for that seemed to him a
place most solemn and meet for prayer. And anon Roland had
it made; and this done St. Francis, seeing that the evening was
drawing nigh, and it was time to depart, preached to them a
little ere they took leave; and after he had preached and had
given them his blessing, it behoved Roland to depart; where¬
fore he called St. Francis and his companions aside, and said to


St. Francis at La Verna 105

them, “ My dearest friars, I am not minded that ye should
endure any bodily want on this wild mountain top, and so be
less able to give heed to spiritual things. Therefore I desire,
and this I say once for all, that ye send confidently to my house
for all things needful to you, and if ye did not so I should take
it very ill of you.” This said, he set forth with his company
and returned to his castle. Then St. Francis made his com¬
panions sit down, and instructed them touching the manner
of the life that they, and whoso would desire to live like religious,
in hermitages, should lead. And, among other things, he laid
upon them the single-minded observance of holy poverty,
saying, “ Heed not overmuch Roland’s charitable offer, lest ye
in any way offend our lady, madonna holy Poverty Be
ye sure that the more we despise poverty, the more the world
will despise us, and the greater need we shall suffer; but if we
embrace holy poverty, full straitly the world will follow after us
and feed us abundantly. God hath called us to this holy Rule
of life for the salvation of the world, and hath made this
covenant between us and the world, that we give good example
to the world and the world provide for our needs. Let us
persevere, then, in holy poverty, because that is the way of
perfection, and the earnest and pledge of everlasting riches.”
And after many fair and devout words, and admonitions of this
sort, he made an end, saying, “ This is the manner of life that
I lay on myself and on you; and for that I see me drawing nigh
unto death, I purpose to withdraw to a solitary place and make
my peace with God, and weep for my sins before Him; and
let Friar Leo, when it shall seem good to him, bring me a little
bread and water, and on no account to suffer any lay folk to
come to me: do ye answer them for me.” These words said, he
gave them his blessing, and went to the cell under the beech
tree, and his companions remained in their habitation with
the steadfast purpose to obey the commands of St. Francis. A
few days thereafter, as St. Francis was standing beside the said
cell, considering the form of the mountain, and marvelling at
the exceeding great clefts and caverns in the mighty rocks, he
betook himself to prayer; and then it was revealed to him by
God that these clefts, so marvellous, had been miraculously
made at the hour of the Passion of Christ, when, according to
the gospel, the rocks were rent asunder. And this, God willed,
should manifestly appear on the mount of La Verna, because
there the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ was to be renewed,
through love and pity, in the soul of St. Francis, and in his

E * 8 5


io6 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


body by the imprinting of the sacred, hallowed stigmas. No
sooner had St. Francis received that revelation than he forth¬
with locked himself in his cell, and retired wholly into himself,
and made him ready for the mystery of this revelation, and
from that hour St. Francis, through his unceasing prayers,
began to taste more often of the sweetness of divine contempla¬
tion; wherefore many times was he so rapt in God that he
was seen of his companions to be lifted up bodily from the
ground and ravished out of himself. And in these contempla¬
tive ecstasies, not only were things present and future revealed
to him, but likewise the secret thoughts and appetites of the
friars, even as Friar Leo, his companion, made proof of that
day. Now to this Friar Leo, while enduring a mighty tempta¬
tion of the devil, and not a carnal one, but a spiritual one, there
came a great desire to have some pious words written by the
hand of St. Francis; for he thought within himself, that if he
had them, that temptation would leave him, either wholly or in
part; yet, through shame or reverence, he had not the heart to
tell of this desire to St. Francis. But the desire that Friar Leo
spake not of, was revealed by the Holy Spirit to St. Francis:
whereat he called Friar Leo to him, and made him bring pen
and ink and paper, and with his own very hand did write a
laud of Christ, according to the friar’s desire. And at the end
thereof he made the letter Tan* and he gave the writing to him,
saying, “ Dearest friar, take this paper and keep it diligently
until thy death. God bless thee and keep thee from all tempta¬
tion. Be not afraid that thou art tempted, for the more thou
art assailed by temptations the greater friend and servant of
God do I hold thee, and the greater love do I bear thee. Verily
I say unto thee, let no man deem himself the perfect friend of
God until he have passed through many temptations and
tribulations.” When Friar Leo received this writing, with
exceeding devotion and faith, straightway every temptation
departed, and returning to the friars, he related to them, with
great joy, what grace God had bestowed upon him when he
received that writing from St. Francis; and putting it away and
keeping it diligently, the friars wrought many miracles by means
thereof . 2 And from that hour the said Friar Leo began to
watch closely and meditate with great purity and good intent

1 See Ezekiel ix. 4 (in the Vulgate). According to St. Jerome, Tau (T),
which is the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet, was used in the Samaritan
language to represent the cross, of which it had the form.

2 This precious relic of St. Francis is still preserved in the sacristy of the
great church of S. Francesco at Assisi.


St, Francis at La Verna 107

on the life of St. Francis; and because of his purity it was
vouchsafed to him many times and oft, to behold St. Francis
rapt in God and lifted up from the earth: sometimes to the
height of three cubits, sometimes four, sometimes as high as
the top of the beech tree; and sometimes he saw him lifted up
in the air so high, and surrounded by such dazzling splendour,
that scarce could the eye behold him. Now what was this
simple friar wont to do when St. Francis was lifted up but a
little space from the earth so that he could reach him? He
went softly and embraced his feet and kissed them, and said, in
tears, “ My God, have mercy on me, a sinner, and through the
merits of this holy man give me to find grace with Thee.” And
one time, among others, while thus standing beneath the feet
of St. Francis, when he was so far lifted up from the earth that
he could not touch him, he saw a scroll descend from heaven,
writ with letters of gold, and rest on the head of St. Francis;
and on this scroll these words were writ. Behold the Grace of
God. And after he had read it he saw it return to heaven.
Through this gift of God's grace within him, St. Francis was
not only rapt in God by ecstatic contemplation, but many times
was likewise comforted by visits of angels. Wherefore, as
St. Francis one day was meditating on his death, and on the
state of his Order after his death, and saying, “ Lord God, what
will become of Thy poor little household, that Thou of Thy
goodness hast committed to me, a sinner? Who shall comfort
them? Who shall correct them? Who shall pray to Thee for
them ? ” And while he was uttering such words, the angel sent
of God appeared to him, and comforted him with these words,
“I say unto thee, in God’s name, that the profession of thy
Order shall not fail until the Judgment Day; and none shall
be so great a sinner, but that if he love thy Order in his heart,
the same shall find mercy in God’s sight; and none that evilly
persecuteth thy Order shall have length of life. Moreover, no
wicked member of thy Order shall long continue therein, except
he amend his life. Therefore be not cast down if thou seest
some that are not good friars in thy Order, and that observe not
the Rule as they ought; think not that for this thy Order shall
perish; for ever shall there be of them—and they shall be many
and many—that will observe perfectly the life of the gospel of
Christ, and the purity of the Rule; and such as these shall go
straightway to life everlasting after the death of the body,
without passing through any purgatory. And some shall
observe the Rule, but not perfectly; and they, ere they go to


108 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

paradise, shall pass through purgatory, but the time of their
purgation shall be committed to thee by God. But touching
those that observe not the Rule at all—have no care of them,
saith God, because He careth not.” These words said, the
angel departed, and St. Francis remained comforted and
consoled. As the feast of the Assumption of Our Lady was
now drawing nigh, St. Francis seeketh tlie opportunity of a
more solitary and more secret place, wherein he may keep the
fast of St. Michael the Archangel, that beginneth with the said
feast of the Assumption. Wherefore he calls Friar Leo, and
speaks to him thus, “ Go and stand at the doorway of the
oratory of the friary, and when I call thee do thou return to
me.” Friar Leo goes and stands at the doorway, and St. Francis
withdrew a space and called loudly. Hearing himself called,
Friar Leo returns to him, and St. Francis saith, “ Son, let us
seek a more secret place, whence thou canst not hear me when
I call.” And, in their search, they caught sight of a secret
place on that side of the mountain that looketh to the south,
and only too meet for his purpose; but they could not get
there, because in front thereof was a horrible and fearful and
very great chasm in the rock; wherefore, with great labour,
they laid some logs across this chasm, after the manner of a
bridge, and passed over. Then St. Francis sent for the other
friars, and tells them how that he purposed to keep the lent of
St. Michael in that solitary place, and therefore prays them to
make a little cell there, so that no call of his might be heard by
them. And the little cell of St. Francis being made, he saith
to them, “ Go ye to your dwelling, and leave me here alone, for
with God’s help I purpose to keep the fast here, with mind
undistraught or unperturbed: therefore let none of you come
to me, nor suffer any worldly folk to come to me. But thou
only, Friar Leo, shalt come to me, once a day, with a little bread
and water, and once again, by night, at the hour of matins: then
shalt thou come to me in silence, and when thou art at the loot
of the bridge thou shalt say to me, Domine labia mea aperies ,
and if I answer * Come,’ pass thou on to the cell, and we will
say matins together; but if I answer not, return thou straight¬
way.” And St. Francis said this because sometimes he was so
rapt in God that he neither heard nor perceived aught with his
bodily senses. This said, St. Francis gave them his blessing,
and they returned to the friary. And the feast of the Assump¬
tion being come, St. Francis began the holy fast with great
abstinence and severity, mortifying his body and comforting


Temptation of St. Francis 109

his spirit with fervent prayers, watchings, and scourgings; and
ever waxing from virtue to virtue in these prayers, he made
ready his soul to receive the divine mysteries and divine
splendours, and his body to endure the cruel assaults of the
devils, wherewith he was ofttimes smitten corporeally; and
among other times, on a day during that fast, as St. Francis
issued from his cell in fervour of spirit, and went to pray hard
by in a hollow cave in the rock, at a great height from the
ground and looking on a horrible and fearful abyss, suddenly
the devil cometh in a terrible form, with tempest and mighty
ruin, and smiteth him to thrust him down the abyss. Whereat
St. Francis, having no whither to flee, and being unable to suffer
the cruel aspect of the devil, anon turned with hands and face
and all his body close to the rock, commending himself to God,
and groping about with his hands, if haply he might find aught
to cling to. But, as it pleased God, who never letteth His
servants be tempted beyond what they can endure, straightway
the rock, whereto he clung, was hollowed out by a miracle to
the form of his body, and received him into itself, in such wise
that the said rock was imprinted with the form of the face and
the hands of St. Francis, as if he had pressed his hands and face
against melted wax; and thus, with God’s help, he escaped from
the devil. But what the devil was unable to do then to St.
Francis, to wit, thrust him down thence, was done a long time
after the death of St. Francis to one, a dear and devoted friar,
who was at that place, laying down some planks of wood, in
order that he might go thither without peril, out of devotion to
St. Francis, and in memory of the holy miracle there wrought;
for on a day, as he was carrying a big log of wood on his head
to lay across the chasm, he was pushed by the devil and thrust
down and made to fall with that log on his head. But God,
who had saved and preserved St. Francis from falling, saved
and preserved that devout friar by his merits from the peril of
his fall; for as the friar was falling he commended himself with
a loud voice and with great devotion to St. Francis; and he
straightway appeared to him, and grasping him, placed him
down on the rocks, so that he felt neither shock nor wound.
But the other friars, having heard the cry of this friar as he fell,
and deeming him dead, and all dashed to pieces on the sharp
rocks, by the great depth of his fall, took up the bier, and with
great grief and many tears went to the other side of the moun¬
tain to seek the fragments of his body and bury them. And
when they were come down, to the foot of the rock, lo, that friar


i io The Little Flowers of St. Francis

who had fallen met them, carrying the log on his head and
singing Te Deum laudamus with a loud voice. And seeing the
friars marvel greatly, he related to them, in order, all the manner
of his fall, and how St. Francis had delivered him from all peril.
Then all the friars came with him together to that place, singing
most devoutly the aforesaid psalm, Te Deum laudamus , praising
and giving thanks to God, and to St. Francis, for the miracle
he had wrought for one of his friars.

St. Francis then, as hath been told, persevered in that fast,
and albeit he endured many assaults of the devil, none the less
did he receive many consolations from God, not only by visits
of angels, but likewise of wild birds; for all the time of that lent,
a falcon that had built her nest hard by his cell awoke him
every night, a little before matins, by her singing and by beating
her wings against his cell, and she departed not until he had
risen up to say matins. And when St. Francis was more weary
at one time than another, or more sick, or more feeble, this
falcon, after the manner of a discreet and compassionate person,
sang later. And so St. Francis had great pleasure of this clock;
for the great solicitude of this falcon drove all sloth away from
him and urged him to prayer, and beyond this, she ofttimes by
day dwelt familiarly with him. Finally, as to this second con¬
sideration, St. Francis, being much weakened in body, in part
by his great abstinence, and in part by the assaults of the devil,
and being fain to comfort his body with the spiritual food of the
soul, began to meditate on the ineffable glory and joy of the
blessed in the life eternal; and he began to beseech God to
grant him the grace of some foretaste of that joy. And while
he remained thus meditating, anon an angel appeared to him
with exceeding great splendour, that held a viol in his left hand
and a bow in his right; and as St. Francis stood all dazed at this
vision, the angel drew his bow once upwards across the viol;
and straightway St. Francis heard such sweet melody that it
ravished his soul and lifted him beyond all bodily sense, so that,
as he afterwards related to his companions, he doubted lest his
soul had wholly parted from his body, by reason of the unbear¬
able sweetness, if the angel had drawn the bow downwards
again. And this is all that concemeth the second consideration.

III. Touching the third consideration oj the sacred , hallowed
stigmas.

Coming to the third consideration, to wit, of the seraphic
vision, and of the imprinting of the sacred, hallowed stigmas, be
it known that the feast of the Most Holy Cross in the month of


111


The Divine Vision

September drawing nigh, Friar Leo went one night at the
wonted hour to the wonted place, in order to say matins with
St. Francis, and having cried from the foot of the bridge,
Domine labia mia aperies, as he was used to do, St. Francis did
not answer. And Friar Leo turned not back, as St. Francis had
bidden him, but passed over the bridge, with good and holy
intent, and entered softly into his cell, and finding him not,
thought he might be somewhere in the wood at prayer.
Whereat he comes forth and goes about the wood in search of
him by the light of the moon. And at last he heard the voice of
St. Francis, and drawing nigh, beheld him on his knees in
prayer with face and hands lifted up to heaven, saying in fervour
of spirit, “ Who art Thou, my God most sweet ? What am I,
Thy unprofitable servant and vilest of worms ? ” And these self¬
same words he again repeated and said naught besides. Whereat
Friar Leo, marvelling greatly, lifted up" his eyes and looked
heavenward; and as he looked, he beheld a flaming torch
coming down from heaven, most beautiful and resplendent,
which descended and rested on the head of St. Francis; and from
the said flame he heard a voice come forth which spake with St.
Francis, but the words thereof this Friar Leo understood not.
Hearing this, and deeming himself unworthy to remain so near
the holy place where that wondrous vision was seen, and fear¬
ing likewise to offend St. Francis, or disturb him in his medita¬
tion if he were heard of him, he stole softly back, and standing
afar off, waited to see the end. And as he gazed steadfastly, he
beheld St. Francis stretch forth his hands thrice towards the
flame; and at last, after a great space of time, he saw the
flaming torch return to heaven. Whereupon he bestirred him¬
self and returned secretly to his cell, glad in heart at the vision.
And as he was going confidently away, St. Francis heard him by
the rustling of the leaves under his feet, and bade him stay his
steps and await him. Then Friar Leo, obedient, stood still and
awaited him, with such great fear that, as he afterwards told
his companions, at that moment he would rather the earth had
swallowed him up than await St. Francis, who he thought would
be displeased with him; for he guarded himself with the greatest
diligence against offending his father, lest through his own fault
St. Francis should deprive him of his companionship. Then
St. Francis, as he came up to him, asked, “ Who art thou? ”
And Friar Leo, all trembling, answered, “ I am Friar Leo, my
father.” And St. Francis said to him, “ Wherefore earnest
thou hither, friar, little sheep ? Have I not told thee not to go


112 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

spying on me? Tell me, by holy obedience, if thou didst see or
hear aught?” Friar Leo answered, “ Father, I heard thee
speak and say many times, ‘ Who art Thou, my God most
sweet? What am I, thy unprofitable servant and vilest of
worms ? ' ” And then Friar Leo knelt down before St. Francis
and confessed his sin of disobedience, for that he had done con¬
trary to his commands, craving forgiveness of him with many
tears. And thereafter he entreated him devoutly to interpret
to him those words he had heard, and tell him those he had not
understood. Then St. Francis, seeing that God had revealed
to this lowly Friar Leo, because of his purity and simplicity, or
in sooth had suffered him to hear and behold certain things,
deigned to reveal to him and interpret to him all those things he
asked of him. And he spake thus, “ Know thou, friar, little
sheep of Jesus Christ, that when I was saying those words that
thou didst hear, two lights were shown to me within my soul—
one, the knowledge and understanding of myself; the other,
the knowledge and understanding of the Creator. When I
said, ‘ Who art Thou, my God most sweet? ' then was I illumined
by the light of contemplation, whereby I beheld the depths of
the infinite goodness and wisdom and power of God. And
when I said, ‘ What am I, etc. ? '1 was in the light of contempla¬
tion, whereby I beheld the deplorable depths of my own vile¬
ness and misery; and therefore I said, ‘ Who art Thou, Lord,
infinite in goodness and wisdom, that deignest to visit me that
am a vile and abominable worm? ' And God was in that flame
thou sawest, who spake to me in that vision even as of old He
had spoken to Moses. And among other things He said, He
asked of me to make Him three gifts; and I answered, 4 My
Lord, I am wholly Thine; well Thou knowest I have naught
save tunic, cord, and breeches, and even these three things are
Thine; what, then, can I offer or give unto Thy Majesty?'
Then God said, * Search in thy bosom and offer Me what thou
fmdest there.' I sought there and found a ball of gold, and
this I offered to God; and thus did I thrice, according as God
had thrice bidden me. And then thrice knelt I down, and
blessed and gave thanks to God that had given me wherewithal
to offer to Him. And straightway it was given me to know that
those three offers signified holy obedience, most exalted poverty,
and most resplendent chastity, which God had vouchsafed to
me by His grace to observe so perfectly that my conscience
reproved me of naught. And even as thou sawest me place my
hands in my bosom and offer to God those three virtues signified


The Angel of God 113

by the three balls of gold that God had placed in my bosom*
even so hath God given me this virtue in my soul—that for all
the good and for all the grace He hath bestowed upon me by
His most holy goodness, I ever in my heart and with my lips
do praise and magnify Him. These are the words thou didst
hear when thou sawest me lift up my hands thrice. But
beware, friar, little sheep; go thou not spying upon me, but
return to thy cell with God’s blessing, and have diligent care of
me: for yet a few days and God shall work such great and
wondrous things on this mountain that all the world shall
marvel thereat; for He shall do things, new and strange, such
as never hath He done to any creature in this world.” These
things said, St. Francis had the book of the gospels brought to
him, for God had put it into his soul that by opening the book
of the gospels thrice, those things that God was pleased to do
with him should be shown forth. And when the book was
brought, St. Francis betook himself to prayer, and the prayer
ended, he had the book opened thrice by the hand of Friar Leo,
and in the name of the most holy Trinity; and even as it pleased
the divine providence, ever in those three openings the Passion
of Christ was displayed to him. Through which thing it was
given him to understand that even as he had followed Christ in
the acts of his life, so was he to follow Him and conform himself
unto Him in the afflictions and sorrows of the Passion, ere he
passed from this life. And from that time forth St. Francis
began to taste and feel more bounteously the sweetness of
divine contemplation and of divine visitations. Among which,
he had one, immediate and preparatory to the imprinting of the
divine stigmas, in this form. The day that goeth before the
feast of the Most Holy Cross in the month of September, as
St. Francis was praying in secret in his cell, the angel of God
appeared to him and spake thus to him in God’s name, “ I am
come to comfort and admonish thee that thou humbly prepare
thee and make thee ready, with all patience, to receive that
which God willeth to give thee and to work in thee.” St.
Francis answered, “ I am ready to endure patiently all things
that my Lord would do with me.” This said, the angel de¬
parted. The day following, to wit, the day of the Most Holy
Cross, St. Francis, on the morn before daybreak, knelt down
betimes in prayer before the door of his cell; and turning his
face eastwards, prayed in this wise, “ 0 my Lord Jesus Christ,
two graces do I pray Thee to grant unto me ere I die: the
nrst, that while I live I may feel in my body and in my soul, so


114 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

far as is possible, that sorrow, sweet Lord, that Thou didst
suffer in the hour of Thy bitterest Passion; the second is, that
I may feel in my heart, so far as may be possible, that exceed¬
ing love wherewith, 0 Son of God, Thou wast enkindled to
endure willingly for us sinners agony so great.” x\nd remain¬
ing a long time thus praying, he knew that God would hear him;
and that, so far as might be possible to a mere creature, thus
far would it be vouchsafed to him to suffer the aforesaid things.
St. Francis, having this promise, began to contemplate most
devoutly the Passion of Christ and His infinite love; and the
fervour of devotion waxed so within him that through love and
through compassion he was wholly changed into Jesus. And
being thus inflamed by this contemplation, he beheld, that
same morning, a seraph with six resplendent and flaming wings
come down from heaven; which seraph, with swift flight, drew
nigh to St. Francis so that he could discern him, and he knew
clearly that he had the form of a man crucified; and thus were
his wings disposed: two wings were extended over his head;
two were spread out in flight; and the other two covered the
whole of the body. St. Francis, beholding this, was sore afeard,
and yet was he filled with sweetness and sorrow mingled with
wonder. Joy had he, exceeding great, at the gracious aspect
of Christ that appeared to him thus familiarly and looked on
him so graciously; but, on the other hand, seeing him nailed
upon the cross, he suffered unspeakable grief and compassion.
Thereafter, he marvelled greatly at so stupendous and un¬
wonted a vision, well knowing that the infirmity of the Passion
doth not accord with the immortality of the seraphic spirit.
And being in this wonderment, it was revealed by the seraph
who appeared to him, that that vision had been shown to him
in such form, by divine providence, in order that he might
understand he was to be changed into the express similitude of the
crucified Christ in this wondrous vision, not by bodily martyr¬
dom but by spiritual fire. Then the whole mount of La Verna
seemed to flame forth with dazzling splendour, that shone and
illumined all the mountains and the valleys round about, as
were the sun sinning on the earth. Wherefore when the
shepherds that were watching in that country saw the mountain
aflame and so much brightness round about, they were sore
afraid, according as they afterwards told the friars, and affirmed
that that flame had endured over the mount of La Verna for
the space of an hour and more. Likewise, certain muleteers
that were going to Romagna, arose up at the brightness of this


Imprinting of the Holy Stigmas I x 5

light which shone through the windows of the inns of that
country, and thinking the sun had risen, saddled and loaded
their beasts. And as they went their way, they saw the said
light wane and the real sun rise. Now Christ appeared in that
same seraphic vision, and revealed to St. Francis certain secret
and high things that St. Francis would never, during his life,
disclose to any man; but, after his death, he revealed them,
according as is set forth hereafter. And the words were these,
“ Knowest thou,” said Christ, “ what I have done to thee? I
have given thee the stigmas that are the marks of my Passion,
in order that thou be My standard-bearer. And even as I, on
the day of my death, descended into limbo and delivered all
the souls I found there by virtue of these My stigmas, so do I
grant to thee that every year, on the day of thy death, thou
mayst go to purgatory and deliver all the souls thou shalt find
there of thy three orders—Minors, Sisters, and Penitents—
and others likewise that shall have had great devotion to thee,
and thou shalt lead them up to the glory of paradise in order
that thou be conformed to Me in thy death, even as thou art in
thy life.” This wondrous vision having vanished, after a great
space, this secret converse left in the heart of St. Francis a
burning flame of divine love, exceeding great, and in his flesh,
a marvellous image and imprint of the Passion of Christ. For
the marks of the nails began anon to be seen on the hands and
on the feet of St. Francis, in the same manner as he had then
seen them in the body of Jesus Christ crucified that had
appeared to him in the form of a seraph: and thus his hands
and feet seemed nailed through the middle with nails, the heads
whereof were in the palms of his hands and in the soles of his feet,
outside the flesh; and the points came out through the backs of
the hands and the feet, so far, that they were bent back and
clinched in such wise that one might easily have put a finger of
the hand through the bent and clinched ends outside the flesh,
even as through a ring: and the heads of the nails were round
and black. In like fashion, the image of a lance-wound, un¬
healed, inflamed, and bleeding, was seen in his right side, whence
thereafter blood came out many times from the holy breast of
St. Francis and stained his tunic and his nether garments with
blood. Wherefore his companions, before they learned these
things from him, perceiving nevertheless that he never un¬
covered his hands or his feet, and that he could not put the soles
of his feet to the ground, and finding thereafter that his tunic
and nether garments were all bloody when they washed them,


116 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

knew of a surety that he had the image and similitude of our
Lord Jesus Christ crucified, expressly imprinted on his hands and
feet, and likewise on his side. And albeit he strove much to
conceal and to hide those glorious, sacred, and hallowed stigmas,
thus clearly marked on his flesh; yet on the other hand, seeing
that he could ill conceal them from his familiar companions,
and fearing to publish abroad the secrets of God, he remained
in great doubt whether he ought to reveal the seraphic vision
and the imprint of the sacred, hallowed stigmas. At last,
pricked by conscience, he called to him certain of his most
familiar friars and propounded his doubts to them in general
terms, without giving expression to the fact and asked counsel
of them. Now among these friars was one of great holiness
called Friar Illuminatus, and he, verily illumined by God, under¬
stood that St. Francis must have beheld wondrous things, and
answered him thus, “ Friar Francis, know that not for thee
alone, but also for others, God showeth to thee at divers times'
his holy mysteries; therefore hast thou reason to fear lest thou
be worthy of reproof if thou keep this thing hidden that God
hath shown to thee for profit of others.” Then St. Francis,
moved by these words, laid before them, with exceeding great
fear, all the manner and form of the aforesaid vision, and added
that Christ when He appeared to him, had said certain things
that he would never tell while he lived. And albeit those most:
holy wounds, in so far as they were imprinted by Christ, gave-
him great joy in his heart, nevertheless to his flesh and to his-
bodily senses they gave unbearable pain. Wherefore, being:
constrained by necessity, he chose Friar Leo, simplest and
purest among the friars, and to him revealed all things; and
he suffered him to see and touch those holy wounds and bind
them with kerchiefs to ease the pain and staunch the blood that
issued and ran therefrom: which bands, at the time of his
sickness, he suffered often to be changed, yea, even every day*
save from Thursday evening to Saturday morning; for he would! i
not that the pains of the Passion of Christ, that he bore in his
body, should be eased in any way by human remedies and!,
medicines during the time our Saviour Jesus Christ had been,
taken and, for our sakes, crucified and slain and buried. It
befell on a time when Friar Leo was changing the swathings of
the wound in his side, that St. Francis, by reason of the pain'
he felt in the loosing of the blood-stained kerchief, laid his hand
on Friar Leo’s breast; and at the touch of those holy hands,
Friar Leo felt such great sweetness of devotion in his heart that, -


St. Francis Returns to St. Mary 117

a little more, and he had fallen swooning on the ground. And
finally, as to this third consideration: St. Francis having com¬
pleted the forty days’ fast of St. Michael the Archangel, made
ready by divine revelation to return to St. Mary of the Angels.
Wherefore he called Friar Masseo and Friar Angelo to him, and
after many words and many holy admonitions, commended the
holy mountain to them with all the zeal in his power, saying
that it behoved him, together with Friar Leo, to return to St.
Mary of the Angels. This said, he took leave of them and
blessed them in the name of the crucified Jesus; and deigned, in
answer to their prayers, to stretch forth to them his most holy
hands, adorned with those glorious and sacred and hallowed
stigmas, that they might see them and touch them and kiss
them, and leaving the friars thus comforted he departed from
them and descended the holy mountain.

IV. Touching the fourth consideration of the sacred , hallowed
stigmas .

Touching the fourth consideration, be it known, that after
the true love of Christ had perfectly transformed St. Francis
into God and into the true image of Christ crucified, that angelic
man, having completed the fast of forty days in honour of
St. Michael the Archangel on the holy mount of La Verna, came
down from the mountain with Friar Leo and a devout peasant
on whose ass he rode, because, by reason of the nails in his feet,
he could not well go a-foot. And when he was come down from
the mountain, forasmuch as the fame of his sanctity was noised
abroad throughout the land (because the shepherds that had
seen the mount of La Verna all aflame had said it was a sign
of some great miracle God had wrought on St. Francis), the folk
of that country-side all flocked to behold him as he passed by:
men and women, small and great, all with great devotion and
desire, strove to touch him and to kiss his hands. And St.
Francis, being unable to deny his hands to the devotion of the
people, albeit he had bound up the palms, nevertheless bound
them over again, and covered them with his sleeves, and only
held forth his uncovered fingers for them to kiss. But albeit
he sought to conceal and hide the sacred mystery of the holy
stigmas, that he might flee all occasion of worldly glory, it
pleased God to show forth many miracles for His own glory, by
virtue of the said sacred, hallowed stigmas, and notably on
that journey from La Verna to St. Mary of the Angels. And
very many other miracles thereafter were wrought in divers
parts of the world, both during his life and after his glorious


118 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

death; and this to the end that their hidden and wondrous
virtue, and the exceeding love and mercy of Christ, so won-
drously vouchsafed to him, might be made manifest to the
world through clear and evident miracles, whereof we here set
down a few.

When St. Francis was drawing nigh to a village which was
on the confines of the district of Arezzo, a woman came before
him, weeping greatly, and bearing her son in her arms, that was
eight years of age; and this child for four years had been sick
of the dropsy; and his belly was so swollen and so deformed
that when he stood up he could not see his feet; and placing
this child before him, this woman besought St. Francis to pray
to God for him. And St. Francis first betook himself to prayer,
and then, the prayer ended, laid his holy hands on the child’s
belly, and straightway all the swelling was down, and he w r a.s
wholly healed; and St. Francis gave him back to his mother,
who received him with the greatest joy, and led him home,
giving thanks to God and to St. Francis; and willingly she
showed her son healed to all those of the country-side that came
to her house to behold him. The same day, St. Francis passed
by Borgo di San Sepolcro, and before he came nigh to the burg,
the crowds therefrom and from the villages made towards him;
and many of them went before him, bearing olive branches in
their hands, crying with a loud voice, “ Behold the saint!
Behold the saint! ” And by reason of the devotion and desire
that the folk had to touch him, they made a great throng and
press about him; but he went on with mind uplifted and rapt
in God, through contemplation; and albeit he was touched and
held and dragged about, yet as one insensible he felt naught
that was done or said to him; nay, he perceived not even that
he was passing by that burg or through that land. Wherefore,
having passed through the Borgo, and the crowds being gone
to their homes, he came to a leper house, a good mile beyond,
and this celestial contemplative then returned to himself, as
were he come back from another world; and he asked his
companions, “ When shall we be nigh the Borgo? ” For of a.
truth his soul, fixed and rapt in contemplation of celestial
things, had been sensible of no earthly thing; neither variety
of place, nor change of time, nor of persons he passed. And
this befell many other times, even as his companions proved
by clear experience. On that evening, St. Francis came to the
friary of Monte Casale, wherein a friar lay so cruelly sick and
so horribly tormented by his sickness that his ill seemed rather


Miracles of St. Francis 119

a iribulation and torment of the devil than a natural sickness;
for sometimes he flung himself on the ground in a mighty
trembling and foaming at the mouth; now he contracted all the
limbs of his body, now he thrust them forth; now he bent his
body, now he writhed; now bending back Ills heels to the
nape of his neck, he sprang high up into the air, and straightway
fell again on his back. And St. Francis, hearing from the other
friars, as he sat at table, of this miserably sick and incurable
friar, had compassion on him; and taking a slice of the bread
he was eating, he made thereon the sign of the most holy cross
with his holy wounded hands, and sent it to the sick friar; and
no sooner had he eaten thereof than he was perfectly healed,
and never more felt that sickness. The next morning being
come, St. Francis sent two of the friars that were in that house
to dwell at La Verna, and sent back with them the peasant that
had followed behind the ass he had lent him, desiring that he
should return home with them. St. Francis, after he had
sojourned some days in that friary, departed and went to Citta
di Castello. And behold, many of the townsfolk brought before
him a woman that for a long time had been possessed by a
devil, and besought him humbly to deliver her, for that she,
now with grievous howlings, now with cruel shrieks, now with
barks like a dog, disturbed the whole country-side. Then St.
Francis, having first prayed and made the sign of the most holy
cross over her, commanded the devil to depart from her, and
straightway he departed, leaving her whole in body and mind.
And this miracle being noised abroad among the people, another
woman, with great faith, brought to him her child, that was
grievously sick of a cruel wound, and devoutly besought him
that he would be pleased to make the sign over him with his
hands. Then St. Francis, granting her prayer, takes this child
and unbinds the wound and blesses him, making thrice the sign
of the most holy cross over the wound; then with his own hand
he binds the wound up again, and restores him to his mother.
And because it was evening, she straightway laid him in his bed to
sleep. In the morning she goes to take her child from the bed
and finds the wound unbound, and looks and finds him per¬
fectly healed, as if he had never had any ill, save that the flesh
had grown over the place where the wound was, in the form of a
red rose; and this was to bear witness to the miracle rather
than in token of the wound; for the said rose remaining there
all the days of his life, did oft move him to a special devotion
for St. Francis, who had made him whole. In that same city


120 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

St. Francis, at the prayers of the devout townsfolk, abode a
month, in which time he wrought very many other miracles,
and departed thence, to go to St. Mary of the Angels with Friar
Leo and an honest fellow that lent him his ass whereon he rode.
Now it befell, that what with the bad roads and what with the
great cold, they could not, even by journeying the whole day,
come to any place where they might lodge. Wherefore, con¬
strained by the darkness and by the bad weather, they took
shelter under the hollow cliff of a rock, to escape the snow and
the darkness that had overtaken them. And being thus in
sorry plight, and but ill sheltered, the man that had lent the ass
was unable to sleep, and having no means of kindling a fire,
he began to complain softly within himself and to weep, mur¬
muring at St. Francis that had brought him to such a pass.
Then St. Francis, hearing this, had compassion on him, and in
fervour of spirit, stretched forth his hand and laid it upon him
and touched him. Marvellous to tell! no sooner had he touched
him with his hand, pierced and enkindled by the fire of the
seraph, than all the cold vanished, and so much heat warmed
him from within and without, that himseemed to be nigh to a
fiery furnace; wherefore, comforted in body and soul, anon he
fell asleep; and, according as he was wont to say, he slept all
that night till morn, amid rocks and snow, better than he had
ever slept in his own bed. On the morrow, they journeyed on
and came to St. Mary of the Angels; and when they were nigh
thereto Friar Leo lifted up his eyes and looked towards the said
friary of St. Mary of the Angels; and he beheld a cross, exceed¬
ing beautiful, whereon was the figure of the Crucified, going
before St. Francis, who was riding in front of him; and so
closely did that cross conform to the movements of St. Francis,
that when he stopped, it stopped; and when he went on, it
went on: and that cross shone with such exceeding brightness
that not only did the face of St. Francis shine resplendent, but
likewise the whole way around him was illumined. And that
brightness endured even up to the time that St. Francis entered
the friary of St. Mary of the Angels. St. Francis then being
come with Friar Leo, they were received with the greatest joy
and charity, and from that hour St. Francis abode the most of
his time in the friary of St. Mary of the Angels, even until his
death. And ever more the fame of his holiness and of his
miracles was spread abroad throughout the Order and through¬
out the world, albeit he, of his deep humility, concealed, so far
as he could, the gifts and the graces of God, and called himself


121


St. Francis Resigns FI is Office

the greatest of sinners. Whereat Friar Leo marvelled, and on
a time thought within himself thus foolishly, “ Lo, this man
calleth himself in public places the greatest of sinners; he is
grown great in the Order, and is much honoured of God; never¬
theless, in secret he never confessed any carnal sin: could he
be a virgin ? ” And a very great desire came upon him to
know the truth of this thing; but he had not dared to ask St.
Francis. Wherefore, having recourse to God, and beseeching
with great insistence that He would certify to him, through the
many prayers and the merits of St. Francis, that which he
desired to know, his prayer was heard, and he was certified by a
vision that St. Francis was verily a virgin in body: for in a
dream he beheld St. Francis standing on a high and exalted
place, whereunto none could go nor attain; and it was revealed
to him in spirit that that place, so high and exalted, betokened
in St. Francis the high excellence of virginal chastity, that
rightly was in accord with the flesh that was to be adorned with
the sacred, hallowed stigmas of Christ. Now St. Francis, seeing
that by reason of the stigmas of Christ his bodily strength was
little by little ebbing away, and that he could no longer have
care for the government of the Order, hastened to summon the
Chapter-General; and when all were assembled he humbly
excused himself to the friars for his waning strength, whereby
he was no longer able to give heed to the cares of the Order, nor
fill the office of General; albeit he might not lay down the
generalship, for he could not, since he was made general by the
pope; therefore, he could not leave the office nor appoint
another in his place without the express licence of the pope;
but he instituted Friar Peter Cattani as his vicar, and com-
, mended the Order to him and to the ministers of the provinces
with all the affection he could. This done, St. Francis was
comforted in spirit, and lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven,
spake thus, “ To Thee, my Lord God, to Thee I commend Thy
household, that until this hour Thou hast committed to my
charge, and now, because of my infirmities, whereof Thou
knowest, my sweetest Lord, no more can I have the care thereof.
Likewise I commend it to the ministers of the provinces; let
them answer to Thee for it, on the Day of Judgment, if any
friar perish through their negligence, or through their evil
example, or through their too harsh correction.” And with
these words, as it pleased God, all the friars at the Chapter
understood that he spake of the sacred, hallowed stigmas, in
that he excused himself because of his infirmities; and of their


122 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

devotion none could henceforth keep back his tears. And,
from that time forth, he left the care and government of the
Order in the hands of his vicar and of the ministers of the
provinces, and then he said, “ Now since I have laid aside the
cares of the Order, because of my infirmities, I am henceforth
held to naught save to pray to God for our Order, and to give
a good example to the friars. Amd well I know, and truly, that
if my sickness left me, the greatest aid I could give to the Order
would be to pray unceasingly to God for it, and that He would
defend it and guide it and preserve it.” Now, as hath been said
above, albeit St. Francis strove with all his might to conceal
the sacred, hallowed stigmas, and, after he had received them,
ever went about or remained with his hands swathed and his
feet shod, it availed not but that many friars, in divers ways,
saw and felt them; and especially the wound in his side, that
he strove to conceal with the greatest diligence. Wherefore, a
friar that served him, craftily contrived on a time to induce him
to take off his tunic, that the dust might be shaken therefrom;
and it being taken off in his presence, that friar saw clearly the
wound in the side; and, putting forth his hand quickly, he
touched his breast with three fingers, and felt the width and
depth thereof; and in like manner his vicar saw it at that time.
But Friar Ruffino, a man of very great contemplation, was
most clearly certified thereof—he of whom St. Francis said on
a time that there was no saintlier man in the world, and whom,
for his holiness, he loved tenderly and granted to him all he
desired. This Friar Ruffino certified himself and others in
three ways of the sacred, hallowed stigmas, and especially of the
wound in the side. The first way was this: The said Friar
Ruffino, when he was about to wash the hose (which St. Francis
wore so large that by drawing them well up he could cover the
wound in his right side), was wont to look at them and consider
them diligently; and every time he did so he found them
stained with blood on the right side; wherefore he perceived,
of a surety, that blood issued from the said wound: and St.
Francis chid him, when he saw him unfold the clothes he took
away from him, in order to see the said stains. The second way
was, that the said Friar Ruffino on a time purposely put his
fingers in the wound in the side, whereat St. Francis, for the
pain he felt, cried out loudly, “ God forgive thee, 0 Friar
Ruffino, for that thou hast done this tiling.” The third way
was, that on a time he craved with great earnestness that
St. Francis would give him his cloak, as an exceeding great


Removed from the Bishop’s Palace 123

favour, and take his in exchange, for love of charity; which
petition the charitable father deigned to grant, albeit un¬
willingly, and took off his cloak and gave it to him, receiving his
in return: and then, as he took it off and put on the other,
Friar Ruffino clearly saw the wound. Friar Leo, likewise, and
many other friars, saw the sacred, hallowed stigmas of St.
Francis while he yet lived: which friars, albeit they were by
their holiness worthy of faith, and to be believed on their
simple word, nevertheless, to remove all doubt from men’s hearts,
did swear upon the sacred Book that they had clearly seen
them. Certain cardinals likewise saw them that were very
familiar with him, and composed and made fair and devout
hymns and antiphones and rhymes 1 out of reverence for the
said sacred and hallowed stigmas of St. Francis. The high
pontiff, Pope Alexander, preaching to the people in the presence
of the cardinals, and among them the saintly Friar Bonaventura,
that was a cardinal, said and affirmed that he had seen with his
own eyes the sacred and hallowed stigmas of St. Francis while
he was alive. And the lady Jacqueline of Settesoli, that in her
day was the greatest lady in Rome, and had a very great
devotion to St. Francis, beheld them and kissed them many
times with great reverence, both before he died and after his
death; for she came from Rome to Assisi, by divine revelation,
at the death of St. Francis, and it was in this wise: St. Francis,
some days before his death, lay sick in the bishop’s palace at
Assisi with some of his companions; and notwithstanding his
sickness, he ofttimes sang certain lauds of Christ. On a day,
one of his companions said to him, “ Father, thou knowest the
men of this city have great faith in thee, and deem thee a
holy man; and therefore they may think, that if thou art
such as they believe thee to be, thou oughtest in this thy sick¬
ness to meditate on thy death, and weep rather than sing, since
thou art so grievously sick; and know that this singing of
thine, and ours that thou biddest, is heard of many, both
within and without, since this palace is guarded by many
men-at-arms by reason of thy presence, who haply may have
evil example thereof. Wherefore,” said this friar, “ methinks
thou wouldst do well to depart hence and all we return to St.
Mary of the Angels, because it is not well with us here among
worldly men.” St. Francis answered, “ Dearest brother, thou

1 Prose. See Purg. xxvi. 118. The Anonimo fiorentino, commenting
on this passage, says far prosa di romanzi means to compose in rhyme. The
interpretation is, however, disputed.


124 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

knowest that two years now agone, when we were at Foligno,
God revealed to thee the term of my life; and even so hath He
revealed again to me that, yet a few days and the said term
shall end during this sickness; and in this revelation God hath
certified me that all my sins are remitted, and that I shall go
to paradise. Until that revelation I bewailed my death and
my sins; but since I had that revelation I am so filled with joy
that I can weep no more; therefore do I sing, and will sing, to
God, that hath given me the joy of His grace, and hath made
me certain of the joys of the glory of paradise. Touching our
departure hence, it pleaseth me well, and I consent thereto; but
find ye some means to carry me, for by reason of my sickness I
cannot walk.” Then the friars took him in their arms, and so
carried him, accompanied by many citizens. And when they
came to an hospice that was on the way, St. Francis said to them
that bore him, “ Lay me down on the ground, and turn me
towards the city.” And when he was laid with his face towards
Assisi, he blessed the city with many blessings, saying, “ Blessed
be thou of God, holy city, for many souls shall be saved because
of thee, and in thee shall dwell many of God’s servants; and
from thee many shall be chosen to the kingdom of life ever¬
lasting.” These words said, he had himself borne towards
St. Mary of the Angels. And when they were come to St. Mary
of the Angels they carried him to the infirmary, and there laid
him down to rest. Then St. Francis called one of his com¬
panions to him, and spake to him thus, “ Dearest friar, God
hath revealed to me that on such a day in this sickness I shall pass
from this life: and thou knowest that if the Lady Jacqueline of
Settesoli, the dearest friend of our Order, came to hear of my
death, and were not present, she would sorrow overmuch;
therefore signify to her that she must straightway come hither,
if she would see me alive.” The friar answered, “ Thou sayst
but too true, father, for verily of the great devotion she hath
for thee, it would be most unseemly if she were not present at
thy death.” “ Go then,” said St. Francis, “ and fetch me
ink and paper and pen, and write what I shall tell thee.” And
when he had brought them, St. Francis dictated the letter in
this wise, “ To the Lady Jacqueline, servant of God, greeting
and fellowship of the Holy Ghost in our Lord Jesus Christ,
from Friar Francis, Christ’s poor little one. Know, dearest
lady, that the blessed Christ hath revealed to me by His
grace that the end of my life is at hand. Therefore, if thou
wouldst find me yet alive, set forth when thou hast seen


Visit of the Lady Jacqueline 125

this letter, and come to St. Mary of the Angels; for if by
such a day thou art not come, thou shalt not find me alive;
and bring sackcloth, wherein my body may be shrouded, and
wax needful for my burial. Prithee, also, bring me of those
meats to eat that thou wast wont to give me when I lay sick
at Rome.” And while this letter was writing, it was revealed
by God to St. Francis that the lady Jacqueline was coming to
him, and was near by, and had brought with her all those
things he was sending to ask for in the letter. Whereupon,
having had this revelation, St. Francis told the friar that was
writing the letter to write no further, since there was n® need,
but to lay the letter aside: whereat the friars marvelled greatly,
because the letter was not finished, nor would he have it
despatched. Then a little while, and a loud knocking was
heard at the door, and St. Francis sent the doorkeeper to open
it; and the door being opened, there was the Lady Jacqueline,
the noblest lady of Rome, with her two sons, that were Roman
senators, and with a great company of horsemen, and they
entered in; and the Lady Jacqueline goes straight to the
infirmary and comes to St. Francis. And at her coming St.
Francis had great joy and consolation, and she likewise, when
she beheld him living, and was able to speak with him. Then
she recounted how that God had revealed to her at Rome, while
she was at prayer, that the term of his life was at hand, and
that he was to send for her and to ask of her all those things she
had brought; and she bade them be carried in to St. Francis,
and gave him to eat thereof. And when he had eaten, and was
much comforted, the Lady Jacqueline knelt at the feet of
St. Francis, and took those most holy feet, marked and adorned
with the wounds of Christ, and kissed them, and bathed his
feet with her tears, and this with such exceeding great devotion
that the friars that stood around seemed to behold the Magdalen
herself at the feet of Jesus Christ, and in no wise could they
draw her away. Finally, after a great space, they led her
thence and drew her aside; and they asked her how she had
come thus in due time and provided with all those things that
were necessary for the comfort and burial of St. Francis. The
Lady Jacqueline answered, that one night, when she was
praying at Rome, she heard a voice from heaven, saying, “ If
thou wouldst find St. Francis living, delay not, but haste to
Assisi, and bear with thee those things thou art wont to give
him when he is sick, and the things needful for his burial;”
<£ And,” said she, “ thus have I done.” The said Lady Jac-


126 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

queline abode there until such time as St. Francis passed from
this life and was buried, and she and all her company did very
great honour to his burial, and paid the cost of all that was
needed. And then, being returned to Rome, this noble lady,
in a short time, died a holy death; and, through devotion to
St. Francis, she appointed St. Mary of the Angels to be her
burial-place: thither was she borne, and even there was buried.

V. How Jerome, that believed not therein, touched and saw the
sacred and hallowed stigmas.

Not only did the said Lady Jacqueline and her sons and her
company see and kiss the glorious and sacred stigmas of St.
Francis at his death, but likewise many men of the city of
Assisi; and among them a knight of much renown and a mighty
man, called Jerome, that was incredulous and doubted much,
even as St. Thomas the Apostle doubted of the wounds of
Christ; and to certify himself and others thereof, he boldly
moved the nails in the hands and feet, and openly felt the
wound in the side in the presence of the friars and of lay folk.
Wherefore he was ever after a constant witness of the truth,
and sware on the gospel that thus it was and thus he had seen
and touched. St. Clare also, with her nuns that were present
at the burial, saw and kissed the glorious and hallowed stigmas
of St. Francis.

VI. Touching the day and the year of the death of St. Francis.

St. Francis, glorious confessor of Christ, passed from this life

in the year of our Lord one thousand two hundred and twenty-
six, on Saturday, the fourth day of October, and was buried
on the Sunday. And that year was the twentieth year of his
conversion, to wit, when he had begun to do penance; and it
was the second year after the imprinting of the sacred and
hallowed stigmas, and the forty-fifth year of his life.

VII. Of the canonisation of St. Francis.

St. Francis was thereafter canonised by Pope Gregory IX.,
in the year one thousand two hundred and twenty-eight, and
he came in person to Assisi to canonise him. And let this
suffice for the fourth consideration.

VIII. Touching the fifth and last consideration of the sacred
and hallowed stigmas.

The fifth and last consideration is of certain visions and
revelations and miracles that God wrought and showed forth
after the death of St. Francis, in confirmation of his sacred and
hallowed stigmas, and in certification of the day and the hour
when Christ gave them to him. And touching this be it re-


St. Francis Appears to Friar Matthew 127

membered that in the year of our Lord one thousand two
hundred and eighty-two, on the . . . day of October, Friar

Philip, minister of Tuscany, by command of Friar John Buona-
grazia, the minister-general, bade by holy obedience Friar
Matthew of Castiglione Aretino, a man of great devotion and
sanctity, tell him what he knew touching the day and the hour
whereon the sacred and hallowed stigmas were imprinted by
Christ on the body of St. Francis: for he had heard that of this
he had a divine revelation. This Friar Matthew, constrained
by holy obedience, answered him thus, “ When I was sojourn¬
ing at La Verna, this past year, in the month of May, I betook
me one day to prayer in my cell, which is on the spot where it is
believed that the vision of the seraph was seen. And in my
prayers I besought God, most devoutly, that it would please
Him to reveal to some person the day and the hour whereon
the sacred and hallowed stigmas were imprinted on the body of
St. Francis. And I, persevering in prayer and in this petition
beyond the first sleep, St. Francis appeared to me in a great
light and spake to me thus, 4 Son, wherefore prayest thou to
God ? ’ And I said to him, ‘ Father, I pray for such a thing.’
And he to me, 4 1 am thy father, Francis, knowest thou me
well? ’ 4 Father/ said I, 4 yea! ’ Then he showed to me the

sacred and hallowed stigmas in his hands and feet and in his
side, and said, 4 The time is come when God willeth that to His
glory those things shall be made manifest that the friars in the
past have not cared to know. Know that He who appeared to
me was no angel, but Jesus Christ in the form of a seraph, that
with His hands imprinted these wounds on my body, even as
He received them in His body on the cross; and it was in this
manner—the day before the exaltation of the holy cross, an
angel came to me and in God’s name bade me make ready to
suffer and receive that which God willed to send me. And I
answered that I was ready to receive and endure all things at
God’s pleasure. Then on the morrow, to wit, the morning of
Holy Cross day, which in that year fell on a Friday, I came forth
from my cell at the dawn in exceeding great fervour of spirit,
and I went to pray in this place where thou now art, in which
place I was ofttimes wont to pray. And while I was at prayer,
lo, there came down through the air from heaven a youth cruci¬
fied, in the form of a seraph, with six wings; and he came with
great swiftness; at whose wondrous aspect I knelt me down
humbly and began to meditate devoutly on the ineffable love
of Jesus Christ crucified, and on the unspeakable pain of His


128 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

Passion. And His aspect begat in me compassion so great that
meseemed verily to feel this passion in mine own body; and at
His presence all the mountain shone, bright as the sun: and
thus descending from heaven He came nigh to me. And stand¬
ing before me He spake to me certain secret words that I have
not yet revealed to any man; but the time is at hand when they
shall be revealed. Then after some space Christ departed and
went back to heaven, and I found me thus marked with these
wounds. ‘Go then/ said St. Francis, ‘and tell these things
confidently to thy minister, for this is the work of God and not
of man/ These words said, St. Francis blessed me and returned
to heaven with a great multitude of youths in shining raiment.”
All these things Friar Matthew said he had seen and heard, not
sleeping, but waking. And even so he sware that he had said
really and truly to the minister in his cell at Florence when he
required him thereof by obedience.

IX. How a holy friar was reading in the legend about the secret
words that the seraph said when he appeared to St. Francis as set
forth in the chapter touching the sacred and hallowed stigmas , and
how the said friar prayed to God so fervently that St. Francis
revealed them to him.

Another time, when a devout and holy friar was reading the
chapter of the sacred and hallowed stigmas in the Legend of St.
Francis, he began to think with great anxiety of mind what
those words, so secret, might have been that St. Francis said he
would reveal to no man while he lived, and that the seraph had
spoken when he appeared to him. And this friar said within
himself, “ St. Francis would never tell those words to any man
while he lived, but now after his bodily death haply he might
tell them if he were devoutly entreated.” And thenceforth the
devout friar began to pray to God and to St. Francis that they
would be pleased to reveal those words; and this friar, per¬
severing for eight years in this prayer, on the eighth year, by
his merits, his prayer was answered in this wise: One day after
he had eaten and had returned thanks in church, he was at
prayer in another part of the church, beseeching God and St.
Francis to grant his prayer more devoutly than he was wont to
do, and with many tears, when he was called by another friar
and bidden by order of the warden to bear him company to the
city on the business of the Order. Wherefore, doubting not
that obedience was more meritorious than prayer, on hearing the
command of the prelate, he forthwith ceased to pray and
humbly went forth with that friar who had called him. And,


St. Francis Appears to the Friars 129

as it pleased God, in that act of ready obedience he merited
what by long years of prayer he had failed to merit. Wherefore
no sooner were they outside the friary door than they encountered
two stranger friars that seemed to have come from a far country ;
and one of them seemed young in years, the other aged and
lean; and by reason of the bad weather, they were all bemired
and wet. And this obedient friar, having great compassion on
them, said to the companion with whom he went, “ 0 my dearest
brother, if the business wherefore we go may be delayed a while,
forasmuch as these stranger friars have great need of being
charitably received, prithee let me first go and wash their feet,
and especially the feet of that aged friar that hath the greater
need thereof, and you can wash the feet of this younger one: and
then we will go our way on the affairs of the Order.” This friar
then consenting to the charity of his companion, they returned
within, and receiving these stranger friars very charitably,
they led them to the kitchen fire to warm and dry themselves;
and at this fire eight other friars were warming themselves.
And after they had stood a while at the fire, they drew them
aside to wash their feet, according as they had agreed together.
And as that obedient and devout friar was washing the feet of
the aged stranger, and cleansing them from the mire, he looked,
and beheld his feet marked with the sacred and hallowed
stigmas; and straightway embracing them tenderly, for very
joy and amazement, he began to cry, “ Either thou art Christ, or
thou art St. Francis.” At this cry and at these words the friars
that were by the fire rose up and with great trembling and
reverence drew nigh to behold those glorious stigmas. And at
their entreaties this aged friar suffered them to see them clearly
and to touch them and kiss them. And as they marvelled yet
more for very joy, he said to them, “ Doubt not, nor fear,
dearest friars, my children; I am your father, Friar Francis,
who, according to God's will, established three Orders. And
forasmuch as I have been entreated, these eight years past, by
this friar that washeth my feet, and this day more fervently
than ever, that I would reveal to him those secret words the
seraph said to me, when he gave me the stigmas, which words I
would never reveal during my life, this day, by commandment
of God, and because of his perseverance and his ready obedience,
when he renounced the sweetness of contemplation, I am sent
by God to reveal to him, in your sight, what he asked of me.”
And St. Francis, turning towards that friar, spake thus, “ Know,
dearest friar, that when I was on the mount of La Verna, all


130 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

rapt in the contemplation of the Passion of Christ, in this
seraphic vision I was by Christ thus stigmatised in my body;
and then Christ said to me, ‘ Knowest thou what I have done
to thee? I have given thee the marks of my Passion in order
that thou mayst be My standard-bearer. And even as I, on the
day of My death, descended into limbo and drew thence all the
souls I found therein, by virtue of my stigmas, and led them up
to paradise, so do I grant to thee from this hour (that thou
mayst be conformed to Me in thy death as thou hast been in thy
life) that after thou hast passed from this life thou shalt go
every year, on the day of thy death, to purgatory, and shalt
deliver all the souls thou shalt find there of thy three Orders, to
wit, Minors, Sisters, and Penitents, and likewise the souls of thy
devoted followers, and this, in virtue of thy stigmas that I have
given thee; and thou shalt lead them to paradise/ And those
words I told not while I lived in the world.” This said, St.
Francis and his companion vanished; and many friars there¬
after heard this from those eight friars that were present at the
vision and heard the words of St. Francis.

X. How St. Francis appeared after his death to Friar John of
La Verna while he was at prayer.

On the mount of La Verna, St. Francis appeared on a time to
Friar John of La Verna, a man of great sanctity, while he was at
prayer, and remained and held converse with him a very long
space; and at last being willed to depart, he spake thus, “ Ask
of me what thou wilt.” Said Friar John, “ Father, I pray thee,
tell me that which for a long time I have desired to know, to
wit, what you 1 were doing, and where you were, when the seraph
appeared to you.” St. Francis answers, “ I was praying in that
place where the chapel of Count Simon of Battifolle now stands,
and I was craving two graces of my Lord Jesus Christ. The
first was, that he would vouchsafe to me, during my life, to feel
in my soul and in my body, so far as might be, all that pain He
had felt in Himself at the time of His bitterest Passion. The
second grace I asked of Him was that I should likewise feel in
my heart that exceeding love wherewith he was enkindled to
endure that Passion so great, for us sinners. And then God put
in my heart that He would grant me to feel the one and the
other, so far as might be possible to a mere creature: which
thing was well fulfilled in me by the imprinting of the stigmas.”
Then Friar John asks of him if those secret words that the
seraph said to him were after the manner that the aforesaid holy
1 See note, p. 3.


St. Francis Appears to Friar John 131

friar had recited, who had affirmed he had heard them from St.
Francis in the presence of eight friars. St. Francis answered
that the truth was even as that friar had said. Then Friar John
takes heart from the freedom of his condescension and says
thus, “ 0 father, thee I pray most earnestly, suffer me to behold
and kiss thy sacred and glorious stigmas; not because I doubt
aught thereof, but only for my consolation, for this have I ever
desired.” And St. Francis, freely showing them and holding
them forth to him, Friar John beheld them clearly, and touched
them, and kissed them. And finally he asked of him, “ Father,
what consolation did your soul feel on beholding the blessed
Christ coming to give you the signs of His most holy Passion?
Would to God that I now might feel a little of that sweetness! ”
Then St. Francis answers, “ Seest thou these nails?” Saith
Friar John, “ Yea, father.” “ Touch yet again,” saith St.
Francis, “ this nail in my hand.” Then Friar John with great
reverence and fear touched that nail, and anon, as he touched
it, a great fragrance issued forth like to a column of incense, and,
entering the nostrils of Friar John, filled his soul and his body
with such sweetness that straightway he was rapt in God and
became senseless in ecstasy, and he remained thus ravished
from that hour, which was the hour of tierce, until vespers.
And this vision and familiar converse with St. Francis, Friar
John told to no man save to his confessor, until he came to die;
but, being nigh unto death, he revealed it to many friars.

XI. Of a holy friar who beheld a wondrous vision of one of his
companions that was dead.

A most devout and holy friar saw this wondrous vision in the
province of Rome. A very dear friar, his companion, having
died one night, was buried on the morrow before the entrance
to the chapter-room; and on that same day this friar withdrew,
after dinner, into a corner of the chapter-room to pray devoutly
to God and to St. Francis for the soul of the dead friar, his
companion. And as he persevered in prayer with supplication
and tears, lo, at noon, when all the other friars were gone to
sleep, he heard a great moving about in the cloister. Whereat,
greatly afeard, anon he turned his eyes towards the grave of this
his companion, a.nd beheld St. Francis at the entrance of the
chapter, and behind him a great multitude of friars all standing
round the said grave; and he saw a fire with great tongues of
flame in the middle of the cloister, and in the midst of the
flames stood the soul of his dead companion. He looks around
the cloister and sees Jesus Christ going around the cloister with


132 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

a great company of angels and saints. And gazing at these
things with great amaze he sees that when Christ passes before
the chapter, St. Francis and all those friars kneel down; and St.
Francis saith these words, “ I pray Thee, my dearest Father and
Lord, by that inestimable love Thou didst show forth to the
generations of men when Thou didst die on the wood of the
cross, have mercy on the soul of this my friar that burneth in this
fire.” And Christ answered naught but passed on. And He
returns a second time, and passing before the chapter-room, St.
Francis again kneels down with his friars as before and entreats
Him in this wise, “ I pray Thee, pitying Father and Lord, by
the ineffable love Thou didst show to the generations of men
when Thou didst die on the wood of the cross, have mercy on
the soul of this my friar.” And Christ, in like manner, passed
on and heard him not. And going round the cloister He re¬
turned a third time and passed before the chapter-room; and
then St. Francis, kneeling down as before, showed Him his hands
and feet and breast, and spake thus, “ I pray Thee, pitying
Father and Lord, by that great pain and great consolation I felt
when Thou didst imprint these stigmas on my flesh, have mercy
on the soul of this my friar that is in this purgatorial fire.”
Marvellous to tell! Christ, being entreated this third time by
St. Francis, in the name of his stigmas, straightway stays His
steps and looks on the stigmas and answers his prayer and
saith these words, “ To thee, Francis, I grant the soul of thy
friar.” And thereby of a surety He willed to confirm and
honour the glorious stigmas of St. Francis and openly signify that
the souls of his friars that go to purgatory are delivered from
their pains in no other way more readily than by virtue of his
stigmas, and led to the glories of paradise; according to the
words that Christ said to St. Francis when He imprinted them
upon him. Wherefore, these wmrds said, straightway that fire
in the cloister vanished, and the dead friar came to St. Francis,
and all that company of the blessed ascended to heaven with
him, and with Christ their glorious King. Whereat this friar,
his companion, that had prayed for him, had exceeding great
joy when he beheld him delivered from the pains of purgatory
and taken up to heaven; and thereafter he related this vision
in due order to the other friars, and together with them gave
praise and thanks to God.

XII. How a noble knight , that had devotion to St. Francis , was
certified of his death and of the sacred and hallowed stigmas .

A noble knight of Massa di San Pietro, named Rudolph, that


The Devil Bears Witness to St. Francis 133

had a great devotion to St. Francis, and who at length had
received the habit of the third Order at his hands, was thus-
wise certified of the death of St. Francis and of his sacred and
hallowed stigmas: When St. Francis was nigh unto death, the
devil at that time entered into a woman of the said burg and
tormented her cruelly, and withal made her speak with such
subtle learning that she overcame all the wise men and learned
doctors that came to dispute with her. And it fell out that the
devil departed from her and left her free two days: and the
third day he returned to her and afflicted her more cruelly than
before. Rudolph, hearing this, goes to this woman, and asks
of the devil that possessed her, for what cause he had departed
from her two days, and then returned and tormented her more
harshly than before. The devil answers, “ When I left her, it
was because I, with all my companions that are in these
parts, assembled together and went in mighty force to the
death-bed of the beggar Francis, to dispute with him and
capture his soul; but his soul being surrounded and defended
by a multitude of angels, greater than we were, was carried by
them straight to heaven, and we went away confounded; so
I restore and make up to this miserable woman what I let pass by
during those two days.” Then Rudolph conjured him in God's
name to tell the whole truth of the holiness of St. Francis,
who he said was dead, and of St. Clare that was alive. The
devil answers, “ Willy-nilly, I will tell thee what there is of
truth in this. God the Father was so wroth against the sinners
of this world that it seemed He would, in brief time, give His
last judgment against men and women, and, if they did not
amend, destroy them from the face of the earth. But Christ,
His Son, praying for sinners, promised to renew His life and
His Passion in a man, to wit, in Francis, the poor little one and
a beggar, through whose life and teaching He would bring back
many from all over the world to the way of truth, and many
also to repentance. And now, to show forth to the world what
He had wrought in St. Francis, He hath willed that the stigmas
of His Passion that He had imprinted on St. Francis’s body
during his life, might, at his death, be seen and touched by
many. Likewise, the Mother of Christ promised to renew her
virginal purity and her humility in a woman, to wit, in Sister
Clare, in such wise that by her example she would deliver many
thousands of women from our hands. And thus God the Father,
being softened, did delay His final sentence.” Then Rudolph,
desiring to know of a surety if the devil, that is the abode and


1 34 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

father of lies, spake truth in these things, and especially as to
the death of St. Francis, sent one, his trusty squire, to St. Mary
of the Angels at Assisi, to learn if St. Francis were alive or
dead; which squire, coming thither, found of a surety it was so,
and returning to his lord, reported that on the very day and
at the very hour that the devil had said, St. Francis had passed
from this life.

XIII. How Pope Gregory IX., doubting of the stigmas of
St. Francis, was certified thereof.

Setting aside all the miracles of the sacred and hallowed
stigmas of St. Francis, which may be read in his legend, be it
known, in conclusion of this fifth consideration, that St. Francis
appeared one night to Pope Gregory IX., as he afterwards told,
when he was in some doubt touching the wound in the side of
St. Francis, and lifting up a little his right arm, discovered the
wound in his side, and asked for a vase, and he had it brought to
him; and St. Francis had it held under the wound in his side,
and verily it seemed to the pope that he saw the vase filled to
the brim with blood mingled with water, that issued from the
wound: and thenceforth all doubt departed from him. Then,
in council with all the cardinals, he approved the sacred and
hallowed stigmas of St. Francis, and thereof gave special privilege
to the friars by a sealed Bull; and this he did at Viterbo, in the
eleventh year of his pontificate; and then, in the twelfth year,
he issued another Bull yet more fully indited. Pope Nicholas III.
likewise, and Pope Alexander, gave abundant privileges whereby
whosoever denied the sacred and hallowed stigmas of St. Francis
should be proceeded against as a heretic. And let this suffice
as to the fifth consideration of the glorious, sacred, and hallowed
stigmas of St. Francis our father. And may God give us the
grace to follow after his life, in this world, so that, through
the virtue of his glorious stigmas, we may merit salvation, and
be with him in paradise. To the praise of Jesus Christ and of
the poor little one, St. Francis. Amen^

Here beginneth the Life of Friar Juniper

I. How Friar funiper cut the foot off a pig only to give it to
a sick man.

Friar Juniper was one of the most chosen disciples and first
companions of St. Francis. He was a man of deep humility
and of great zeal and charity; and of him St. Francis said,
speaking on a time with those holy companions of his, “ He


Friar Juniper 135

were a good friar that had so overcome himself and the world
as Friar Juniper hath.” One day, as he was visiting a sick
friar at St. Mary of the Angels, all aflame with charity, he asked
with great compassion, "Can I serve thee in aught?” The
sick man answers, "Much comfort and great solace would it
be to me if I might have a pig’s foot.” And Friar Juniper said,
" Trust to me, for I will get one forthwith.” And off he goes
and snatches up a knife (I believe ’twas a kitchen knife) and
goes in fervour of spirit about the wood, where certain pigs
were feeding, and falling on one of them, cuts off a foot and runs
away with it, leaving the pig maimed; he returns, washes and
dresses and cooks this foot, and having well dished it up, carries
the said foot to the sick man with much charity. And the sick
friar ate thereof greedily, to the great consolation and joy of
Friar Juniper, who told the story of the assaults he had made
on the pig with great glee, to rejoice the heart of the sick man.
Meanwhile the swineherd, that saw this friar cut the foot off,
told over the whole story with much bitterness to his master.
And he, being informed of this deed, comes to the friary and
calls the friars hypocrites, thieves, false knaves, and wicked
rogues, exclaiming, " Wherefore have ye cut off my pig’s foot? ”
Hearing the great uproar he made, St. Francis and all the friars
hurried along, and St. Francis made excuse for his friars, saying,
with all humility, that they knew naught of the deed; and to
pacify the man, promised to make amends for every wrong done
to him. But for all this he was not to be appeased, but de¬
parted from the friary in great wrath, uttering many insults and
threats, repeating over and over again how that they had
wickedly cut off his pig’s foot, and accepting neither excuses
nor promises, he hastened away greatly scandalised. But St.
Francis, full of prudence, bethought him the while the other
friars stood, all stupefied, and said in his heart, " Can Friar
Juniper have done this thing out of indiscreet zeal? ” So he
bade call Friar Juniper secretly to him, and asked him, saying,

" Hast thou cut off that pig’s foot in the wood? ” To whom
Friar Juniper answered, right gleefully, and not as one having
committed a fault, but as one that believed he had done a deed
of great charity, and spake thus, " My sweet father, true it is
I have cut off a foot from that said pig; and the cause thereof,
my father, hear, if thou wilt, compassionately. I went out of
charity to visit a certain friar that was sick;” and then he
related the whole story in order, and added, " I tell thee this
much, that considering the consolation this friar of ours felt,


136 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

and the comfort he took from the said foot, had I cut off the
feet of a hundred pigs as I did this one, I believe of a surety
God would have looked on it as a good deed.” Whereupon
St. Francis, with righteous zeal, and with great bitterness, said,
“ O Friar Juniper, wherefore hast thou wrought this great
scandal ? Not without cause doth that man grieve, and thus rail
against us; and perchance even now, as I speak, he is going about
the city defaming us of evil, and good cause hath he. Where¬
fore I command thee, by holy obedience, run after him until
thou overtake him, and cast thyself on the ground prostrate
before him and confess thy fault, and promise to make him
such full amends as that he shall have no cause to complain of
us: for of a surety this hath been too monstrous an offence.”
Friar Juniper marvelled much at the aforesaid words, and was
filled with amaze, being astonished that there should be any
disturbance over such an act of charity; for these temporal
things seemed to him naught, save in so far as they were charit¬
ably shared with one’s neighbour. And Friar Juniper answered,
“ Fear not, father mine, for anon will I repay him and make him
content. And wherefore should he be so troubled, seeing that
this pig, whose foot I have cut off, was God’s rather than his own,
and a very charitable use hath been made thereof? ” And so
he sets forth at a run, and cometh up with this man that was
raging beyond all measure and past all patience; and he told
him how, and for what cause, he had cut off the said pig’s foot,
and withal in such great fervour and exultation and joy, even
as one that had done him a great service for which he ought to
be well rewarded. But the man, boiling with anger, and over¬
come with fury, heaped many insults on Friar Juniper, calling
him a mad fellow and a fool, a big thief, and the worst of
scoundrels. But Friar Juniper cared naught for these abusive
words, and marvelled within himself, for he rejoiced in being
reviled, and believed that he had not heard aright; for it
seemed to him matter for rejoicing, and not for spite: and he
told the story anew, and fell on the man’s neck and embraced
him and kissed him, and told him how that this thing had been
done for charity’s sake alone, inviting him and entreating him
to give likewise what was left of the pig; and all with such
charity and simplicity and humility that the man, being come
to himself, fell on the ground before him, not without many
tears; and asking pardon for the wrong he had said and done
to these friars, he goes and takes this pig and kills it, and having
cooked it, he carries it, with much devotion and many tears, to


Friar Juniper 137

St. Mary of the Angels, and gives it to these holy friars to eat
out of compassion for the said wrong he had done them. And*
St Francis, considering the simplicity and the patience under
adversity of this said holy friar, said to his companions and to
tie others that stood by, “ Would to God, my brethren, that I
had a whole forest of such junipers! ”

II. An ensample of Friar Juniper's great power against the
devil. 6

That the devil was unable to endure the purity of the inno¬
cence of Friar Juniper and his deep humility appeareth in this.
On a time, a man possessed with a devil, flung out of the way he
was going, and, beyond his wont and with much fury, all of a
sudden fled full seven miles by divers paths. And being over¬
taken and questioned by his kinsfolk who followed after him
with bitter grief, wherefore in his flight he had taken such
devious ways, he answered, “ The reason is this: forasmuch as
that fool Juniper was passing by that way, being unable to endure
his presence, nor to encounter him, I fled through these woods.”
And certifying themselves of this truth, they found that Friar
Jumper had passed along at that hour even as the devil had
said. Wherefore St. Francis, when the possessed were brought
to him that they might be healed, was wont to say, if the devils
departed not straightway at his command, “ An thou depart
not forthwith from this creature I will bring Friar Juniper up
against thee.” And then the devil, fearing the presence of
l'riar Juniper and unable to endure the virtue and humility of
St. Francis, would straightway depart.

III. How at the instigation of the devil Friar Juniper was con-
demned to the gallows.

On a. time, the devil, desiring to affright Friar Juniper and to
vex and trouble him, went to a most cruel tyrant named Nicholas
that was then at war with the city of Viterbo, and said, “ My
lord, guard this your castle well, for anon a false traitor is to
come hither, sent by the men of Viterbo, that he may slay you
and set fire to your castle. And, in token of the truth of this
1 give you these signs. He goeth about after the fashion of a
poor wight, with garments all tattered and patched, and with a
ragged cowl falling on his shoulders; and with him he beareth
an awl wherewith he is to kill you, and he hath a flint and steel
with him to set fire to this castle. And if you find I speak not
sooth, deal with me as you will.” At these words Nicholas
was filled with amaze and grew sore afraid, because he that
spake these words seemed an honest fellow. And he com-

F 485


138 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

manded diligent watch and ward to be kept, and that if this
man, with the aforesaid tokens came, he should be straightway
brought into his presence. Meanwhile Friar Juniper comes
alone, for because of his perfection he had licence to go forth
and stay alone, even as it pleased him. Now Friar Juniper
happened on certain evil youths that began to mock and abuse
him shamefully; and at all these things he was not troubled,
but rather led them to deride him the more. And when he
came up to the door of the castle, the guards seeing him thus
ill favoured and in a sc^nt habit all in rags (for he had given
part thereof to the poor by the way), and seeing he had no
semblance of a friar minor, and that the tokens given them were
manifestly apparent, dragged him, with great fury, before this
tyrant Nicholas. And being searched by his servants for
hidden weapons, they found an awl in his sleeve wherewith he
was wont to mend his sandals; likewise they found a flint and
steel, which he carried with him to kindle fire; for his time was
his own, and oft he abode in woods and desert places. Nicholas,
beholding these signs on him, in accord with the testimony of
the accusing devil, commanded his servants to bind a rope about
his neck, and this they did, with such great cruelty that the
rope entered into his flesh; and then they put him on the rack
and stretched his arms and racked his whole body without any
mercy. And being asked who he was, he answered, “ I am the
greatest of sinners.” And when asked if he had purposed to
betray the castle and give it over to the men of Viterbo, he
answered, “ I am the greatest of traitors, and unworthy of any
good thing.” And asked if he purposed to kill Nicholas the
tyrant with that awd and set fire to the castle, he answered that
he would do even worse things and more monstrous, if God per¬
mitted. This Nicholas, maddened with rage, would suffer no
more questioning of him, but, without any term or delay, con¬
demned Friar Juniper, in his fury, as a traitor and manslayer,
to be tied to the tail of a horse and dragged along the ground to
the gallows and there straightway hanged by the neck. And
Friar Juniper made no defence, but, as one that was content to
suffer tribulation for love of God, was all joyous and glad. And
the sentence of the tyrant being put in execution, Friar Jumper
was bound by his feet to the tail of a horse and dragged along
the ground; and he complained not, nor lamented, but as a
gentle lamb led to the slaughter, went with all humility. At
this spectacle and swift justice all the people ran to behold
him executed thus hastily and thus cruelly: and they knew


Friar Juniper 139

him not. But, as God willed, a good man that had seen Friar
Jumper taken and thus quickly dragged to execution, runs to
the house of the friars minor, and saith, “ For love of God I
pray you, come quickly, for a poor wretch hath been taken and
straightway condemned and led forth to die: come that at
least he may give his soul into your hands; for he seemeth to
me an honest fellow, and hath had no time wherein he may con-
es s; 1° , he is led forth to the gallows and seemeth to have no
care for death, nor for the salvation of his soul: ah! I beseech
you, deign to come quickly.” The warden, that was a com¬
passionate man, goes forthwith to provide for the salvation of
his soul and coming up to the place of execution, finds that the
multitudes who had come to see were so increased that he could
not pass through: and he stood and watched for an opening.
And as he waited, he heard a voice in the midst of the crowd"
that cried, “ Don’t, don’t, ye bad men; ye hurt my legs.” At
this voice a suspicion took the warden that this might be Friar
Juniper, and in fervour of spirit he flung himself among them
and tore aside the wrappings from the face of him; and there
truly was Friar Juniper. YVherefore the compassionate warden
was minded to take off his cloak to clothe Friar Juniper withal-
but he, with joyous countenance and half laughing, said “ O
warden, thou art fat, and it were an ill sight to see thy naked¬
ness. I will not have it.” Then the warden, with many tears
besought the hangmen and all the people for pity’s sake to wait
a while until he should go and entreat the tyrant for Friar
Juniper, that he might grant him pardon. The hangmen
and certain bystanders consenting thereto (for they truly be¬
lieved he was a kinsman), the devout and compassionate warden
goes to Nicholas the tyrant, and with bitter tears saith, “ My
lord, I am in such great bitterness and wonderment of soul that
tongue cannot tell thereof, for meseems that the greatest sin
and the greatest wickedness ever wrought in the days of our
forefathers is this day being done in this city: and I believe it
ls done m ignorance.” Nicholas hears the warden patientlv
and asks of him, “ What is the great wrong and evil deed com-
mittecl this day in our city ? ” The warden answers, “ My lord
you have condemned one of the holiest friars in the Order of St!
Francis, for whom you have singular devotion, to a cruel death'
and, as I verily believe, without cause.” Saith Nicholas, “ Now
tell me, warden, who is this? for perchance knowing him not
1 have committed a great wrong.” Saith the warden/ 1 He that
you have doomed to death is Friar Juniper, the companion of


140 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

St Francis.” Nicholas the tyrant, stupefied, for he had heard
of the fame and of the holy life of Friar Juniper, runs, astomed
and all pale, together with the warden, and coming up to Friar
Juniper looseth him from the tail of the horse and sets him free;
then, in the presence of all the people, flings himself prostrate
on the ground before Friar Juniper, and with many tears con¬
fesses his guilt, and bewails the wrong and the villainy he had
done to this holy friar, and cried, “ Verily I believe that the
days of my evil life are numbered, since I have thus tortured
the holiest of men without cause. God will appoint an end to
rny wicked life, and in brief time I shall die an evil death, albeit
I have done this thing in ignorance.” Friar Juniper freely
forgave Nicholas the tyrant; but God sufiered, ere a tew days
were passed, that this Nicholas the tyrant should end his life
and die a very cruel death. And Friar Juniper departed,
leaving all the people edified.

IV. How Friar Juniper gave to the poor all he could lay nanas
on for love of God .

So much pity and compassion had Friar Juniper for the poor
that when he saw any one ill clad or naked, anon he would take
off his tunic, and the cowl from his cloak, and give them to poor
souls such as these. Therefore the warden commanded him,
by obedience, not to give away the whole of his tunic, nor any
part of his habit. Now it fell out that Friar Juniper ere a
few days had passed, happened on a poor creature, well-nigh
naked who asked alms of him for love of God, to whom he said
with great compassion, “ Naught have I, save my tunic, to give
thee; and this my superior hath laid on me, by obedience, to
give to no one; nay, nor even part of my habit; but if thou
wilt take it off my back, I will not gainsay thee. He spake
not to deaf ears, for straightway this poor man stripped him ot
his tunic and went his way with it, leaving Friar Juniper naked.
And when he was back at the friary, he was asked where his
tunic was, and he answered, “ An honest fellow took it from my
back and made off with it.” And the virtue of pity increasing
within him, he was not content with giving away his tunic, but
likewise gave books and church ornaments and cloaks, or any
thing he could lay hands on, to the poor. And for this reason
the friars never left things lying about the friary, because Friar
Juniper gave all away for love of God and in praise of Him.

V. How Friar Juniper stripped certain little bells from lac
altar, and gave them away for love of God. _ . . .

Friar Juniper, being on a time in Assisi, at the Nativity of


Friar Juniper 141

Christ, engaged in deep meditation at the altar of the friary,
which was richly decked and adorned, was asked by the sacristan
to guard the said altar while he went to eat. And while he was
in devout meditation, a poor little woman begged alms of him
for love of God: to whom Friar Juniper thus answered, “ Tarry
a while and I will see if I can give thee aught from this altar so
rich-” Now there was on that altar a hanging of gold, richly
and sumptuously adorned with little silver bells of great worth.
Saith Friar Juniper, “ These bells are a superfluity.” So he
takes a knife and cuts them all from the hanging, and gives them,
out of compassion, to this poor little woman. No sooner had
the sacristan eaten three or four mouthfuls than he remembered
the ways of Friar Juniper, and was sore afeard lest out of his
zealous charity he might work some mischief to the rich altar
he had left in his charge. And straightway he rose from the
table, in much dread, and went to the church and looked to see
if any of the ornaments of the altar had been removed or taken
away; and lo, he beheld the hanging hacked about and the
bells cut off: whereat he was beyond all measure perturbed and
scandalised. And Friar Juniper, beholding him thus agitated,
saith, “ Be not troubled about those bells, for I have given them
to a poor woman that had very great need of them, and here
they were of no use, save that they made a show of worldly
pomp.” Hearing this, the sacristan ran straightway through
the church and about the whole city, in great affliction, to see
if haply he might find her. But so far from finding her, he
could not even find any one that had seen her. Returning to
the friary, he took the hanging from the altar, in a great rage,
and carried it to the general that was at Assisi, and said,
Father-general, I demand of you justice on Friar Juniper,
who hath spoiled this hanging for me, that was the most precious
thing in our sacristy; look now how he hath destroyed it and
stripped off all the little silver bells, and he saith he hath given
them away to a poor woman.” The general answered, “ Friar
Juniper hath not done this, rather hath thy folly done it, for
thou oughtest by this time to know his ways well; and I say
unto thee, I marvel that he hath not given away all the rest;
but none the less will I correct him for this fault.” And having
called all the friars together in Chapter, he bade call Friar
Juniper, and in the presence of the whole house rebuked him
very harshly because of the aforesaid little bells; and he waxed
so furious in his wrath, that by raising his voice so high he
grew quite hoarse. Friar Juniper heeded those words little or


142 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

naught, for he rejoiced* in contumely and when he was well
abased; but returning good for evil, he began to think only how
he might find a remedy for his general’s hoarseness. So having
endured the general’s scolding, Friar Juniper goes to the city
and orders a good dish of porridge and butter; and a good part
of the night being spent, he goes and lights a candle and comes
back with this mess of porridge and takes it to the general’s
cell and knocks. The general opens to him, and, beholding him
with a lighted candle in one hand and the dish of porridge
in the other, asks softly, “What is this?” Friar Juniper
answered, “ My father, to-day, when you chid me for my faults,
I perceived that your voice was growing hoarse, and, as I ween,
from over-fatigue; therefore I bethought me of a remedy, and
I had this porridge made for thee; pray eat thereof, for I tell
thee it will ease thy chest and throat.” Said the general,
“ What hour is this for thee to go disturbing folk? ” Friar
Juniper answered, “ Look now, for thee ’tis made; prithee
make no more ado, but eat thereof, for ’twill do thee much
good.” And the general, angry at the late hour and at his
importunity, bade him begone, for at such an hour he had no
desire to eat, and called him a base fellow and a caitiff. Friar
Juniper, seeing that neither prayer nor coaxing was of any
avail, spake thus, “ My father, since thou wilt not eat of this
porridge that was made for thee, at least do me this favour:
hold the candle for me, and I will eat it.” And the pious and
devout general, bearing in mind Friar Juniper’s compassion and
simplicity, and knowing that all this was done by hitn out of
devotion, answered, “ Look now, since thou wilt have it so, let
us eat, thou and I, together.” And both ate of this dish of
porridge, because of his importunate charity. And much more
were they refreshed by their devotion than by the food.

VI. How Friar Juniper kept silence for six months.

Friar Juniper, on a time, made a vow to keep silence for six
months, in this manner. The first day, for love of the Heavenly
Father. The second day, for love of His Son, Jesus Christ.
The third day, for love of the Holy Ghost. The fourth day,
for reverence of the most holy Virgin Mary; and so in this order,
every day, for six months, he observed silence for love of some
saint.

VII. How to resist temptations of the flesh.

Friar Giles and Friar Simon of Assisi, and Friar Ruffino and
Friar Juniper, being on a time gathered together to discourse of
God and of the salvation of the soul, Friar Giles said to the


Friar Juniper 143

others, How do ye with temptations to carnal sin? ” Said
hiiar Simon, I consider the baseness and turpitude of the sin,
and then ariseth within me a great horror thereof, and thus I
escape.” Saith Friar Ruffino, “I cast me prostrate on the
ground, and so fervently do I continue in prayer, beseeching
God s mercy and the Mother of Jesus Christ, until I feel me
wholly delivered therefrom. ,, Friar Juniper answers, “ When
I feel the tumult of this devilish suggestion, straightway I run
and close the door of my heart, and for defence of the fortress
of my heart I occupy me in holy meditations and in holy desires;
so that when the temptation cometh and knocketh at the door
of my heart, I, as ’twere from within, answer, ‘ Begone! for
the hostel is already taken, and herein no more guests can
enter; and thus I suffer no thought to enter within my heart:
whereat the devil, seeing himself vanquished, departeth as one
discomfited, not only from me, but from the whole country.”
Friar Giles answers, “ Friar Juniper, I hold with thee: against
the enemy of the flesh one cannot fight, but only flee; for
within, through the traitorous appetite, and without, through
the senses of the body, the enemy feeleth himself so mighty
that one cannot overcome him save by flight. And, therefore
he that would fight otherwise seldom hath the victory after
the toil of battle. Flee, then, from vice, and thou shalt be
victorious.

VIII. How Friar Juniper abased himself to the rlorv of
God. 7 J

On a time Friar Juniper, desiring truly to abase himself,
stripped him of all save his breeches; and having made a bundle
of his habit, placed his clothes on his head, and entering Viterbo
went to the market-place to be derided. And standing there
the children and youths of the city, deeming him bereft of his
senses, reviled him sorely, casting much mire at him, and pelting
him with stones. Hither and thither they rushed him with
many mocking words; and thus persecuted and scorned he
remained for the greater part of the day: then he went to’the
friary. And when the friars beheld him they were full of
wrath, most of all for that he had come through the whole city
with his bundle on his head; and they rebuked him very
severely, uttering great threats. And one said, “ Let us cast
him into prison.” And another said, “Let us hang him.”
And the others said, “We cannot inflict too great a punishment
for so evil an example as this friar hath made of himself this
day and of all the Order.” And Friar Juniper, right glad,


144 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

answered with great humility, “ Ye say well, for I am worthy
of all these pains and many more.”

IX. How Friar Juniper , to abase himself , played at see-saw.

On a time as Friar Juniper was journeying to Rome, where
the fame of his holiness was already noised abroad, many
Romans, of their great devotion, went out to meet him; and
Friar Juniper, beholding so many people coming, imagined how
he might turn their devotion into sport and mockery. Now
there were two children playing at see-saw, to wit, they had placed
one log of wood across another, and each of them sat at his end
of the log and see-sawed up and down. Away goes Friar
Juniper and takes off one of these children from the log, and
mounting thereon begins to play see-saw. Meanwhile the
people came up and marvelled to see Friar Juniper see-sawing,
yet, with great devotion, they greeted him and waited for him
to end the game of see-saw, in order to accompany him honour¬
ably as far as the friary. And Friar Juniper heeded little their
greetings, their reverence, and their waiting, but held very dili¬
gently to his see-sawing. And waiting thus a long space, certain
of them began to weary thereof, and said, “ What a blockhead! ”
Others, knowing his ways, waxed in greater devotion. Never¬
theless all departed and left Friar Juniper on his see-saw. And
when they were all gone, Friar Juniper was left wholly com¬
forted, because he saw that certain of them had mocked at him.
He then set forth and entered Rome, and with all meekness and
humility came to the house of the friars minor.

X. How Friar Juniper once cooked enough food to last the
friars a fortnight.

Friar Juniper, being on a time left alone m a small friary,
inasmuch as all the friars, for a certain reasonable cause, had to
go out from the friary, the warden saith to him, “ Friar Juniper,
all we have to go abroad; look to it, therefore, that when we
return thou have some dish ready cooked for the refreshment
of the friars.” Friar Juniper answers, “ Right gladly, leave it
to me 1 ” And all the friars being gone forth, as hath, been told,
Friar Juniper saith, “ What unprofitable care is this, for one
friar to be lost in the kitchen and far away from all prayer 1
Certes, if I am left here to cook, this time will I cook so much
that all the friars, and even more, shall have enough to eat for a
fortnight.” And so he goes very diligently to the city and begs
several great cooking pots and pans, and procures fresh meat
and salt, fowls and eggs and pot herbs, and begs much firewood,
and puts everything on the fire, to wit, the fowls with their


Friar Juniper 145

feathers on, and eggs in their shells, and all the other things
one after the other. When the friars came home, one that was
ware of Friar Juniper’s simplicity entered the kitchen and
beheld many great pots and pans on a raging fire. And he sat
him down and looked on with wonderment and said no word,
but watched with what great diligence Friar Juniper went
about his cooking. Now the fire was very fierce, and since he
could not get very close to his pots to skim them, he took a
wooden board and bound it closely to his body with his cord,
and then leapt from one pot to another, so that it was a joy to
behold. Thinking over these things, with great delight, this
friar comes from the kitchen and seeks the other friars, and
saith, “ Friar Juniper is making a wedding feast, I can tell you! ”
But the friars took this for a jest. And Friar Juniper lifted
his pots from the fire and bade ring the bell for supper. And
the friars, having taken their places at table, Friar Juniper
comes into the refectory, all ruddy with his toil and the heat of
the fire, with that meal of his, and saith to the friars, “ Eat well,
and then let us all to prayers; and let no one have any care
about cooking for days to come, because I have cooked so much
to-day that I shall have enough for more than a fortnight.”
And he served up this hotch-potch to the friars at table, and
there is no hog in the whole of Rome hungry enough to have
eaten thereof. Friar Juniper, to push his wares, cries up his
cooking, but seeing that the other friars eat naught thereof,
saith, “ Now look you, fowls such as these are comforting to the
brain,^ and this mess will keep the body moist, for ’tis right
good. And while the friars were lost in wonderment and
devotion at the simplicity and devotion of Friar Juniper, lo, the
warden, angry at such folly and at the waste of so much good
food, rebuked Friar Juniper very harshly. Then Friar Juniper
dropped straightway on his knees before the warden and
humbly confessed his fault to him and to all the friars, saying,

I am the worst of men: such a one committed such a crime,
and therefore his eyes were plucked out, but I was more worthy
thereof than he: such a one was hanged for his sins, but I
deserve it far more for my wicked deeds: and now have I
wasted^so much of God’s bounty and of the good things of the
Order. And thus he departed, all sorrowing, and all that day
was not seen of any friar. And then the warden said, “ My
dearest friars, I would that every day this friar should spoil,
even as he hath now, as many more of our good things, if we


146 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

had them, solely for our edification; for he hath done this thing
out of his great simplicity and charity”

XI. How Friar Juniper went on a time to Assisi for his con-

f On a time, when Friar Juniper was dwelling in the vale of
Spoleto, seeing that there was a solemn festival at Assisi, and
that much people were going thither with great devotion, a
desire took him to go to that festival: and hear how he went
Friar Juniper stripped himself to his breeches, and thus fared
forth, passing through the midst of the city of Spoleto and comes-
to the friary. The friars, much perturbed and scandalised,
rebuked him very harshly, calling him a mad fellow and a fool
that brought confusion to the Order of St. Francis; and they
would have put him in chains as a madman. And the general,
that was then in the house, bade call Friar Juniper and all the
friars, and in the presence of the whole community gave him
a hard and bitter reproof. And after many words of vigorous
condemnation, he spake thus to Friar Juniper, “ Thy fault is
such, and so heavy, that I know not what penance to lay upon
thee ” Friar Juniper answers, even as one that rejoiced in his
own confusion, “ Father, I will tell thee: for penance bid me
return, in the same guise as I came hither, to the place whence I
set forth to come to this festival.” .

XII. How Friar Juniper was rapt in God as he was celebrating

mass. . . , ,

Friar Juniper, on a time, while hearing mass with great
devotion, was rapt in God through the elevation of his mind,
and for a long space. And being left in the room, far away from
the other friars, he began, when he came to himself, to say with
great devotion, “ 0 my brethren, who is there in this life so
noble that would not fain carry a bushel of dung through the
whole earth, if a house filled with gold were given to him?
And he said, “ Ah me! wherefore are we not willing to endure a
little shame, in order that we may win the blessed life? ”

XIII. Of the grief that Friar Juniper felt at the death of his
companion , Friar Amazialbene.

Friar Juniper had a companion friar that he dearly loved,
whose name was Amazialbene. And truly had this friar the
virtue of highest patience and obedience; for if he were beaten
the whole day long never did he utter one single word of lamen¬
tation or complaint. Often was he sent to friaries where the
whole community was ill to get on with, and from whom he
suffered much persecution; and this he endured very patiently


Friar Juniper 147

and without murmuring. He, at the bidding of Friar Juniper,
was wont to laugh and to weep. Now, as it pleased God, this
Friar Amazialbene died in the highest repute; and Friar Juniper,
hearing of his death, felt such great sadness of spirit as he never
in his life had felt for the loss of any material thing. And he
showed forth outwardly the great bitterness that was within
him, and said, “ Woe is me! poor wretch! now no good thing is
left to me, and all the world is out of joint at the death of my
sweet and most beloved brother Amazialbene. Were it not
that I should have no peace with the other friars, I would go to
his grave and take away his head, and with the skull I would
make me two bowls: and from one I would ever eat for devout
memory of him; and from the other would I drink whenever
I were athirst or had desire to drink.”

XI V. Oj the hand that Friar Juniper saw in the air.

Friar Juniper, being on a time at prayer, and haply thinking
on the great works he would do, himseemed to behold a hand in
the air, and he heard with his bodily ears a voice that spake to
him thus, “ 0 Friar Juniper, without this hand thou canst do
naught.” Whereat he straightway arose and lifted up his eyes
to heaven and ran through the friary crying with a loud voice,
“ True indeed! True indeed!” And this he repeated for a
good space.

XV. How St. Francis hade Friar Leo wash the stone*

When St. Francis was speaking with Friar Leo on the mount
of La Verna, St. Francis said, “ Friar, little sheep, wash this
stone with water.” And Friar Leo was quick to wash the stone
with water. Saith St. Francis with great joy and gladness,
“ Wash it with wine.” And ’twas done. Saith St. Francis,
“ Wash it with oil.” And this was done. Saith St. Francis,
“ Friar, little sheep, wash that stone with balm.” Friar Leo
answers, “ O sweet father, how shall I obtain balm in this
wilderness? ” St. Francis answered, “ Know, friar, thou little
sheep of Christ, that this is the stone whereon Christ sat when
He appeared to me here: therefore have I bidden thee four
times; wash it, and hold thy peace, for Christ hath promised
me four singular graces for my Order. The first is, that all those
who shall love my Order with all their hearts, and all steadfast
friars, shall, by grace divine, make a good end. The second is,
that the persecutors of this holy Order shall be notably punished.
The third is, that no evil-doer who remaineth in his perversity
can endure long in this Order. The fourth is, that this Order
shall endure until the last judgment,”


148 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


Here beginneth the Life of the Blessed Friar Giles,
the Companion of St. Francis

I. How Friar Giles and three companions were received into the
Order of the friars minor .

Forasmuch as the example of holy men on the minds of devout
hearers, is to make them despise fleeting pleasures and to beget
a desire for eternal salvation, I will recite, to the honour of God
and of His most reverend Mother, Madonna St. Mary, and for
the profit of all hearers, certain words touching the work that
the Holy Ghost wrought in our holy Friar Giles, who, while
yet wearing the secular habit, was touched by the Holy Ghost,
and began to ponder in his heart how in all his works he might
please God alone. In those days St. Francis, a new herald of
God, sent as an exemplar of the life of humility and of holy
penitence, drew and led, two years after his conversion, Master
Bernard, a man adorned with wondrous prudence and very
rich in worldly goods, and likewise Peter Cattani, to the observ¬
ance of the gospel and of holy poverty. And they, by the
counsel of St. Francis, gave away all their worldly treasures to
the poor, for love of God, and put on the glory of meekness and
of gospel perfection with the habit of the friars minor; and they,
with the greatest fervour, promised to keep their vows all the
days of their life: and even so did they with great perfection.
A week after their conversion and the distribution of their
goods, Friar Giles, while yet in the secular habit, beholding such
contempt of earthly things in these two noble knights of Assisi
that the whole city was in amaze thereat, went betimes on the
day following (that was the feast of St. George in the year one
thousand two hundred and nine) to the church of St. Gregory,
where the convent of St. Clare was, all enkindled with divine
love and careful for his salvation. And having prayed, he had
a great desire to behold St. Francis, and went towards the
lazar-house, where he was dwelling apart in a hovel, in gieat
humility, with Friar Bernard and Friar Cattani. And being
come to a crossway, and knowing not whither to turn, he
directed his prayer to Christ, our precious Guide, who led him
to the said hovel by the straight way. And while he was
pondering on the reason of this his coming, St. Francis met him
as he was returning from the wood wherein he had gone to pray ;
whereupon, anon, he fell on his knees on the ground before
St. Francis, and humbly besought him to receive him into his


Conversion of Friar Giles 149

company, for love of God. St. Francis, gazing on the devout
aspect of Friar Giles, answered and said, Dearest brother,
God hath wrought in thee a very great grace. If the emperor
came to Assisi, and would make one of the men of this city his
knight, or private chamberlain, ought he not to rejoice greatly?
How much greater joy oughtest thou to receive in that God
hath chosen thee for His knight and most beloved servant, to
observe the perfect way of the holy gospel? Therefore, be
steadfast and constant in the vocation whereto God hath called
thee.” And he takes him by the hand and raises him up, and
leads him into the aforesaid hovel; and he calls Friar Bernard
and saith, “ Our Lord and Master hath sent us a good friar,
wherefore rejoice we all in the Lord and eat together in charity.
And after they had eaten, St. Francis went with this Giles to
Assisi, to get cloth to make Friar Giles’s habit. And they found
a poor woman by the way, that begged alms of them for love of
God; and knowing not how to minister to the poor little woman s
needs St. Francis turned to Friar Giles with an angelic coun¬
tenance and said, “ For love of God, dearest brother, let us give
this cloak to the poor creature.” And Friar Giles obeyed the
holy father with so ready a heart, that himseemed to behold
that alms fly forthwith to heaven; and Friar Giles flew with it
straightway to heaven, whereat he felt unspeakable joy, and a
renewed heart within him. And St. Francis, having procured
the cloth and made the habit, received Friar Giles into the Order;
and he was one of the most glorious religious m the contempla¬
tive life the world had ever seen in those days. After the
reception of Friar Giles, anon St. Francis went with him into
the Marches of Ancona, singing with him and magnifying with
praise the Lord of heaven and earth; and he said to Friar Giles,
“ Son our Order shall be like unto the fisher that casteth his net
into the water and taketh a multitude of fishes: and the big
fish he holds, and puts the little ones back into the waters.
Friar Giles marvelled at this prophecy, because there were not
yet in the Order more than St. Francis and three friars; and
albeit St. Francis had not preached to the people in public
places, yet as he went by the way he admonished and corrected
both men and women, saying, with loving simplicity, Love
and fear God, and do fitting penance for your sins. And
Friar Giles said, “ Do that which my spiritual father telleth
you, for he speaketh excellently well.”

II. How Friar Giles went to St. James the Great.

Once in the course of time, Friar Giles went, by leave of St.
Francis, to St. James the Great in Galicia; and in the whole


I 5 ° The Little Flowers of St. Francis

of that way only once did he satisfy his hunger, by reason of the
great poverty of all that land. Wherefore, asking alms and
finding none that would give him charity, he happened by
chance that evening on a threshing floor, where some few grains
of beans were left: these he gathered up, and these were his
supper. And here he slept that night, for he was ever fain to
abide in solitary places, far from the haunts of men. that he
might the better give himself up to prayer and to vigils. And
in that supper he was so greatly comforted by God, that if he
had eaten of divers viands he deemed he would not have eaten
so full a meal. And journeying on, he finds by the way a poor
man that craves alms, for love of God; and Friar Giles, most
chaiitable of men, having naught save his habit to cover his
body, cut off the cowl from his cloak, and gave it to that poor
man for love of God; and thus, sans cowl, he journeyed for
twenty days together. And returning by way of Lombardy, he
was hailed by a man, to whom he went right gladly, think ing
to receive some alms of him: and stretching forth his hand"
this man put a pair of dice therein, and invited him to plav a
game. Friar Giles answered, very humbly, “ God forgive thee
this, my son.” And so journeying through the world, he was
much mocked at, and endured all these things meekly.

III. Of Friar Giles s way of life when he went to the Holy
Sepulchre.

Friar Giles went, by leave of St. Francis, to visit the Holy
Sepulchre of Christ, and came to the port of Brindisi, and there
stayed over many days, for there was no ship ready. ' And Friar
Giles, desiring to live by his labour, begged a pitcher, and filling
it with water, went about the city crying, “ Who lacks water? ”
And for his toil he received bread and things needful for the
life of the body, both for himself and for his companion. And
then he crossed the seas, and visited the Holy Sepulchre of
Christ, and the other holy places, with great devotion. And
journeying back, he abode many days in the city of Ancona;
and forasmuch as he was wont to live by the labour of his hands
he made baskets of rushes and sold them, not for money but
for bread for himself and for his companion; and he carried the
dead to burial for the aforesaid price. And when these things
failed him, he returned to the table of Jesus Christ, asking alms
from door to door. And thus, with much toil and poverty he
came back to St. Mary of the Angels. ’

IV* How Friar Giles praised obedience more than prayer .

A friar on a time was at prayer in his cell, and his warden


Friar Giles 15 1

bade tell him, by obedience, to go questing for alms. ^Where¬
upon he straightway went to Friar Giles and said, Father
mine, I was at prayer, and the warden hath bidden me go for
bread, and meseems ’twere better to remain at prayer.” Friar
Giles answered, “ My son, hast thou not yet learned or known
what prayer is ? True prayer is to do the will of our superior,
and it is a token of great pride in him who, having put his neck
under the yoke of holy obedience, refuseth it for any cause, in
order to work his own will, even though it may seem to him
that he is working more perfectly. The perfectly obedient
religious is like unto a knight mounted on a mighty steed, by
whose power he passeth fearlessly through the midst of the fray,
and contrariwise, the disobedient and complaining and un¬
willing religious is like unto one that is mounted on a lean and
infiniTand vicious horse, because with a little striving he is lain
or taken by the enemy. I say unto thee, were there a man of
such devotion and exaltation of mind that he spake.with angels,
and while thus speaking he were called by his superior, straight¬
way he ought to leave his converse with the angels and obey his
superior.”

V. How Friar Giles lived by the labour of his hands.

Friar Giles, being on a time in the friary at Rome, was minded
to live by bodily toil, even as he was ever wont to do since he
entered the Order, and he wrought in this wise: Betimes, m
the morning, he heard mass with much devotion, then he went
to the wood that was eight miles distant from Rome and carried
a faggot of wood back on his shoulders, and sold it for bread, or
aught else to eat. One time, among others, when he was return¬
ing with a load of wood, a woman asked to buy it; and being
agreed on the price, he carried it to her house. The woman,
notwithstanding the bargain, gave him much more than she
had promised, for she saw he was a religious. Saith Friar Giles,
“ Good woman, I would not that the sin of avarice overcame me,
therefore I will not take a greater price than I bargained with
thee.” And not only would he take no more, but he took only
the half of the price agreed upon, and went his way; wherefore
that woman conceived a very great devotion for him. Friar
Giles did any honest work for hire, and always gave heed to
holy honesty; he gave a hand to gather olives and to tread the
wine-press for the peasants. Standing on a day in the market¬
place, a certain man sought hands to beat down his walnuts,
and begged one to beat them down for him, at a price; but he
made excuse, saying it was very far away, and the trees were


* 5 2 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

very hard to climb. Saith Friar Giles, “ Friend, an thou wilt
give me part of the walnuts I will come with thee and beat them
down.” The bargain made, he went his way, and, first making
the sign of the holy cross, he climbed up to beat a tall walnut tree
with great fear. And after he had beaten the branches thereof
so many walnuts were due to him for his share that he could not
carry them away in his lap. Wherefore he took off his habit
and bound up the sleeves and the cowl, and made a sack thereof
and having filled this his habit with walnuts, he lifted it on to’
his shoulder and carried the walnuts to Rome; and he gave all
to the poor, with great joy, for love of God. When the corn was
cut Friar Giles went with the other poor folk to glean some ears;
and if any one offered him a handful of corn he answered,
.Brother, I have no granary wherein to store it.” And the
ears of wheat he gleaned he gave away, more often than not,
for love of God. Seldom did Friar Giles work the whole day
through, for he always bargained to have some space of time
to say the canonical hours and not fail in his mental prayers.
Once on a time Friar Giles went to the fountain of San Sisto to
draw water for the monks, and a man asked him for a drink
Fnar Giles answers, “ And how shall I carry this vessel half
filled to the monks?” And this man angrily spake many
words of contumely and abuse to Friar Giles: and Friar Giles
returned to the monks grieving much. Begging a large vessel
anon he returned to the said fountain for water, and finding
that man again, said to him, “My friend, take and drink as
much as thy soul desireth, and be not angry, for methinks ’tis a
base thing to take water that hath been drunk of, to those
holy monks. ITe, pricked and constrained by the charity and
hcimility of Friar Giles, confessed his fault, and from that hour
forth held him in great veneration.

VI. How Fnar Giles was miraculously provided for in a
Jor alms because oj the heavy snow, he could not quest

Friar Giles, when dwelling with a cardinal at Rome, foras¬
much as he had not the peace of mind he desired, said to the
cardinal, as the time of the greater lent drew nigh, “ Mv father
with your eave I would go, for my peace, with this my com¬
panion, to keep this lent in some solitary place.” The cardinal
answers, Prithee, my dearest friar, whither wouldst thou <r 0 ?
There is a. sore famine in these parts, and ye are strangers. Ah 1
be pleased to remain at my court, for to me ’twill be a singular
giace to have you given whatsoever ye may need for love of


Friar Giles


*53

God.” But Friar Giles was minded to go forth, and he went out
of Rome to the top of a high mountain where in days of old
stood a burg, and he found there a deserted church that was
called St. Lawrence, and therein he and his companion entered,
and remained in prayer and in many meditations; and for that
they were not known, small reverence or devotion was shown
to them. Wherefore they suffered great want; and moreover
there fell a great snowstorm that endured many days. They
could not issue from the church, and naught was sent them to
live upon, and of themselves they had no store; and so they
remained, shut in for three mortal days. Friar Giles, seeing he
could not live by his labour, and for alms could not go forth,
said to his companion, “ My dearest brother, let us call on our
Lord Jesus Christ with a loud voice, that of Llis pity He may
provide for us in this sore extremity and need; for certain
monks, being in dire need, have called on God, and divine
providence did provide for them in their needs.” And after the
example of these, they betook them to prayer, and besought
God, with all affection, that He would provide a remedy in so
sore a need. God, that is all-pitiful, had regard to their faith
and devotion and simplicity and fervour in this wise: A certain
man was looking towards the church where Friar Giles and his
companion were, and being inspired by God, said within him¬
self, “ Haply in that church there be some good souls doing
penance and, in this season of heavy snows, have naught for
their needs, and by reason thereof may die of hunger.” And
urged by the Holy Ghost he said, “ Certes, I will go and learn
if my foreboding be true or not.” And he took some loaves
and a vessel of wine and set forth on his journey, and with very
great difficulty he won his way to the aforesaid church, where
he found Friar Giles and his companion devoutly engaged in
prayer; and they were so ravaged by hunger that in their aspect
they had the semblance of dead rather than of living men. He
had great compassion on them, and having refreshed and com¬
forted them, he returned and told his neighbours of the extreme
poverty and need of these friars, and besought them, for love
of God, to provide for them; whereupon many, after the
example of this man, brought them bread and wine and other
necessaries to eat, for love of God; and through all that lent
they ordered among themselves that the needs of these friars
should be provided for. And Friar Giles, considering the great
mercy of God and the charity of these folk, said to his com¬
panion, “ My dearest brother, but now have we prayed to God


154 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

to provide for us in our need, and we have been heard; therefore
it is meet that we return thanks and glory to Him and pray for
those that have fed us with their alms, and for all Christian
folk.” And by his great fervour and devotion, so much grace
was given by God to Friar Giles that many, by his example,
forsook this blind world, and many others that were not called
to take up the religious life did very great penance in their
homes.

VII. Touching the day of the holy Friar Giles's death .

On St. George’s eve, at the hour of matins, these fifty-two
years agone, the soul of Friar Giles, for that he had received the
habit of St. Francis in the first days of the month, was received
by God into the glory of paradise, to wit, on the feast of St*
George.

VIII. How a holy man being at prayer saw the soul of Friar
Giles go to life everlasting.

A good man being at prayer when Friar Giles passed from
this life, saw his soul, together with a multitude of souls, come
out of purgatory and ascend to heaven; and he beheld Jesus
Christ come forth to meet the soul of Friar Giles, and with a
multitude of angels, and with all those souls ascend with sweet
melody into the glory of paradise.

IX. How the soul of a friar preacher's friend was delivered from
the pains of purgatory through the merits of Friar Giles.

When Friar Giles lay sick so that in a few days he died, a
Dominican friar fell sick unto death. And he had a friend that
was also a friar, who, seeing him draw nigh unto death, said to
the sick man, “ My brother, I desire, if it be God’s will, that after
thy death thou return to me and tell me in what state thou
mayst be.” The sick friar promised to return whensoever it
might be possible. The sick man died on the self-same day as
Friar Giles, and after his death he appeared to the living friar
preacher, and said, “ ’Twas God’s will that I should keep my
promise to thee.” Saith the living friar to the dead, “ How
fares it with thee? ” The dead friar answered, “ ’Tis well
with me, for I died on a day whereon a holy friar minor passed
from this life whose name was Friar Giles, and to him for his
great holiness Christ granted that he should lead all the souls
that were in purgatory to holy paradise, among which souls was
I, in great torments; and through the merits of the holy Friar
Giles I am delivered therefrom.” This said, he forthwith
vanished; and the friar revealed that vision to no man. This
said friar fell sick; and anon deeming that God had smitten


Friar Giles on Vice and Virtue 155

him because he had not revealed the virtue and the glory of
Friar Giles, he sent for the friars minor, and there came to him
five couples of them; and having called them, together with
the preaching friars, he declared the aforesaid vision to them
with great devotion, and seeking very diligently they found
that on that selfsame day these twain had passed from this life.

X. How God had given certain graces to Friar Giles and of the
day of his death.

Friar Bonaventura of Bagnoreggio was wont to say of Friar
Giles that God had given and vouchsafed singular grace to him
for all those that commended themselves to him, with devout
intent, in the things that appertained to the soul. He wrought
many miracles during his life and after his death, as appeareth
from his legend; and he passed from this life to supernal glory,
in the year of our Lord one thousand two hundred and fifty-
two, on the day of the feast of St. George; and he is buried at
Perugia in the house of the friars minor.

Here beginneth the Chapters of Certain Doctrines
and Notable Sayings of Friar Giles

I. Chapter of vices and virtues.

The grace of God and the virtues are the way and the ladder
whereby we ascend to heaven; but the vices and the sins are
the way and the ladder whereby we descend to the depths of
hell. Vices and sins are poison and deadly venom; but virtues
and good works are healing treacle . 1 One grace bringeth and
draweth after it another. Grace desireth not to be praised,
and vice cannot endure to be despised. The mind is at peace
and resteth in humility: patience is her daughter. Holy purity
of heart seeth God; but true devotion savoureth him. If thou
lovest, thou shalt be loved. If thou servest, thou shalt be
served. If thou fearest, thou shalt be feared. If thou bearest
thyself well towards others, it behoves that others bear them¬
selves well towards thee. But blessed is Jie that truly loveth and
desireth not to be loved. Blessed is he that serveth and de¬
sireth not to be served. Blessed is he that feareth and desireth
not to be feared. Blessed is he that beareth himself well towards
others, and desireth not that others bear themselves well towards
him. But forasmuch as these things are exceeding high, and

1 Compare Chaucer, “ Christ which that is to every harm treacle.” The
Venetians were famed for their skilful preparation of this medicinal com¬
pound, which was universally regarded in the Middle Ages as an antidote
against snake bites and other poisons.


156 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

of great perfection, the fool can neither know them nor attain
to them. Three things are exceeding high and useful, and he
that shall have attained to them shall never fall. The first is,
if thou endure willingly, and with gladness, every tribulation
that shall befall thee, for love of Jesus Christ. The second is,
if thou humble thyself every day in all things thou doest, and
in all things thou seest. The third is, if thou love steadfastly,
and with all thy heart, that highest celestial and invisible good,
which cannot be seen with mortal eyes. Those things that are
most despised and most reviled by worldly men are verily most
acceptable and pleasing to God and to His saints; and those
things that are most honoured and most loved and are most
pleasing to worldly men, those are most despised and scorned
and most hated by God and by His saints. This foul unseemli¬
ness proceedeth from the ignorance and the wickedness of men,
for the wretched man loveth most those things he should hate,
and hateth those things he should love. Once on a time, Friar
Giles asked another friar, saying, “ Tell me, dearest, is thine a
good soul? ” That friar answered, “ This I know not.” Then
said Friar Giles, “ My brother, I would have thee to know that
holy contrition and holy humility and holy charity and holy
devotion and holy joy make the good and blessed soul.”

II. Chapter of faith.

All things whatsoever that can be thought in the heart or
told with the tongue, or seen with the eyes, or touched with
the hands—all are as naught in respect of, and in comparison
with, those things that cannot be thought, nor seen, nor touched.
All the saints and all the sages that have passed away, and all
those that are in this present life, and all that shall come after
us, that spake or wrote, or that shall speak or write, of God,
ne’er told nor e’er can tell of God so much as a grain of millet
would be in respect of, or in comparison with, the heavens and
the earth, nay, even a thousand thousandfold less. For all
scripture that spealceth of God, speaketh of Him with stammer¬
ing voice, as the mothei* doth who prattles with her child, that
could not understand her words if she spoke in other fashion.
Friar Giles said, on a time, to a worldly judge, “ Believest thou
that the gifts of God are great? ” The judge answered, “ Yea,
I believe.” Whereat Friar Giles said, “ I will show thee how
that thou believest not faithfully.” And then he said to him,
“ What price is all thou possessest in this world worth? ” The:
judge answered, “ ’Tis worth, perchance, a thousand pounds.”
Then said Friar Giles, “ Wouldst thou give those thy possessions


On Faith 1 57

for ten thousand pounds?” The judge answered, without
delay, u Verily, that would I.” And Friar Giles said, Certain
it is" that all the possessions of this world are as naught m
respect to heavenly things; therefore, why givest thou not
these thy possessions to Christ, that thou mayst buy those
possessions that are celestial and eternal? ” Then that judge,
wise with the foolish wisdom of the world, made answer to the
pure and simple Friar Giles, “ God hath filled thee with wise
and divine foolishness. Thinkest thou, Friar Giles, that there
lives a man whose outward works accord with all he believes in
his inmost heart?” Friar Giles answered, “Look now my
dearest, it is very truth that all the saints have striven to fulfil
by their works those things they were able to comprehend or to
know were the will of God, according to their power. And all
those things they were not able to fulfil by their works, these
they fulfilled by the holy desire of their will; in such wise, that
what was lacking in their works by reason of their defect of
power, this they fulfilled by the desire of their soul: and they
were not found wanting.” Yet again Friar Giles said, If any
man could be found of perfect faith, in short time he would attain
to the perfect state, whereby full assurance of his salvation
would be given him. What hurt or what ill could any temporal
adversity in this present life do to that man who, with steadfast
faith, awaiteth this eternal and supreme and highest good?
And the miserable man, that awaiteth everlasting torment,
what could any prosperity, or temporal possession, in this
world avail him ? Yet how grievous a sinner soever a man may
be, let him not despair, while he yet liveth, of the infinite
mercy of God; for there is no tree in this world so full of thorns,
nor so knotted nor so gnarled, but that men cannot plane it
and polish it and adorn it, and make it fair to look upon. Fven
so there is no man in this world so sunk m iniquity, nor so
great a sinner, but that God can convert him and adorn him
with peculiar grace, and with many virtuous gifts.

III. Chapter of holy humility.

No man can attain to any knowledge or understanding of
God, save by the virtue of holy humility: for the straight way
upward is the straight way downward. All the perils and the
great falls that have come to pass in this world have come about
for no cause save the lifting up of the head, to wit, of the mind,
in pride; and this is proven by the fall of the devil, that was
cast out of heaven; and by the fall of our first parent, Adam,
that was driven out of paradise through the exaltation of the


158 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

head, to wit, through disobedience; and again by the Pharisee,
whereof Christ speaketh in the gospel, and by many other
ensamples. And so contrariwise: for all the great and good
things that have e’er come to pass in this world, have come to
pass through the abasement of the head, to wit, through the
humility of the mind, even as is proven by the blessed and most
humble Virgin Mary, and by the publican, and by the holy
thief on the cross, and by many other ensamples in the scrip¬
tures. And, therefore, it were well if we could find some great
and heavy weight that we might ever hang about our necks,
in order that it might ever bear us down, to wit, that it might
ever make us humble ourselves. A friar asked Friar Giles,
“ TeH me, father, how shall we flee from this sin of pride? ”
To whom Friar Giles answered, “ My brother, be persuaded of
this: never hope to be able to flee from pride, except thou first
place thy mouth where thou hast set thy feet; but if thou wilt
consider well the blessings of God, then shalt thou know that
of thy duty thou art held to bow thy head. And, again, if thou
wilt think much on thy faults and on thy manifold offences
against God, most of all wilt thou have cause to humble thyself.
But woe unto those that would be honoured for their wicked¬
ness! One degree in humility hath he risen that knoweth
himself to be the enemy of his own good; another degree in
humility is to render to others those things that are theirs,
and not to appropriate them to ourselves, to wit, that every
good thing and every virtue a man findeth in himself, he
ought not to own it to himself, but to God alone, from whom
proceedeth every grace and every virtue and every good thing;
but all sin or passion of the soul, or whatsoever vice a man
find in himself, this should he own to himself, since it proceedeth
from himself and from his own wickedness, and not from others.
Blessed is that man that knoweth himself and deemeth himself
vile in the sight of God, and even so in the sight of men.
Blessed is he that ever judgeth himself and condemneth himself
and not others, for he shall not be judged at that dread and*
last judgment eternal. Blessed is he that shall bend diligently
under the yoke of obedience and under the judgment of others,
even as the holy apostles did before and after they received the
Holy Spirit.” Likewise said Friar Giles, “ He that would gain
and possess perfect peace and rest must needs account every
man his superior; he must ever hold himself the subject and
inferior of others. Blessed is that man who in his deeds and
in his words desireth not to be seen or known, save only in that


On Holy Humility 159

unalloyed being, and in that simple adornment which God
created and adorned him with. Blessed is the man that
knoweth how to treasure up and hide divine revelations and
consolations, for there is nothing so hidden but that God shall
reveal it, when it pleaseth Him. If a man were the most
perfect and the holiest man in the world, and yet deemed
and believed himself the most miserable of sinners and the
vilest wretch on the earth—therein is true humility. Holy
humility knoweth not how to prate, and the blessed fear of God
knoweth not how to speak” Said Friar Giles, “ Methinks
humility is like unto a thunderbolt ; for even as the bolt maketh
a terrible crash, breaking, crushing, and burning all that it
findeth in its path, and then naught of that bolt is found, so, in
like manner, humility smiteth and scattereth and bumeth and
consumeth every wickedness and every vice and every sin; and
yet is found to be naught in itself. The man that possesseth
humility findeth grace in the sight of God,^ through that
humility, and perfect peace with his neighbour.”

IV. Chapter of the holy fear of God.

He that feareth naught showeth that he hath naught to lose.
The holy fear of God ordaineth, governeth, and ruleth the soul
and maketh it to come to a state of grace. If any man possess
any grace or divine virtue, holy fear is that which preserveth
it. And he that hath not yet gained virtue or grace, holy fear
maketh him to gain it. The holy fear of God is the bringer of
divine graces, for it maketh the soul, wheresoever she abideth,
to attain quickly to holy virtue and divine graces.. All creatures
that have fallen into sin would never have fallen if they had had
the holy fear of God. But this holy gift of fear is given only to
the perfect; for the more perfect a man is, the more godfearing
and humble he is. Blessed is he that knoweth he is in a dungeon
in this world, and ever remembereth how grievously he hath
offended his Lord. A man ought ever to fear pride with a great
fear, lest it thrust against him and make him fall from the state
of grace wherein he standeth; for a man can never stand secure
being girt about with enemies; and our enemies are the seduc¬
tions of this miserable world and our own flesh that, together
with the devil, is ever the enemy of the soul. A man hath need
of greater fear lest his own wickedness overcome him and beguile
him than of any other of his enemies. It is impossible that a
man can rise and ascend to any divine grace, or virtue, or
persevere therein, without holy fear. He that feareth not God
goeth in danger of perishing, and in yet greater peril of ever-


160 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

lasting perdition. The fear of God maketh a man to obey
humbly, and maketh him bow down his head under the yoke
of obedience; and the greater the fear a man hath, the more
fervently doth he worship. Not a little gift is prayer to who-
soever it is given. The virtuous words of men, however great
they may appear to me ; are not therefore accounted nor rewarded
according to our measure, but according to the measure and
good pleasure of God; for God regardeth not the sum of our
toils, but the sum of our love and humility. Therefore, the
better part for us is to love always, and fear with great humility,
and never put trust in ourselves for any good thing; ever
having suspicion of those thoughts that are begotten in the
mind under the semblance of good.

V. Chapter of holy patience.

He that with steadfast humility and patience suffereth and
endureth tribulation, through fervent love of God, soon shall
attain to great grace and virtues, and shall be lord of this world,
and shall have a foretaste of the next and glorious world.
Everything that a man doeth, good or evil, he doeth it unto
himself; therefore, be not offended with him that doeth thee
an injury, for rather oughtest thou to have humble patience
with him, and only grieve within thee for his sin, taking com¬
passion on him. and praying God earnestly for him. The
stronger a man is to endure and suffer patiently injuries and
tribulations, for love of God, the greater is he in the sight of God,
and no more; and the weaker a man is to endure pain and
adversity, for love of God, the less is he in the sight of God. If
any man praise thee, speaking well of thee, render thou that
praise to God alone; and if any man speak evil of thee, or
revile thee, aid thou him, speaking evil of thyself, and worse.
If thou wilt make good thine own cause, strive ever to make it
appear ill, and uphold thy fellow’s cause, ever imputing guilt
to thyself, and ever praising and truly excusing thy neighbour.
When any man would contend or have the law of thee, if thou
wouldst win, lose; and then shalt thou win; but if thou wouldst
go to law to win, when thou thinkest to win, then shalt thou
find thou hast lost heavily. Therefore, my brother, believe of
a surety, the straight way of salvation is the way to perdition.
But when we are not good bearers of tribulation, then we cannot
be seekers after everlasting consolations. Much greater con¬
solation and a more worthy thing it is to suffer injuries and
revilings patiently, without murmuring, for love of God, than
to feed a hundred poor folk and fast continually every day.


On Holy Patience 161

But how shall it profit a man, or what shall it avail him, to
despise himself and afflict his body with great fastings and
vigils and scourgings, if he be unable to endure a small injury
from his neighbour? For which thing, a man shall receive a
much greater reward and greater merit than for all the afflictions
a man can give to himself of his own will; because to endure
the revilings and injuries of one’s neighbour, with humble
patience and without murmuring, purgeth sin away much more
quickly than doth a fount of many tears. Blessed is the man
that ever holdeth before the eyes of the mind the memory of
his sins and the good gifts of God; for he will endure with
patience every tribulation and adversity, whereby he looketh
for great consolations. The truly humble man looketh for no
reward nor merit from God, but striveth ever only how he can
give satisfaction in all things, owning himself God’s debtor: and
every good thing he hath, that, he knoweth he hath through
the goodness of God, and not through any merit of his own;
and every adversity he endureth, he knoweth it to be truly
because of his sins. A certain friar asked Friar Giles, saying,
“ If in our time any great adversity, or tribulation, should
befall, what should we do in that case? ” To whom Friar Giles
answered, saying, “ My brother, I would have thee know that
if the Lord rained down stones and arrows from heaven, they
could not injure nor do any hurt to us, if we were such men
as we ought to be; for if a man were verily what he ought to be,
he would transmute every evil and every tribulation into good;
for we know what the apostle said, that all things work together
for good to them that love God: even so all things work
together for ill and to the condemnation of him that hath an
evil will. If thou wilt save thyself and go to celestial glory,
thou shalt desire no vengeance nor punishment of any creature;
for the heritage of the saints is ever to do good and ever to
suffer evil. If thou knewest in very truth how grievously thou
hast offended thy Creator, thou wouldst know that it is a worthy
and just thing that all creatures should persecute thee and
give thee pain and tribulation, in order that these creatures
might take vengeance for the offences thou hast done to their
Creator. A high and great virtue it is for a man to overcome
himself; for he that overcometh himself shall overcome all his
enemies, and attain to all good. And yet a greater virtue
would it be if a man suffered himself to be overcome by all men ;
for he would be lord over all his enemies, to wit, his vices, the
devil, the world, and his own flesh. If thou wilt save thyself,


i 62 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

renounce and despise all consolation that the things of this
world and all mortal creatures can give thee; for greater and
more frequent are the falls that come through prosperity and
through consolation than are those that come through adversity
and tribulation.” Once on a time a religious was murmuring
against his superior, in the presence of Friar Giles, by reason of
a harsh obedience he had laid upon him; to whom Friar Giles
said, “ My dearest, the more thou murmurest the heavier is the
weight of thy burden, and the harder shall it be to thee to bear;
and the more humbly and devoutly thou shalt place thy neck
under the yoke of holy obedience, the lighter and easier will that
obedience be to bear. But methinks thou wouldst not be
rebuked in this world, for love of Christ, and yet wouldst be
with Christ in the next world; thou wouldst not be persecuted
or cursed for Christ’s sake in this world, and in the next, wouldst
be blessed and received by Christ; thou wouldst not labour in
this world, and in the next, wouldst rest and be at peace. I
tell thee, friar, friar, thou art sorely beguiled; for by the way
of poverty and of shame and of reviling a man cometh to true
celestial honour; and by enduring patiently mocking and
cursing, for love of Christ, a man shall come to the glory of
Christ. Therefore, well saith a worldly proverb,

He whose gifts cost him no woe.

Good gifts from others must forgoe.

How useful is the nature of the horse! for how swiftly soever
the horse runneth, he yet letteth himself be ruled and guided,
and leapeth hither and thither, and forward and backward,
according to the will of his rider: and so, likewise, ought the
servant of God to do, to wit, he should let himself be ruled,
guided, turned aside, and bent, according to the will of his
superior, or of any other man, for love of Christ. If thou
wouldst be perfect, strive diligently to be full of grace and
virtue, and fight valiantly against vice, enduring patiently
every adversity for the love of thy Lord, that was mocked and
afflicted and reviled and scourged and crucified and slain for
love of thee, and not for Ilis own sin, nor for His glory, nor for
His profit, but only for thy salvation. And to do all this that
I have told thee, above all things it is necessary that thou
overcome thyself; for little shall it profit a man "to lead and
draw souls to God, if first he overcome not himself, and lead and
draw himself to God.”


On Sloth


163


VI. Chapter of sloth .

The slothful man loseth both this world and the next; for
himself beareth no fruit and he profiteth not another. It is
impossible for a man to gain virtue without diligence and great
toil. When thou canst abide in a safe place stand not in a
perilous place: he abideth in a safe place who striveth and
suffereth and worketh and toileth through God, and for the
Lord God; and not through fear of punishment, or for a price,
but for love of God. The man that refuseth to suffer and labour
for love of Christ, verily he refuseth the glory of Christ; and
even as diligence is useful and profitable to us, so is negligence
ever against us. Even as sloth is the way that leads to hell, so
is holy diligence the way that leads to heaven. A man ought to be
very diligent to gain and keep virtue and the grace of God, ever
labouring faithfully with this grace and virtue; for many times
it befalleth that the man who laboureth not faithfully loseth the
fruit for the leaves, or the grain for the straw. To some God
giveth of His grace good fruit with few leaves; to others He
giveth fruit and leaves together; and there are others that have
neither fruit nor leaves. Methinks Tis a greater thing to know
how to guard and keep well the good gifts and graces given to us
by the Lord, than to know how to gain them. For albeit a
man may know well how to gain, yet if he know not how to
save and treasure up, he shall never be rich; but some there be
that make their gains little by little, and are grown rich because
they save well their gains and their treasure. Oh, how much
water would the Tiber have stored up if it flowed not away to
the sea! Man asketh of God an infinite gift, that is without
measure and without bounds, and yet will not love God, save
with measure and with bounds. He that w r ould be loved of God
and have infinite reward from Him, beyond all bounds and
beyond all measure, let him love God beyond all bounds and
beyond all measure, and ever serve Him infinitely. Blessed is
he that loveth God with all his heart and with all his mind, and
ever afflicteth his body and his mind for love of God, seeking no
reward under heaven, but accounting himself only a debtor. If
a man were in sore poverty and need, and another man said to
him, “ I will lend thee a very precious thing for the space of
three days: know that if thou use well this thing within this
term of three days thou shalt gain an infinite treasure, and be
rich evermore,” is it not a sure thing that this poor man would
be very careful to use well and diligently this thing so precious,
and would strive much to make it fruitful and profit him well:


164 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

so do I say likewise that this thing lent unto us by the hand of
God is our body, which the good God hath lent us for three days;
for all our times and years are but as three days in the sight of
God. Therefore if thou wouldst be rich and enjoy the divine
sweetness everlastingly, strive to labour well and make this
thing, lent by the hand of God, bear good fruit; to wit, thy
body, in this space of three days; to wit, in the brief time of thy
life: for if thou art not careful of gain in this present life, while
thou hast yet time, thou shalt not enjoy that everlasting riches
nor find holy rest in that celestial peace everlastingly. But if
all the possessions of the world were in the hands of one person
that never turned them to account himself, nor put them out
for others to use, what fruit or what profit would he have of
those things? Of a surety, neither profit nor fruit would he
have. But it might well be that a man, having few possessions
and using them well, should have much profit and a great
abundance of fruit for himself and for others. A worldly
proverb saith, “ Never set an empty pot on the fire hoping thy
neighbour will come and fill it.” And so likewise God willeth
that no grace be left empty; for the good God never giveth a
grace to any man that it be kept empty, rather doth he give it
that a man may use it and bring forth fruit of good works; for
good-will sufficeth not except a man strive to pursue it and
use it to a profit of holy words. On a time a wayfarer said to
Friar Giles, “ Father, I pray thee give me some consolation.”
Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My brother, strive to stand
well with God and straightway shalt thou have the consolation
thou needest; for if a man make not a pure dwelling-place ready
in his soul, wherein God may abide and rest, never shall he find
an abiding place nor rest nor true consolation in any creature.
When a man would work evil he never asketh much counsel for
the doing thereof; but, ere they do good, many folk seek much
counsel and make long delay.” Once Friar Giles said to his
companions, “ Mv brethren, methinks, in these days, one findeth
no man that would do those things that he seeth are most pro¬
fitable, and not only for the soul but also for the body. Believe
me, my brethren, I can swear, of a truth, that the more a man
flees and shuns the burden and the yoke of Christ the more
grievous he maketh it to himself and the more heavily it weigheth
upon him, and the greater is the burden; but the more ardently
a man taketh up his burden, ever heaping up more weight of
his own will, the lighter and the more pleasant he feeleth it to
bear. Would to God that men would labour to win the good


On Contempt of Temporal Things 165

things of the body, since they would win also those of the soul;
forasmuch as the body and the soul, without any doubt, must
ever be joined together, either to suffer or to enjoy; to wit,
either ever to suffer together in hell everlasting pains and bound¬
less torments, or, through the merits of good works, to enjoy
perpetual joys and ineffable consolations with the saints and
angels in paradise. Because, if a man laboured well, or forgave
well, yet lacked humility, his good deeds would be turned to
evil; for many have there been that have wrought many works
that seemed good and praiseworthy, but since they lacked
humility they were discovered and known to be done through
pride; and their deeds have shown this, for things done through
humility are never corrupted.” A friar said to Friar Giles,
“ Father, methinks we know not yet how to understand our
own good.” To whom Friar Giles answered, “ My brother, of
a surety each man worketh the art he hath learned, for no man
can work well except he have first learned: wherefore I would
have thee know, my brother, that the noblest art in this world
is the art of working well; and who could know that art except
first he learn it? Blessed is that man in whom no created thing
can beget evil; but yet more blessed is he that receiveth in him¬
self good edification from all things he sees or hears.”

VII. Chapter of the contempt of temporal things.

Many sorrows and many woes will the miserable man suffer
that putteth his desire and his heart and his hope in earthly
things, whereby he forsaketh and loseth heavenly things, and
at last shall e’en lose also these earthly things. The eagle
soareth very high, but if she had tied a weight to her wings she
would not be able to fly very high: and even so for the weight
of earthly things a man cannot fly on high, to wit, he cannot
attain to perfection; but the wise man that bindeth the weight
of the remembrance of death and judgment to the wings of his
heart, could not for the great fear thereof go astray nor fly at the
vanities nor riches of this world, which are a cause of damna¬
tion. Every day we see worldly men toil and moil much and
encounter great bodily perils to gain these false riches; and
after they have toiled and gained much, in a moment they die
and leave behind all that they gained in their lives; therefore
put not thy trust in this false world that beguileth every man
that believeth therein, for it is a liar. But whoso desireth and
would be grfiat and truly rich, let him seek after and love ever¬
lasting riches, and good things that ever savour sweetly and
never satiate and never grow less. If we would not go astray.


166 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

let us take pattern from the beasts and the birds, for these, when
they are fed, are content and seek not their living save from
hour to hour when their need cometh: even so should a man
be content with satisfying his needs temperately, and not seek
after superfluities. Friar Giles said that the ant was not so
pleasing to St. Francis as other living things because of the
great diligence she hath in gathering together and storing up, in
the time of summer, a treasure of grain for the winter; but he
was wont to say that the birds pleased him much more, because
they laid not up one day for the next. But yet the ant teacheth
us that we ought not to be slothful in the summer of this present
life, so that we be not found empty and barren in the winter of
the last day and judgment.

VIII. Chapter of holy chastity.

Our miserable and frail human flesh is like unto the swine
that ever rejoiceth to wallow and bemire himself in filth, choosing
the mire for his own delight. Our flesh is the devil’s knight-
errant, for it fighteth and resisteth all those things that pertain
to God and to our salvation. A friar asked Friar Giles, saying
unto him, “ Father, teach me in what manner we may guard
ourselves from carnal sin.” To whom Friar Giles answered,
“ My brother, he that would move any great weight or any great
stone from one place to another, it behoveth him to strive to
move it by skill rather than by force. And so likewise, if we
will overcome carnal sin and gain the virtue of chastity, we shall
rather gain it by humility and by good and discreet spiritual
guidance, than by our presumptuous austerities and by the
violence of penance. Every sin cloudeth and darkens holy and
shining chastity, for chastity is like unto a bright mirror that
is clouded and darkened, not only by the touch of foul things,
but also by the breath of man. It is impossible for a man to
attain to any spiritual grace so long as he findeth him inclined
to carnal lust; therefore, thou mayst turn and turn again, as it
please thee, and thou shalt find no other remedy, nor be able to
attain to spiritual grace, except thou trample under foot every
carnal sin. Therefore, fight valiantly against thy sensual and
frail flesh, thy proper enemy, that ever striveth against thee,
day and night; let him that overcometh this flesh, our mortal
foe, know of a surety that he hath overcome and routed all his
enemies, and soon shall attain to spiritual grace and to every
good state of virtue and of perfection/’ Said "Friar Giles,
“ Among all the other virtues I most do prize the virtue of
chastity; for sweetest chastity hath in itself alone some per-


On Holy Chastity 167

fection; but no other virtue can be perfect without chastity.”
A friar asked Friar Giles, saying, “ Father, is not charity a
greater and more excellent virtue than chastity? ” And Friar
Giles said, “Tell me, brother, what thing in this world is found
more chaste than holy charity? ” Many a time did Friar
Giles chant this little song—

O holy chastity,

How great a good thou holdest!

How precious to possess!

For such sweet fragrance issueth forth from thee.

The taste thereof the wise alone can know:

Therefore the foolish never learn thy worth.

A friar asked Friar Giles, saying, “ Father, thou that com-
mendest so the virtue of chastity, prithee make plain to me what
chastity is.” Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My brother, I
tell thee that the diligent custody and continual watching of
our bodily and spiritual senses, keeping them pure and spotless
before God—that is truly called chastity.”

IX. Chapter of temptations.

The great graces that a man receiveth from God cannot be
possessed in peace and quietness, for many contrary things
and many tribulations and many adversities rise up against
these graces, because the more acceptable a man is in the sight
of God, the more mightily is he assailed and warred against by
the devil. Therefore it behoveth a man never to cease from
fighting, that he may pursue that grace he hath received from
God; for the fiercer the battle the more precious shall be the
crown, if he conquers in the fight. But we have not many
battles, nor many hindrances, nor many temptations; for we
are not such as we ought to be in the spiritual life. But, never¬
theless, true it is that if a man walk warily and well in the way
of God, he shall have neither toil nor weariness on his journey;
but the man that walketh in the way of the world shall ne’er be
able to flee from the many toils, the weariness, the anguish, the
tribulations, and sorrows, even to the day of his death. Said a
friar to Friar Giles, “ My father, methinks thou sayest two
things, one contrary to the other; for thou didst first say that
the more acceptable and the more virtuous a man is in the sight
of God, the more hindrances and the more battles he hath in
the spiritual life, and then thou saidst the contrary; to wit, that
the man who walked warily and well in the way of God would
feel neither toil nor weariness on his journey.” Whereto Friar
Giles made plain the contrariness of these two sayings, and


168 The Little Flowers of St. Francis


answered thus, “ My brother, of a surety the devils assail men
of good will with mightier temptations than they do others that
have not good will, I mean, in the sight of God. But the man
that walketh warily and fervently in the way of God, what toil,
what weariness, and what hurt can the devils and all the adver¬
sities of the world bring on him? Doth he not know and see
that he selleth his wares for a price a thousandfold higher than
they are worth ? But I tell thee more: of a surety he that were
kindled with the fire of divine love, the more mightily he were
assailed by sins, the more would he hate and abominate them.
The worst devils are wont to pursue and tempt a man when
he is weighed down by some infirmity or bodily weakness, or by
great cold, or anguish, or when he is ahungered or athirst, or
when he hath suffered some injury, or shame, or temporal or
spiritual hurt; for these evil spirits know that it is in hours and
moments such as these that a man is more apt to receive tempta¬
tions. But I say unto thee that for every temptation and for
every sin thou overcomest thou shalt gain a virtue; and that if
thou conquer that sin that warreth against thee, thou shalt
receive therefore the greater grace and a greater crown of
victory.” A friar asked counsel of Friar Giles, saying, “ Father,
ofttimes am I tempted by a sore temptation, and oft have I
prayed to God to be delivered therefrom, and yet the Lord
taketh it not away from me. Give me thy counsel, father,
what ought I to do ? ” Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My
brother, the more richly a king hamesseth his knights with
noble armour and strong, the more valiantly he desireth they
should fight against his enemies, for love of him.” A friar asked
Friar Giles, saying, “ Father, what remedy can I find that I
may go more willingly to prayer and with a more fervent
desire ? for when I go to pray, I am hard, slothful, withered, and
slack.” Whereto Friar Giles answered, saying, “ A king hath
two servants, and the one is armed for battle, but the other hath
no arms wherewith to fight; and both would go forth to battle
and fight against the enemies of the king. He that is armed
goeth forth to battle and fighteth valiantly; but the other
that is unarmed saith thus to his lord, ‘ My lord, thou seest I am
naked and without arms, but for love of thee fain would I join
the battle and fight thus unarmed as I am/ And then the
good king, beholding the love of his trusty servant, saith to his
ministers, ‘ Go with this my servant, clothe him with all those
arms that are needful for the fight, in order that he may hie
securely forth to battle; and mark ye all his arms with my


On Temptation 169

royal scutcheon, that he be known as my trusty knight.’ And
even so, ofttimes it befalleth a man, when he goeth forth to
pray and findeth himself naked, indevout, slothful, and hardened
in spirit; but, nevertheless, let him gird himself, for love of the
Lord, and go forth to the battle of prayer; and then our good
King and Lord, beholding the wrestling of his knight, giveth
him fervent devotion and good will by the hands of his minister¬
ing angels. Some time this befalleth: a man setteth about some
great work of heavy labour, as to clear and till the ground, or a
vineyard, that in due season he may be able to gather the fruit
thereof. And many men, because of the great labour and the
many toils, grow a-weary and repent them of the work they
have begun; but if a man sweat and toil till the time of harvest,
then he forgetteth all his heaviness; he is consoled and glad,
beholding the fruit he shall enjoy. Even so, a man that is
strong under temptations shall attain to many consolations;
for after tribulation, saith St. Paul, cometh consolation and the
crown of eternal life: and not only in heaven shall the reward
be given to them that resist temptation, but also in this life,
even as the psalmist saith, ‘ Lord, in the multitude of my
temptations and my sorrows thy comforts delight my soul; ’ so
that the greater the temptation and the fight, the more glorious
shall be the crown.” A friar asked counsel of Friar Giles touch¬
ing a temptation, saying, “ 0 father, I am tempted by two sore
temptations: one is, that when I do some good thing, anon I
am tempted by vainglory; the other is, when I work any evil
I fall into such sadness and such dejection that I well-nigh
sink into despair.” Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My brother,
well dost thou and wisely to grieve for thy sin, but I counsel
thee to grieve temperately and discreetly, and ever shouldst
thou remember that God’s mercy is greater than thy sin. But
if, in His infinite mercy, God accepteth the repentance of a man
that is a great sinner and one that sinneth wilfully, when he
repents, thinkest thou this good God will forsake the good
sinner that sinneth against his will, when he is contrite and
repentant? I counsel thee, also, faint not in well-doing through
fear of vainglory; for if a man said, when he should sow his
seed, ‘ I will not sow, for if I were to sow, haply the birds would
come and eat thereof’; and, if saying thus, he sowed not
his seed, of a surety he would gather no corn that year. But if
he sowed his seed, albeit the birds did eat of that seed, yet the
labourer would reap the greater part; even so a man, assailed
by vainglory, if he do good not for the sake of vainglory, but
G 485


170 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

ever fighteth against it, I say he shall not lose the merit of the
good he hath done, because he is tempted.” A friar said to
Friar Giles, It is told that St. Bernard once recited the seven
penitential psalms with such peace of mind and such devotion
that he thought of naught save the proper meaning of the
aforesaid psalms.” Whereto Friar Giles thus made answer,
“ My brother, I deem there is much more prowess in a lord that
holdeth his castle when it is besieged and assaulted by his
enemies, defending it so valiantly that he letteth not one of his
enemies enter therein, than there is in one that liveth in peace
and hath no enemy.”

X. Chapter of holy penitence.

A man ought ever to afflict himself much and mortify his
body, and suffer willingly every injury, tribulation, anguish,
sorrow, shame, contempt, reproach, adversity, and persecution,
for love of our good Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, who gave
us the example in Himself; for from the first day of His glorious
Nativity, until His most holy Passion, He ever endured anguish,
tribulation, sorrow, contempt, pain, and persecution, solely for
our salvation. Therefore, if we would attain to a state of grace,
above all things it is necessary that we walk, as far as lieth in us’
m the paths and in the footsteps of our good Master, Jesus Christ,
A secular once asked of Friar Giles, saying, “ Father, in what
way can we men in the world attain to a state of grace?”
Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My brother, a man ought first
to grieve for his sins, with great contrition of heart, and then
he should confess to the priest with bitterness and sorrow of
heart, accusing himself sincerely, without concealment and
without excuse: then he must fulfil the penance perfectly that
is given and laid upon him by his confessor. Likewise, he must
guard himself against every vice and every sin, and against
every occasion of sin; and also he must exercise himself in good
and virtuous works before God and towards his neighbour; and,
doing these things, a man shall attain to a state of grace and of
virtue. Blessed is that man that hath continual sorrow for
his sins, bewailing them ever, day and night, in bitterness of
heart, solely for the offences he hath done to God! Blessed is
the man that hath ever before the eyes of his mind the afflictions
and the pains and the sorrows of Jesus Christ, and that for love
of Him neither desireth nor receiveth any temporal consolation
in this bitter and stormy world, until he attain to that heavenly
consolation of life eternal, where all his desires shall be fully
satisfied with gladness.”


On Holy Prayer 171

XI. Chapter of holy prayer.

Prayer is the beginning, middle, and end of all good: prayer
illumines the soul, and through prayer the soul distinguishes
good from evil. Every sinful man ought to make this prayer
with a fervent heart, every day unceasingly; to wit, let him
pray humbly to God to give him a perfect knowledge of his own
misery and of his sins and of the blessings he hath received, and
doth receive, from this good God. But the man that knoweth
not how to pray, how shall he know God? All those that
would be saved, if they are persons of true understanding, above
all things it is necessary that they be at last converted to holy
prayer. Friar Giles said, “ If a man had a son, guilty of so many
offences that he was condemned to death, or to be banished
from the city, of a surety this man would be very diligent, and
strive with all his might, both day and night, and at every hour,
to obtain pardon for this his son, and save him from death or
banishment, making earnest prayers and supplications, and
giving presents or paying fines, to the uttermost of his means,
both of himself or through his friends and kinsfolk. Therefore,
if a man do this for his son that is mortal, how much more
diligent ought a man to be in beseeching God, by his own
prayers and through the prayers of good men in this world, and
through His saints in the other world, for his own soul that is
immortal, when she is banished from the celestial city, or doomed
to everlasting death for sin and wickedness.” A friar said to
Friar Giles, “ Father, methinks a man ought to grieve much,
and be exceeding sorrowful, when he cannot have the grace of
devotion in his prayers.” Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My
brother, I counsel thee, go very gently about thy business; for
if thou hadst a little good wine in a cask, and in that cask the
lees were still below this good wine, of a surety thou wouldst
not shake or move that cask about, lest thou mingle the good
wine with the lees. And so I say: as long as prayer is not free
from all carnal and sinful lust it shall receive no divine consola¬
tion; for that prayer which is mingled with the lees of fleshly
lusts is not clear in the sight of God. Therefore, a man ought
to strive, with all his might, to free himself from all lees of
vicious lusts, in order that his prayers be pure in the sight of
God, and that he receive devotion and divine consolation there¬
from. ’ A friar asked Friar Giles, saying, “ Father, wherefore
doth this thing come to pass: that when a man is worshipping
God he is more sorely tempted, assailed, and troubled in his
mind than at any other time? ” Whereto Friar Giles thus


172 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

answered, “ When any man hath a suit to further before a
judge, and he goeth to plead his own cause, as ’twere asking
counsel and aid, and his adversary heareth this, doth he not
straightway appear before the judge and oppose and gainsay
the petition of that man, and so give him great hindrance, as
’twere disproving all he said? Even so it befalleth when a
man goeth forth to pray; forasmuch as he asketh God’s help
in his cause, straightway his adversary, the devil, appeareth
with his temptations and maketh great resistance and opposi¬
tion, and striveth, with all his might and cunning and devices,
to hinder this prayer, so that it be not acceptable in God’s sight,
and that the man may have neither merit nor consolation from
his prayers. And this we can see clearly, for when we speak of
worldly things, then do we suffer no temptation nor distraction
of mind, but if we go to prayer to delight and comfort the soul
with God, anon we feel our soul smitten with divers arrows, to
wit, divers temptations, which the devils put in our way to
warp our minds, in order that the soul have neither joy nor
consolation from those things that the said soul hath uttered
to God.” Friar Giles said that a prayerful man was like unto
a good knight at battle, who, albeit he were pierced or smitten
by his enemy, departeth not straightway from the battle, but
rather resisteth manfully to gain the victory over his enemy,
in order that the victory won, he may be comforted and rejoice
in that victory; but if he departed from the battle when he was
smitten or wounded, of a surety he would suffer confusion and
shame and dishonour. And so should we do likewise; to wit,
never depart from prayer for any temptation, but rather resist
stoutly; for blessed is the man that endureth temptations, as
the Apostle saith, for by overcoming them he shall receive the
crown of eternal life; but if a man cease from prayer because of
temptations, of a surety he shall suffer confusion, defeat, and
discomfiture at the hands of his enemy, the devil.” A friar said
to Friar Giles, “ Father, I have seen certain men that have
received from God the grace of devotion and tears in their
prayers, and none of these graces can I feel when I pray unto
God.” Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My brother, I counsel
thee, labour faithfully and humbly in thy prayers, for the fruits
of the earth are not to be had without much toil and labour before¬
hand; and even after this labour the desired fruit followeth not
straightway, before the time and season are come: even so
God giveth not this grace forthwith to a prayerful man until
the convenient time be come, and the mind be purged from


On Holy Prayer 173

every carnal affection and sin. Therefore, my brother, labour
humbly in thy prayer; for God, who is all-good and all-gracious,
knoweth all things and discerneth the better way: when the
time and the season are come, He, of His loving-kindness, will
give much fruit of consolation.” Another friar said to Friar
Giles, “ What art thou doing, Friar Giles? What art thou
doing? ” He answered, “ I am doing ill.” And that friar
said, “ What ill art thou doing? ” Then Friar Giles turned to
another friar and bespake him thus, “ Tell me, my friar, who
thinkest thou is the readier, our God to grant us His grace, or
we to receive it? ” And that friar answered, “ Of a surety,
God is more ready to give us His grace than we are to receive it.”
And then Friar Giles said, “Then do we well?” And that
friar said, “ Nay, we do ill.” And then Friar Giles turned to the
first friar and said, “ Behold, friar, it is clearly shown that we
do ill; and what I answered was true, to wit, that I am doing
ill.” Said Friar Giles, “ Many works are commended and
praised by Holy Scripture, to wit, the works of mercy and other
holy works; but when the Lord spake of prayer. He spake thus,
i Your heavenly Father seeketh and desireth of men that they
worship Him on earth in spirit and in truth.' ” Friar Giles said
likewise that the true religious are like unto wolves; for they
seldom issue forth in public places save for hard necessity, and
incontinently do strive to return to their hiding-place without
much converse or dwelling with men. Good works adorn the
soul, but, above all other works, prayer adorns and illumines
the soul. A friar, the companion and familiar of Friar Giles,
said, “ Father, wherefore goest thou not sometimes to discourse
of the things of God, and teach and win the salvation of Christian
souls? ” Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My brother, I desire
to fulfil my duty to my neighbour with humility and without
hurt to my soul, I mean by prayer.” And that friar said to
him, “ At least if thou went sometimes to visit thy kinsfolk! ”
And Friar Giles answered, “ Knowest thou not that Christ saith
in the gospel, ‘ Every one that hath forsaken father or mother,
or brethren or sisters, or possessions, for My name's sake, shall
receive a hundredfold.’ ” Again he said, “ A man of noble birth
entered the Order, whose riches were worth perchance sixty
thousand pounds: therefore, great rewards await them that
forsake great riches, for love of God; since God giveth them a
hundredfold more. But blind are we that when we behold
any man virtuous and gracious in the sight of God, we cannot
understand his perfection because of our own imperfection and


174 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

blindness. But if a man were truly spiritual, hardly would he
desire to behold or to hear any man save for great necessity;
for the truly spiritual man desireth ever to dwell apart from men,
and to be one with God through contemplation.” Then said
Friar Giles to another friar, “ Father, fain would I know, what
is contemplation? ” And that friar said, “ Father, that truly
know not I.” And then Friar Giles said, “ Methinks the high
grace of contemplation is a divine flame and a sweet emanation
of the Holy Ghost, and a rapture and an exaltation of the mind,
which is inebriated in the contemplation of that ineffable savour
of divine sweetness; ’tis a sweet and peaceful and gentle delight
of the soul that is lifted up and rapt in great marvel at the
glory of supernal and celestial things—a burning inward sense
of celestial and unspeakable glory/’

XII. Chapter of holy spiritual prudence .

0 servant of the King of heaven, thou that wouldst learn the
mysteries and the profitable and virtuous lessons of holy spiritual
doctrine, open well the ears of the understanding of thy soul,
and receive with thy heart’s desire, and carefully keep in the
chamber of thy memory, the precious treasure of these doctrines
and precepts and spiritual admonitions which I declare to thee:
thereby shalt thou be illumined and guided on thy journey—
the journey of the spiritual life—and shalt be defended from the
wicked and cunning assaults of thine enemies, real and shadowy,
and shalt walk securely, with humble boldness, voyaging on this
stormy sea, to wit, of this present life, until thou come to the
longed-for haven of salvation. Therefore, my son, hearken and
mark well what I say unto thee. If thou wouldst see well,
pluck out thine eyes and be blind; if thou wouldst hear well,
be deaf; if thou wouldst speak well, be dumb; if thou wouldst
walk well, stand still and walk with thy mind; if thou wouldst
work well, cut off thy hands and work with thy heart; if thou
wouldst love well, hate thyself; if thou wouldst live well,
mortify thyself; if thou wouldst gain well and grow rich, lose
and be poor; if thou wouldst enjoy well and take thine ease,
afflict thyself and be ever sorrowful; if thou wouldst dwell
secure, be ever afeard and in dread of thyself; if thou wouldst
be exalted and have great honour, abase and decry thyself; if
thou wouldst be held in great reverence, despise thyself and do
reverence unto them that revile thee and spitefully use thee;
if thou wouldst have good always, suffer ill always; if thou
wouldst be blessed, desire that all men curse thee and speak
evil of thee; if thou wouldst have true and everlasting peace,


On Knowledge 175

labour and afflict thyself, and desire every temporal affliction.
0, how great is the wisdom that knoweth and doeth these
things! But because these things are great and very lofty,
therefore are they vouchsafed by God to few men. But, verily,
whoso striveth well after all the aforesaid things, and doeth
them, I say he will need to go neither to Bologna nor to Paris
to learn other theology; for if a man lived a thousand years,
and had naught to do with outward things and naught to say
with his tongue, I say he would have enough to do with the in¬
ward discipline of his heart, labouring within him for the purgation
and ruling and justification of his mind and of his soul. A man
should neither desire, nor behold, nor hear, nor discourse of
aught save in so far as it may be profitable to his soul. The
man that knoweth not himself is not known; therefore, woe
unto us that receive gifts and graces from the Lord and under¬
stand them not; but woe, and greater woe, unto those that
neither receive them nor know them, nor even care to gain
them or possess them! Man that is made in the image of God
changeth even as he willeth, but the good God never changeth.

XIII. Chapter of profitable and unprofitable knowledge.

The man that would know much, should work much and
humble himself much, abasing himself and bowing down his
head, so that his belly goeth on the ground: then the Lord will
give him much knowledge and wisdom. The highest wisdom
is to be steadfast in well-doing, working virtuously and well,
guarding oneself against every sin and every occasion of sin, ever
meditating on the judgments of God. Friar Giles said, on a
time, to one that would go to the schools to get knowledge,
“ My brother, wherefore wouldst thou go to the schools ? I
would have thee know that the sum of all knowledge is to fear
and to love: let these two things suffice thee. For sufficient for
a man’s works shall his knowledge be, and no more. Vex thee
not overmuch for the profit of others, but ever strive and further
and do those things that are profitable to thyself; for ofttimes
this befalleth: we would gain much knowledge to help others
and little to help ourselves. I say unto thee, the word of God
is not in the speaker, nor in the hearer, but in the true worker.
Men there have been that knew not how to swim and entered
the water to help those that were drowning; and it came to
pass that they were all drowned together. If thou canst not
save thine own soul, how shalt thou save the souls of thy neigh¬
bours ? If thou canst not profit thyself, how shalt thou profit
another? for it cannot be that thou lovest another’s soul more


176 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

than thine own. The preacher of God’s word ought to be the
standard-bearer, the torch and the mirror of the people.
Blessed is the man that in such wise guideth others in the way
of salvation and himself ceaseth not to walk in that way of
salvation 1 Blessed is the man that in such wise inviteth others
to run and himself ceaseth not to run 1 But more blessed is he
that in such wise aideth others to gain and be rich, and him¬
self ceaseth not to gain riches. I believe the good preacher
admonishes and preaches more unto himself than to others.
Methinks, the man that would convert and draw sinners to the
paths of God should ever fear lest he be evilly perverted by
them and drawn astray to the paths of sin and of the devil and
of hell. ,,

XIV. Chapter of good and of evil speaking.

The man that uttereth good words and profitable to souls is
verily as ’twere the mouth of the Holy Spirit; and likewise the
man that uttereth evil and unprofitable words is, of a surety,
the mouth of the devil. Whenever good and spiritual men are
assembled to discourse together they ought ever to speak of the
beauty of virtue, in order that virtue be more pleasing to them,
and that they may delight the more therein; for by delighting
and taking more pleasure in virtue, the more they will be dis¬
ciplined therein, and by exercising themselves therein they will
be kindled to greater love thereof; and by that unceasing love
and exercise of virtue, and by pleasure therein, they will ever
rise to more fervent love of God and to a higher state of the
soul; for which cause more gifts and more divine graces shall
be vouchsafed to them by the Lord. The more a man is tempted
the greater heed hath he to discourse of the holy virtues; for
even as a man ofttimes falleth lightly into sinful deeds through
evil and sinful talk, so ofttimes through discoursing of virtue a
man is lightly led and disposed to the holy works of virtue.
But how shall we tell of the good that cometh from virtue?
For it is so exceeding great that we cannot speak worthily of its
marvellous and infinite excellence. And also, what shall we
say of the evil and everlasting torments that proceed from sin?
For it is an evil so great, and an abyss so deep, that it is impos¬
sible for us to comprehend or to fathom it, or, in sooth, to speak
thereof. I deem it no lesser virtue to know how to keep silence
well than to know how to speak well: therefore methinks a man
hath need of a neck as long as the crane’s, so that when he would
speak, his words should pass through many joints before they
came to his mouth, I mean that when a man would speak, it
were needful that he should think and think again, and examine


On Perseverance 177

and discern right well, the how and the why, the time and the
manner, and the condition of his hearers and the effect on his
own self and his purpose and motives.

XV. Chapter of good perseverance .

What doth it profit a man to fast much and pray and give
alms and afflict himself with the overpowering sense of heavenly
things if he come not to the blessed haven of the salvation he
desireth; to wit, the haven of good and steadfast perseverance?
Some time this cometh to pass: a certain ship, very fair and
mighty and strong and new, and filled with great riches, is seen
on the seas; and it befalleth that through some tempest, or
through the fault of the helmsman, this ship perisheth and is
wrecked, and miserably sunk, and cometh not to the desired
haven. . What then availed all her beauty and goodness and
riches since she perished thus miserably in the great waters of
the sea? And, likewise, on a time, some little ship and old
appeareth on the sea, with small merchandise; but having a
good and skilful helmsman, she weathers the storm and escapeth
from the deep waters of the sea and cometh to the desired
haven: and so it befalleth men in this stormy sea of the world.
Therefore, said Friar Giles, a man ought ever to fear; and albeit
he abide in great prosperity, or in high estate, or in great
dignity, or in great perfection, if he have not a good helmsman,
to wit, a wise rule over himself, he may miserably perish in the
deep waters of sin. Therefore, above all things, perseverance is
needful for well-doing, as the Apostle saith, “Not he that be-
ginneth, but he that persevereth to the end shall win the crown. ”
When a tree springeth up, it doth not straightway wax great;
and after it hath become great, it doth not forthwith yield
fruit; and when it beareth fruit, not all that fruit cometh to the
mouth of the lord of that tree; for much of that fruit falleth on
the ground, or rots, or is spoiled; and such as this is eaten by the
beasts: but yet, persevering until the proper season, the lord
of that tree gathereth the greater part of the fruit thereof.
Again, Friar Giles said, “ What would it profit me if I tasted
full a hundred years of the kingdom of heaven, if thereafter I
came not to a good end? ” And also he said, “ I deem that
these are the two greatest graces and gifts of God to him that
can gam them in this life, to wit, to persevere with love in the
service of God and ever guard himself from falling into sin. ,,

XVI. Of the true religious life.

Friar Giles was wont to say, speaking of himself, “ I would
rather, as a religious in the Order, have a little of the grace of


178 The Little Flowers of" St. Francis

God than I would, as a secular, living in the world, have many
graces of God; for many more are the perils and hindrances in
the world, and much less the healing and the help than in the
religious life.” Friar Giles also said, “ Methinks the sinful man
is more afraid of his good than he is of his hurt and his evil; for
he fears to enter the religious life and do penance, but fears not
to offend God and injure his own soul by remaining in the hard
and stubborn world and in the filthy mire of his own sins,
awaiting his eternal doom at last.” A secular asked Friar Giles,
saying, “ Father, what dost thou counsel me to do? Shall I
enter the religious life, or shall I remain in the world and do good
works? ” Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My brother, if any
needy man knew that a great treasure lay hidden in the common
field, of a surety he would not ask counsel of any man to know
whether it were good to dig it out and carry it to his own house;
how much the more ought a man to strive and make haste, with
all care and diligence, to search out that heavenly treasure
which is found in the holy orders of religion, and in spiritual
communities, without so much asking of counsel? ” And that
secular, when he heard this answer, anon gave away all he
possessed to the poor, and thus, stripped of everything, entered
the Order. Friar Giles was wont to say that many men entered
the religious life and yet put not those things into practice and
into operation that pertain to the perfect state of the holy
religious life; but that such as these are like unto that plough¬
man that armed himself with the arms of Roland, and knew not
how to fight or wield them. Not every man knoweth how to
ride a restive and vicious horse, and if he yet bestrode it, per¬
chance he would know not how to save himself from falling
when the horse ran or reared. Again, Friar Giles said, “ I deem
it no great thing that a man may know how to enter the court
of the Icing, nor do I esteem it a great thing that a man may
know how to win some of the king’s graces or favours; but the
great thing is, that he know how to stand well, and abide in, and
frequent the king’s court, while persevering in prudence accord¬
ing to what is meet and fitting. The state of the court of that
o-reat King of heaven, is the holy religious life, wherein is nc
Sreat labour to enter and receive some gifts and graces from
God; but the great thing is that a man shall know how-to live
well'and persevere therein discreetly, even unto death.” Ye<
acrain, Friar Giles said, “ I would rather live in the world, anc
hope and desire unceasingly and devoutly to enter the religion;
life, than be clothed in the habit of the holy religious life withou
the' practice of virtuous works, and continue in sloth anc


On Holy Obedience 179

negligence. Therefore, the religious ought ever to strive to
live well and virtuously, knowing that he cannot live in any
other state than in his professed vows.” Once Friar Giles said,
“ Methinks the Order of the friars minor was truly sent of God
for the profit and the edification of the people; but woe unto
us friars if we be not such men as we ought to be. Of a surety,
in this life no more blessed men than we could be found; for he
is holy that followeth holiness, and he is truly good that walketh
in the way of the good, and he is rich that goeth the way of the
rich; for the Order of the friars minor, more than any other
Order, followeth the footsteps and the ways of the best, the
richest, and the holiest that ever was or ever shall be, to wit,
our Lord Jesus Christ.

XVII. Chapter of holy obedience.

The more bound under the yoke of holy obedience the religious
is, for love of God, the greater fruit of himself he will yield unto
God; and the more he is subject to his superior, for God’s
honour the more free and more cleansed shall he be from his
sins. The truly obedient religious is like unto a knight well
armed and well horsed that breaks fearlessly through the ranks
of his enemies and scatters them, because none of them can do
him hurt. But he that obeys with murmurings, and as one
driven, is like unto an unarmed and ill-horsed knight, that when
he joineth battle shall be dragged to the ground by his enemies
and wounded and taken by them and sometimes cast into
prison and slain. The religious that would live according to
the determination of his own will, showeth that he would build a
perpetual habitation in the abyss of hell. When the ox putteth
his neck under the yoke, then he plougheth the earth well, so that
it bringeth forth good fruit in due season; but when the ox
goeth wandering around, the ground is left untilled and wild,
and giveth not fruit in its season. Even so the religious that
bendeth his neck under the yoke of obedience yieldeth much
fruit to the Lord God in its time; but he that is not obedient
with a good heart to his superior, is barren and wild and without
any fruit from his vows. Wise and great-hearted men bend
their necks readily, without fear and without doubt, under the
yoke of holy obedience; but foolish and faint-hearted men
strive to wrest their necks from under the yoke of holy obedience,
and then would obey no creature. I deem it a greater perfec¬
tion in the servant of God to obey his superior with a 'pure
heart, for reverence and love of God, than it would be to obey
God in person if He commanded him: for he that is obedient
to the Lord’s vicar would surely obey sooner the Lord Himself


180 The Little Flowers of St. Francis

if He commanded him, Methinks also that if any man having
the grace of speaking with angels had promised obedience to
another, and it befell that while he was standing and discours¬
ing with these angels this other man to whom he had promised
obedience called him, I say, that straightway he ought to leave
his converse with the angels and run to do that obedience, for
honour of God. He that hath put his neck under the yoke of
holy obedience, and then would draw back his neck from under
that obedience, that he might follow a life of greater perfection,
I say, that if he be not first perfect in the state of obedience, it is
a sign of great pride that lieth hidden in his soul. Obedience
is the way that leadeth to every good and every virtue, and
disobedience is the way to every evil and every vice.

XVIII. Chapter of the remembrance of death.

If a man had the remembrance of his death and of the last
eternal judgment and of the pains and the torments of damned
souls ever before the eyes of his mind, of a surety, nevermore
would the desire come upon him to sin or to offend God. But
if it were possible that any man had lived from the beginning of
the world, even to the time that now is, and during all this time
had endured every adversity, tribulation, pain, affliction, and
sorrow, and if he were to die, and his soul should go to receive
everlasting reward in heaven, what hurt would all that ill he
had endured, in past times, do him ? And so, likewise, if a man
during all the aforesaid time had had every good thing and every
joy and pleasure and consolation the world could give, and then
when he died his soul should receive the everlasting pains of
hell, what would all the good things he had received, during
that past time, profit him? An unstable man said to Friar
Giles, “ I tell thee, fain would I live much time in this world
and have great riches and abundance of all things, and I would
be greatly honoured.” Whereto Friar Giles answered, “ My
brother, but if thou wert lord of all the world, and shouldst
live therein for a thousand years in every joy and delight and
pleasure and temporal consolation, ah, tell me, what reward or
what merit wouldst thou expect to have from this thy miserable
flesh which thou hadst served and pleased so greatly! I say
unto thee, that the man who liveth well in the sight of God, and
guardeth him well from offending God, he shall surely receive,
from God the highest good and an infinite and everlasting
reward, and great bounty and great riches, and great honour and
long life eternal in that perpetual glory of heaven, whereunto
may the good God, our Lord and King Jesus Christ, bring us, to,
the praise of Jesus Christ and of His poor little one, Francis.”


THE MIRROR OF PERFECTION


THE MIRROR OF PERFECTION


SECTION I

This book was compiled as a legend from certain ancient ones which the
fellows of blessed Francis wrote and caused to be written in diverse
plates: and note that blessed Francis made three Rules, namely that
which Pope Innocent III. confirmed without a bull. Again, he made
ancther shorter, namely that which he made on account of the vision
revealed to him’ of the small host he was bidden to make from the
fragments offered him and share out to those who would eat, and this
Rule was lost, as is told after. Then he made another which Pope
Hcnorius confirmed with a bull, from which Rule many things were
renoved by the Ministers against the will of blessed Francis as is
coitained hereafter


CHAPTER I

HOW ST. FRANCIS ANSWERED HIS MINISTERS WHEN THEY WOULD
NOT BE BOUND TO OBSERVE THE RULE WHICH HE WAS
MAKING

Aftsr the second Rule which blessed Francis made had been
lost, he went up into a certain mountain with Brother Leo of
Ass:si and Brother Bonyzo of Bologna to make another Rule,
which, by the teaching of Christ, he caused to be written down.
But many Ministers being gathered together to Brother Elias
(who was the vicar of blessed Francis) said to him, “ We have
heard that this Brother Francis maketh a new Rule, but we fear
lest he make it so harsh that we may not observe it. Therefore
we will that thou go to him and say that we will not be bound to
that Rule; let him make it for himself and not for us.” To
whom Brother Elias answered that he would not go without
them, and then all went together. And when Brother Elias was
near the place where blessed Francis was, Brother Elias called
him. To whom answering, and beholding the foresaid Ministers,
the blessed Father said, “ What would these brethren? ” And
Brother Elias said, “ These are Ministers, who hearing that thou
art making a new Rule, and fearing lest thou shouldst make it
too harsh, do say and protest that they will not be bound to it;
make it for thyself and not for them.” Then blessed Francis

183


184 The Mirror of Perfection

turned his face to heaven and spoke thus to Christ, “ Lord, said
I not well to Thee that they would not believe me? ” Then all
heard the voice of Christ answering in the air, “ So do it, there
is nought of thine in the Rule, but whatever is there is Mine, and
I will that the Rule should thus be observed to the letter, with¬
out a gloss, without a gloss! ” And He added, “ What human
weakness can, do I know, and how much I wish to help them;
let those therefore who will not obey it, go out from the Order! ”
Then blessed Francis turned himself to those brethren and said
to them, Will you that I should cause it to be said to you
again? ” Then the Ministers, looking upon one another, went
back confused and terrified.


SECTION II

OF THE PERFECTION OF POVERTY


CHAPTER II

FIRSTLY HOW BLESSED FRANCIS DECLARED THE WILL AND INTEN¬
TION WHICH HE HAD FROM THE BEGINNING UNTO THE END,
CONCERNING THE OBSERVANCE OF POVERTY

Brother Richard of March, noble by birth and more noble by
holiness, whom blessed Francis did love with great affection, on
a certain day visited blessed Francis in the palace of the Bishop
of Assisi, and amongst other things of which they conversed con¬
cerning the state of the Religion and the observance of the Rule,
asked him specially of this matter, saying, “ Tell me, Father, thy
intention which thou hadst from the beginning when thou didst
begin to have brethren, and the intention which thou now hast
and dost think to have unto the day of thy death, that I may
bear witness of thy intention and will, first and last, whether, for
example, we friars who be clerks, and have many books, may
have them, provided we say that they belong to the Order.”
Blessed Francis said to him, “ I tell thee, Brother, that this was
and is my first intention and last desire, if the brethren would
have believed me, that no friar should have anything save a
robe, as our Rule allows, with a girdle and breeches.”

But if any friar should be minded to say, “ Why did not
blessed Francis in his own time make the Rule and Poverty to
be as strictly observed by the friars as he said to Richard, nor
command it should thus be observed ? ” we who were with him
answer to this as we have heard from his own mouth, since he
himself said these and many other things to the brethren, and
also made many of these things to be written in the Rule which
he had besought of the Lord wdth earnest prayer and meditation
for the benefit of the Order, affirming them to be altogether
according to the will of God; but after he showed these things
to the brethren they seemed to them burdensome and not to be
borne, not knowing then what things should come to pass in
the Order after his death. And because he greatly feared
scandal both towards himself and the brethren, he would not

185


186 The Mirror of Perfection

strive with them, but suffered, unwillingly, their will, and
excused himself before the Lord. But that the word which the
Lord had put into his mouth for the benefit of the brethren
might not return unto Him empty, he wished to fulfil it in him¬
self that from thence some reward might be obtained from the
Lord, and in the end his spirit found rest herein and was consoled.


CHAPTER III

HOW HE ANSWERED A MINISTER WHO WISHED TO HAVE BOOKS
WITH HIS LEAVE,* AND HOW THE MINISTERS WITHOUT HIS
KNOWLEDGE CAUSED THE CHAPTER OF THE PROHIBITIONS OF
THE GOSPEL TO BE REMOVED FROM THE RULE

But on a time, when blessed Francis was returned from over¬
sea, a certain Minister was speaking with him of the Chapter of
Poverty, wishing to know his will and understanding thereon,
and chiefly—for at that time a certain chapter of the Prohibitions
of the Holy Gospel was written in the Rule, namely, “ Take
nothing with ye in the way.” And the blessed Father answered,
“ I understand it thus, that friars should possess naught save
a robe with a cord and breeches, as says the Rule, and if they
are forced by necessity they may wear sandals.” And the
Minister said to him, “ What shall I do, who have so many
books that they be worth more than fifty pounds? ” (but this he
said for that he would have them with a good conscience, since
against it he had owned so many books, knowing that blessed
Francis understood the Chapter of Poverty so strictly). And
blessed Francis said to him, “ I neither will, nor ought, nor can,
go against my conscience and the perfection of the Holy Gospel
which we have professed ” Hearing these things the Minister
became sad. But the blessed one, seeing him thus troubled,
with great fervour of spirit said to him in the presence of all the
brethren, “ You would be seen of men as Friars Minor, and be
called observants of the Holy Gospel, but for your works you
wish to have store-chests! ”

Yet though the Ministers knew that according to the Rule
friars were bound to observe the Holy Gospel, nevertheless they
caused that chapter to be removed from the Rule, “ Take
nothing with you in the way,” believing that therefor they
would not be held to the observance of the perfection of the
Gospel. Knowing which by the Holy Spirit, blessed Francis


The Perfection of Poverty 187

said therefore before certain brethren, “ The brothers Ministers
think to deceive God and me; though they know that all friars
are bound to observe the perfection of the Holy Gospel. I will
that it be written in the beginning and in the end of the Rule
that friars are bound to strictly observe the Holy Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and that the brethren be for ever without
excuse, since I have announced and do announce to them those
things which the Lord for their and my salvation placed in my
mouth. I wish to show it by my works in the presence of God,
and with His aid to observe it for ever.” Whence he observed
to the letter all the Holy Gospel from the first time when
brethren began to join themselves to him unto the day of his
death.;


CHAPTER IV

OF THE NOVICE WHO WOULD FAIN HAVE A PSALTER
WITH HIS LEAVE

On another time a certain brother novice who knew how to
read the psalter, though not well, obtained from the Minister-
General leave to have one; yet, because he heard that blessed
Francis wished his brethren not to desire knowledge and books,
he was not content to have it without the leave of blessed Francis!
When therefore blessed Francis had come to the place where
that novice was, the novice said, “ Father, it would be a great
solace to me to have a psalter, but though the General has con¬
ceded it to me, yet I wish to have it, Father, with thy know¬
ledge.” To whom the blessed Francis answered, “ Charles the
Emperor, Roland and Oliver, and all the Paladins and strong
men, being mighty in war, chasing the infidels with much
travail and sweat to the death, had over them notable victory,
and at the last themselves did die in battle, holy martyrs for
the faith of Christ; but now there are many who would fain
receive honours and human praise for the mere telling of the
things which those others did. So also amongst ourselves are
many who would fain receive honours and praise by reciting
and preaching only the works which the saints did.” (As if he
would say, “ Books and science should not be esteemed, but
rather virtuous labours, since knowledge puffeth up, but charity
edifieth. ) But after a few days, when blessed Francis was
sitting at the fire, the same novice spoke to him again of the


188 The Mirror of Perfection

psalter. And blessed Francis said to him, “ After you have a
psalter, you will desire and wish to have a breviary. Then you
will sit in your chair, like a great prelate, and say to your
brother, ‘ Bring me the breviary 5 ? ” So saying, blessed
Francis with great fervour of spirit took up some ashes and put
them on his head, and drawing his hand over his head in a
compass like one who washes the head, said, “ I, a breviary, I, a
breviary! ” And he repeated it thus many times, drawing his
hand over his head. And that brother was amazed and ashamed.
Afterwards blessed Francis said to him, “Brother, I likewise
was tempted to have books, but when I might not know the
will of the Lord concerning this, I took up a book wherein the
Gospels of the Lord were written, and I prayed the Lord that
in the first opening of the book He would show me His will
concerning this thing. And when the prayer was finished in
the first opening of the book I lighted on that saying of the
Holy Gospel: Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God , hut unto others in parables” And he said,
“ There are so many who willingly rise unto knowledge, that he
shall be blessed who makes himself barren for the love of God.”
But many months having passed, when blessed Francis was
at the dwelling of St. Mary of the Portiuncula, near the cell
beyond the house in the street, the aforesaid brother spoke
again to him of the psalter. To whom blessed Francis said,
“ Go and do concerning this what thy Minister tells thee.” And
when he heard this, that brother began to return by the road
whence he had come. And blessed Francis remaining in the
street began to consider what he had said to that brother, and
immediately called after him, saying, “ Wait for me, brother,
wait! ” And he came up to him, and said to him, “ Turn back
with me, brother, and show me the place where I said unto thee
that thou shouldst do in the matter of the psalter as thy Minister
should say.” When therefore they had arrived at the place,
blessed Francis kneeled before that brother, and said, “ Mea
culpa, brother, mea culpa , for whosoever will be a Friar Minor
should have nothing except a tunic, as the Rule concedes to him,
and a cord and breeches, and those who are forced by manifest
necessity, sandals.” Whence as often as friars came to him to
have his counsel on these matters, he used to answer them on
this wise, because, as he often used to say, “ As much knowledge
hath a man as he doth work, and a Religious is as good a speaker
as his works proclaim, for the worker is known by his fruit.”


The Perfection of Poverty 189


CHAPTER v

OF KEEPING POVERTY IN BOOKS AND BEDS AND UTENSILS

The most blessed Father used to say that we should look for
proof and not price in books, edification not ornament. He
wished that few be owned and those in common, befitting the
poverty and necessity of friars. In beds and bedding so great
poverty abounded, that he who had half-worn-out rags over his
chaff reputed them mattresses.

He taught further his friars to make their huts poor and their
little cabins of wood, not of stone, and he would have them be
constructed and built of mean appearance, and not only did he
hate pride in dwellings, but also he did much abhor many or
choice utensils. He loved that they should preserve in their
tables or in their vessels nothing of worldly seeming, by which
they should recall the world, so that all things should end
in poverty, should sing out to them of their pilgrimage and
exile.


CHAPTER VI

HOW HE MADE ALL THE FRIARS DEPART FROM A CERTAIN HOUSE
WHICH WAS CALLED THE HOUSE OF THE FRIARS

When he was passing through Bologna he heard that a House
of Friars had been newly builded there. And immediately
when he had heard that house called the House of the Friars, he
turned on his steps and went out of the city, and ordered most
strictly that all the friars should depart in haste, and no longer
dwell therein. Therefore all the friars went out, so that even
the sick did not remain there, but were turned out with the
others, until Dorn Hugo, Bishop of Ostia, and Legate in Lom¬
bardy, publicly announced that the said house belonged to him.
And a sick friar who was turned out from that same house bears ,
witness to these things and wrote these words.


190


The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER VII

HOW HE WOULD FAIN DESTROY A CERTAIN HOUSE WHICH
THE FOLK OF ASSISI HAD MADE AT ST. MARY OF THE
PORTIUNCULA

When the Chapter-General was drawing near which took place
each year at St. Mary of the Portiuncula, the people of Assisi,
considering that the friars were daily multiplying, and that
every year all were used to assemble together there, although
they had but one small cell thatched with straw whose walls
were of wattle and mud, having held their council, did in a
few days with very great devotion and respect build there a
great house of stone and lime, without the consent of blessed
Francis, and in his absence. And when the blessed Father re¬
turned from a certain province and came thither for the Chapter,
he marvelled greatly at that house constructed there, and
fearing lest by occasion of that house other friars would cause
to be made likewise great houses in the places in which they
dwelt and should dwell, and because he wished that place to be
the form and example of all other places of the Order, before
the Chapter was finished he went up on the roof of that house,
and ordered the friars to come up with him, and together with
those friars he began to throw down on the ground the laths
with which the house had been covered, being fain to destroy
it even to the foundations. But certain men-at-arms of Assisi
who were there to guard the place on account of the crowds
of rabble who had come together to see the Chapter of the
Friars, seeing that blessed Francis with other friars wished to
pull the house to pieces, forthwith went to him and said,
“ Brother, this house belongs to the Commune of Assisi, and we
be here on the part of that Commune. Whence we forbid thee
to destroy our house.” Hearing this, blessed Francis said
to them, “ Therefore if it be yours, I will not touch it.” And
straightway he and the friars came down from it. (For which
cause the folk of the City of Assisi made a law that from that
time forth their Podesta, whoever he should be, should cause
that house to be repaired. And every year for a long time this
law was observed.)


The Perfection of Poverty


I 9 I


CHAPTER VIII

HOW HE BLAMED HIS VICAR BECAUSE HE WAS MAKING A
LITTLE HOUSE TO BE BUILT FOR SAYING THE OFFICE

On another time the Vicar of blessed Francis began to have
built in that place a little house where the friars might rest and
say their Hours, since for the multitude of friars who came to
that place they had no place wherein to say the Office. For
all the brethren of the Order came together there, because no
one was received into the Order save only there. And now,
when the house was complete, blessed Francis returned to that
place, and being in that cell heard the noises of those labouring
there, and calling to him his companion he asked him what those
brethren were doing. To whom his companion told all things
as they were. Then forthwith he caused the Vicar to be called,
and said to him, “ Brother, this place is the form and example
of the whole Order, and I would therefore rather that the friars
of this place should bear tribulation and inconveniences for the
love of the Lord God, and that other friars who come hither
should carry away with them a good example of poverty to their
own place, than that they should have their consolations fully,
and that others should take an example of building in their own
places, saying, ‘ In this place of Blessed Mary of the Portiuncula,
which is the chief place of the Order, there are such and so great
buildings; we also may well build in our own places.’ ”


CHAPTER IX

HOW HE WOULD NOT REMAIN IN A SPECIALLY MADE CELL
OR IN ONE WHICH WAS CALLED HIS OWN

A certain brother, right spiritual and much familiar with
blessed Francis, caused to be made in the hermitage wherein
he was staying, a certain cell a little remote, wherein blessed
Francis might stay at prayer when he should come thither.
But when the holy Father came to that place that friar led him
to the cell; to whom said blessed Francis, “ This cell is too fair.”
(But it was only made of planks, rough hewn with an axe and
a hatchet.) “ If therefore thou wouldst that I should remain
there, cause to be made for it a covering within and without.


1 9 2 The Mirror of Perfection

of withies and branches of trees.” (For the more poverty
stricken were houses and cells, so much the more gladly would
he remain there.) Which when that brother had done, blessed
P rancis remained there for some days. But on a day, when he
had gone out of that cell, a certain friar went to see it, and
afterward came to the place where blessed Francis was. And
when the blessed Father saw him he said to him, “ Whence
comest thou, brother? ” And he said, “ I come from thy cell.”
And blessed Francis said, “ For that thou hast called it mine,
another shall stay there henceforth, and not I.” But we who
were with him often heard him saying that word, The foxes
have holes , and the birds of the air have nests y but the Son of Man
hath not where to lay His head. And again he said, “ The Lord,
when He remained in the open air and fasted forty days and
forty nights, did not cause a cell to be made for Him there or a
house, but lay under the rocks of the mountains.” And there¬
fore by His example he would have neither house nor cell which
could be called his own, nor ever did he cause one to be made at
all. If sometimes it happened that he said to the brethren,
Go and make ready that cell,” he would not afterwards abide
in it, because of that saying of the Holy Gospel, Be ye not anxious ,
etc. For even at the time of his death he made it to be written
in his will that all the cells and houses of the friars should be of
wood and mud only; for the better safeguard of poverty and
humility.


CHAPTER X

CONCERNING THE MANNER OF CHOOSING PLACES IN CITIES, AND
OF BUILDING IN THEM, ACCORDING TO THE INTENTION OF
BLESSED FRANCIS

On a certain time when he was at Siena for the weakness of his
eyes, Dorn Bonaventura, who gave the land to the brethren on
which the friary was built, said to him, “ What thinkest thou of
this place?” And blessed Francis said to him, “Wilt thou
that I tell thee how the dwellings of friars should be built? ”
He answered, “ I do wish it, Father.” And the holy Father
said, “ When friars go to any city where they have no dwelling,
and come upon any one willing to give them a place to build a
house, and have a garden and all things necessary, they should
firstly consider how much land is sufficient for them, having


The Perfection of Poverty 193

regard always to the poverty and the good example which in
all things we are bound to show.” (But this he said because he
was in no wise willing that friars should possess any places by
right of ownership, in the houses or churches or gardens or other
things which they used, but should sojourn therein as travellers
and pilgrims; and therefore he wished that friars should not be
gathered together in great numbers in their dwellings, because
it seemed to him difficult to observe poverty in a great multi¬
tude. And his intention from the beginning of his conversion
even unto the end was that poverty should be altogether
observed in all things.) “ Having considered therefore the land
necessary for a dwelling, the friars should go to the Bishop of
the city and say unto him, ‘ Lord, such an one would give us so
much land for the love of God, and for his souFs health, that
we may build therein a dwelling. Wherefore we come to you,
in the first place, because you are father and lord of souls of all
the flock committed unto you, and of all our brethren who shall
sojourn in that place; we would fain therefore, with God’s
blessing and yours, build there.’ ” (But this he said because
the harvest of souls which the friars would fain reap they do
better obtain when they are in harmony with the clergy, profit¬
ing them even as the lay folk, than by causing them scandal,
even though the people should be won thereby.) And he said,
“ The Lord hath called us to the aid of His faith, and of the
clergy and prelates of the Holy Roman Church. And therefore
we are bound, as much as we may, always to love and to honour
and to reverence them.” (For he called them Friars Minor that
they should be humble like their name both in example and
labour beyond other men of this age.) “ And because from the
beginning of my conversion He placed in the mouth of the
Bishop of Assisi His words, that he should counsel me and well
strengthen me in the service of Christ; on account of this and
many other excellent things which I behold in prelates, I wish
to love and venerate not only the bishops but also the poor
priests, and to hold them for my lords.”

Then, having received a blessing from the Bishop, let them go
and make a great trench in the circuit of the land which they
have received for building the dwelling, and let them set there
a good hedge as their wall, as a sign of holy poverty and humility.
Afterwards let them make poor little houses of wattle and dab,
and some little cells in which from time to time the friars may
pray and work, for greater seemliness, and to avoid sloth. Let
them also build small churches, for they ought not to make


194 The Mirror of Perfection

great churches, neither to preach to the people, nor for any
other reason, since their humility is greater and their example
better when they go to other churches to preach. And if at any
time prelates and clergy, regular or secular, come to their dwell¬
ings; the poor little houses, the little cells, and tiny churches
will preach to them, and they will be more edified by these than
by words.” And he said, “ Many times friars build great build¬
ings, breaking our holy poverty, and cause an evil example and
a murmuring and sometimes by occasion of a better and more
holy dwelling, or of a greater congregation of the people, through
their covetousness and avarice they leave their former dwellings
or buildings and destroy them and make others great and exces¬
sive, whence those who have given their alms there, and others
likewise seeing this be scandalised and troubled therefor. For
which cause it is better for friars to make small and poor little
buildings, observing their profession and giving a good example
to their neighbours, than that they should act against their
promise, giving to others an evil example. For if the friars
should on a time leave a lowly place by occasion of one more
fitting, the scandal would be less.”


CHAPTER XI

HOW FRIARS, AND ESPECIALLY THE PRELATES AND LEARNED
AMONG THEM, WERE CONTRARY TO FRANCIS IN MAKING
HUMBLE DWELLINGS AND HABITATIONS

But when blessed Francis had ordered that the friars’ churches
should be small, and their house be builded only of wattle and
dab, in token of holy poverty and humility, wishing this pattern
to be set in the dwelling of St. Mary of the Portiuncula, that the
houses should be constructed of wood and clay, so that it should
be an everlasting memorial to all friars, present and to come,
since that it was the first and principal place of the whole Order,
certain friars were against him in this matter, saying that in
some provinces beams were dearer than stones, so that it seemed
not good to them that their houses should be made of wood and
clay. But the blessed Father would not contend with them,
the more because he was near death and was sore sickening.
Wherefore he caused it to be written in his will, “ Let friars
beware of receiving churches and dwellings and all other build¬
ings which be constructed for them save as becometh holy


The Perfection of Poverty 195

poverty ; living there ever as guests and strangers and pilgrims.”
But we who were with him when he wrote the Rule and well-
nigh all his other writings bear testimony that he made many
things to be written in the Rule and in his other writings (wherein
many of the friars were against him, notably our prelates and
learned folk) which would to-day have been very useful and
necessary to the whole Order: but for that he greatly feared
scandal, he suffered, though not willingly, the wishes of his
brethren. Yet often he was used to say these words, “ Woe to
those friars who are contrary to me in this matter, which I
firmly know to be of the Will of God for the greater usefulness
and necessity of the whole Order, though unwillingly I bend
myself to their will.” Whence often he used to say to us, his
fellows, “ Herein is my grief and my affliction; that in those
things which with much labour of prayer and meditation I
obtain of God through His mercy, for the benefit, present and
future, of the whole Order, and which I am assured by Him are
according to His will, some brethren by the authority of their
knowledge and false foresight are against me and make them
void, saying, ‘ These things are to be held and observed, and
these not/ ”


CHAPTER XII

HOW HE COUNTED IT A THEFT TO GET ALMS OR
TO USE THEM BEYOND NEED

Blessed Francis was used to say these words to his brethren,
" I have never been a thief concerning alms, in getting them or
using them beyond necessity. Always have I taken less than
I needed, lest I should defraud other poor folk of their portion,
for to do the contrary would have been theft.”


CHAPTER XIII

HOW CHRIST SAID UNTO HIM THAT HE WOULD NOT THAT FRIARS
SHOULD OWN AUGHT, NEITHER IN COMMON NOR IN SPECIAL

When the Ministers would have persuaded him that he should
allow something to the friars in common at the least, so that the
multitude should have that to which it might have recourse,
blessed Francis called upon Christ in prayer and took counsel


196 The Mirror of Perfection

with Him thereon. Who straightway answered him, saying,
“ I confer all things in general and in special; I shall always be
ready to provide for this family, however much it may ^increase,
and ever will I cherish it as long as it shall hope in Me.


CHAPTER XIV

OF HIS HORROR OF MONEY, AND HOW HE PUNISHED A FRIAR
FOR TOUCHING IT

As a true friend and imitator of Christ, Francis, despising per¬
fectly all things which are of this world, did above all things
execrate money; and by word and example urged his brethren
to flee it as it were the devil. For this maxim had been given
by him to the friars, that they should measure with one price
of love, dung and money. Now it happened on a day that a
certain layman entered the church of St. Mary of the Portiun-
cula to pray, and put some money for an offering near the cross,
which when he had departed, a certain friar taking innocently
in his hand, threw into the window. But when this was told to
blessed Francis, that friar seeing himself taken in a fault, sought
pardon, and throwing himself on the ground, offered himself to
punishment. The holy Father reproved him, and very severely
blamed him for moving the money, and bade him lift the money
from the window with his mouth, and convey it without the
hedge of the dwelling, and put it with his own mouth on the
dung of an ass. And all they that did see and hear were filled
with very great fear, and from that time forth did despise money
more than the dung of an ass, and daily were they animated
with new examples to contemn it altogether-


CHAPTER XV

OF AVOIDING SOFTNESS AND A MULTITUDE OF TUNICS, AND OF
PATIENCE IN NECESSITY

This man, being clothed with virtue from on high, was warmed
more within by a divine, than without by a bodily garment.
He execrated those in the Order who were clad in threefold
garments, and those who used softer clothing than was needful.
But he was used to say that a necessity pointed out by will only


The Perfection of Poverty 197

and not by reason was a sign of a dead spirit, “ For with luke¬
warm spirit and one cooling from grace, little by little flesh and
blood must seek their own.” And he used to say, “ For what
remaineth when the wish for spiritual delight is wanting, except
that the flesh should turn to its own.” And when animal
appetite pleadeth the article of necessity, then the sense of the
flesh fashioneth the conscience. But if true necessity is on my
brother, and straightway he maketh haste to satisfy it, what
reward shall he receive? For an occasion of merit hath arisen,
but he hath studiously proved that it displeased him. For not
to bear patiently those wants is nothing other than to seek
Egypt again.” Never on any account would he that friars
should have more than two tunics, though these he used to allow
to be lined with pieces sewn together. He was accustomed to
say that choice cloths were horrible, and he used to find fault
very bitterly with those contrary to him, and that he might
excite such by his own example, he was always used to sew
rough sack upon his own tunic. Whence even in death he
ordered his burial tunic to be covered with sackcloth. But to
those friars whom infirmity or any other necessity compelled, he
allowed another soft tunic next the skin, but yet so that out of
doors roughness and vileness should always be preserved in
their bearing. For he was accustomed to say with very great
grief , 4 4 Now shall rigour be so much relaxed and sloth shall rule,
that the sons of a beggar father shall not be ashamed to wear
even scarlet cloths, its colour only being changed,”


CHAPTER XVI

HOW HE WOULD NOT SATISFY HIS OWN BODY

But when blessed Francis was staying at the hermitage of
St. Eleutherius, over against Rieti, on account of the great cold
he lined his tunic and the tunic of his fellow Richer with some
patches (because of custom he carried but one tunic), so that
his body thence began to be some little cherished. And a little
after when he had returned from prayer, he said with great joy
to his fellow, “ It behoves me to be the form and example of all
the friars, and therefore though it be necessary to my body to
have a lined tunic, yet must I consider my other brethren to
whom the same is necessary, and who perchance have it not
and cannot have it. Whence it behoves me to consider them,


198 The Mirror of Perfection

and bear the necessities they bear, that seeing this in me, they
may be strong to suffer with great patience.” But how many
and how great necessities he denied his body that he might give
a good example to his brethren, and that they might more
patiently bear their needs, we who were with him can neither
by words or by writing set forth. For after the friars began to
be multiplied he set his chief and highest study in this, to teach
his brethren rather by works than by words what they had to
do or avoid.


CHAPTER XVII

HOW HE WAS ASHAMED TO SEE ANY ONE POORER
THAN HIMSELF

Once when he had come on a certain poor man, considering his
poverty, he said to his fellow, “ The poverty of that man brings
great shame upon us, and much rebukes ours. For very great
shame it is to me when I find any one poorer than I am: since
I have chosen holy poverty for my Lady, and for my spiritual
and bodily riches: and this saying has gone out into the whole
world, that I have professed poverty before God and man,”


CHAPTER XVIII

HOW HE INDUCED AND TAUGHT THE FIRST FRIARS
TO GO AND SEEK ALMS

When blessed Francis first began to have friars he rejoiced so
much at their conversion, and that God had given to him a
goodly fellowship, and loved and venerated them so much, that
he did not bid them go for alms, and the more because it seemed
to him that they were ashamed to go, for which reason their
father went alone for alms. But when he was greatly fatigued
by this, especially because he was well nurtured while he was
in the world, and feeble of nature, and by too great abstinence
and affliction up to that time was still more weakened, and
considering that he could not bear such labour alone, and that
they themselves were called to it, though they were ashamed to
do it, because they did not yet fully know nor were they so
discreet as to say, “ We also wish to go seek alms.” Therefore he
said to them, “ Dearest brethren and my little children, be not


The Perfection of Poverty 199

ashamed to go, for this is our heritage which our Lord Jesus
Christ acquired and left to us and to all who wish by His example
to live in holy poverty. In truth I say to you, that many of
the more noble and more holy of this world shall come to this
congregation, and shall hold it for great honour and grace to go
seek alms. Go, therefore, confident in mind and rejoicing with
the benediction of God for alms; and ye ought the more willingly
and rejoicingly to go for alms, than he who for one piece of
money should return an hundred pence, since ye offer to them
from whom you seek an alms the love of God, saying, ‘ For the
love of God do us an alms-deed, in comparison with Whom
heaven and earth are as nought.' ” But because the brethren
were so few, he could not send them two by two, but sent them
one by one through villages and towns. And so it was that
when they returned with the gifts which they had found, each
of them showed to blessed Francis his alms which he had
collected. And one used to say to another, “ I have received
more alms than thou." And at this time the blessed Father
was rejoiced, seeing them so merry and jocund. And from that
time forward each of them more willingly sought leave to go
beg alms,


CHAPTER XIX

HOW HE WOULD NOT THAT FRIARS SHOULD TAKE THOUGHT
AND BE SOLICITOUS FOR THE MORROW

At that same time, when blessed Francis was living with the
brethren whom he then had, he lived in such poverty with them,
that they observed the Holy Gospel in and through all things
to the letter, from that day in which the Lord revealed to him
that he and his brethren should live, according to the form of
the Holy Gospel. Whence he forbade the brother who used to
cook for the friars to put dried beans in warm water when they
were to be given to the friars to eat on the following day, as the
custom is, so that they might observe that saying of the Holy
Gospel, Take no thought for the morrow. And so that brother
put off setting them to soften till after Matins, because by then
the day in which they were to be eaten had begun. (On account
of which many friars observed this rule in many places for a
long time and would neither ask nor accept more alms than were
necessary to them for one day; and this especially in cities.)


200


The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER XX

IIOW BY WORD AND EXAMPLE HE REBUKED THE FRIARS WHO
HAD PREPARED A SUMPTUOUS TABLE ON CHRISTMAS DAY

When a certain Minister of the friars had come to blessed Francis
to celebrate the feast of Christmas with him in the friars’ dwell¬
ing at Rieti, the friars, because of the Minister and the feast,
laid out the table a little worshipfully and choicely on that
Christmas Day, putting on fair and white napery and glass
vessels. But the blessed Father coming down from his cell to
eat, saw the tables placed on high, and so choicely laid out.
Then forthwith he went secretly, and took the staff and wallet
of a certain poor man who had come thither that day, and calling
to him with a low voice one of his fellows, went out to the door of
the dwelling, the brethren of the house not knowing of it But
his fellow remained inside near the door. The friars in the
meantime had entered to the table. For the blessed Father
had ordered that the friars should not wait for him, when he did
not come straightway at meal-time. And when he had. stood
a little while outside, he knocked at the door, and forthwith his
fellow opened to him, and coming with his wallet behind his
back and his stick in his hand, he went to the door of the room
in which the friars were eating like a pilgrim and a pauper, and
called out, saying, “ For the love of the Lord God, give an alms
to this poor and infirm pilgrim.” But the Minister and the
other friars knew him straightway. And the Minister answered
him, “ Brother, we also be poor, and since we be many, the alms
we have be necessary to us. But for the love of that Lord Whom
thou hast named, enter the house, and we will give you of the
alms which the Lord hath given to us.” And when he had
entered and stood before the table of the friars, the Minister gave
him the platter in which he was eating, and bread likewise.
And humbly accepting it he sat down next the fire in the presence
of the friars sitting at the table. And sighing, he said to the
friars, “ When I saw the table worshipfully and sumptuously
laid out, I thought within myself it was not the table of poor
religious who daily go from door to door for alms. For it becomes
us, dearest, more than other religious to follow the example of
the humility and poverty of Christ, because we are professed and
called to this before God and men. Whence it seems that I now
sit as a Friar Minor, for the feasts of the Lord and of other saints


201


The Perfection of Poverty

are rather honoured with the want and poverty by which those
saints conquered heaven for themselves, than with the elegance
and superfluity by which they be made distant from heaven.”
But the friars were ashamed, considering he was speaking the
pure truth. And some of them began to weep greatly, seeing
how he was sitting on the earth, and that he would correct and
instruct them in so holy and pure a wise. For he admonished
the friars that they should have such humble and decent tables
that by them the worldly might be edified. And if any poor
man should come and be invited by the friars that he might sit
as an equal beside them, and not the poor man on the earth,
and the friars on high.


CHAPTER XXI

HOW MY LORD OF OSTIA WEPT AND WAS EDIFIED AT
THE POVERTY OF THE FRIARS

My Lord of Ostia, who was afterwards Pope Gregory, when he
had come to the chapter of the friars of St. Mary of the Portiun-
cula, entered the house to see the dormitory of the friars, with
many knights and clerks. And seeing that the friars used to lie
on the earth, and had nothing under them except a little straw
and some pallets as if all broken, and no pillows, he began to
weep sore before them all, saying, “ Behold, here sleep the friars,
but we wretched ones, how many superfluities do we use!
What therefore shall happen to us? ” Whence he and all others
were much edified. Also he saw no table there, for that in
that dwelling the friars were accustomed to eat on the earth.


CHAPTER XXII

HOW THE MEN-AT-ARMS WENT SEEKING ALMS FROM DOOR TO
DOOR ACCORDING TO THE COUNSEL OF BLESSED FRANCIS

When blessed Francis was in the dwelling of Bagni, over the
city of Nocera, his feet began to swell sore by reason of his
ailment of dropsy; and sore sick was he there. Which, when
they of Assisi had heard, certain men-at-arms came hastily to
that place to bring him back to Assisi, fearing lest he should
die there, and that others should have his most holy body.
H 485


202


The Mirror of Perfection


But while they were bringing him home, they rested in a certain
fortified place of the lordship of Assisi, to break their fast, and
the blessed Father rested in the house of a certain poor man,
who willingly received him. But the soldiers went through the
place to buy themselves necessaries, and found none. And they
returned to blessed Francis, saying to him as if making pastime,
“ You, Brother, must give us of your alms, since we can get
nothing to eat.” And blessed Francis said to them with great
fervour of spirit, “ You have not found, because you confided
in your fly-gods and pence, and not in God. But return now to
the houses whither you went seeking to buy, and laying aside your
shame, ask alms there for the love of the Lord God; and the
Holy Spirit inspiring them, they shall give to you abundantly.”
They went therefore and sought alms as the blessed Father said
to them, and those from whom they sought alms gave to them
joyfully and with abundance of the things which they had.
And knowing this to have happened to them as by a miracle,
the soldiers praising God returned with great joy to blessed
Francis.

Thus verily the blessed Father held it for great nobility and
dignity before God and the world, to seek alms for the love of
the Lord God; because all things which the Father of Heaven
had created for the use of man on account of His beloved Son
are granted freely to the worthy and the unworthy alike by
charity since their sin. For he was wont to say that the servant
of God ought more willingly and joyfully to seek alms for the
love of the Lord God, than he who of his own bounty and
courtesy should go, saying, “ Whoever shall give to me a coin
worth one single penny, I will give to them one thousand marks
of gold.” “ For the servant of God when seeking an alms offers
the love of God to those from whom he begs, in comparison
with which reward all things which are in heaven and in earth are
nothing.” Whence before the friars were multiplied, and even
after they were multiplied, when they went through the world
preaching and were invited by any one, however noble and rich,
to eat and guest with them, always at the hour of eating they
were accustomed to go for alms before they would go to his
house, on account of the good example of the brethren and the
dignity of the Lady Poverty. And many times he who had
invited him would say to him that he ought not to go, to whom
he answered, “ I will not put off my royal dignity and heirship,
and my profession and that of my brethren, namely, to go for
alms from door to door.” And sometimes he who had invited


The Perfection of Poverty 203

him used to go with him himself, and took to him the alms
which blessed Francis obtained, and on account of his devotion
kept them for relics. He who has written this saw this many
times, and bears testimony concerning these things.


CHAPTER XXIII

HOW HE WENT BEGGING BEFORE HE WOULD GO IN TO
THE TABLE OF THE CARDINAL

On a certain time when the blessed Father had visited my Lord
of Ostia (who was afterwards Pope Gregory), at the hour of
meals he went as if by stealth for alms from door to door. And
when he had returned, my Lord of Ostia had already gone in
to table with many knights and nobles. But blessed Francis
approaching placed those alms which he had received on the
table beside him, for he would that the blessed Father should
always sit near him. And the Cardinal was a little ashamed
because he went for alms and put them on the table, but he
said nothing to him then on account of his guests. And when
blessed Francis had eaten a little, he took of his alms and sent a
little to each of the knights and chaplains of my Lord Cardinal
on behalf of the Lord God. Who all received them with great
joy and devotion, stretching out to him cowls and sleeves*
And some did eat while others put it aside, out of their great
devotion to him. But my Lord of Ostia rejoiced greatly at
their devotion, chiefly because those alms were not of wheaten
bread. After the meal he entered his chamber, taking with him
blessed Francis, and lifting up his arms he embraced him with
great joy and exultation, saying to him, “ Why, my most simple
brother, hast thou done me this shame to-day, that coming to
my house, which is the home of thy brethren, thou shouldst
go begging alms? ” The blessed Father answered him, “ Nay,
my Lord, I have done you great honour, for when a servant
does his duty and fulfils his obedience to his lord, he does honour
to his lord.” And he said, “ It behoves me to be a form and
example to my poor ones, especially because I know that in this
order of friars there will be Friars Minor in name and in deed,
who for the love of the Lord God and the unction of the Holy
Spirit Who shall teach them concerning all things, shall be
humiliated to all humility and subjection and service of their
brethren. But there are, and will be, some amongst them who.


204 The Mirror of Perfection

held back by shame or evil usage, disdain and will disdain to
humiliate themselves and to stoop to go begging alms and to
do other servile work; wherefore it behoves me by my deeds
to teach those who are and will be in the Order, that they shall
be without excuse in this life and the next before God. Being
therefore with you, who are our lord and our apostle, and with
other magnates and rich men of the world, who for the love of
the Lord God not only receive me with much devotion into your
houses, but also compel me to sit at your table, I will not be
ashamed to beg alms, nay, I would fain have and hold this a
very great nobility and royal dignity before God, and in honour
of Him Who, when He was Lord of all, wished for our sakes to
become servant of all, and when He was rich and glorious in His
majesty became poor and despised in our humility. Whence
let those who are and shall be friars know that I hold it for
greater consolation of soul and body to sit at the sorry table
of the friars, and see before me the wretched alms which they
beg from door to door for the love of the Lord God, than to sit
at your table, or that of other lords, abundantly prepared with
diverse dainties. For the bread of charity is holy bread, which
the praise and love of the Lord God sanctifies, since when a
brother ask an alms he should first say, ‘ Praised and blessed be
the Lord God/ afterwards he should say, * Do to us an alms for
the love of the Lord God.’ ” And the Cardinal was much
edified at this conversation of the blessed Father, and said to him,
“ My son, do that which is good in thine eyes, since God is with
thee, and thou with Him.” For this was the oft-repeated desire
of blessed Francis, that a friar ought not to remain long without
going out for alms, both on account of the great merit of the
act and lest he should afterwards be ashamed to go. Nay, the
more noble and great in this world was the friar, so much the
more was he rejoiced and edified with him, when he went to
seek alms and did other servile work, as at that time the friars
were wont to do.


The Perfection of Poverty


205


CHAPTER XXIV

OF THE FRIAR WHO NEITHER USED TO PRAY NOR
WORK, BUT WHO ATE WELL

In the first days of the Order, when the friars dwelt at Rivo
Torto near Assisi, there was amongst them a certain friar who
prayed little and did not work, who would not ask for alms
and used to eat well. Considering these things, blessed Francis
knew by the Holy Spirit that he was a carnal man, and said to
him, “ Go thy way, friar fly, since thou wilt eat of the labour of
thy brethren and be idle in the work of God, like a lazy and
sterile drone which profiteth nothing and laboureth not, but
eateth the labour and profit of the good bees. ,, And so he
went his way. And because he was carnal, he sought not for
mercy nor found it.


CHAPTER XXV

HOW HE WENT OUT WITH FERVOUR TO MEET A POOR MAN WHO
WENT AWAY WITH HIS ALMS THANKING GOD

On another time also, when the blessed Father was at St. Mary
of the Portiuncula, a certain very spiritual poor man was coming
through the street returning from Assisi with alms, and went
along praising God in a loud voice with much joyfulness. But
when he drew near the church of blessed Mary, blessed Francis
heard him, and straightway with great fervour and joy went out
to him, running up to him in the way, and with great joyfulness
kissing the shoulder whereon he carried the scrip with alms.
And he took the wallet from his shoulder and put it on his own
shoulder, and thus brought it into the house of the friars, and
in their presence said, “ Thus I would that a brother of mine
should go and return with alms, glad and joyful and praising
God.”


CHAPTER XXVI

HOW IT WAS REVEALED BY THE LORD THAT THEY SHOULD BE
CALLED FRIARS MINOR TO ANNOUNCE PEACE AND SALVATION

On a certain day blessed Francis said, “ The order and life
of the Friars Minor is a certain little flock which the Son of
God in these last times asked of His Heavenly Father, saying,


2o6


The Mirror of Perfection


‘ Father, I would that Thou shouldst make and give to Me
a new and humble folk in these last times, unlike to all others
who have gone before them, in humility and poverty, and
content to possess Me alone.’ And the Father said, having
heard the Son, 4 My Son, that which Thou hast asked is done.’ ”
Whence the blessed Father used to say that for this reason
God willed and revealed to him that they should be called
Friars Minor, because this is that poor and humble folk which
the Son of God demanded of His Father. Of which folk
the Son Himself speaks in the Gospel, Fear not , little flock,
for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom.
And again, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these My brethren, ye have done it unto Me. And the Lord
understood this of all spiritual poor men, yet He spake it more
especially of the Order of Friars Minor, which was to be in His
Church. Whence, as it was revealed to blessed Francis that it
should be called the Order of Friars Minor, so he made it to be
written in his testament and the first Rule which he took to
the Lord Pope, Innocent III., who approved and conceded it,
and afterwards announced it to all in Consistory. Likewise
the Lord revealed to him the salutation which the friars should
use, as he caused to be written in his testament, saying, 44 The
Lord revealed to me that I should say for a greeting: The Lord
give thee peace." Whence, in the first days of the Order, when
he would go with a certain friar who was one of the first twelve,
he saluted the men and women on the road, and those who
were in the fields, saying, 44 The Lord give you peace.” And
for that men had not heard up to then such a salutation from
any religious they wondered greatly. Nay, some used to say
to them with great indignation, 44 What does this salutation of
yours mean? ” So that that brother began to be ashamed of
it, whence he said to blessed Francis, 44 Let me use another
greeting.” And the holy Father said to him, 44 Let them talk,
since they perceive not those things which are of God. But be
not ashamed, because from henceforth the nobles and princes
of this world shall show reverence to thee and other friars for
this salutation. For it is no great thing if the Lord should wish
to have a new and little flock, singular and unlike all those who
have come before them in life and work, a folk which should be
content to have Him alone most sweet.”


SECTION III


OF CHARITY AND COMPASSION AND YIELDING TO
ONE'S NEIGHBOUR


CHAPTER XXVII

AND FIRSTLY, HOW HE CONDESCENDED TO A BROTHER WHO WAS
DYING OF HUNGER, BY EATING WITH HIM, ADMONISHING THE
BRETHREN THAT THEY SHOULD DO PENANCE DISCREETLY

On a certain time when blessed Francis began to have friars,
dwelling with them at Rivo Torto near Assisi, it fell on a night,
all the friars being at rest, about the middle of the night, one of
them called out, saying, “ I am dying! I am dying! ” whereon
all the friars woke up amazed and affrighted. And the holy
Father, rising, said, “ Rise, brothers, and kindle the light! ”
And when it was lit he said, “ Who is he that said, ‘ I am
dying 9 ? ” The brother answered, “ It is I.” And he said to
him, “ What is the matter, brother? How dost thou die?”
And he said, “ I die of hunger.” Then the blessed Father
caused the table to be laid straightway, and like a man full of
charity and discretion, ate with him lest he should be put to
shame by eating alone, and by his will, all the other friars ate
likewise. For that brother and all the other friars who had
newly turned to the Lord, used to inflict their bodies even
beyond measure. And after the meal the holy Father said to
the other friars, “ Dearest, I bid you, each of you, consider
his nature, because though one of you may be able to sustain
himself on less food, yet I will that another who requires more
food shall not be bound to imitate the first in this thing, but
shall, considering his own nature, give his body what it requires,
so that it may be able to serve the spirit. For as we are bound
to beware of superfluity of eating, which harms body and soul,
so also must we beware of too great abstinence, nay, even more,
since the Lord will have mercy and not sacrifice.” And he said,
“ Dearest brothers, this which I have done, to wit, that on
account of charity towards my brother, we have eaten together
with him, lest he should be ashamed to eat alone, necessity and
charity rather forced me to do. But I say to you that I would

207


2o8


The Mirror of Perfection


not so do again, seeing it would be neither religious nor becoming.
But I will and command you that each of our brethren according
to our poverty satisfy his body as it shall be necessary for him. ,,
For the first friars, and the others who came after them for a
long time, afflicted their bodies beyond measure with abstinence
from food and drink, with vigils, with cold, with roughness of
raiment, and the labour of their hands; they wore next their flesh
very strong iron belts and coats, and hair shirts; on which
account, seeing by occasion of this the friars might become
weak, and that some were already in that short time ill, he
forbade in a certain chapter any friar to wear anything next the
skin except a tunic.

But we who were with him bear testimony of him, that though
in the whole time of his life he was thus discreet and temperate
concerning his brethren, yet it was so that they should at no time
deviate from the way of poverty and the decorum of our Order.
Nevertheless the most holy Father himself, from the beginning
of his conversion unto the end of his life, was austere to his own
body, although he was by nature feeble, and could not have
lived in the world, except delicately. Whence, considering on
a certain day, that the friars were exceeding the measure of
poverty and of decency in their food and in other things, in a
certain sermon which he made to sundry brethren, in the presence
of all the friars he said, “ Let not the brethren think that some
allowance is necessary to my body, for because it behoves me
to be the form and example of all friars, I wish to use and be
content with few and very wretched meats, and to use all other
things according to poverty, and utterly to turn in disgust
from things rare and delicate.”


CHAPTER XXVIII

HOW HE CONDESCENDED TO A SICK FRIAR BY
EATING GRAPES WITH HIM

On another time when the blessed Father was at the same place,
a certain friar, spiritual and old in the Order, was there infirm
and very feeble. And when he saw him blessed Francis was
moved with pity for him. But because then the friars, both
well and ill, with great joy were using poverty for their abund¬
ance, and not using in their sickness medicines nor even asking


Charity and Compassion 209

for them, but on the other hand taking by choice those things
which were contrary to the body, blessed Francis said within
himself, “ If that brother would eat some ripe grapes early in
the morning I believe it would do him good.” And as he
thought so he did in its turn.

For he rose on a certain day, very early, and called to him
that friar privately, and led him into a certain vineyard which
was near the dwelling. And he chose a vine whereon the grapes
were good to eat, and sitting near the vine with that friar,
began to eat of the grapes, lest the brother himself should be
ashamed to eat alone. And while they were eating, the friar
was cured, and together they praised the Lord. Whence that
friar for the whole time of his life, remembered this the mercy
and piety which the most holy Father showed and did unto
him, and often with great devotion and shedding of tears was
wont to relate this among the brethren.


CHAPTER XXIX

HOW HE STRIPPED HIMSELF AND HIS FELLOW THAT HE
MIGHT CLOTHE THE POOR

At Celano in the winter time, when blessed Francis had a cloth
folded like a mantle which a certain friend of the friars had
lent to him, there came to him an old woman seeking alms.
Who forthwith loosed the cloak from his neck, and though it
belonged to another, gave it to the poor old woman, saying,
“ Go and make a tunic for yourself, because you want it
enough.” The old woman laughed, and astonished, I know not
whether from fear or joy, took the cloth from his hands, and lest
delay should bring about a danger of his taking it back, ran
very swiftly, and fell upon the cloth with her scissors. But
when she found the cloth was not enough for a tunic, she came
back to the first kindness of the holy Father, pointing out to
him that the cloth was not large enough for a tunic. The saint
turned his eyes to his fellow who wore such another cloth on
his back, and said to him, “ Hearest thou what this poor woman
says. For the love of God let us bear the cold, and give that
cloth to the poor woman that her tunic may be finished.”
And forthwith as he had given it so also did his fellow. Thus
both of them remained bare that the poor woman might be
clothed.


210


The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER XXX

HOW HE COUNTED IT THEFT NOT TO GIVE TO ONE
WHOSE NEEDS WERE GREATER

Once when he was returning from Siena, he came across a poor
man on the way, and said to his fellow, “We ought to return
this mantle to its owner. For we received it only as a loan,
until we should come upon one poorer than ourselves.” But
his fellow, considering the necessity of the holy Father, main¬
tained that he ought not to neglect himself to provide for
another. To whom the saint answered, “ I will not be a thief.
For it would be counted to us for a theft if we should not give
to him who is more needy.” And so the pious Father handed
over the mantle to the poor man.


CHAPTER XXXI

HOW HE GAVE A MANTLE TO A POOR MAN ON AN
AGREEMENT

At the Cell of Cortona, the blessed Father was wearing a new
mantle which the friars had been at some trouble to obtain for
him. A poor man came to the dwelling, weeping for his dead
wife and his wretched orphaned family. To whom the com¬
passionate saint said, “ I give thee this mantle on condition
that you will not give it up to any one except he buy it from
you and pay you well.” The friars, hearing this, ran together
to the poor man to take away that mantle from him. But the
poor man, gathering boldness from the face of the holy Father,
with clasped hands was carrying it away as his own. At last
the friars redeemed the mantle, procuring that the due price
should be given to the poor man.


CHAPTER XXXII

HOW A CERTAIN POOR MAN, BY VIRTUE OF THE ALMS OF BLESSED
FRANCIS, FORGAVE HIS INJURIES AND HATE TO HIS LORD

At the hill of the lordship of Perugia, blessed Francis met a
certain poor man whom he had known before in the world, arid
said to him, “ Brother, how is it with thee? ” But he with
angry mind began to utter curses on his lord, saying, “ By the


212


The Mirror of Perfection


praising the Lord. And fearing lest it should be taken away
from her, she rose secretly by night and returned to her home
with gladness. But blessed Francis had arranged with the
Warden to give her her charges every day while she abode there.
Whence we who were with him bear testimony of him that he
was of so much charity and pity to the sick and the whole, not
only toward his brethren but also toward other poor folk, well
or ill, that he used to give to the poor those necessaries of his
body which the brethren used sometimes to acquire with great
solicitude and labour, first soothing us lest we should be troubled
by it, with great joy inward and outward, taking away those
things from himself even which were very necessary to him.
And on account of this thing the General Minister and his
Warden had ordered him not to give his tunic to any friars
without their leave. For the friars of their devotion used
sometimes to beg a tunic of him, who immediately gave it to
them, and sometimes he divided it and gave them a part, and
kept a part for himself, because he only carried one tunic.


CHAPTER XXXIV

HOW HE GAVE HIS TUNIC TO FRIARS WHO BEGGED IT
FOR THE LOVE OF GOD

Whence on a time, when he was going through a certain
province preaching, two French-born friars met him. Who when
they had had great consolation from him, finally begged his tunic
of him for the love of God. But he, when he heard “ for the
love of God ” forthwith took off his tunic and gave it to them,
remaining bare for some hours. For when the love of God was
named to him, he never denied to any one his cord, or his tunic,
or anything whatever that was asked for; nay, he greatly mis-
liked it and often reproved the friars when he heard them for
anything whatever name uselessly “ for the love of God.” For
he was wont to say, “ So very high and very precious is the love
of God, that it should never be named save seldom and in
great necessity, and with much reverence.”

But one of those friars took off his own tunic, and gave it to
him. When he gave a tunic or part of it to any one he suffered
thence great necessity and tribulation, since he could not very
quickly have another, especially because he always wished to


21 I


Charity and Compassion

grace of my lord, whom may the Lord curse, I can be nothing
but ill, since he has taken away from me all my goods.” But
blessed Francis, seeing that he persisted in mortal hatred,
having pity on his soul, said to him, “ Brother, forgive thy lord
for the love of God, and free your own soul; it may be that he
will restore what he Iras taken away; otherwise thou hast lost
thy goods and wilt lose thy soul.” And he said, “ I cannot
forgive him at all, unless he first return what he has taken away
from me.” Then the holy Father answered, “ Behold, I give
thee this mantle; I beg thee to forgive thy lord for the love of
the Lord God.” And immediately his heart was sweetened,
and moved by this good deed he forgave his lord his injuries.


CHAPTER XXXIII

HOW HE SENT A MANTLE TO A POOR WOMAN WHO
SUFFERED FROM HER EYES LIKE HIMSELF

A certain poor woman of Machilone came to Rieti for a disease
of the eyes; and when the doctor came to blessed Francis, he
said to him, “ Brother, a certain woman diseased in the eyes
has come to me, who is so poor that I have had to pay her
charges for her.” And when he had heard this, he was forth¬
with moved with pity for her, and calling one of the friars who
was his Warden, he said to him, “ Brother Warden, we must
return what we borrowed.” Who answered, “ What is that
loan, brother? ” But he said, “ This mantle which we have
received as a loan from that poor sick woman, we should return
to her.” And his Warden said to him, “ Brother, what seemeth
best to thee to be done, so do.” Then the holy Father called
with glee a certain spiritual man familiar with him, and said
to him, “ Take this mantle, and twelve loaves with it, and go
to the poor woman sick of her eyes whom the doctor shall show
thee, and say to her, 4 The poor man to whom you entrusted
this mantle gives thanks to thee for the loan of the mantle, take
that which is thine own.’ ” He went therefore and said to the
woman all the things that blessed Francis had said to him. But
she, thinking he was making game of her, said to him with fear
and modesty, “ Leave me in peace, for I know not what thou
sayest.” But he put the mantle and the twelve loaves in her
hands. She then, considering that he must have spoken this
in truth, accepted it with fear and reverence, rejoicing and


Charity and Compassion 213

wear a sorry tunic patched with pieces of cloth sometimes both
within and without; nay, he would never or rarely wear a tunic
of new cloth, but he used to get from another friar his tunic
which he had already worn for some time, and sometimes he
would take from one brother a part of his tunic and from another
a part. But on account of his many infirmities and chills of
the stomach and the spleen, he used sometimes to patch it on
the inside with new cloth. And this manner of poverty in his
clothes he held and observed until the year in which he passed
to the Lord; for a few days before his death, because he was
dropsical, and as if all dried up, and on account of the many
other infirmities which he had, the friars made for him several
tunics, for that of necessity his tunic should be changed every
day and night.


CHAPTER XXXV

HOW HE WISHED TO GIVE A PIECE OF CLOTH SECRETLY
TO A POOR MAN

Another time a certain poor man came to the place where
blessed Francis was, and begged a piece of cloth for the love of
God. Hearing which, blessed Francis said to a certain friar,
“ Seek through the house if thou canst find some cloth or any
piece, and give it to that poor man.” And that friar, running
through the whole of the house, said that he could not find any.
Then that the poor brother should not go away empty, blessed
Francis went by stealth lest his Warden should forbid him,
and took a knife, and sitting in his hiding-place, began to cut
off that part of his tunic which was sewed on in the inside,
wishing to give that piece to the poor man by stealth. But the
Warden learning this, went forthwith to him, and forbade him
to give it, especially because there was then a great frost, and
he was very ill and cold. Then blessed Francis said to him,
“ If thou wilt not that I should give that piece to him, thou
must arrange that some piece be given to that poor brother.”
And so the friars gave to that poor man some cloth from their
own clothing, for the sake of blessed Francis. When he went
through the world to preach, either on his feet or on an ass
(after he began to grow sick), or on a horse in the greatest and
strictest necessity (because otherwise he would not ride, and
this only a little before his death), if any brother used to lend


214 The Mirror of Perfection

him a mantle, he would not receive it unless he might give it
to any poor man meeting him or coming to him, so only that
the testimony of his spirit showed him that it was necessary
to him.


CHAPTER XXXVI

HOW HE BADE BROTHER GILES CLOTHE A POOR MAN

In the first days of the Order, when he was staying at Rivo
Torto, with the two companions whom he then had, alone,
behola, a certain man, by name Giles, who was the third friar,
came from the world to him, to receive his life. And after he
abode there for some days clothed with the garments he had
brought from the world, it happened that a certain poor man
came to the place, seeking an alms from blessed Francis.
Turning to Giles, blessed Francis said to him, “ Give thy mantle
to thy poor brother.” Who forthwith with great joy took it
from his back and gave it to the poor man. And then it was
seen that God had put a new grace into his heart, for that he
had given with joy his mantle to the poor. And so he was
received by blessed Francis, and ever went forward virtuously
to the greatest perfection.


CHAPTER XXXVII

OF THE PENANCE HE GAVE TO A FRIAR WHO
MISJUDGED A POOR MAN

When blessed Francis had gone to preach at a certain dwelling
of the friars near Rocca Brizzi, it happened that on that day
on which he should preach a certain poor and infirm man came
unto him. On whom having much compassion, he began to
speak to his fellow of his poverty and sickness, and his fellow
said to him, “ Brother, it is true that he seems poor enough; but
it may be that in the whole province there is no one who wishes
more to be rich than he.” And being immediately severely
reproved by blessed Francis, he confessed his fault. And blessed
Francis said, “ Wilt thou for this do the penance which I shall
bid thee? ” Who answered, “ I will do it willingly.” And he
said to him, “ Go and put off your tunic, and throw yourself


Charity and Compassion 215

naked at the poor man's feet, and tell him how thou hast sinned
against him in speaking evil in that matter, and ask him to
pray for you." He went therefore and did all the things which
blessed Francis had told him. Which done, he arose and put
on his tunic and returned to blessed Francis. And blessed
Francis said to him, “ Wouldst thou know how thou hast sinned
against him, nay, against Christ ? When thou seest a poor man,
thou oughtest to consider Him in Whose Name he cometh,
namely, Christ. Who took our poverty and infirmity on Him:
for the infirmity and poverty of this man, is as it were a mirror
to us, wherein we may see and consider with pity, the sickness
and poverty of our Lord Jesus Christ,"


CHAPTER XXXVIII

HOW HE CAUSED A NEW TESTAMENT TO BE GIVEN
TO THE MOTHER OF TWO FRIARS

Another time, when he was abiding at St. Mary of the
Portiuncula, a certain woman, poor and old, who had two sons
in the order, came to the dwelling seeking an alms from the holy
Father. Immediately blessed Francis said to Friar Peter of
Catana, who was then the Minister General, “ Have we aught
which we can give to this our mother? " (For he was wont to
say that the mother of any friar was the mother of him and of all
friars.) Friar Peter answered him, “ We have nothing in the
house which we can give her, for she would have an alms to
sustain her body. But we have in the church one only New
Testament wherein we read the lessons at Matins." (For in
that time the friars had no breviaries nor many psalters.)
Blessed Francis said to him therefore, “ Give the Testament to
our mother, that she may sell it for her necessity. For I believe
firmly that it will please the Lord and the Blessed Virgin more,
than if we were to read in it." And so he gave it her. For
that can be said and written of him, which is read of blessed
Job: For from my youth {charity) was brought up with me . . <
and from my mother's womb. Whence unto us who were with
him not only what we have learned from others of his charity
and pity toward friars and other poor men, but also those things
which our eyes have seen would be very difficult to write or tell.


SECTION IV

OF THE PERFECTION OF HOLY HUMILITY AND
OBEDIENCE IN HIMSELF AND HIS BRETHREN


CHAPTER XXXIX

AND FIRSTLY HOW HE RESIGNED THE OFFICE OF HIS PRELACY
AND APPOINTED PETER OF CATANA GENERAL MINISTER

To observe the virtue of holy humility, a few years after his
conversion he resigned the office of his prelacy in a certain
Chapter before the friars, saying: “ From henceforth am I dead
to you, but behold Brother Peter of Catana, whom both I and
vve all will obey.” And throwing himself on the earth before
him, he promised him obedience and reverence. Thereupon all
the friars wept, and their exceeding great grief forced from
them deep sighs, when they saw themselves in a manner become
orphans of such a father. But the holy Father rising, with his
eyes raised to heaven and his hands joined, said, “ Lord, I
commend to Thee Thy family which hitherto Thou hast com¬
mitted to me; and now on account of the infirmities which
Thou knowest, O most sweet Lord, being unable to have the care
of it, I commend it to its Ministers, who shall be held in the day
of judgment to show cause before Thee, 0 Lord, if any brother
should perish through their negligence, or evil example, or bitter
correction.”

He remained therefore from that time a subject unto the day
of his death, bearing himself more humbly in all things than any
of the others.


CHAPTER XL

HOW IIE GAVE UP HIS FELLOWS, BEING UNWILLING
TO HAVE A SPECIAL FELLOW

At another time he gave up all his fellows to his Vicar, saying,
“ I will not seem singular in this prerogative of liberty to have
a special fellow, but let friars join me from place to place as the
Lord shall have inspired them.” And he added, “ I saw just

2l6


Holy Humility and Obedience 217

now a blind man who had but a puppy as a guide on his way,
and I will not seem better than he.” But this was always his
glory, that having left behind him all appearance of singularity
or boasting, there should dwell in him the virtue of Christ,


CHAPTER XLI

THAT HE RESIGNED OFFICE BY REASON OF EVIL PRELATES

Once having been asked by a certain friar, why he had thus
cast off his brethren from has care, and handed them over into
strange hands, as if they did not belong to him in the smallest
degree, he answered, “ My son, I love the brethren as I am able,
but if they would follow in my footsteps, I would love them still
more, nor would I make myself strange to them. For there are
certain of the prelates, who draw them to other things, proposing
to them the example of the ancients, and little considering my
warnings. But what and how they do shall appear more clearly
in the end.” And a little after, when his exceeding great
infirmity weighed upon him, in the vehemence of his spirit he
rose in his bed, and crying out, said, “ Who are they who snatch
my Order and my brethren from my hands? If I come to the
General Chapter, I will show them what will they have,”


CHAPTER XLII

THAT HE HUMBLY ACQUIRED MEAT FOR THE INFIRM,

AND WARNED THEM TO BE PATIENT

The blessed Father was not ashamed to obtain flesh meat for
a sick friar in the public places of the cities, yet he warned them
that lay sick to bear want patiently, and not to rise in scandal
when they were not fully satisfied. Whence in the first Rule
he caused it to be written thus, “ I beseech my brethren that in
their infirmities they grow not angry, nor be disturbed against
God or their brethren, nor demand medicines too eagerly, nor
desire too greatly to set free the flesh that so soon shall die,
which is the enemy of the spirit. But let them give thanks for
all things, and desire to be such as God would have them to be.
For those, whom the Lord hath preordained to life eternal, He
teaches with the stings of scourges and infirmities, as He Himself
says. As many as 1 love, 1 rebuke and chasten .”


2 I 8


The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER XLIII

OF THE HUMBLE ANSWER OF BLESSED FRANCIS AND DOMINIC
WHEN THEY WERE ASKED AT THE SAME TIME BY THE
CARDINALS, WHETHER THEY WOULD THAT THEIR BRETHREN
SHOULD BE PRELATES OF THE CHURCH

In the city of Rome when those two renowned lights, blessed
Francis and blessed Dominic, were together before my Lord of
Ostia, who was afterwards Pope, and each in turn had poured
forth sweet things concerning God, then my Lord of Ostia said
to them, “ In the primitive church the pastors and prelates were
poor, and men fervent in charity, not greed. Why therefore
should we not make bishops and prelates of your friars, who
should prevail over all others for a document and example? ”
Then was there between the saints a humble and devout con¬
tention concerning their answer, not indeed a pushing forward,
but each in turn turning to the other, and forcing him to answer..
But at the last the humility of Francis conquered, so that he did
not answer first, and Dominic conquered, who by answering first
did humbly obey. Blessed Dominic therefore answering said,
“ My Lord, my brethren have been exalted to a good condition
if they will but know it, and, as far as lies in my power, I shall
never permit them to attain any form of dignity.” Then blessed
Francis, inclining himself before the aforesaid Lord, said, “ My
Lord, my brethren be called Minors for this reason, that they
should not presume to become greater. For their vocation
teaches them to remain lowly, and to imitate the footsteps of
the humility of Christ, that hereby at last they may be exalted
more than others in the sight of the saints. For if you would
that they bring forth fruit in the Church of God, hold and keep
them in the state of their calling, and if they strive for high
things, cast them down violently to the ground, and never
permit them to rise to any prelacy.” These were the answers of
the saints. And when they were ended, my Lord of Ostia, much
edified by the responses of them both, gave exceeding great
thanks to God. Both going away together, blessed Dominic
asked blessed Francis to deign to give him the cord by which
he was girded. And blessed Francis denied it him from humility,
as he had demanded it from charity. Yet the happy devotion
of him who asked did conquer, and blessed Dominic having
received the cord of blessed Francis by the violence of his charity.


Holy Humility and Obedience 219

girded it under his tunic, and from that time forth devoutly wore
it. Then either of them placed his hands between the hands of
the other, and commended each to the other with the sweetest
mutual commendations. And so holy Dominic said to holy
Francis, “ I would, brother Francis, that thine and mine should
make one Order, and that we should live in like manner in the
church.” Then when they were separated from one another,
Dominic said to several who were standing by, “ In truth I say
unto you, that all religious ought to imitate this holy man Francis,
so great is the perfection of his holiness.”


CHAPTER XLIV

THAT AS A FOUNDATION OF HUMILITY, HE WILLED
HIS FRIARS TO SERVE THE LEPERS

Blessed Francis, from the beginning of his conversion, the
Lord aiding him, founded himself like a wise builder upon the
rock, that is, on the exceeding great humility and poverty of
the Son of God, calling his Order that of the Friars Minor by
cause of his great humility. Whence in the beginning of the
Order he wished that the friars should abide in leper houses to
serve them, and there lay a foundation of holy humility. For
when gentle and simple came to the Order, amongst the other
things which were announced to them, he was wont to say that
it behoved them to serve lepers, and abide in their houses;
as it was contained in the first Rule, “ Willing to have naught
under heaven except holy poverty, whereby they may be fed
by the Lord in this world with bodily and spiritual food, and
in the life to come attain their heavenly heritage.” And thus
he chose for himself and others a foundation on the greatest
humility and poverty, inasmuch as when he might have been a
great prelate in the Church of God, he chose and wished to be
lowly, not only in the Church, but also among his brethren.
For this lowliness, in his opinion and desire, was very great
exaltation in the sight of God and man.


220


The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER XLV

THAT HE WISHED THE GLORY AND HONOUR OF ALL HIS GOOD
WORKS AND DEEDS TO BE GIVEN TO GOD ALONE

When he had been preaching to the people in Rieti in the
market place of the city, after the preaching was finished, the
bishop of that city straightway rose up, a man both discreet
and spiritual, and said to the people, “ The Lord, from the first
day in which He planted and built up His church, has always
adorned it with holy men, to nourish it by word and example.
But now, in this latest hour, He has adorned it with this poor
and despised and unlettered man, Francis, and therefore are we
bound to love and honour the Lord, and beware of sin. For
he hath not done after this manner to any nation.” Having
finished these words, the bishop came down from the place
where he had preached, and entered the Cathedral. And blessed
Francis coming to him, throwing himself at his feet, bowed
down before him, and said, “ In truth I say unto you, my Lord
Bishop, that no man has done so much honour to me in this
life, as you have done to me to-day, for those men say, ‘ This
is a holy man/ attributing to me glory and sanctity, and not to
the Creator. But you, as one discreet, have separated the
precious from the vile.”

For when the holy Father used to be praised and called holy,
he was wont to answer to such speeches, saying, “I am not
yet so secure, that I ought not to have sons and daughters. For
at whatever hour the Lord should take away from me the
treasure which He has commended to me, what else would
remain to me but body and soul, which even infidels have?
Nay, I ought to believe that if the Lord should have granted
so many and so great gifts to a thief or an infidel as to me they
would have been more faithful to their Lord than I. For, as
in the picture of the Lord and the Blessed Virgin painted on
wood, the Lord and the Blessed Virgin are honoured, and yet
the wood and the picture take nothing of it to themselves, so
the servant of God is in a manner a picture of God, wherein God
is honoured on account of His goodness. But he ought to take
nothing of this to himself, since in respect of God, he is less than
the wood and the picture, nay, he is pure nothing. And there¬
fore unto God alone must the glory and honour be rendered,
but unto him only shame and tribulation while he lives among
the miseries of this life.”


Holy Humility and Obedience 221


CHAPTER XL VI

HOW UP TO HIS DEATH HE WOULD FAIN HAVE A
WARDEN AND LIVE IN SUBJECTION

But wishing to remain in perfect humility and subjection unto
death; some time before his death he said to the Minister-
General, “ I would that thou shouldst commit thy rule over me
to one of my fellows, to whom I may do obedience in thy place,
for on account of the merit of obedience I desire that in life
and in death it should ever remain with me.” And from that
time forward he had one of his fellows as a Warden, whom he
obeyed in the stead of the Minister-General, nay, on a time
he said to his fellows, “ The Lord has granted me this grace
amongst others, to obey as diligently the novice who enters the
Order to-day, if he were assigned to me for Warden, as he who
is foremost and ancient in life and in the Order. For a subject
ought to look upon his superior, not as a man, but as that God
for Whose love he is subject to him.” Afterwards he said,
“ There is no prelate in the whole world who is so much feared
as the Lord would make me to be feared, if so I wished it, by
my brethren. But the Lord has granted me this grace, that
I wish, to be content with all, as he that is least in the Order.”

This also we have seen with our eyes who were with him, as
also he himself testified, that when certain of the friars did not
satisfy him in his necessities, or said to him some word by which
a man is wont to be disturbed, straightway he went to prayer,
and on his return he would remember nothing, nor ever said,
“ Such an one did not satisfy me,” or, “ Such an one said to
me such a word.” And thus persevering in this wise, by so
much the more as he drew near to death was he solicitous to
consider how he might live and die in all humility and poverty,
and in all perfection of virtues.


CHAPTER XLVII

OF THE PERFECT MANNER OF OBEYING WHICH
HE TAUGHT

The most holy Father was wont to say to his brethren,
“ Brothers most dear, fulfil a command at the first word, nor
wait till what was said to you is repeated. Do not argue or


222


The Mirror of Perfection


judge, for there is no impossibility in the command, for even if
I were to order you aught above your strength, holy obedience
will not be wanting to aid your weakness.”


CHAPTER XLVIII

HOW HE LIKENED PERFECT OBEDIENCE, IN A PARABLE,

TO THE BODY OF A DEAD MAN

But on a time before his fellows he uttered this sigh, “ Hardly
is there one Religious in the world who obeys his superior well.”
Immediately, his fellows said to him, “ Tell us, Father, what is
the perfect and highest obedience? ” But he answering, de¬
scribed true and perfect obedience under the figure of a dead
body, thus, u Take a lifeless body and put it where it shall
please thee, you will see that it will not resist moving, nor
change its place, nor claim dismissal. But if it be exalted on a
throne, it looks not on high things but low. If it be lapped in
purple, it grows doubly pale. He therefore is truly obedient
who judges not why he is moved, takes no thought where he is
placed, and asketh not that he should be moved; promoted to
office he keeps his unwonted humility, while the more he is
honoured, the more he reputes himself unworthy.”

Things ordered purely and simply, not asked of him, he
called holy obediences. But he believed that the highest
obedience, that in which flesh and blood had no part, was
when men should go by divine inspiration among the infidels,
either for the good of their fellows, or for the desire of martyr¬
dom, and he judged that to seek this was right acceptable.


CHAPTER XLIX

THAT IT IS DANGEROUS TO ORDER TOO LIGHTLY BY
OBEDIENCE, OR NOT TO OBEY AN ORDER

And so the blessed Father thought that an order should be
given by virtue of obedience seldom, nor should that weapon
be used first which should be the last; for said he, “ The hand
should not be laid readily on the sword.” But he was wont to
say that he who did not immediately obey the precept of
obedience, neither feared God nor revered man (so long, namely,


Holy Humility and Obedience 223

as there was no necessary cause for delay). Nor is there any¬
thing more true, for what else is the power of command in a rash
governor than a sword in the hand of a wrathful man? But
who more hopeless than the Religious who neglects and con¬
temns obedience?


CHAPTER L

HOW HE ANSWERED THE FRIARS PERSUADING HIM TO
SEEK THE PRIVILEGE OF PREACHING FREELY

Certain friars said to blessed Francis, “ Father, dost thou not
see that sometimes the bishops will not permit us to preach,
and make us stand idle many days in one place before we can
announce the word of the Lord. It were better that thou
shouldst obtain from the Lord Pope a privilege concerning this
matter, as it would be for the salvation of souls.” To whom he
answered with sore rebuke, saying, “ You, Friars Minor, know
not the will of God, and do not allow me to convert the whole
world as God willeth. For I wish by perfect humility and
reverence first to convert the prelates. Who, when they shall
see our holy life and humble reverence towards them, shall
beseech you to preach and convert the people, and they shall
call them to the preaching better than your privileges which
would lead you into pride. And if you be separated from all
avarice, and persuade the people to give to the churches their
due, they themselves would ask you to hear the confession of
their flock, though of this you need not take heed, for if these
were converted they should well find confessors. But as for me,
I desire this privilege from the Lord, that never may I have any
privilege from man, except to do reverence to all, and to convert
the world by obedience to the holy Rule rather by example than
by word,”


CHAPTER LI

OF THE MANNER IN RECONCILING ONE ANOTHER WHEN
ONE OFFENDED ANOTHER

He was wont to affirm that the Friars Minor had been sent by
the Lord in these last times, that they might show examples to
those bound up in the darkness of sinners. He was wont to say
that he was filled with the sweetest odours and anointed with


224 The Mirror of Perfection

the virtue of precious ointment, when he heard great things of
the holy friars dispersed through the world. It fell on a day
that a certain friar, in the presence of a nobleman of the Island
of Cyprus, reproached another, but when he perceived that his
brother was somewhat disturbed thereby, being wrathful with
himself, he straightway took the dung of an ass and put it in his
own mouth, breaking it small with his teeth, saying, “ Eat dung,
0 tongue, which poured out the venom of wrath on my brother.”
But he who beheld these things, being astonished to stupor, went
his way much edified, and from that time forth submitted himself
and all he had to the will of the friars. And this custom all the
friars observed that if one of them should have uttered a word of
injury or trouble to another, having thrown himself prostrate
upon the earth, he kissed the foot of his angered brother straight-
way, and humbly asked forgiveness. The holy Father was
rejoiced in such things when he heard that his sons had drawn
examples of holiness for themselves from him, and he loaded
those friars with most worthy benedictions of all acceptation,
who by word or work should lead sinners to the love of Christ.
For in the zeal of souls wherewith he himself was perfectly filled,
he wished his sons to resemble him with a perfect similitude.


CHAPTER LII

HOW CHRIST COMPLAINED TO BROTHER LEO, OF THE
INGRATITUDE AND PRIDE OF THE FRIARS

On a certain time the Lord Jesus Christ said to Brother Leo,
the fellow of blessed Francis, “ Brother Leo, I lament for the
friars." To Whom answered Brother Leo, “ Wherefore, O
Lord? ” And the Lord answered, “ For three things: namely,
because they do not recognise My benefits which so largely and
abundantly I shower on them, as thou knowest; while they sow
not neither do they reap. And because the whole day they
murmur, and are idle. And for that they provoke each other
often to anger, and do not return to love, and do not forgive
the injury they receive,"


Holy Humility and Obedience 225


CHAPTER LIII

HOW HE ANSWERED HUMBLY AND TRULY TO A CERTAIN DOCTOR
OF THE ORDER OF PREACHERS WHO QUESTIONED HIM CON¬
CERNING THE WORDS OF SCRIPTURE

But while he was abiding at Siena, there came to him a certain
doctor of divinity of the Order of Preachers, a man both humble
and right spiritual. When he had discussed with blessed
Francis for some time together the words of the Lord, the said
master asked of him concerning that word of Ezekiel: If thou
speakest not to warn the wicked from his wicked ways , his blood
will 1 require at thine hand. For he said, “ I know many, how¬
ever, good Father, that be in mortal sin, to whom I do not speak
to warn them of their impiety, will their souls therefore be
required at my hands?” To whom blessed Francis humbly
said that he was a simpleton, and that therefore he should rather
be taught of him than answer concerning the meaning of
Scripture. Then that humble master added, “ Brother, though
I have heard an exposition of this text from sundry wise men,
yet would I willingly learn your understanding of it.” There¬
fore blessed Francis said, “ If the text is to be understood
generally, I take it thus, that the servant of God should so burn
and shine forth by life and holiness in himself, that by the light
of his example and by the speech of his holy conversation he
should reprove all the impious. Thus, say I, his splendour and
the odour of his fame will announce to all their iniquities.”
And so that doctor, going away much edified, said to the fellows
of the blessed Father, “ My brethren, the theology of this man,
founded on purity and contemplation, is a flying eagle, while
our science crawls on its belly on the earth.”


CHAPTER LIV

OF HUMILITY AND PEACE WITH THE SECULAR CLERGY

Blessed Francis would that his sons should have peace with all
men, and hold themselves lowly to all. Yet he taught them by
word and showed them by example to be chiefly humble to the
clergy. For he was wont to say, “We have been sent in aid of
the clergy for the salvation of souls, and that whatsoever is


226 The Mirror of Perfection

found wanting in them may be supplied by us, but each will
receive his reward, not according to his authority, but according
to his labour. Learn, brethren, that the gain of souls is most
pleasing to God, and this we can better obtain when in peace,
than in discord with the clergy. But if these hinder the welfare
of the people, revenge is of God, and He will reward them in His
time. And therefore be ye subject to superiors, nor let any evil
emulation arise from you. For if you shall have been sons of
peace, you will gain clergy and people, and this is more acceptable
to God, than to gain the people alone with a scandalised clergy.
Cover,” he said, “ their lapses and supply their manifold defects,
then when ye have done this, be the more humble.”


CHAPTER LV

' HOW HE HUMBLY ACQUIRED THE CHURCH OF ST. MARY OF THE
ANGELS FROM THE ABBOT OF ST. BENEDICT, AND HOW HE
WISHED HIS BRETHREN TO DWELL THERE AND LIVE HUMBLY

Blessed Francis, seeing that the Lord wished to multiply the
number of his friars, said to them, “ Dearest brethren and my
little sons, I see that the Lord wills to multiply us, whence it seems
good and religious to me that we should obtain either from the
canons of St. Rufinus, or from the Abbot of St. Benedict some
church where the friars may say their Hours, and only have near
it some small sorry hut constructed from mud and branches,
where the brethren may rest and work. For this place is not
fitting nor sufficient to the friars, since the Lord wishes to
multiply them, and especially since we have here no church
wherein the friars may say their Hours. And if any friar should
die, it would not be fitting to bury him here, nor in a church of
the secular clergy.” And this speech pleased all the friars.

He went therefore to the Bishop of Assisi, and laid the afore¬
said request before him. Unto whom said the Bishop, “ Brother,
I have no church which I can give you,” and the canons also
answered the same. Then he went to the Abbot of St. Benedict
of Monte Subasio, and laid the same proposition before him.
But the Abbot, moved with piety, having taken counsel with
his monks, the divine grace and will operating, conceded to
blessed Francis and to his friars the church of Blessed Mary of
Portiuncula, as the smallest and the poorest church they had.
And the Abbot said to blessed Francis, “ Behold, brother, we


Holy Humility and Obedience 227

have granted what thou hast asked. But if the Lord shall
multiply this congregation, we would that this place should be
the chief of all your dwellings.” And the speech pleased blessed
Francis and his brethren, and the blessed Father rejoiced
greatly concerning the place conceded to the friars, especially
on account of the name of the church, of the Mother of Christ,
and because it was so small and poor a church, and also because
it was named the Portiuncula, in which it was prefigured that
it should be the head and the mother of the poor Friars Minor.
For the Church was called the Portiuncula, because of that
court which was formerly called “ the little portion.” Whence
the blessed Father was wont to say, “ The Lord wished that no
other church should be conceded to the friars, and that the first
friars should not as then build a new church nor have any other
except that, since by this, through the advent of the Friars
Minor, a certain prophecy was fulfilled.” And though it was
poor and now destroyed, yet for a great time the men of the
city of Assisi and of all its lordship had had great devotion to
that church, and they have a greater to-day, and daily doth it
wax. Whence as the brethren went there to dwell, forthwith
the Lord multiplied their number almost daily, and the odour
of their fame was wonderfully scattered through all the valley
of Spoleto, and many parts of the land. Yet of old it was
called St. Mary of the Angels because, as it was said, the songs
of Angels and of celestial spirits were there heard of those coming
to the place.

(But now, because the friars are colder in prayer and virtuous
works and more lax and idle, and given to uttering idle words
and the news of this world, than they were used, that place
itself is not held in so great reverence and devotion, as hereto¬
fore it has been of custom, and as I would wish it to be.)

When the blessed Father had said these words, forthwith
with great fervour he concluded, saying, “ I would that this
place should always be immediately under the power of the
Minister-General and servant, for the reason that he should
have greater care and solicitude in providing there a good and
holy family. Let clerks be chosen among the better and more
holy and more fitting friars, those of the whole Order who can
best say the Office, that not only lay folk but also the other
friars may willingly and with great devotion see and hear them.
But of the lay brothers, let holy men discreet and humble and
decent be chosen, who may serve them. I will also that no
woman and no friar enter that place except the General Minister


228 The Mirror of Perfection

and the friars who serve them. And they shall not speak with
any person, except with the friars who serve them and with the
Minister who shall visit them, I will, likewise, that the lay
brothers themselves who serve them, be bound never to say to
them idle words or this world's news, or anything not useful
to their souls. And on account of this, I especially will that
no one shall enter into the dwelling, that they the better pre¬
serve its purity and sanctity, and that in that place nothing be
said or done uselessly, but the whole place itself be preserved
pure and holy in hymns and the praises of the Lord. And when
any of those friars shall have passed away to the Lord, I will
that in his place another holy friar, wherever he may be, be
sent thither by the Minister-General. For if the other friars
shall have fallen off somewhat from purity and honesty, I will
that this place be blessed, and that it remain for ever a mirror
and a good example of the whole Order, and like a candlestick
before the throne of God and the blessed Virgin, always burning
and shining. On account of which the Lord will have mercy
on the defects and faults of all friars, and always preserve and
protect this Order and this His tender plant.”


CHAPTER LVI

OF THE HUMBLE REVERENCE WHICH HE SHOWED CONCERNING
THE SWEEPING AND CLEANING OF CHURCHES

On a time when he was staying at St. Mary of the Portiuncula,
and there were as yet but few friars, blessed Francis went by
those villages and churches in the neighbourhood of Assisi
announcing and preaching to men that they should do penance,
and he carried a broom to sweep out unclean churches. For
the holy Father grieved much when he saw any church not so
clean as he wished. And therefore, when the preaching was
finished, he always made all the priests who were there gather
together in some remote place, lest he should be overheard by
the lay folk, and preached to them of the salvation of souls,
and especially that they should be careful to keep clean the
churches and altars, and all things which pertained to the
celebration of the divine mysteries.


Holy Humility and Obedience


CHAPTER LVII

OF THE RUSTIC WHO FOUND HIM SWEEPING A CHURCH, AND
BEING CONVERTED ENTERED THE ORDER, AND WAS A
SAINTLY FRIAR

But when he had gone to a certain village belonging to the city
of Assisi, he began to sweep it and clean it. And immediately a
rumour of him went through the whole village, for he was gladly
seen of those men and more willingly heard. But when a certain
rustic of strange simplicity, who was ploughing in his field, John
by name, heard this he went straightway to him and found him
sweeping the church humbly and devoutly. And he said to
him, “ Brother, give me the broom, for I wish to help thee.”
And taking the broom from his hands he swept out the re¬
mainder. And while they were sitting together he said to
blessed Francis, “ Brother, it is now a long time that I have had
the will to serve God, and especially after I have heard the
rumour of thee and thy brethren, but I knew not how to come
to thee. Now therefore, since it has pleased the Lord that I
should see thee, I have the will to do whatever shall be pleasing
to thee.” But the blessed Father, considering his fervour,
rejoiced in the Lord, especially for that he had then few brethren,
and it seemed to him that for his simplicity and purity this
should be a good Religious. But he said to him, “ Brother, if
thou wilt be of our life and society, thou must strip thee of all
that which thou mayest not own without scandal, and give it to
the poor, according to the counsel of the Holy Gospel, since all
my brethren that were able have done the same.” When he
had heard this, he went straightway to the field where he had
left his cattle, and loosened them and led one of them before
blessed Francis, and said to him, “ Brother, so many years have
I served my father and all them of my house, and though this
portion of my heritage be small, I wish to take this ox for my
part, and give it to the poor as may seem best to thee.” But
his parents and his brothers, who were still little, and all of his
house, seeing that he would leave them, began to weep so sore
and to utter such plaintive noises with grief, that blessed Francis
was moved by it to pity, because it was a large family, and
feeble. And blessed Francis said to them, “ Prepare a feast
for us all, and let us all eat together, and weep not, for I will
make you truly .joyful.” So they prepared it forthwith, and


230 The Mirror of Perfection

all together with great joy did eat. But after meat blessed
Francis said, “ This, your son, wishes to serve God, and ye ought
not to be saddened because of this, but rather to rejoice. For
not only as regards God, but also according to this life it shall
be reputed to you great honour and profit of souls and bodies,
that God is honoured of your flesh, and all our brothers will be
your sons and brothers. And because he is a creature of God,
and wishes to serve his Creator, to serve Whom is to reign, I
cannot nor ought not to return him unto you, but that ye may
have consolation concerning him, I will that he give you that
ox as to the poor, though he ought to give it to other poor folk
according to the Gospel. ,, And all were consoled with the
words of St. Francis, and chiefly they rejoiced on account of
the ox, because it was returned to them, since they were very
poor. And because pure and holy simplicity in himself and in
others greatly pleased blessed Francis, he clothed him with the
garments of religion straightway, and led him with him humbly
for his fellow. For he was of so great simplicity, that he believed
himself bound to all things which blessed Francis did. Whence
when the blessed Father stood in any church or in any place to
pray, he also wished to see him, that he might conform himself
in all his acts and gestures to him. And so if the blessed Father
bent his knees, or raised his hands to heaven, or spat, or sighed,
he himself did all these things in like manner. But when
blessed Francis perceived this, he began with great gladness
to reprove him for simplicity of this kind. To whom he
answered, “ Brother, I promised to do all things which thou
didst, and therefore I must conform to thee in all things.” And
at this the blessed Father wondered and rejoiced wonderfully,
beholding in him such purity and simplicity. But he after¬
wards began to profit so much that blessed Francis and all the
other friars wondered greatly at his perfection. And after a
little time he died in that holy profit of virtues. Whence
afterwards blessed Francis with joy of mind and body was
wont to tell amongst the friars of his conversion, naming him
not Brother, but Holy, John*


Holy Humility and Obedience 231


CHAPTER LVTII

HOW HE PUNISHED HIMSELF BECAUSE HE HAD DONE
SHAME TO A LEPER

But blessed Francis, having returned to the church of blessed
Mary of the Portiuncula, found Brother James the Simple with
a certain leper much ulcerated. For the blessed Father had
commended that leper and all the others to him, because he
was as it were their physician, and he freely touched their
wounds and cleansed them and took care of them, for then the
friars used to abide in the hospitals of the lepers. The holy
Father therefore said to Brother James, as if reproving him,
“ You ought not to lead out these Christians, because it is
neither decent for you nor for them.” For though he wished
to serve them, yet he was unwilling that he should take those
who were much afflicted out of the hospital, because men are
accustomed to hold such in abhorrence, and Brother James
himself was so simple, that he used to go with them from the
hospital up to the church of St. Mary of the Portiuncula, as he
would have gone with the friars. But blessed Francis used to
call the lepers themselves Christian brothers. And when he
had said these things, the blessed Father immediately blamed
himself, believing that the leper had been put to shame for the
blame which he had thrown on Brother James. And therefore
being fain to satisfy God and the leper, he told his fault to
Brother Peter of Catana, who was then Minister-General. And
he said, “ I will that thou shouldst confirm to me the penance
which I have chosen to do for this fault, and that thou shouldst
in no respect contradict me.” Who answered, “ Brother, do
that which shall please thee.” For Brother Peter so much
venerated and feared him that he did not presume to contradict
him, though he was often thence afflicted. Then said the
blessed Father, “ Let this be my penance, that I eat in one dish
with my Christian brother.” When therefore blessed Francis
sat down to table with the leper and with the other friars, one
dish was placed between blessed Francis and the leper. But
he was all ulcerated and loathsome, and especially he had his
fingers shrivelled and bleeding with which he took up lumps
from the dish, so that when he put them in the dish the blood
and matter of the fingers flowed into it. And seeing this Brother
Peter and the other friars were much saddened, but did not dare


232 The Mirror of Perfection

to say anything on account of the fear and reverence of the holy
Father. He who saw this wrote it down, and bears testimony of
these things.


CHAPTER LIX

HOW HE PUT THE DEMONS TO FLIGHT WITH
HUMBLE WORDS

On a certain time blessed Francis went to the church of blessed
Peter of Bovara near the castle of Trevi in the valley of Spoleto,
and with him went Brother Pacificus, who in the world used to
be called the King of Verse, a noble and courtly doctor of
singers. But that church was abandoned. Therefore the
blessed Father said to Brother Pacificus, “ Return to the leper
hospital, for I wish to remain here alone to-night, and to-morrow
very early return to me.” But when he had been left alone
there, and had said complines and other prayers, he wished to
be quiet and to sleep, but he was not able. For his spirit began
to fear and to feel diabolical suggestions, and immediately he
went out of the church and crossed himself, saying, “ On the
part of Almighty God I say unto you, 0 Demons, that ye may
work on my body whatever is given to you to do by the Lord
Jesus Christ, since I am ready to sustain all things. For since
I hold that my body is my greatest enemy, ye shall but avenge
me on my adversary and worst enemy.” And immediately
those suggestions altogether ceased, and having returned to the
place where he was lying, he slept in peace.


CHAPTER LX

OF THE VISION OF FRIAR PACIFICUS WHICH HE SAW, AND HOW
HE HEARD THAT THE SEAT OF LUCIFER WAS RESERVED
FOR BLESSED FRANCIS

But when it was morn Brother Pacificus returned to him. He
was then standing before the altar in prayer, and Brother
Pacificus waited for him without the choir praying likewise
before a crucifix. And when he began to pray, he was raised
up and snatched into Heaven, whether in the body or out of the body
God only knoweth. And he saw in Heaven many seats, among
which he saw one more notable than the others, and beyond


Holy Humility and Obedience 233

all the rest glorious, shining and adorned with every precious
stone. And admiring its beauty, he began to wonder in himself
whose that seat should be. And immediately he heard a voice
saying unto him, “ This was the seat of Lucifer, and in his
stead shall the humble Francis sit.” And when he returned to
himself, blessed Francis forthwith came out to him, at whose
feet that brother fell in the shape of a cross with his arms
extended. And looking upon him as if he were already in
Heaven sitting in that seat, he said to him, “ Father, do me this
grace, and ask the Lord that He may have mercy on me, and
forgive me my sins.” But the blessed Father stretching out
his hands raised him, and forthwith knew that he had seen
something in prayer, for he seemed all transfigured, and he
spoke to blessed Francis as one not living in the flesh, but as
already reigning in Heaven. But after, because he was un¬
willing to tell the vision to the blessed man, he began to speak
with himself words as if from afar, and amongst other things
he said to him, “What thinkest thou of thyself, Brother?”
The blessed Father answered and said unto him, “ It seems to
me that I am a greater sinner than any one in the whole world.”
And immediately it was revealed to the soul of Brother Pacificus,

“ B y this thou may knowest that the vision which thou hast
seen was true, since as Lucifer was ejected from his place on
account of his pride, so Francis on account of his humility shall
merit to be exalted, and to sit in it.”


CHAPTER LXI

HOW HE MADE HIMSELF TO BE DRAGGED BOUND WITH A
ROPE AT HIS NECK UNCLOTHED BEFORE THE PEOPLE

But on a certain time when he had got a little stronger from
a certain very great infirmity of his, it seemed to him that he
had had some allowance in that weakness, though he had eaten
but little. And rising on a certain day, though he was not
entirely freed from the quartan fever, he made the people of
the city of Assisi be called together in the market place, for
preaching. But when the sermon was done he warned the
people that no one should go away from thence until he should
return to them. And entering the cathedral of St. Rufinus
with many friars and with Brother Peter of Catana who had
been canon of that church and was chosen first Minister-
1 485


234 The Mirror of Perfection

General by blessed Francis, he spoke to that brother Peter,
ordering him by obedience, that he should without contradiction
do whatever he should say to him. Brother Peter answered
him, “ Brother, I neither may nor ought, will or do anything
concerning thee and me, except as it may please thee.” Casting
off therefore his tunic, blessed Francis bade him drag him
unclad before the people with a cord bound round his neck to
the place where he had preached. He bade another friar that
he should take a dish full of ashes and should go up to the place
where he had preached, and when he should have been drawn
up to that place to throw the ashes over his face. Yet this
last did not obey him in this on account of the great compassion
by which he was moved towards him. And Brother Peter,
taking the cord bound to his neck, dragged him after him as he
had ordered him. But he was weeping very sore, and the other
friars with him shed tears of compassion and of bitterness.
When he was thus led naked in the sight of all men up to the
place where he had preached, he said, “ You, and all those
who, after my example, leave this world and enter religion and
the life of the friars, believe me to be a holy man, but I confess
to God and to you that I have eaten in this my infirmity flesh
and broth made with flesh.” And all began to weep over him
for great pity and compassion, especially because it was then
winter time and a very intense frost, and he was not yet re¬
covered from the quartan fever. And striking their breasts
they accused themselves, saying, “ If this saint, for just and
manifest necessity, accuses himself with so much shame of
body, whose life we know to be holy, whom even we know to
be living in the flesh as if almost dead on account of the great
abstinence and austerity which he has made to his body from
the beginning of his conversion to Christ, what shall we wretched
ones do, who for the whole time of our life have lived and still
live according to the desires of the flesh.”


CHAPTER LXII

HOW HE WISHED THAT WHATEVER OF COMFORT HIS
BODY RECEIVED SHOULD BE KNOWN

Likewise on a certain time when he had eaten in a certain
hermitage in the Advent fast (St. Martin’s Lent), cakes cooked
with lard on account of his infirmities, for which oil was very


Holy Humility and Obedience 235

unwholesome; Lent being finished, when he should preach to
a great crowd, he said to them in the first word of his sermon,
You come to me with great devotion, believing me to be
a holy man, but I confess to God and to you, that I have eaten
m this Lent cakes cooked with lard.” Nay, well-nigh always
when he used to eat with any seculars, or when any bodily
comfort was given him by the friars on account of his infirmities,
immediately in the house and outside, before those friars who
did not know of it, and the seculars, he was accustomed to say
openly, I have eaten such and such a food.” For he was
unwilling to hide from men what was laid open to God. Like¬
wise also wherever, in the presence of whatever Religious and
laymen, his spirit was moved to pride or vainglory, or to any
iault, he confessed it immediately in their presence openly
without any veil. Whence once he said to his companions’

t , -j S W0U -l d l lve m hermita ges and in the other places where
1 abide, as if all men could see me. For if they think me to be
a holy man, and I lead not the life which becomes a holy man
1 should be a hypocrite.” And thus, when on account of the
weakness of the spleen and coldness of the stomach, one of his
fellows who was his Warden wished to sew under his tunic a little
loxskin opposite his spleen and stomach, especially as there was
then a great cold, blessed Francis answered him, “ If you would
that I have foxskin under my tunic you must put a piece of
that skin outside, so that every one may know by this that I
have foxskin inside.” And so he caused it to be done, but he
wore it very little, though it would have been very necessary


CHAPTER LXIII

HOW HE ACCUSED HIMSELF IMMEDIATELY OF VAIN¬
GLORY IN GIVING CHARITY

When he went through the city of Assisi, a certain poor old
woman begged an alms of him for the love of God And he
immediately gave her the mantle which he had on his back
and forthwith without delay he confessed in the presence of
those who followed how he had thence vainglory. And we
have seen and heard so many other examples like to these of
his very great humility, we who were always in his companv
that neither with words nor with letters can we narrate them[


236 The Mirror of Perfection

For in this blessed Francis had his chief and highest study,
that he should not be a hypocrite before God, and though on
account of his infirmity an allowance would have been necessary
to him, yet he took thought with himself, always to show a good
example to the friars and to others, whence he sustained all
poverty patiently that he might take away from all any occasion
of murmuring*


CHAPTER LXIV

HOW HE DESCRIBED THE STATE OF PERFECT HUMILITY
IN HIMSELF

When the time of the Chapter was drawing near, the holy
Father said to his fellow, “ It seemeth not to me that I am a
Friar Minor, unless I be in the state which I will tell thee.
Behold, the friars invite me with great devotion to the Chapter,
and moved by their devotion I go to the Chapter with them.
But they, being gathered together, ask me to announce to them
the Word of God, and to preach amongst them. And rising up,
I preach to them as the Holy Spirit shall have taught me.
Having finished therefore my sermon, put it that all cry out
against me, ‘ We will not have thee to reign over us, for thou
art not eloquent, as is becoming, and thou art too simple and
idiotic, and we fear greatly to have so simple and despised a
superior over us, whence henceforth, presume not to call thyself
our prelate! * And so they cast me out with blame and re¬
proach. It would seem to me that I was not a Friar Minor, if
I did not rejoice to the same extent when they reproached me
and cast me out with shame, unwilling that I should be their
prelate, as when they venerate and honour me; holding their
profit and usefulness to be equal in either case. For if I am
glad when they exalt and honour me on account of their profit
and devotion, where yet there may be a danger to my soul,
much more ought I to rejoice and be glad of the profit and
salvation of my soul when they blame me, where is certain
gain of my soul.”


Holy Humility and Obedience 237


CHAPTER LXV

HOW HE WISHED TO GO HUMBLY TO FOREIGN PARTS AS HE HAD
SENT OTHER FRIARS, AND HOW HE TAUGHT THE FRIARS TO
GO HUMBLY AND DEVOUTLY THROUGH THE WORLD

When that Chapter was finished in which many friars were sent
to certain provinces over sea, blessed Francis, remaining with
certain friars, said to them, “ Dearest brethren, it behoves me
to be the form and example of all friars. If therefore I have
sent some of them to distant parts to bear labours and shame,
hunger and thirst, and other privations; it is just, and holy
humility requires it, that I should go likewise to some distant
province, so that the friars may the more patiently sustain
adversity when they shall have heard that I bear the same.
Go, therefore, and pray the Lord that He may give me to choose
that province which should be most to His praise and the profit
of souls and the good example of our body.” (For it was the
manner of the most holy Father when he would go to any
province, to pray first the Lord, and to set the friars to pray
that the Lord would direct his heart to that same place which
was most pleasing to Him.) The brethren therefore went to
pray, and when it was finished they returned to him, and
straightway he said to them, “ In the name of Our Lord Jesus
Christ, and of the glorious Virgin Mary His Mother, and of all
saints, I choose the province of France in which is a Catholic
folk, especially because amongst all other Catholics they show
great reverence to the Body of Christ, wherefore I shall converse
with them most willingly.”

For the holy Father had so much reverence and devotion to
the Body of Christ, that he wished it to be written in the Rule
that friars should have care and solicitude in the provinces
where they should stay concerning this thing; and that they
should admonish clerks and priests, to keep the Body of Christ in
a good and decent place, which if they neglected, the friars should
do it. He wished it also to be placed in the Rule that wherever
friars should find the names of the Lord, and these words by
which the body of the Lord Is made, not well and decently
placed, that they themselves should collect them and decently
put them away, honouring the Lord in His words. And though
these things were not written in the Rule, because it did not seem
good to the Ministers that the friars should have this in com-


238 The Mirror of Perfection

mand, yet he wished to leave his will to the friars concerning
these things in his testament and in his other writings. Nay,
on a certain time, he wished to send some friars through all the
provinces carrying many fair and clean pyxes; and wherever
they should find the Body of the Lord unsuitably preserved,
they should put it honourably in those pyxes. Also he wished
to send some other friars with good and new wafer-irons to make
fair and clean hosts.

When therefore the holy Father chose those brethren whom
he wished to take with him, he said to them, “ In the name of
the Lord, go two and two on the way humbly and decently, and
especially with strict silence from the dawn till past the hour of
tierce, praying the Lord in your hearts, and let not idle and use¬
less words be so much as named amongst you. For though you
walk, let your conversation be as humble and seemly as if you
were in a hermitage or in a cell. For wherever we are and walk,
we may have always our cell with us. For Brother Body is our
cell; and our soul is the hermit, who remains within his cell, to
pray to God and to meditate on Him. Whence if the soul does
not remain in quiet in its cell, little profits the Religious a cell
made with hands? ” And when he had arrived at Florence
he found there Lord Hugo, the Bishop of Ostia, who was after¬
wards Pope Gregory. Who, when he had heard from the
blessed man, that he wished to go into France, forbade him to
go, saying, “ Brother, I 4° not wish you to go beyond the
mountains, because there a^e many prelates who would willingly
hinder the good of thy fellowship in the Roman Court. But I
and the other Cardinals, who love that body, will more gladly
protect and aid it, if you remain in the circuit of this province.”
And blessed Francis said to him, “My Lord, it is great shame to
me to send my other brethren to remote provinces if I remain in
these provinces, and am not partaker of the tribulations which
they shall suffer on the Lord’s behalf.” But the Bishop said to
him, as if reproving him, “ Why hast thou sent thy brethren so
far to die with hunger and to sustain other tribulations? ”
Blessed Francis answered him with great fervour and with the
spirit of prophecy, saying, “ My Lord, think you that the Lord
sent the friars on account of these provinces alone? But I say
unto you in truth, that God chose out and sent the friars for the
profit and welfare of the souls of all men of this world; and they
shall be received, not only in the lands of the faithful, but even
among the infidels, and shall gain many souls.” Then the
Bishop of Ostia wondered at his words, affirming that he spoke


Holy Humility and Obedience 239

the truth. And thus he did not permit him to go into France,
though blessed Francis sent thither Brother Pacificus with many
otheir friars, but he himself returned to the valley of Spoleto.


CHAPTER LXVI

HOW HE TAUGHT CERTAIN FRIARS TO GAIN THE SOULS
OF SOME THIEVES BY HUMILITY AND CHARITY

To a certain hermitage of friars above the Borgo San Sepolcro
there came from time to time thieves, who used to lie in the
woods and spoil the passers-by. And some of the friars used
to say that it was not good to give them charity, but others gave
out of compassion, that they might admonish them to penitence.
In the meantime blessed Francis came to that place, whom the
friars asked whether it were right to give charity to them. And
the holy Father said to them, “ If you will do as I will tell you
I trust in the Lord that you shall gain their souls. Go therefore
and get some good bread and good wine, and carry them into the.
wood where they dwell, and shout, saying, ‘ Brother thieves,
come to us, because we are friars, and we bring you good bread
and good wine.’ They will come forthwith, but you spread a
cloth on the earth, and place on it the bread and wine, and serve
them humbly and joyfully until they have eaten. But after
the meal ye shall speak to them of the Word of the Lord, and
finally ye shall ask of them for the love of God that they will
promise you this first petition, that they shall not strike nor do
evil to any one, in his body. For if ye ask all things at once
they Will not hear yoU, but on account of your humility and'
charity they Will immediately promise you this. Then on
another day on account of their good promise, you will carry
to them with the bread and wine some eggs and cheese: and
ye shaU serve them Until they have eaten, and after the meal
ye shall say to them, ‘ Why stay ye here all the day to die of
hunger and to bear sb much adversity, and do many evil things
for the which ye shall lose your souls except ye be converted to
the Lord? Better is it that ye should serve the Lord, Who will
give you m this life the necessities of the body, and in the end
will save your souls.’ Then the Lord shall inspire them: so
A! f u r /u Ur humilit y and charity that ye have shown them
they shall be converted.” And so the friars did all these things
as the holy Father bade them; and those robbers, through the


240 The Mirror of Perfection

grace and mercy of God, heard and kept letter by letter and
point by point all things which the friars humbly asked of them.
Nay, on account of the humility and kindliness of the friars
towards them, they began to humbly serve the friars themselves,
carrying on their shoulders their wood up to the hermitage.
And some of them at last entered religion. But the others,
confessing their faults, did penance for their sins, promising
in the hands of the friars for the future that they would live by
the labour of their hands, and never again do such deeds.


CHAPTER LXVII

HOW FROM THE BLOWS OF THE DEMONS HE KNEW IT WAS MORE
PLEASING TO THE LORD THAT HE SHOULD STAY IN POOR
AND HUMBLE DWELLINGS RATHER THAN WITH CARDINALS

On a certain time blessed Francis went to Rome to visit my
Lord of Ostia. And when he had remained some days with
him, he visited also my Lord Leo the Cardinal, who was very
'devoted to the blessed men. And because it was then winter,
and altogether unfit for going on foot because of the cold and
the winds and the rain, he asked him to abide with him some
days, and as a beggar to receive his food from him, with the
other beggars who daily used to eat in his house. But this he
said, because he knew that the blessed man ever would be
received like a beggar wherever he was guested, though the
Cardinals and the Lord Pope would receive him with the greatest
devotion and reverence, and would venerate him as a saint.
And he added, “ I will give thee a good house apart where thou
mayest abide and where thou canst pray and eat as thou
wishest.” Then Friar Angelo Tancredi, who was one of the
twelve first friars, who also abode with the said Cardinal, said
to the blessed man, “ Brother, there is near here a certain tower
right spacious and apart, where thou mayest abide as if in a
hermitage.” And when the blessed man had seen it, it pleased
him, and returning to the Lord Cardinal he said to him, “ My
Lord, perchance I will stay with you for some days.” And
my Lord Cardinal rejoiced greatly. So Brother Angelo went
and prepared the place in the tower for the blessed man and his
fellow. And because blessed Francis would not come down
from thence as long as he should remain with the Cardinal nor
wish any one to enter to him, Brother Angelo promised and took


Holy Humility and Obedience 241

orders to daily carry food to him and his fellow. And when the
blessed Father had gone there with his fellow; on the first night
when he would sleep there, came demons and beat him very
sore. And calling his fellow he said to him, “ Brother, demons
have beaten me very sore, and therefore I will that thou remain
with me, for I fear to stay alone.” And that night his fellow
abode near him. For blessed Francis trembled as a man who
suffers fever, wherefore both watched through the whole night.
In the meantime the holy Father said to his fellow, “ Why have
the demons beaten me, and why is that power of hurting me
given them by the Lord? ” And he said, “ The demons are the
sergeants of our Lord. For as the Podesta sends his sergeants
to punish him who has sinned, so the Lord by sergeants, that is,
by the demons who in this world are His ministers, corrects and
chastens those whom He loves. For many times he who is a
perfect Religious sins ignorantly; whence since he knows not
his sin, he is chastened by demons, that he may diligently see
and consider, within and without, those things in which he has
offended, for whom the Lord loves with a true love, nothing in
them He leaves unpunished. But by the mercy and grace of
God, I know not that I have offended in anything which I have
not amended by confession and satisfaction, nay, by His mercy
God has granted me this gift that I may receive in prayer a
clear knowledge of all things in which I may please or displease
Him. But it may be that He now chastises me by His sergeants
for that though my Lord Cardinal willingly showed me mercy,
and though it is necessary to my body to receive this rest, yet
my brethren who go through the world bearing hunger and
many tribulations and the other friars who live in hermitages
and poor little dwellings, when they shall hear that I live with
my Lord Cardinal, may have an occasion of murmuring, saying,

‘ We bear so many adverse things, and he has his consolations.'
But I am bound always to give them a good example, because
for this reason I was given unto them. For the brethren are
more edified when I abide in their own poor little dwellings
amongst them, than in others; and they bear their tribulations
more patiently when they hear that I bear also the same.”
And it was, therefore, the highest and continual study of our
Father, that in all things he might afford a good example, and
that he might take away any occasion of murmuring concerning
him from other friars. And on account of this, well or ill, he
suffered so much, that whichever friars knew him as we who
were with him to the day of his death did, as often as they read


242 The Mirror of Perfection

those things or call them to memory, cannot contain themselves
from tears, and they sustain all their tribulations and necessities
with greater patience and joy. Therefore blessed Francis came
down very early from the tower, and went to my Lord Cardinal;
telling him all things that had befallen him and what he had
borne with his fellow: nay, he said to him, Men think me to
be a holy man, and behold demons have cast me out of a cell!
And my Lord Cardinal was much rejoiced with him. Yet
because he knew and venerated him as a saint, he would not
contradict him after he was unwilling to remain there. And
so the holy man bidding him farewell, returned to the hermitage
of Fonte Palumbo, near Rieti.


CHAPTER LXVIII

HOW HE BLAMED FRIARS WISHING TO GO BY THE WAY OF THEIR

WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE, AND NOT BY THE WAY OF

humility; and foretold the reformation of the

ORDER TO ITS FIRST STATE

When blessed Francis was in the Chapter-General at St. Mary
of the Portiuncula (which was called the Chapter of the Mats,
because there were no dwellings there except made of mats,
and there were five thousand friars there), several wise and
learned friars went to my Lord of Ostia who was there and said
to him, “ My Lord, we wish thee to persuade Brother Francis
to follow the counsel of wise brethren, and to allow himself now
and then to be led by them.” And they quoted the Rule of
St. Augustine, of St. Benedict, and of St. Bernard, who taught
thus and thus to live in order. And when the Cardinal had
repeated this to the holy man, by way of admonition, blessed
Francis answered him nothing, but took him by the hand and
led him to the friars assembled in the Chapter, and spoke thus
to the friars in the fervour and power of the Holy Spirit, “ My
brethren, my brethren, the Lord called me by the way of
simplicity and humility, and this way hath He shown me in
truth for me and those who will believe and imitate me. And
therefore I would that ye name not to me any rule, neither of
St. Augustine, nor St. Benedict, nor of Bernard, nor any way
or form of living, but that which was mercifully shown and given
me by the Lord. And the Lord said to men that He wished me
to be a new covenant in this world, and He would lead me by


Holy Humility and Obedience 243

another way than by this science. But God will confound you
through your wisdom and knowledge, and I trust in the sergeants
of the Lord that God will punish you by them, and that you will
yet return to your state with reproach, willye, nillye.” Then
the Cardinal was much amazed; and answered nothing, and all
the friars feared greatly.


CHAPTER LXIX

HOW HE FORESAW AND PREDICTED THAT LEARNING
WOULD BE THE RUIN OF THE ORDER

Blessed Francis grieved greatly if any one, neglecting virtue,
sought after the science which puffeth up, especially if any one
did not persist in that vocation to which he was called from the
beginning. For he was wont to say, “ My brethren who are led
by desire of learning shall find their hands empty in the day of
tribulation. I would therefore, that they be rather strengthened
in virtues, that when the time of tribulation shall come they
shall have the Lord with them in their straits. For a time of
tribulation is to come, when books shall be useful for nothing,
and shall be thrown ill windows and cupboards.” (This he did
not say, for that the reading of Holy Scriptures displeased him,
but that he might draw back all from overmuch care of learning.
For he wished them rather to be good by charity than smatterers
through the desire of knowledge. For he weighed beforehand
the time shortly to come, in which already he foreknew that
knowledge which puffeth up should be an occasion of ruin.
Whence appearing after his death to one of his fellows too
intent on the study of preaching, he reproved and prohibited
him, and ordered him that he should study to tread the path of
humility and simplicity.)


CHAPTER LXX

HOW IN THE TIME OF THE TRIBULATION TO COME, THOSE WHO
SHALL ENTER THE ORDER SHALL BE BLESSED, AND THOSE
WHO SHALL BE PROVED SHALL BE BETTER THAN THEIR
PREDECESSORS

Blessed Francis used to say, “ The time' shall come in which
this Order beloved by God shall be so defamed by the bad
example of evil friars, that it will be ashamed to go forth in


244 The Mirror of Perfection

public. But they who in that time shall come to join the Order,
shall be led only by the working of the Holy Spirit, and flesh
and blood shall raise no stain on them, and they shall be blessed
by the Lord. Though meritorious deeds be not found in them,
since charity grows cold which made the saints work fervently,
very great temptations shall come upon them; and those who
in that time shall have been found worthy shall be better than
their predecessors. But woe unto those, who, with the form
and appearance only of religious conversation, applauding
themselves in their wisdom and confident in their learning, be
found idle (that is, not exercising themselves in virtuous works,
in the way of penitence, and in the pure observance of the
Gospel; which by their profession they are bound to observe
pure and simply). For these will not resist with constancy the
temptation which shall be permitted to happen for the proving
of the elect; but those who have been tried and approved shall
receive the crown of life, to which in the meantime the malice
of the reprobate urges them on.”


CHAPTER LXXI

HOW HE ANSWERED HIS FELLOW WHO ENQUIRED WHY HE DID
NOT CORRECT THE EXCESSES WHICH WERE IN THE ORDER
IN HIS OWN DAY

A certain companion once said to blessed Francis, “ Father,,
forgive me that I would say unto you, which already many have
thought.” And he said, “ Thou knowest how formerly through
the grace of God, the whole Order flourished in the purity of:
perfection; how all friars with great fervour and solicitude
observed holy poverty in everything, in small and poor buildings;
and garniture, in few and poor books and clothes; and as in
these so in all other externals they were of one will and fervour,,
and in the solicitude of observing all things which pertain to.
our profession and vocation and the example of all; and thus,
they were of one mind in the love of God and their neighbour J(
as men truly apostolical and evangelical. But now of late this,
purity and affection begin to change, though many speak and.
excuse the friars on account of their multitude, saying that on,
this account the Rule cannot be observed by them. Nay, many
friars have come to such blindness that they think that people,
will be edified and turn to devotion, by this rather than by the.


Holy Humility and Obedience 245

former way, and it seems to them that they on this account live
more decently, despising and counting for naught the way of
holy simplicity, humility, and poverty, which was the beginning
and foundation of our Order. Whence we, considering these
things, believe that they are displeasing to thee; but we wonder
much if they do displease thee, why thou dost allow and not
correct them.” The holy man answered and said to him,
“ May the Lord have mercy on thee, brother, since thou wilt
be contrary and adversary to me, and mix me up in those things
which pertain not to my office. For as long as I had the office
of prelacy over the friars, and they remained in their vocation
and profession, though from the beginning of my conversion I
was always infirm, yet with my small solicitude I satisfied them
by example and preaching. But after I saw that the Lord
multiplied the number of the friars, and that they, on account
of their lukewarmness and want of spirit, began to depart from
the right and secure way by which they had been used to walk,
and entering on the broader way which leads to death, were not
following their vocation and profession and a good example,
nor did they wish to abandon that dangerous and deadly journey
which they had begun for my preaching and admonition and
the example which I showed to them continually, therefore,
I handed over the rule of the Order to the Lord and the Ministers.
Whence, though at the time when I gave up the office of the
prelacy of the friars, I excused myself before them in the Chapter-
General, that on account of my infirmities I was not able to
have the charge of them, yet if the friars wish to walk according
to my will even now, for their consolation and utility, I would
not that they should have any other Minister except me until
the day of my death.” (For from when a faithful and good
subject knows and observes the will of his superior, the prelate
need have little solicitude concerning him.) “Nay, so much
would I rejoice at the profit and the welfare of the brethren on
account of their and my gain, that if I were lying ill in bed I
should not be ashamed to satisfy them, because my office (that
is of prelacy) is spiritual only (namely, to keep under faults and
to correct and amend them spiritually). But since l am not
able to correct and amend them by preaching, admonition, and
example, I will not become an executioner, punishing and
flogging them, like the magistrates of this world. For I trust
in the Lord that the invisible enemies, who are the sergeants of
the Lord for punishment in this world and the next, will take
vengeance on those who have transgressed the commands of


246 The Mirror of Perfection

God and the vow of their profession, and will make them to be
corrected by the men of this world to their disgrace and shame,
and thus shall they return to their vocation and profession.
Yet truly, until the day of my death I will not cease at once
by example and the good works which the Lord has shown me
to teach the brethren, and walk by that way which I have
taught and shown them by word and example; that they may
be inexcusable before God; and I am not bound to give account
of them in the presence of God.”

After this are written the words which Brother Leo , the companion
and confessor of St. Francis , wrote for Brother Conrad of
Offida, at Saint Damian near Assisi , saying that he had them
from the mouth of the blessed man y the which holy Father was
standing near Assisi behind the pulpit of the church of St.
Mary of the Angels in prayer , lifting his hands on high to
Christ , that He should have mercy on the people , in the great
tribulation which must needs come.

And the Lord said, “ Francis, if thou wouldst that I should
have mercy on the Christian people, do this for Me, that thy
Order may remain in that state in which it was placed, because
of the whole world there will remain nothing more to Me, and
I promise thee, that for the love of thee and of thine Order, I
will not permit the world to suffer any tribulation. But I say
unto thee, that they must needs go back from the way in which
I have placed them, and they will provoke Me to such wrath,
that I shall rise against them, and I shall call the demons and I
shall give them the powef which they have desired, and they
shall place such a scandal between them and the world, that
there shall be no one who may wear thy habit except in the
woods. And when the world loses faith there will not remain
any other light except that of thine Order, because I have placed
them for a light to the world.” And St. Francis said, “ On
what shall my brethren live who shall dwell in the woods? ”
And Christ said, “ I will feed them as I fed the sons of Israel,
with manna in the desert; because they will be like them, and
then shall they return to the first state, in which thy Order was
founded and begun.”


Holy Humility and Obedience 247


CHAPTER LXXII

THAT THOSE SOULS ARE CONVERTED BY THE PRAYERS AND
TEARS OF THE HUMBLE AND SIMPLE BRETHREN WHICH SEEM
TO BE CONVERTED BY THE KNOWLEDGE AND PREACHING
OF OTHERS

The most holy Father was unwilling that his friars should be
desirous of knowledge and books, but he willed and preached to
them that they should desire to be founded on holy humility,
and to imitate pure simplicity, holy prayer, and our Lady
Poverty, on which the saints and first friars did build. And
this, he used to say, was the only safe way to one’s own salva¬
tion and the edification of others, since Christ, to Whose imita¬
tion we are called, showed and taught us this alone by word
and example alike. For the blessed Father himself, looking
forward to the future, knew by the Holy Spirit, and many
times used to say to the brethren, that friars by occasion of
teaching others, lose their own vocation, that is, holy humility,
pure simplicity, prayer, and devotion, and our Lady Poverty.
“ And it will happen to them, that they will think themselves
to be more filled with devotion and fired with love, and illumi¬
nated with the knowledge of God on account of their under¬
standing of the Scriptures. Thence on occasion they will
remain cold and empty within, and they cannot return to their
first vocation, because they have wasted their time of living
according to their vocation in vain and false study. And I fear
that that which they seem to have will be taken away from
them; because that which was given to them, that is, to hold
and to imitate their vocation, they have altogether neglected.”
And he said, “ There are many friars who place all their study
and care in acquiring knowledge, leaving their holy vocation,
and wandering with mind and body out of the way of humility
and of holy prayer. Who, when they shall have preached to
the people, and shall have learnt that some are thence edified
or turned to penitence, will be puffed up or extol themselves
for their work and another’s profit, as for their own; when yet
they have preached rather to their own condemnation and
prejudice, and have done nothing more in truth, except as instru¬
ments of those by whom the Lord truly acquired this fruit. For
those whom they believe to be edified and converted to penitence
by their knowledge and preaching, the Lord has taught and


248 The Mirror of Perfection

converted by the prayers and tears of holy, poor, and humble
and simple friars, though those holy friars, for the most part:,
know not of it. For thus it is the will of God that they know
it not lest they grow proud. These are my brethren of the
Table Round, who lie hidden in deserts and hidden places, that
more diligently they may give place to prayer and meditation,
deploring their own and others’ sins, living simply and con¬
versing humbly, whose sanctity is known of God, even when
it is unknown to their brethren and to men. And when their
souls are brought by the angels to the Lord, then the Lord shall
show them the fruit of their labours, namely the many souls
which by their example, prayers, and tears/are saved/ And
He shall say to them, ‘ My beloved sons, such and so many souls
have been saved by your prayers, tears, and example; and
because ye have been faithful over few things I will make
you rulers over many things. Others, indeed, have preached
and have laboured by the speeches of their wisdom and know¬
ledge, and I, by your merits, have brought about the fruit of
salvation. Therefore receive the reward of their labours and
the fruit of your merits, which is an everlasting kingdom; which
you have taken by the force of the violence of your humility
and simplicity, and of your prayers and tears/ And thus these,
carrying their sheaves (that is, the fruits and merits of their
holy humility and simplicity), shall enter into the joy of the
Lord rejoicing and exulting. But they who have taken no
thought except to know and to show to others the way of
salvation, doing nothing for themselves, shall stand naked and
empty before the tribunal of Christ, bringing only sheaves of
confusion, shame, and grief. Then shall the truth of holy
humility and simplicity, and holy prayer and poverty, which
is our vocation, be exalted and glorified and magnified, which
truth those puffed up with the wind of science condemned with
their life, and with the vain speeches of their wisdom, saying
that the truth was falsehood, and like blind men, persecuting
cruelly those who have walked in the truth. Then the error
and falsity of their opinions by which they have walked, which
they have preached for truth, by which they have thrown many
into the pit of blindness, shall be ended in grief, confusion, and
shame, and they themselves with their opinions shall be plunged
in outer darkness with the spirits of darkness.” Whence blessed
Francis often used to say concerning that word: then the barren
hath born many , and she that hath many children is waxed feeble:

“ the barren is a good Religious, simple, humble, poor, and


Holy Humility and Obedience 249

despised, who by his holy prayers and virtues continually
edifies others, and brings forth good fruit with dolorous sighs.”
This word he used to say very often before the Ministers and
other friars, especially in the Chapter-General.


CHAPTER LXXIII

HOW HE WILLED AND TAUGHT THAT PRELATES AND PREACHERS
SHOULD EXERCISE THEMSELVES IN PRAYER AND WORKS OF
HUMILITY

The faithful servant and perfect imitator of Christ, Francis,
feeling himself to be most thoroughly transformed by the virtue
of holy humility in Christ: above all other virtues desired this
humility in his brethren, and that they might love, desire,
acquire, and preserve this grace, he animated them incessantly
both with word and example, and especially did he admonish
and induce the Ministers and preachers to exercise works of
humility. For he used to say that they ought not on account
of the duty of their prelacy and their solicitude of preaching to
neglect holy and devout prayer, or going for alms, working
sometimes with their hands, and doing other works like the rest
of the friars, for the sake of the good example and the profit
of their own and others’ souls. And he said, “ For subject
friars are much edified, when their Ministers and preachers
spend time in prayer, and bend themselves willingly to works
of utility, and lightly-esteemed duties. But otherwise they
cannot without confusion, prejudice, and condemnation of
themselves, admonish other friars concerning works; for it
becomes us by the example of Christ rather to do than to teach,
and to do and teach together.”


CHAPTER LXXIV

HOW 1IE TAUGHT THE FRIARS TO KNOW WHEN HE WAS
THE SERVANT OF GOD AND WHEN NOT

Blessed Francis once called together many friars, and said to
them, “ I have asked the Lord, that He would deign to show
me when I am His servant. But the most gracious Lord in
His condescension answered me, * I know that thou art truly


250 The Mirror of Perfection

My servant when thou thinkest, speakest, and doest holy things.'
Therefore have I called you, brethren, and have shown this to
you, that I may be put to shame before you, when you shall
see me wanting in any of the aforesaid things,”


CHAPTER LXXV

HOW HE WILLED EXPRESSLY THAT FRIARS LABOUR
NOW AND THEN WITH THEIR HANDS

He used to say that lukewarm ones who did not apply them¬
selves to any task busily and humbly would quickly be spewed
out from the mouth of the Lord; so that no idle man could
appear before him, without being immediately attacked with
biting tooth. And thus he, the example of all perfection,
laboured humbly with his hands, permitting nothing of the
best gift of time to flow to waste. For he said, “ I wish all my
friars to labour and be exercised humbly in good works, that
we be the less burdensome to men, and that neither heart nor
tongue may wander in ease. But let those who know nothing
learn to work.” For he used to say that the profit and reward
of the labour should not be left to the will of the labourer, but to
the judgment of the warden or the community.


SECTION V

CONCERNING HIS ZEAL FOR THE PERFECTION OF THE
RULE AND THE WHOLE ORDER

CHAPTER LXXVI

AND FIRSTLY, HOW HE USED TO PRAISE THE PROFESSION OF
THE RULE AND WISH THE FRIARS TO KNOW IT, AND THAT
IT SHOULD BE KEPT BY ALL FRIARS

Blessed Francis, perfectly zealous and a lover of the Observance
of the Holy Gospel, was most ardently zealous for the common
profession of our Rule, which is none other than the perfect
Observance of the Gospel; and he endowed those who are and
shall be true enthusiasts for it with his singular benediction.
For he used to say to his imitators that this our profession was
the book of life, the hope of salvation, the foretaste of Glory,
the marrow of the Gospel, the way of the cross, the state of
perfection, the key of Paradise, and the pact of the eternal
covenant. This he wished to be held and known of all, and he
wished his brethren to confer concerning it very often in their
conversation against weariness, and in memory of their first
oath full often to talk of it with their inner man. He taught
them also that it should always be carried before their eyes in
commemoration and memory of leading the life, and of the due
Observance of the Rule, and what is more, he wished and taught
that the friars should die with it.


CHAPTER LXXVII

OF A HOLY LAYMAN WHO WAS MARTYRED HOLDING
THE RULE IN HIS HAND

Not unmindful therefore of the teaching of the most blessed
Father, a certain lay brother, whom we believe undoubtedly to
have been taken into the choir of martyrs, when he was amongst
the infidels for the desire of martyrdom, and while he was being
led to martyrdom by the Saracens, holding the Rule with great

251


252 The Mirror of Perfection

fervour in both his hands, his knees humbly bent, said to his
fellow, “I confess myself guilty, dearest brother, before the eyes
of the Divine Majesty and before thee, of all things which I have
done against this Rule.” To this short confession succeeded
the sword, by which, finishing his life, he attained the crown
of martyrdom. For he had entered the Order so young, that
he was hardly able to bear the yoke of the Rule, and yet a
youth he bore a shirt of mail next his flesh. Happy boy, who
happily began, and more happily ended!


CHAPTER LXXVIII

HOW HE WISHED HIS ORDER TO BE ALWAYS SUBJECT TO THE
PROTECTION AND CORRECTION OF THE ROMAN CHURCH

Blessed Francis used to say, “ I will go and commend the
Order of the Friars Minor to the holy Roman Church, by whose
mighty rod its evil wishers may be terrified and kept in check,
and the sons of God may rejoice everywhere with full liberty,
to the increase of their eternal salvation. Let my sons recognise
from this the sweet benefits of their mother, and ever embrace
her reverend footsteps with spiritual devotion towards her.
For under her protection, no evil son of Belial shall come into the
Order, the impious shall pass through the vineyard of the Lord.
That mother shall gather up the glory of our poverty and will
not permit the joy of obedience and the reward of humility in
any way to be darkened by the cloud of pride. She will preserve
untouched the bonds of charity and of peace among us; striking
with her strictest censure the unwilling, and the holy Observation
of Evangelical purity shall continually flourish in her sight, nor
will she suffer the odour of good fame and holy conversation to
be lost at any time.”


CHAPTER LXXIX

OF THE FOUR PREROGATIVES WHICH THE LORD GAVE TO THE
ORDER REVEALING THEM TO SAINT FRANCIS

Blessed Francis said that he had obtained from the Lord these
four things, announced to him by an angel: namely, that the
Order and profession of Friars Minor should never fail even tp


The Rule and the Order 253

the Day of Judgment. Also that no one setting himself with
all his might to persecute the Order should live long. Also that
no evil man, wishing to live evilly in the Order, should be able
to remain in it long. Also whoever from his heart should love
the Order, although he should be a sinner, yet he should at the
last obtain mercy*


CHAPTER LXXX

OF WHAT SORT THE MINISTER-GENERAL SHOULD BE

Such was the zeal which he had for the preservation of perfection
in the Order, and such seemed to him the perfection of the pro¬
fession of the Rule, that he often used to consider who would
be sufficient after his death for the governance of the whole
Order, and to the conservation of perfection in it with the help

of God; and he could come upon none fit.

Whence near the end of his life, a certain friar said to him,

“ Father, thou wilt pass away to the Lord, and this family
which has followed thee will remain in the vale of tears. Point
out any one in the Order, if thou knowest one, in whom thy
mind might be at rest, on whom the burden of the Minister-
General may be worthily imposed.” Blessed Francis answered,
pointing all his words with sighs, “ My son, I behold no sufficient
leader of so great and various an army, no shepherd of so wide
and scattered a flock, but I will paint to you one in whom should
shine out how the leader and shepherd of this family ought to
be This man (he said) ought to be of most grave life, of great
discretion, of laudable report, without private affections, lest
while he loves more dearly on one side, scandal may grow m the
whole body. There should be in him friendly zeal for prayer,
yet so that he distribute certain hours to his own soul, and
certain to his flock. For early in the morning, he should put
before all things the most holy sacrifice of the Mass, and there,
with long devotion, most earnestly commend himself and his
flock to the divine protection. But after prayer he shall place
himself in the midst that he may be questioned by all, answer
to all, to provide for all with charity and patience and gentleness
“ For he should be no acceptor of persons, so that he should
take no less heed of the simple and foolish than of the wise and
learned. To whom if the gift of learning be granted, yet let
him bear in his manner the stamp of piety and simplicity, of


254 The Mirror of Perfection

patience and humility, and let him cherish these virtues, ir
himself and in others, and continually exercise himself ir
preaching them, inciting others more by example than by
speech. Let him be a hater of money, which is the chief cor¬
ruption of our profession and perfection, and as the head and
example to be imitated by all, let him in no wise be wasted by
many store-chests.

“ Let a habit and a book be sufficient for himself, but for others
his pencase with a reed and writing tablets, and a seal. Let
him not be a collector of books nor much given to reading, lest
haply that be taken from his office which is given to study.
Let him console piously the afflicted, since he is the last resort
of those in tribulation, lest if the remedies of health be wanting
with him, despair of disease should prevail in the infirm. That
he may bend the violent to gentleness, let him bear himself
humbly, and relax something of his own rights that he may
have profit of their soul. To the runaways of the Order, as to
sheep who have perished, let him extend the bowels of pity,
and let him never deny mercy to them; knowing those tempta¬
tions to be very great which could compel to such a fall, which
temptations if the Lord should permit to him, he himself might
haply fall into a greater precipice.

“ I will that he, as vicar of Christ, be honoured by all with
devotion and reverence and that he be provided for by all and
in all things with all good-will, according to his necessity and the
lowliness of our condition. Yet it will behove him not to smile
on honours; nor to rejoice more in favours than in injuries, so
that his manners be not changed by honours except for the
better. But if sometimes he may need pleasanter and better
food; let him not take it privately but in a public place, that
the shame may be taken from others of providing them in their
infirmities and weaknesses. It behoves him chiefly to distinguish
hidden knowledge, and to search out the truth from secret veins.
Let him hold all accusations suspect in the beginning, until the
truth begin to appear by diligent examination. Let him not
lend his ear to much speakers, and let him hold them especially
suspect in accusations, nor lightly believe them. He should be
such as would, for the desire of retaining vile honour, never
injure nor relax the form of justice and equity. Yet so, that
out of too much rigour the soul of no one may be destroyed, and
out of superfluous gentleness sloth be not generated, and out
of lax indulgence the dissolution of discipline come not: and
thus that he be feared by all, and loved of those that fear him.


The Rule and the Order 255

Let him always think and feel the office of his prelacy rather a
Durden than an honour to him. I wish also that he have for
fellows men well spoken of for honesty, rigid against their own
wills, strong in need, pious and compassionate to delinquents,
having equal affection to all, receiving nothing of their labour
except the pure necessity of the body; and desiring nothing
except the praise of God, the welfare of the Order, the merit of
their own souls, and the perfect health of all the brethren,
suitably affable to all, and receiving those coming to them with
holy joy, and showing the form and Observance of the Gospel,
according to the profession of the Rule, in themselves purely
and simply to all. Behold, I say, such should be the Minister-
General of this Order, and such the fellows he should have.


CHAPTER LXXXI

HOW THE LORD SPAKE UNTO HIM, WHEN HE WAS GREATLY
AFFLICTED ON ACCOUNT OF THE FRIARS WHO WERE DEPART¬
ING FROM PERFECTION

Since, according to the measure of zeal which he continually
had for the perfection of the Order, he must needs be sad if he
saw or heard any imperfection therein, when he began to under¬
stand that some friars were giving an evil example to the Order,
and that the friars (now at the highest point of their perfection
and profession) had begun to decline, touched inwardly with
too great sorrow of heart, on a time he said to the Lord in
prayer, “ Lord, I give back to Thy charge the family which
Thou hast given me! ” And immediately the Lord said to him,
“ Tell Me, oh simple and feeble-minded mannikin, why thou art
so sad when any man goes out of the Order, and when the friars
do not walk by the way which I have shown thee? Also, tell
Me Who has planted this order of friars? Who has made man
to be converted to penitence; Who gives the virtue of per¬
severance? Is it not I? I have not chosen thee over My
household as a learned and eloquent man, because I wish neither
thee nor those that were true friars and true observers of the
rule which I have given thee, to walk by the way of science and
eloquence. But I have chosen thee a simple and unlearned man
that thou mayest know, both thou and others, that I will watch
over My flock, and I have placed thee for a sign to them, that
the works which I work in thee, they may work in themselves.


256 The Mirror of Perfection

For those who walk in the way I have shown thee, have Me mor
abundantly. But those who wish to walk by another way evei
that which they seem to have shall be taken away from them
Wherefore I say unto thee, for the rest, be not so sad, but dc
what thou doest, work what thou workest, since I have plantec
m perpetual charity the Order of Friars. Whence thou art tc
know that because I love them so much if any friar, having
returned to his vomit, should die outside the Order, I will send
another into the Order, who in his place shall have his crown.
And if he be not born, I will make him to be born. And that
you may know how freely I love the life and Order of Friars-
let it be granted that in the whole Order there should not remain
except three, yet even then it shall be My Order, and I will not
give it up for ever.” And when he heard these words his mind
remained wonderfully consoled. And though on account of the
great zeal which he always had for the perfection of the Order
he was not able wholly to contain himself from growing
vehemently sad when he heard of any imperfection done by the
friars by which evil example or scandal might arise, yet after he
was thus strengthened by the Lord he recalled to memory that
word of the psalm: 1 have sworn and I will perform it, that 1 will
keep thy righteous judgments: “ and to preserve the rule which
the Lord Himself gave to me, and to those who would wish to
imitate me.”

But all those friars have obliged themselves to this as I •
and therefore since I have put off me the burden of the brethren
by reason of my infirmities and other reasonable causes I am
not bound further than to pray for the Order, and to show a
good example to the brethren. For this I have from the Lord
and know for truth, that if infirmities did not excuse me the
greatest help which I could give the Order is, to spend the time
daily in prayer for it to the Lord, because He governs, keeps
and protects it. For in this, I have bound myself to the Lord
and to the brethren; that if any friar should perish by my evil
example, I will be bound to render reason for him to the Lord.”
These words he used to speak within himself to quiet his heart
and he also used to explain it right often to the friars in his dis¬
courses and at Chapters. Whence if any friar said at any time
to him, that he ought to interfere with the governance of the
Order, he used to answer saying, “ The friars have their Rule
and have sworn to keep it. And that they may not have any
excuse on my account, after it pleased the Lord to command
me to be their prelate, I swore before them likewise to observe


The Rule and the Order 257

it. Whence, since the friars know what they ought to do, and
what also to avoid, there remains nothing, except that I should
teach them by my works; since for this cause I am given to
them, in my life and after my death.”


CHAPTER LXXXII

OF THE SINGULAR ZEAL WHICH HE HAD TO THE PLACE OF
BLESSED MARY AND OF THE CONSTITUTIONS WHICH HE
HAD MADE AGAINST IDLE WORDS THERE

Above the other dwellings of the Order, he had a singular zeal
and especial desire always, while he lived, to observe all per¬
fection of life and conversation in the holy dwelling of St. Mary
of the Angels, as toward the head and mother of the whole
Order; intending and willing that place to be the form and
example of humility and poverty and all Evangelical Perfection
for all places, and that the friars staying there should ever be,
beyond other friars, circumspect and solicitous in doing and
avoiding all things which tend to the perfection of the Observance
of the Rule. Whence on a certain time, to avoid idleness which
is the root of all evils, especially in a Religious, he ordained that
each day after meals the friars should engage with him in some
work lest they should lose altogether or in part, the good which
they had gained in the time of prayer by useless and idle words,
to which man is especially disposed after food. Also he ordered
and commanded it to be firmly observed; that if any of the friars
idling or working amongst the brethren, should utter any idle
word, he should be bound to say one Pater Noster, praising God
in the beginning and the end of the prayer. Yet so, that if by
chance he, conscious of his fault, should have confessed that
which he had done, he should say the Pater Nosier for his own
soul, together with the Laudes Domini as has been said. But if
he were first blamed by any other friar, then he should be bound
to say the Pater Noster as aforesaid for the soul of the brother
rebuking him. But if he who was blamed excused himself,
and would not say the Pater Noster, he should be bound in the
same way to say it twice for the soul of the brother reproving
him. But if, by the testimony of himself or of another, it should
prove to be true that he had said that idle word, then he should
say also the said Laudes at the beginning and end of his prayer,
so loudly that he may be heard or understood by all friars


258 The Mirror bf Perfection

standing round about Which friars, while he is saying it, shal
hold their peace and listen. But if anybody seeing and hearing
a brother say an idle word shall keep silent and shall not reprove
him, he shall be bound in the same way to say the Pater Nostei
with the Laudes for his soul. And any friar whatever entering
a cell or a house, or any place, who shall find there a friar or friars,
should immediate devoutly thank and praise the Lord. The
most holy Father was always solicitous to repeat these Laudes ,
and he taught other friars with a most ardent will and desire
and excited them to saying those Laudes carefully and devoutly.


CHAPTER LXXXIII

HOW HE ADMONISHED THE FRIARS THAT THEY SHOULD
NEVER LEAVE THAT PLACE

Though blessed Francis knew that the kingdom of Heaven was
established in every place of the earth, and though he believed
that in every place the divine grace could be given to the elect
of God, yet he had found the dwelling of blessed Mary of the
Portiuncula to be filled with richer grace, and to be frequented
by the heavenly visitations of celestial spirits. For this reason
he used often to say to the friars, “ See, oh my sons, that ye
never leave this place, if you are thrown out on one side enter
by another, for this place is holy, and the habitation of Christ
and of the Virgin His mother. Here, when we were few, the
Most High increased us, here He enlightened the souls of His
poor by the light of His wisdom, here He inflamed our wills by
the fire of His love. Here he who shall pray with a devout
heart shall obtain what he seeks, and an offender shall be more
heavily punished. For which cause, 0 sons, hold this dwelling
most worthy with reverence and honour as truly the dwelling
of God, singularly beloved by Him and His mother, and therein
with your whole heart with the speech of exultation and con¬
fession, confess to God the Father and to His Son Our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the unity of the Holy Spirit,”


The Rule and the Order 259


CHAPTER LXXXIV

OF THE PREROGATIVES WHICH THE LORD WROUGHT
IN THE DWELLING OF ST. MARY

Holy of holies truly is this place of places.

Worthily held worthy of great honours.

Happy its surname more happy is its name.

And now its third name arises, omen of the gift.

The Angelic presence here casts abroad the light.

Here watches oft by night sounding hymns with the voice.
Afterward all fell to ruin Francis raised it up again.

Out of the three it was one which the Father himself repaired.
This the Father chose when with sackcloth he clothed his
members.

Here he broke the body and forced it to obey the mind.

Here by the fire of his love he kindled our wills.

Here within the temple was begotten the Order, of Minors.
While the Father’s example a crowd of men doth follow.
Clara, the spouse of God was here the first time shorn.

Cast off the pomps of the world and followed Christ.

Here the renowned birth of brothers at once and of sisters.
The holy mother bare by whom she brought back Christ to the
world.

Here was made narrow the broad road of the old world.

And virtue made wider for the chosen race.

Here grew the Rule Holy Poverty reborn.

Pride smitten down the cross called back among us.

Thus where was troubled Francis, and sore wearied*

Here was he rested his death here was renewed.

Here was he shown the truth whereof he doubted.

Nay, here was granted whatever that Father desired.


SECTION VI


OF HIS ZEAL FOR THE PERFECTION OF THE
BRETHREN

CHAPTER LXXXV

AND, FIRSTLY, HOW HE DESCRIBED TO THEM THE
PERFECT FRIAR

The most blessed Father, having transformed in some sort his
brethren into saints by the ardour of the love and the fervour
of the zeal which he had for their perfection, often thought
within himself, by what conditions and virtues a good Friar
Minor should be adorned. And he used to say that he would
be a good Friar Minor who should have the life and conditions of
these holy friars, to wit: the faith of Brother Bernard, which he
had most perfectly, with the love of poverty: the simplicity
and poverty of Brother Leo, who was truly of the holiest purity:
the courtesy of Brother Angelo, who was the first knight who
came to the Order, and who was adorned with all courtesy and
benignity: the gracious and natural sense, with the fair and
devout eloquence, of Brother Masseo: the mind raised in con¬
templation, which Brother Giles had in the highest perfection:
the virtuous and continual labour of holy Rufinus, who without
intermission prayed always, for even when sleeping or doing
anything, his mind was always with the Lord: the patience of
Brother Juniper, who arrived at the perfect state of patience,
because of the perfect truth of his own vileness which he had
before his eyes: and the desire in the highest degree of imitating
Christ through the bodily and spiritual strength of the cross, of
Brother John of the Lauds, who in his time was strong of body
above all men: the charity of Brother Roger, whose whole life
and conversation was in the fervour of charity: and the solici¬
tude of Brother Lucido, who was of the greatest solicitude, and
was unwilling to stay in one place for a month, but when it
pleased him to stay in any place, immediately he went away
from there, and said, “ We have no dwelling-place here but in
Heaven.”


260


His Zeal for Perfection of Brethren 261


CHAPTER LXXXVI

HOW HE DESCRIBED SHAMEFAST EYES, THAT HE
MIGHT TEACH BECOMING BEHAVIOUR

Amongst the other virtues which he loved and desired to be in
the brethren, after the foundation of holy humility, he specially
loved the fairness and cleanness of decency. Whence wishing
to teach the friars to have shamefast eyes, he was accustomed
to represent wanton eyes by this tale: A pious and powerful
king sent to the queen two messengers successively. The first
returns and brings back word for word, and speaks nothing of
the queen. For he had held his eyes in his head wisely, nor had
cast them at all upon the queen. The other returned and
after a few words wove a long history of the beauty of the
queen: “ Truly,” said he, “ Lord, I have seen a most beautiful
woman; happy is he who enjoys her! ” And the king said to
him, “ Thou, wicked servant, hast cast shameless eyes on my
wife; it is plain that thou hast wished subtily to obtain that
thou hast seen.” He ordered the first therefore to be called
again, and said to him, " What thinkest thou of the queen? ”
“ She seems,” said he, “ to me right good, because she listened
willingly and patiently ” (and he answered wisely). And the
king said to him, “ But what of the beauty which is in her?”
He answered, “ My Lord, it is thine to behold it, it was mine
to carry thy words.” The sentence was given by the king:
“ Thou,” said he, “ having chaste eyes, be of chaster body in
my chamber, and enjoy my delights, but let this shameless one
go out from my house, lest he should pollute my bed.” there¬
fore he used to say, “ Who would not fear to look upon the
spouse of Christ ? ”


CHAPTER LXXXVII

OF THE THREE SAYINGS WHICH HE LEFT TO THE FRIARS
TO PRESERVE THEIR PERFECTION

On a certain time when on account of the weakness of his
stomach he desired to vomit, on account of the great violence
he did to himself, he vomited blood for the whole night until
the morning. And when his companions saw him ready to die.


262 The Mirror of Perfection

through his great weakness and affliction, they said to him
with the greatest grief and shedding of tears, “ Father, what
shall we do without thee? Thou wast ever our father and
mother, begetting and bringing us forth in Christ. Thou wast
a leader and a shepherd to us, a master and a corrector, teaching
and correcting us more by example than by word. Whither
therefore shall we go, sheep without a shepherd, orphans without
a father, rude and simple men without a leader? Where shall
we go to seek thee, 0 glory of poverty, praise of simplicity, and
honour of our vileness? Who shall show us, blind ones, hence¬
forth the way of truth; where will the speaking mouth be, and
the tongue that counselled us ? Where will be the fervent spirit,
directing us in the way of the cross; and strengthening us to
evangelical perfection ? Where wilt thou be that we may come
to thee, light of our eyes; that we may seek thee, consoler of
our souls? Behold, Father, thou diest; behold, thou desertest
us thus desolate, leaving us thus sad and bitter; behold, that
day, the day of weeping and bitterness, the day of desolation
and sadness draweth near! Behold the bitter day which we
have always been fearing to see since we have been with thee;
even when we were not able to think of it. Nor is it strange,
truly, because thy life is a continuous light to us, and thy
words were torches, burning and guiding us continually to the
way of the cross and evangelical perfection, to the love and
imitation of the most sweet Crucified One! And therefore,
Father, forthwith bless us and thy other friars whom thou hast
begotten in Christ; and leave to us some memorial of thy
will; that thy brethren may have thee always in memory, and
that they may say, ‘ These words our Father left to his brethren
and his sons at his death.’” Then the most pious Father,
turning his paternal eyes on his sons, said to them, “ Call to
me Brother Benedict of Pirato.” For that brother was a
priest, holy and discreet, who celebrated for blessed Francis
while he lay there infirm (because always when he was able,
he wished to have or hear a mass as long as he was sick). And
when he had come to him, he said to him, “ Write how I bless
my brethren who are in the Order, and who shall come, unto the
end of the world. And since on account of my weakness and
the pain of my infirmity I may not speak, in these three words
I make plain my will and intention briefly to all my brethren,
present and to come; namely, that in token of my memory and
benediction and will, they should always love one another like as
I have loved and do love them; that they should always love


His Zeal for Perfection of Brethren 263

and observe our Lady Poverty, and always remain faithful
subjects to the prelates and clergy of holy Mother Church. ,,

For thus in the Chapter of the friars our Father had always
been anxious at the end of the Chapter to bless and absolve
all friars present and to come in the Order, and even out of
Chapter he did the same many times in the fervour of his
charity. But he used to warn the friars, that they should fear
and guard themselves from evil example; and he cursed all those
who by evil example provoked men to blaspheme the Order
and life of the friars, because good and holy poor men are
shamed by this and much afflicted.


CHAPTER LXXXVIII

OF THE LOVE WHICH HE SHOWED TO THE FRIARS WHEN NEAR
HIS DEATH, GIVING TO EACH A MOUTHFUL OF BREAD BY
THE EXAMPLE OF CHRIST

On a certain night blessed Francis was so weighed upon by the
pains of his infirmities, that he could neither rest nor sleep that
whole night. But in the morning, when his pains had a little
ceased, he caused all the friars in the dwelling to be called. And
placing his right hand on the head of each of them, he blessed
them all, present and absent, and those who should come to the
Order up to the end of the world; and he seemed to have com¬
passion on himself, because he was not able to see all his brethren
and his sons before his death. But wishing in his death to imitate
his Lord and Master, as he had perfectly imitated Him in his
life, he ordered loaves to be brought to him, and blessed them,
and made them to be broken into portions; because on account
of his great weakness he was not strong enough to break it.
And taking it, he handed to each of the friars a portion, bidding
him eat the whole of it. Whence as the Lord before His death
wished in token of His love to eat with His disciples on the
Thursday, so blessed Francis, His perfect imitator, wished to
show the same sign of love to his brethren. And that he wished
to do this in the likeness of Christ appears manifestly, because
he afterwards asked if it were then Thursday. But one of those
friars kept back a particle of that bread, and after the death of
blessed Francis, many sick who tasted thereof were immediately
liberated from their infirmities*


264 The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER LXXXIX

TOW HE FEARED LEST THE FRIARS SHOULD COMPLAIN
OF HIS INFIRMITY

When, on account of the pain of his infirmities he was not able
to rest, and had seen that thereby the friars were much dis¬
tracted and fatigued on his account, since he loved the souls of
his brethren more than his own body, he began to fear lest from
their too great labour on his account the friars should incur even
the least offence before God on account of some impatience.
Whence on a time he said with piety and compassion to his
companions, “ Dearest brethren, and my little sons, let it not
weary you to labour for my infirmity; since the Lord will return
to you all the fruit of your works for His humble servant in this
world and in the future; and those things which ye may not do
now on account of the care of my infirmity, ye shall acquire
even greater profit than if you had done them for yourself, since
he who aids me, aids the whole religion and life of the friars.
Nay more, ye ought to say thus, ‘ We will make our expense
over thee, and the Lord will be our debtor on your account/ ”
(But the holy Father said this wishing to assist and raise the
cowardice of their spirits, on account of the great zeal which
he had for the perfection of their souls. He feared also lest
sometimes tempted by that labour they might say, “ We cannot
pray nor suffer such labour,” and thus they should become
wearied and impatient of such small labour, and lose great fruit.)


CHAPTER XC

HOW HE ADMONISHED THE SISTERS OF ST. CLARE

After blessed Francis made his “ Praises to the Lord concerning
His creatures,” he made also certain holy words with a song
for the consolation and edification of the poor ladies, knowing
them to be greatly troubled concerning his infirmity; and when
he could not visit them in person he sent those words to them
by his companions. For he wished to make plain his will to
them in those words, namely, how they should live and converse
humbly, and be of one mind in charity. For he saw that their


His Zeal for Perfection of Brethren 265

conversion and holy conversation was not only an exaltation of
the Order of the friars but also a very great edification of the
Church Universal. But knowing that in the beginning of their
conversion they had led a very narrow and poor life, he was
always moved to pity and compassion for them. Whence he
asked them in those same words that as the Lord had gathered
them together from many places into one, to holy charity, holy
poverty, and holy obedience, so they should always live and
die in them. And strictly did he warn them, that they should
provide for their bodies discreetly out of the alms which the
Lord should give to them, with joyfulness and giving of thanks;
and especially that they should ever be patient in the labours
which they sustained for their infirm sisters, and that the infirm
themselves should be likewise patient in their infirmities.


K 485


SECTION VII

OF IIIS CONTINUAL FERVOUR OF LOVE AND PASSION
FOR THE PASSION OF CHRIST

CHAPTER XCI

and firstly, how he took no care of his own infirmities

ON ACCOUNT OF HIS LOVE OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST

So great was the fervour of love and compassion of blessed
Francis for the pains and sufferings of Christ, and so much was
he daily afflicted on account of that passion, within and without,
that he took no care of his own infirmities. Whence, though
for a long time, up to the day of his death, he had suffered
ailments of the stomach and liver and spleen, and from the time
when he returned from over-sea he had had very great pains
of his eyes continually, yet he would not on that account take
any pains to make himself be made whole. Whence my Lord
of Ostia, seeing that he was and ever had been austere to his
body, and especially as he had now begun to lose the light of
his eyes; and because he would not be made whole, admonished
him with great pity and compassion, saying, “ Brother, thou
dost not well, because thou dost not get thyself cured, though
thy life and health be very useful to friars and seculars, and the
whole church. For if thou hadst compassion on thy infirm
brethren, and wert always pious and merciful to them, thou
shouldst not be cruel to thyself in so great a necessity. For
which reason I command thee to cause thyself to be cured and
assisted.” (For that most holy Father ever took that which
was bitter for sweet, because he drew immense sweetness from
the humility and footsteps of the Son of God.)


CHAPTER XCII

HOW HE WAS FOUND GOING, LAMENTING IN A LOUD VOICE
THE PASSION OF CHRIST

On a certain time a little after his conversion, when he was
walking alone on the road not very far from the church of
St. Mary of the Portiuncula, he went with a loud voice lament-

266


Love for the Passion of Christ 267

ing. But a certain spiritually-minded man met him, and fearing
lest he had pain of some ailment, said to him, “ What is the
matter, Brother? ” But he answered, “ Thus I go through the
world without shame, lamenting the Passion of my Lord.”
Then they both began to weep together, and shed many tears.
This man we have known, and have learnt this from him, who
also showed much consolation and mercy to the blessed man and
to us his fellows.


CHAPTER XCIII

HOW THE JOYS WHICH HE SOMETIMES HAD WERE
TURNED INTO TEARS

Drunken with the loye and compassion of Christ, blessed Francis
on a time djd things such as these. For the most sweet melody
of spirit boiling up \yithin him frequently broke out in French
speech and the veijis of murmuring which he heard secretly with
his ears, broke forth into French-like rejoicing. And sometimes
he picked up a, branch from the earth, and laying it on his left
arm, he drew in his right hand another stick like a bow oyer it,
as if on a vipl or other instrument, and making fitting gestures,
sang with it in French unto the Lord Jesus Christ. But all this
playjng ended in tears, and this joy dissolved in compassion for
the Passion of Christ. In these times he would draw sighs
continually; and with deep-drawn groans, forgetful of those
things which he held in his hands, he was raised to Heaven.


SECTION VIII


OF HIS ZEAL FOR THE ORDER AND THE
DIVINE WORK

CHAPTER XCIV

AND FIRSTLY, OF PRAYER AND THE DIVINE OFFICE

Though for many years he had been afflicted with the aforesaid
infirmities, yet was he so devout and reverent at prayer and the
Divine Office, that every time he was praying or repeating the
canonical Hours, he would never lean on the wall or doorpost.
For he generally stood erect and bareheaded, though he was
sometimes on his knees; more especially because he spent the
greater part of the day and the night in prayer; nay, when
he went through the world afoot he always stayed his steps
when he wished to say his Hours. But if he were riding, on
account of his ailment, he always alighted to say the Office.
On a certain time it was raining very much, and he was riding
by reason of his infirmity and very great necessity, and though
he was wholly soaked through, he got off the horse when he
wished to say his Hours, and said his Office with as great a
fervour of devotion and reverence thus, standing on the road
with the rain falling on him continually, as if he had been in a
church or a cell. And he said to his companion, “ If the body
wishes to eat its food in peace and quietness, when both are but
the food of worms, with how much quiet and peace, with how
great a reverence and devotion, should the mind receive that
food which is God Himself.”


CHAPTER XCV

HOW HE EVER LOVED SPIRITUAL GLADNESS IN HIMSELF
AND OTHERS

The .blessed Father ever used to have his highest and especial
study in this, that apart from prayer and the Divine Office, he
should continually have spiritual gladness; and this likewise

268


His Zeal for the Order 269

he singularly loved in his brethren, nay, he often reproved them
for sadness and outward grief. For he used to say that “ if
the servant of God would study to preserve within and without
the spiritual joy which comes of cleanness of heart and is
acquired by devoutness of prayer, the demons would not be
able to harm him, for they would say, * Since this servant of
God has joy in tribulation as in prosperity, we can find no way
of entering to him nor of hurting him/ But the demons exult
when they can quench or hinder in any way the devotion and
joy which arises from prayer and other virtuous works. For
if the devil may have aught of his own in the servant of God,
except he be a wise man and solicitous to take away and destroy
it as soon as possible by the virtue of holy prayer, contrition,
confession, and satisfaction, in a short time he will make from
one hair a beam to throw upon him. Since, therefore, my
brethren, this spiritual joy comes of cleanness of heart and the
purity of continual prayer, ye should be first and foremost
desirous to acquire and conserve these two things, that ye may
have, within and without, that joy which with the greatest
longing I desire and wish to know and feel in you and myself,
to the edification of our neighbours and the reproach of the
enemy. For it pertaineth to him and to his members, to grow
sad, but to you ever to rejoice and be glad in the Lord,”


CHAPTER XCVI

HOW HE REPROVED HIS FELLOW WHO WAS SAD OF FACE,
AND CONCERNING INTELLIGIBLE GLADNESS

The holy Father used to say, “ Although I know the demons
envy me the blessings which the Lord has given me; yet I
know and see that they cannot hurt me by myself, and they
intend and desire to hurt me by my fellows. But if they cannot
harm me by myself, or by my fellows, they retire with great
confusion. Nay, if I am sometimes tempted or full of grief,
when I perceive the gladness of my fellows immediately on
account of their joy I return from my temptation and grief to
my interior and exterior joy.” On account of these things,
the Father himself used often to blame those who made a show
of sadness. For on a certain time he blamed one of his fellows
who appeared sad of face, and said to him, “ Why dost thou


270 The Mirror of Perfection

make an outward show of sorrow and sadness for thy offences?
Keep thou this sadness between thee and thy God, and pray to
Him that by His mercy He may spare thee, and restore to thy
soul the gladness of IJis salvation, which is taken away from
thee on account of sin; but before me and others, study always
to have joy, for it befits not the servant of God to show before
his brother or another sadness or a troubled face.”

Not that it should be thought or believed that our Father,
a lover of all gravity and decency, would have wished this
gladness to be shown by laughing or by the least vain word;
since by this not spiritual gladness but rather vanity and folly
is shown; nay, he even singularly abhorred laughing and idle
words in the servant of God; since not only did he wish that
he should not laugh, but not even afford to others the slightest
occasion for laughing. Whence in a certain admonition of his,
he laid down more clearly what should be the joy of the servant
of God. For he said, “ Blessed is that Religious, who has no
joy nor gladness except in the most holy words and works of
the Lord, and with these provokes man to the love of the Lord
in joy and gladness. And woe to that Religious who rejoices
in idle and vain words, and with these provokes men to laughter.”

By gladness of face, therefore, he understood fervour and
solicitude and the disposition and preparation of mind and
body to doing freely all good works, because by fervour and
disposition of this kind others are more provoked sometimes
than by the good deed itself; nay, if an act, however good, does
not seem to be done willingly and fervently, it rather causes
disgust than provokes to good. Aad so he did not wish to see
sadness in the face, which most often represents melancholy
and indisposition of mind and idleness of body to all good.
But he ever loved above all things gravity and maturity in face
and in all the members of the body and the senses in himself and
in others, and he induced others to do this as much as he could
by word and example. For he had found out that gravity and
modesty of manners of this kind was like a wall and a very
strong shield against the shafts of the devil; and that the soul
without the protection of this wall and shield was like a naked
knight amongst very strong and well-furnished enemies, con¬
tinually intent on his death.


His Zeal for the Order


271

CHAPTER XCVII

HOW FRIARS SHOULD SATISFY THE NECESSITIES
OF THE BODY

Our most holy Father, considering that the body was created
for the soul, and that bodily acts should be wrought on account
of spiritual, used to say, “ The servant of God, in eating and
drinking and sleeping and satisfying the other necessities of the
body, ought to satisfy his body with discretion, so that Brother
Body may not be able to murmur against him, saying, ‘ I cannot
stay erect and remain at prayer, nor rejoice in tribulations of
the mind, nor work any other good works, because you do not
satisfy my need.’ For if the servant of God would satisfy his
body with discretion and in a sufficiently good and fitting
manner, and Brother Body should wish to be negligent and fat
and sleepy in prayer, vigils, and good works, then he ought to
phnish it like a bad and fat beast for that he would eat and not
be of profit, and bear a load. But if on account of want and
poverty Brother Body cannot have his necessities in health and
weakness, when he shall have humbly and honestly asked it
from his brother or from his prelate for the love of God, and it
is not given to hitii; let him bear it patiently for the love of
God, Who should console him, Who sought it arid also found
it riot; and this necessity with patience shall be counted to him
by the Lord for martyrdom. And because he has done that
which was his to do (that is, has hrimbly asked his need),
he shall be excused, even if his body were thence made sore
feeble.”


SECTION IX

OF CERTAIN TEMPTATIONS WHICH THE LORD
PERMITTED TO HIM


CHAPTER XCVIII

AT'D firstly, how the demon entered a pillow

WHICH HE HAD UNDER HIS HEAD

When blessed Francis was staying in the hermitage of Greccio
for prayer in the last cell beyond the greater cell, on a certain
night in his first slumber he called his fellow who was sleeping
near him. And this fellow, rising, went to the door of the cell
where the blessed man was sleeping. And the saint said to him,
“ Brother, I have not been able to sleep this night, neither to
stand erect at prayer, for my head and my legs tremble very
much, and it seems to me that I must have eaten some darnel
bread.” And when his fellow spoke to him in compassionate
words, the holy man said, “ But I believe that the devil is in
that pillow which I have at my head.” (For though he had
never wished to sleep on feathers^ or to have a feather pillow
since he left the world; yet against his will the friars forced him
to have that pillow then on account of the weakness of his eyes.)
So he threw it to his fellow. His fellow, taking it, set it on his
left shoulder, and when he had gone out of the porch of that
cell, forthwith he lost his speech, and was not able to put down
the'pMoiv or move his arms, but stood there erect, unable to
move himself from that place, and feeling nothing in him. But
when for some space of time he had stood thus, by the grace of
God the holy Father called him; and immediately he returned
to himself, letting the pillow fall behind his back. And when
he had returned to the blessed man, he told him all things that
had happened to him. And the saint said, “ In the evening,
when I was saying Complines, I felt the devil come into the
cell; whence I see that this devil is very astute, because when
he could not hurt my soul, he wished to hinder the necessity of
the body; so that I could not sleep nor stand erect at prayer,
and that thus he would hinder the devotion and joy of my
heart, and through this I should murmur at my infirmity.”

272


Certain Temptations


2 73


CHAPTER XCIX

OF THE VERY GRAVE TEMPTATION WHICH HE HAD
FOR MORE THAN TWO YEARS

When he was staying in the dwelling of St. Mary, a very grave
temptation of spirit was sent to him for the profit of his soul.
Thereby he was so much afflicted in mind and body that many
times he drew himself away from the company of the friars,
because he was not able to show himself joyful to them as he
was accustomed. He afflicted himself nevertheless by abstin¬
ence from food and drink and words; and he prayed more
instantly and shed tears more abundantly, that the Lord would
be pleased to send to him a sufficient remedy in such a tribula¬
tion. But when he had been thus afflicted for more than two
years, it happened on a certain day, while he was praying in the
church of St. Mary, that the word of the Gospel was spoken to
him in his spirit: If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed ye
shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and
it shall remove. Immediately the holy Father answered to
Him, “ Lord, what is that mountain? ” And it was answered,
“ That mountain is thy temptation/’ The holy Father said,
“ Therefore, Lord, it is done unto me as Thou hast said.” And
immediately he was so perfectly set free, that it seemed to him
that he had never had any temptations. Likewise in the holy
mountain of Alverna, at the time when he received the stigmata
of the Lord in his body, he suffered such trials and temptations
from the demons that he was not able to show himself joyful
to his brethren as he was used, and he used to say to his fellows,
“ If the friars knew how many and what afflictions the demons
cause me, there is not one of them who would not be moved to
compassion and pity on me.”


CHAPTER C

OF THE TEMPTATION WHICH HE HAD THROUGH MICE, CONCERNING
WHICH THE LORD CONSOLED HIM, CERTIFYING HIM OF HIS
KINGDOM

Two years before his death, while he was at St. Damian in a
certain cell made of reeds, and was very greatly afflicted by the
infirmity of his eyes, so that for more than sixty days he was


274 The Mirror of Perfection

not able to see the light of day, or even the light of the fire,
it happened, by the Divine permission, that so many mice came
into his cell for the increase of his affliction and of his merit,
that they, running about over him in that cell by day and by
night, allowed him neither to pray nor to remain quiet, nay,
when he was eating they climbed up on his table, and worried
him very much. Whence it appeared manifest both to himself
and to his fellows, that it was a diabolical temptation. The
blessed man therefore, seeing himself to be punished with so
many afflictions, on a certain night, moved with compassion,
said within himself, “ Lord, look down on my infirmities in my
help, that I may be able to bear them patiently.” And imme¬
diately it was said to him in the spirit, “ Tell me, my brother,
if any one should give to thee for these thy infirmities and
tribulations so great and precious a treasure, that if the whole
earth should be compared to it, it would be nothing in respect
of that great treasure; would you not rejoice greatly? ” And
blessed Francis answered, “ 0 Lord, great would be that
treasure and very precious, and much admirable and desirable.”
And he heard again One saying unto him, “ Therefore, brother,
rejoice and be glad in thy infirmities and tribulations; and for
the rest hold thyself as secure as if thou wert now in My king¬
dom.” And rising early, he said to his companion, “ If the
Emperor should give to any slave a whole kingdom; ought not
that slave to rejoice greatly? If he should give his whole
empire to him, ought he not much more to rejoice? ” And lie
said to them, “ Therefore I should rejoice greatly in my in¬
firmities and tribulations, and be strong in the Lord, and always
give thanks to God the Father and to His only Son our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the Holy Spirit, for such grace given me
by the Lord, namely, that He has deigned to certify me His
unworthy servant, yet living in the flesh, of His kingdom.
Whence I wish to make to His praise and to our consolation
and to the edification of our neighbour a new Praise of the
Creatures of the Lord, which we daily use and without which
we cannot live, and in whom the human race much offends
their Creator; and we are continually ungrateful for so much
grace and benefit, not praising God, the Creator and Giver of
all things, as we ought. And sitting down, he began to meditate
a little, and afterwards he said, “ Most high, omnipotent good
Lord,” etc. And he sang a song over this, and taught his
fellows to say and sing it. For his spirit was then in so great
consolation and sweetness; that he wished to send for Brother


Certain Temptations 275

Pacifico, who in the world used to be called the King of Verses,
and was a truly courteous teacher of singers, and he wished
some friars to be given to him that they should go together with
him through the world preaching and singing praises of the
Lord. For he said that he wished that he who knew how to
preach best among them should first preach to the people, and
after the preaching they should all sing together the praises of
the Lord like minstrels of the Lord. But when the praises were
finished, he wished that the preacher should say to the people,
“ We are the minstrels of the Lord, and for these things we
wish to be paid by you, that is, that you should remain in true
penitence.” And he said, “ For what are the servants of the
Lord but His minstrels, who should raise the hearts of men and
move them to spiritual joy.” And this he used to say specially
of the Friars Minor, who were given to the people of God for
their welfare.


SECTION X

OF THE SPIRIT OF PROPHECY


CHAPTER Cl

AND FIRSTLY, HOW HE PREDICTED THAT PEACE WOULD BE
MADE BETWEEN THE BISHOP AND PODESTA OF THE CITY
OF ASSISI, WHEN THE CANTICLE WAS HEARD WHICH HE
HAD MADE TO THE PRAISES OF THE CREATURES

After blessed Francis had composed the aforesaid Praises of
the Creatures, which he called the “ Canticle of Brother Sun,”
it happened that a great discord arose between the Bishop and
the Podesta of the city of Assisi, so that the Bishop excom¬
municated the Podesta of the city, and the Podesta warned
every one that no one should buy or sell anything with him, or
make any contract with him.

Blessed Francis, although he was sick when he heard this,
was moved with compassion on them, especially as no one
interfered to make peace between them. And he said to his
fellows, “ It is great shame to us, servants of God, that the
Bishop and the Podesta should hate one another thus, and that
no one should concern himself with their peace.” And so
he made immediately a verse in the aforesaid Praises on that
occasion and said:

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of those who pardon for Thy love
and endure sickness and tribulations.

Blessed are they who will endure it in peace,
for by Thee, Most High, they shall be crowned.

Afterwards he called one of his fellows, and said to him, “ Go
to the Podesta and tell him on my part to go to the Bishop’s
palace with the magnates of the city and what others he may
take with him.” And when that brother had gone, he said to
two others of his fellows, “ Go and sing the Canticle of Brother
Sun before the Bishop and the Podesta and the others who are
with them, and I trust in the Lord that He will immediately
humble their hearts, and they will return to their first love and
friendship.” But when they were all gathered together in the

276


The Spirit of Prophecy 277

open court of the cloister of the Bishop's palace, those two friars
arose, and one of them said, “ Blessed Francis has made in his
weakness the Praise of the Lord concerning his Creatures, to the
praise of the said Lord, and the edification of his neighbour.
Whence he asks of you that you should hear him with great
devotion.” And thus they began to speak and to sing. But
the Podesta immediately rose and with joined hands and arms
listened intently to those verses as to the Gospel of the Lord
with very great devotion and even with many tears, for he had
great faith and devotion to blessed Francis. When the Praises
of the Lord were finished, the Podesta said before them all,
“ In truth, I say unto you, that not alone my Lord the Bishop,
whom I wish and ought to have for my Lord, but if any one
should have slain my blood-friend or my son I will forgive him,”
and so saying he threw himself at the feet of the Bishop and said
to him, “ Behold, I am ready to make satisfaction for every¬
thing as it shall please you, for the love of Our Lord Jesus Christ,
and of His servant blessed Francis.”. But the Bishop taking
him with his hands, raised him and said to him, “ My office bids
me be humble, yet because I am naturally prompt to wrath, it
behoves that thou shouldst pardon me.” And thus with much
benignity and love they embraced and kissed each other. But
the friars seeing what the blessed man had predicted of their
concord fulfilled to the letter, were amazed and rejoiced. And
all the others who were present held this for a very great miracle,
ascribing the whole to the merits of the blessed man; because
the Lord had so quickly visited them, and that they had turned
away without the uttering of any word from such discord and
scandal to such harmony. But we who were with the blessed
Father bear testimony that when he said of any one,“ thus it
is,” or, “ thus it will be,” always it happened thus to the letter.
And we have seen so often and so much of this that it would be
long to write or to tell it.


CHAPTER CII

HOW HE FORESAW THE FALL OF A FRIAR UNWILLING TO
CONFESS UNDER AN APPEARANCE OF SILENCE

There was a certain friar outwardly of honest and holy con¬
versation, who by day and night seemed solicitous concerning
prayer, and in such wise observed continual silence, that some-


278 The Mirror of Perfection

times when he would confess to the priest he used to confess
by signs only and not by words. For he seemed so devout and
fervent in the love of God that sometimes sitting with his
brethren even though he did not speak, yet he rejoiced greatly
within and without on hearing such good words, so that from this
he drew other friars to devotion. But when he had remained some
years in this kind of life, it happened that blessed Francis came
to the habitation where he was staying. Who, when he heard
from the friars his conversation, said to them, “ Know in truth
that it is because of a diabolical temptation that he does not
wish to confess.” In the meantime the Minister-General came
there to visit the holy man and began to commend that one to
the blessed man. And thfc blessed one said to him, “ Believe
me, brother, that friaf, since he is led by an evil spirit, will be
deceived. The Minister-General said, “ It seems strange to
me, and almost incredible, that this could be of a man who has
so many signs and works of holiness.” And the holy man said
to him, “ Prove him,” saying to the friar, “ Brother, I wish that
you should confess twice in a week.” But he placed his finger
oyer his mouth, shaking his head and showing by signs that he
did not wish to do this for the love of silence. ' But the Minister,
fearing to scandalise him, let him go. And hot many days after
that friar left the Order of his own will, and returned to the
world, wearing the secular dress.

But so it was, that while on a day two of the cbmpaniohs Of
the blessed man were walking by a certain toad, thev came upon
him walking alone like a very poor pilgrim. And having com¬
passion on him, they said, “ Oh wretched one, where is thy
honest and holy conversation? For thou wast unwilling to
speak and to show thyself to thy brethren, and now thou goest
wandering through the world, like a man ignorant of God ”
But he began to Speak to them, sweating often “ by his faith ”
like the men of this world. And they said to him, “ Wretched
man, why dost thou swear by thy faith like lay-folk, thou who
was wont to be silent, not only from idle words, but from all
speech? ” And so they left him, and a little after he died
And we wondered greatly, seeing what blessed Francis had
predicted of him in the time when the wretched one was reputed
a saint by the friars to be true to the letter.


The Spirit of Prophecy


279


CHAPTER CIII

OF A CERTAIN MAN WHO WEPT BEFORE THE BLESSED FRANCIS
THAT HE MIGHT BE RECEIVED INTO THE ORDER

At the time when no one was received into the Order except
by the leave of the blessed man, the son of a noble citizen of
Lucca with many others, wishing to enter the Order, came to
blessed Francis, who was then sick in the palace of the Bishop
of Assisi. And when they all presented themselves to the
blessed man, he bowed down before him and began to weep
greatly, begging him to receive him. The blessed Father look¬
ing upon him said to him, “ Oh wretched and carnal man; why
dost thou lie to the Holy Spirit and to me? Thou weepest
carnally and not spiritually.” And as these things were said,
his relations came on horseback outside the palace, wishing to
take him away, and carry him off by force. But he, hearing
the noise of the horses, looked through a window and saw his
kinsmen and straightway went down to them, and as the
blessed man had foreseen, returned to the world with them.


CHAPTER CIV

OF THE VINEYARD OF THE PRIEST SPOILED ON ACCOUNT
OF BLESSED FRANCIS

Blessed Francis abode a while by reason of the weakness of his
eyes at the church of St. Fabian, which is near Rieti, with a poor
priest. For my Lord Pope Honorius was then at that city with
all his court; whence many Cardinals and other great clerks
used to visit blessed Francis almost daily, on account of the
devotion which they had towards him. Now that church had
a little vineyard next the house in which the blessed Francis
was: and in that house was a door by which well-nigh all who
visited him entered the vineyard, especially as the grapes were
then ripe and the place was very pleasant; so that for that
reason the whole vineyard was stripped and spoiled of its grapes.
On account of which that priest began to be scandalised, saying,
“ Though it was a small vineyard, yet I used to collect thence
as much wine as was sufficient for my need, and behold I have
lost it all for this year! ” Hearing which blessed Francis made


280


The Mirror of Perfection


him to be called and said to him: “ Be not any further disturbed,
because we cannot do anything else now. But trust in the Lord,
since He is able to make up thy loss by His servant to thee in
full. Tell me, how many measures of wine thou hadst, when
thou hadst most from thy vineyard ? ” The priest answered,
“ Father, thirteen measures.” Blessed Francis said to him,
“Be no more sad, nor say any injurious word to any one on
account of this, but have faith in the Lord and in my word, and
if thou hast less than twenty measures of wine I will cause it
to be made up to thee.” And from that time forward the priest
held his tongue and was quiet, and in the time of the vintage he
had from that vineyard twenty measures of wine and not less.
And all those who heard this wondered greatly, saying that if
the vineyard had been full of grapes it would have been im¬
possible that there should have been twenty measures of grapes
there. But we who were with him bear testimony that what
he said of this and of all things was fulfilled to the letter.


CHAPTER CV

OF THE KNIGHTS OF PERUGIA WHO HINDERED HIS
PREACHING

While blessed Francis was preaching in the place of Perugia
to a great crowd of people congregated there, behold, some
knights of Perugia began to run through the place on horseback
and hinder his preaching. And though they were reproved by
those who were present, yet they did not cease on account of
this. Therefore the holy Father, turning towards them, said
to them with fervour of spirit, “Hear and understand what the
Lord announces to you by me the least of His servants, nor say,
* this man is of Assisi.’ ” (But this he said, because there is an
old hatred between them of Perugia and the men of Assisi.)
And he said to them, “ The Lord has exalted you over all your
neighbours, on account of which ye ought rather to recognise
your Creator by humiliating yourself not only to God but also
to your neighbours. But your heart is lifted up in pride, and
ye lay waste your neighbours and slay many of them. Where¬
fore I say unto you, that unless ye be quickly converted to God,
satisfying those whom ye have offended, the Lord, Who leaves
nothing unpunished, will cause you to rise one against the other
to your shame, for your greater vengeance and punishment.


The Spirit of Prophecy 281

and, moved by sedition and internal war, ye shall suffer greater
tribulation than your neighbours could bring upon you.” (For
thus the holy Father never held his peace on the faults of the
people, when he used to preach, but reproved them all, publicly
and manfully. But the Lord gave so much grace to him, that
all, of whatever state and condition they were, who saw and
heard him, feared and venerated him on account of the abundant
grace of God which he had; so that however often they were
reproved by him they were always edified by his words, and were
converted to the Lord or inwardly struck with penitence.) And
so it was, by divine permission, that a few days after a dissension
arose between the knights and the people, so that the people
turned the knights out of the city, and the knights, with the
Church which assisted them, laid waste their fields and vine¬
yards and trees, and did all the evil which they could do to the
people. And the people likewise destroyed all the goods of the
knights. And so, according to the word of the blessed man,
the people and the knights were punished.

CHAPTER CVI

HOW HE FORESAW THE HIDDEN TEMPTATIONS AND
TRIBULATIONS OF A CERTAIN FRIAR

A certain friar, right spiritual and familiar with the blessed
man, had suffered for many days most grievous suggestions of
the devil, so that he was like to fall into the depths of despair,
and every day he was so tormented that he was ashamed to
confess so often, and afflicted himself greatly for this reason
by fasting, vigil, tears, and disciplines. And it happened, by
the divine dispensation, that blessed Francis went to that place.
And while on a certain day that friar was walking with the
blessed man, blessed Francis knew through the Holy Spirit his
tribulation and temptation, and drawing himself a little apart
from the friar who was walking with him, he turned to that
afflicted brother and said to him, “ Dearest brother, I will that
henceforth thou shalt not feel thyself bound to confess these
diabolical suggestions. And fear not, for nothing shall hurt
thy soul. But, with my leave, you shall say seven Paternosters
as often as you are troubled by them.” And that brother rejoiced
greatly at the words which he had said to him (namely, that he
should not be bound to confess these temptations), for he had


282 The Mirror of Perfection

been greatly afflicted by this. Nevertheless he was greatly
stupefied, seeing that blessed Francis knew that which was
known only by the priest to whom it had been confessed. And
immediately he was set free from that tribulation by the grace
of God and the merits of St. Francis; and from that time forward
remained in great peace and quiet. (And it was because the
saint had hoped this, that he had securely absolved him from
confession.)


CHAPTER CVII

OF THOSE THINGS WHICH HE FORETOLD OF BROTHER BERNARD,
WHICH WERE AFTERWARDS FULFILLED AS HE HAD PRE¬
DICTED

When near his death a certain dainty dish was prepared for
him, he remembered Brother Bernard who was the first friar
that he had, and said to his companions, “ This dish is good for
Brother Bernard,” and forthwith he made him be called to him.
Who, when he had come, sat near the bed whereon the saint
was sitting. And Brother Bernard said, “ Father, I ask thee
that thou shouldst bless me, and show me thy benediction; for
if thou shouldst show me thy paternal benediction, I believe
that God Himself and all men will love me more.” But the
blessed man was not able to see him, because he had lost the light
of his eyes for many days before. But stretching out his right
hand he placed it on the head of Brother Giles who was the third
friar, believing that he had put it on the head of Brother
Bernard, who was sitting next to him. And immediately know¬
ing it by the Holy Spirit, he said, “ This is not the head of my
brother Bernard.” Then Brother Bernard drew nearer, and the
blessed Father putting his hand on his head blessed him, saying
to one of his fellows, “ Write what I say to thee: Bernard was
the first friar, who first began and completed the most perfect
perfection of the Holy Gospel, by distributing his goods to the
poor: on account of which, and on account of many other pre¬
rogatives, I am bound to love him more than any other friar of
the whole Order. Whence I will and command as far as I am
able, that whoever shall be Minister-General should love and
honour him as myself. But let the Minister and all friars of
the whole Order hold him as myself.” And with this Brother
Bernard and the other friars were greatly consoled. For the


The Spirit of Prophecy 283

blessed Father, considering the very great perfection of that
Brother Bernard, had prophesied before certain friars, saying,
“ I say unto you that some of the great and most subtle demons
are allotted to Brother Bernard for his warfare, who shall bring
many tribulations and temptations upon him. But the merciful
Lord will take away from him near his end all tribulation and
temptation, and will set his spirit in such peace and consolation,
that all friars who shall see these things shall wonder greatly and
shall hold it for a great miracle; and in that quiet and consola¬
tion of soul and body he shall pass away to the Lord.”

But all these things, not without very great wonder of all the
friars who heard these things from the blessed Father, were
afterwards fulfilled to the letter in that brother Bernard. For
Brother Bernard in the bitterness of death was in so much peace
and consolation of spirit that he was unwilling to lie down.
And if he lay down, he lay as if sitting, nor even the slightest
humour ascending to his head was able to hinder meditation
concerning God, through sleep or any imagination. And if this
in any way happened, immediately he rose up and struck him¬
self, saying, “What was it? Why did I thus think?” He
wished to take no medicine, but said to him that offered it,
“ Do not hinder rae.” And thenceforward, that he might
more freely and peacefully die, he put all the duties of his body
in the hands of a certain brother who was a physician, saying
to hirt^ “ I wish to have no care of eating Or drinking, but I
commit them to thee; if thou givest I will take, if tholi dost not
give I will ndt ask.” But when he began to grow weak, he
wished to have near him a priest unto the hour of his death, and
when anything came into his mind which burdened his con¬
science, he confessed it immediately. But after his death, his
body became white and soft, and he seemed to smile. Whence
he was fairer dead than alive; and all rejoiced more to look
upon him dead than alive, for he seemed rightly “ a smiling
saint.”


284 The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER CVIII

HOW WHEN NEAR HIS DEATH HE PROMISED TO BLESSED CLARE
THAT SHE SHOULD SEE HIM, AND HOW AFTER HIS DEATH
IT WAS FULFILLED

In that week in which blessed Francis passed away, the lady
Clare, the first offshoot of the poor sisters of St. Damian of
Assisi, the foremost rival of the holy man in preserving Evan¬
gelical Perfection, fearing to die before him, because both were
then sore sick, wept most bitterly and would not be consoled,
for that she thought that she should not see before her death
blessed Francis, her consoler and master and her first founder
in the grace of God, and therefore she signified this by a certain
friar to the blessed Father. Hearing which the saint was moved
with compassion, for he loved her singularly with fatherly
affection. But considering that that could not be which she
wished (that is to see him), he wrote to her by letters for the
consolation of her and all her sisters his benediction; and
absolved her from all defect, if she had been guilty of any,
against the admonition and against the mandates and counsels
of the Son of God; and that she should lay aside all sadness and
sorrow, he said to that friar whom she had sent, “ Go and bid
sister Clare put aside all sorrow and sadness on account of not
being able to see me. But let her know in truth that before her
death, she and her sisters shall see me, and shall be much con¬
soled concerning me.” But so it was, that when a little later
blessed Francis passed away in the night, there came early the
whole of the people and clergy of the town of Assisi, and bore his
holy body from the place where he had died, with hymns and
praises, carrying each of them branches of trees, and thus they
bore him, by the will of God, to St. Damian, that the word
might be performed which the Lord had said through blessed
Francis to console His daughters and His handmaids. And
having moved the iron grating by which they were accustomed
to communicate and hear the Word of God, the friars took the
holy body from the bier, and held it between their arms to the
window for a great space; until lady Clare and her sisters were
consoled concerning him, though they were full and stricken
with many sorrows and tears, seeing themselves deprived of
the consolations and admonitions of such a father.


The Spirit of Prophecy


285


CHAPTER CIX

ROW HE FORETOLD THAT HIS BODY WOULD BE
HONOURED AFTER HIS DEATH

On a certain day when he was lying ailing in the Bishop’s
palace at Assisi, a certain spiritually-minded friar said to him,
as if in sport, and smiling, “ For how much wouldst thou sell
to the Lord all thy sackcloths? Many baldachinos and silken
palls shall be placed over this little body of thine, which now is
clothed with sackcloth.” For then he was bandaged with sack¬
cloth, and had a garment also of sackcloth. And blessed
Francis answered (but not he but the Holy Spirit through him)
and said, with great fervour and joy of spirit, “ Thou sayest
truth, since so it will be for the praise and grace of my God.”


SECTION XI

OF THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE CONCERNING HIM
CHAPTER CX

AND FIRSTLY, HOW THE LORD PROVIDED FOR THE FRIARS
SITTING AT A POOR TABLE WITH THE PHYSICIAN

When blessed Francis was at the hermitage of Fonte Palumbo
near Rieti, on account of the weakness of his eyes there visited
him on a certain day an eye-doctot. When he had stayed with
him for some time and now wished to depart, the blessed Father
said to one of his companions, “ Go and give the doctor some¬
thing of the best to eat.” And his fellow answered him, saying,
“ Father, we say it with shame, we are so poor that we should
be ashamed to invite him now to eat.” Blessed Francis said
to his companion, “ 0 ye of little faith, say no more to me of
it.” And the doctor said to blessed Francis, “ Brother, for that
the friars are poor, I will the more willingly eat with them.”
For that physician was very rich. And though the blessed
Father and his fellows had often invited him, yet he had never
wished to eat there. Therefore the friars went and prepared
the table; and with shame set thereon a little bread and wine,
and some cabbage which they had got ready for themselves.
And sitting down to that poor table they had begun to eat,
when behold there was a knock at the door of the dwelling. So
one of the friars, rising, went to open the door. And behold,
there was a certain woman there, carrying a great vessel full of
good bread and fishes, and crayfish patties, and honey, and
grapes; which the lady of a castle about seven miles off had
sent to blessed Francis. Having seen which, the friars and the
doctor rejoiced greatly, considering the sanctity of the holy
Father, and ascribing all to his merits. And the doctor said
to the friars, “ My brethren, neither you nor we know as we
ought the holiness of this man! ”


286


Divine Providence


287


CHAPTER CXI

OF THE FISH WHICH HE DESIRED IN HIS INFIRMITY

On another time when he was grievously sick in the palace of
the Bishop of Assisi, the friars besought him to eat. And he
answered, “ I have no will to eat; but if I could have some of
the fish called squail, perhaps I could eat it.” And as he said
this, behold, some one came carrying a wicker basket in which
there were three great squails well prepared, and some crayfish,
which the holy Father did willingly eat. And this, Brother Gerard,
the Minister of Rieti, had sent to him. And they praised God
for the divine providence. Who had provided for His servant
those things which were impossible to be had then at Assisi,
since it was winter.


CHAPTER CXII

OF THE FOOD AND CLOTH WHICH HE DESIRED
AT HIS DEATH

When he was ailing in the habitation of St. Mary of the Angels
with the last sickness by which he died, on a certain day he
called his fellow to him, saying, “ You know how the lady
Jacqueline of Settesoli was and is very faithful and devoted to
our Order. And therefore I believe that she will hold it for a
great grace and consolation if you would signify my state to her,
and send specially to her to send me some religious garments in
colour like to ashes, and that with the cloth she should send
also some of that sweetmeat which she has often made for me in
the City.” But the Romans call that sweetmeat mostaccioli,
which is made of almonds and sugar and other things. For
that lady was truly spiritual, and one of the richest and best-
born widows of all Rome; who, by the merits and preaching of
blessed Francis, had received so much grace from the Lord, that
she seemed like another Magdalene, ever full of tears and devo¬
tion for the love and sweetness of Christ. They wrote therefore
a letter as the holy man said, and a certain friar went seeking
some brother to carry the letter to the aforesaid lady. And
immediately there was a knock at the door of the habitation.
And when the door was opened by a friar, behold the lady


288


The Mirror of Perfection

Jacqueline was there, who had come in great haste to visit
blessed Francis ; and with great pleasure he told him how lady
Jacqueline had come from Rome, with her son, and many
others, to visit him. And he said, “ What shall we do, Father?
Shall we allow her to enter and come to thee? ” (But this he
said, because it had been ordered that at that place, with the
will of St. Francis, no woman should enter, on account of the
great seemliness and devotion of it.) And the holy Father said,
This rule is not to be observed with that Lady, seeing that her
great faith and devotion has made her come hither from distant
parts. ’ The dame entered therefore to the blessed man,
shedding many tears before him. And behold a wonder! She
brought a shroud cloth (that is, of ashen colour) for a tunic,
and all the things which were contained in the letter she had
fetched with her, as if she had received it. And the dame said
to the friars, “ My brethren, it was said unto me in the spirit
when I was praying, “ Go and visit thy Father, blessed Francis,
and delay not, for if thou delayest much, thou wilt not find him
alive; and carry with thee such a cloth for a tunic, and such
and such things; and thou shalt make him that sweetmeat.
Take with thee likewise a great quantity of wax for lights, and
also of incense.” (But this was not contained in the letter that
should have been sent.) And thus it was that He Who inspired
kings to go with gifts to honour His Son in the time of His
nativity, inspired also that noble and holy lady to go with
gifts to honour His most beloved servant in the day of his
death, nay, of his true birth. That lady, therefore, prepared
the dish of which the holy Father had desired to eat. But he
ate little thereof, because he grew continually weaker, and drew
nearer to death. She caused also many candles to be made
which should burn after his death before his most holy body.
But of the cloth, the friars made for him a tunic, in which he
was buried. But he himself ordered the friars to sew a sack
over him, in token and in example of humility and Lady
Poverty. And in that week in which dame Jacqueline came,
our most holy Father passed away to the Lord,


SECTION XII


OF HIS LOVE FOR CREATURES AND OF
CREATURES FOR HIM

CHAPTER CXIII

AND FIRSTLY, OF THE LOVE WHICH. HE ESPECIALLY HAD
FOR THE BIRDS WHICH ARE CALLED LARKS

Blessed Francis, wholly wrapped up in the love of God, dis¬
cerned perfectly the goodness of God not only in his own soul,
now adorned with the perfection of virtue, but in every creature.
On account of which he had a singular and intimate love of
creatures, especially of those in which was figured anything
pertaining to God or the Order. Whence above all other birds
he loved a certain little bird which is called the lark, or by the
people, the cowled lark. And he used to say of it, “ Sister
Lark hath a cowl like a Religious; and she is a humble bird,
because she goes willingly by the road to find there any food.
And if she comes upon it in foulness, she draws it out and eats
it. But flying she praises God very sweetly like a good Religious,
despising earthly things, whose conversation is always in the
heavens, and whose intent is always to the praise of God. Her
clothes are like to the earth (that is her feathers), and she gives
an example to Religious that they should not have delicate and
coloured garments, but vile in price and colour, as earth is viler
than the other elements.” And because he perceived this in
them, he looked on them most willingly. Therefore it pleased
the Lord, that these most holy little birds should show some
sign of affection towards him in the hour of his death. For
late in the Sabbath day, after vespers, before the night in which
he passed away to the Lord, a great multitude of that kind of
birds called larks came on the roof of the house where he was
lying; and flying about, made a wheel like a circle round the
roof, and sweetly singing, seemed likewise to praise the Lord.


289


290


The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER CXIV

HOW HE WISHED TO PERSUADE THE EMPEROR TO MAKE A LAW
THAT MEN SHOULD MAKE A GOOD PROVISION FOR BIRDS
AND OXEN AND ASSES AND THE POOR AT CHRISTMAS-TIME

We, who were with blessed Francis, and have written these
things, bear testimony that many times we have heard him
say, “ If I were to speak to the Emperor, I would, supplicating
and persuading him, tell him for the love of God and me to make
a special law that no man should take or kill sister Larks, nor
do them any harm. Likewise, that all the Podestas of the
towns, and the Lords of castles and villages, should be bound
every year on Christmas day to compel men to throw wheat and
other grains outside the cities and castles, that our sister Larks
may have something to eat, and also the other birds, on a day
of such solemnity. And that for the reverence of the Son of
God, Who rested on that night with the most blessed Virgin
Mary between an Ox and an Ass in the manger, whoever shall
have an Ox and an Ass shall be bound to provide for them on
that night the best of good fodder. Likewise on that day, all
poor men should be satisfied by the rich with good food.” For
the blessed Father had a greater reverence for Christmas day
than for any other festival, saying, “ Since the Lord had been
born for us, it behoves us to be saved,” and on account of which
he wished that on that day every Christian should rejoice in the
Lord; and for His love who gave Himself for us, that all should
provide largely not only for the poor, but also for the animals
and birds.


CHAPTER CXV

OF THE OBEDIENCE OF THE FIRE TO HIM, WHEN HE
WAS CAUTERISED

When he came to the hermitage of Fonte Palumbo near Rieti,
for the cure of his ailment of the eyes, to which cure he had been
forced by obedience to my Lord of Ostia, and by Brother Elias,
the Minister-General, on a certain day the physician came to
him, who, considering the disease, said to blessed Francis that
he would make a cautery over the jaw up to the eyebrow of


His Love for Creatures 291

that eye which was weaker than the other. But blessed Francis
was unwilling to begin the cure unless Brother Elias was there;
because he had said that he wished to be present when the
physician began that operation, and because he himself feared,
and it was grave to him, to have so much solicitude for himself;
and so he wished that the Minister-General should cause all to
be done. When therefore they had waited for him, and he did
not come, on account of the many impediments which he had,
at last he permitted the physician to do what he would. And
having placed the iron in the fire to make the cautery, blessed
Francis, wishing to strengthen his spirit, lest he should faint,
spoke thus to the fire, “ My Brother Fire, noble and useful
among all other creatures, be kindly to me in this hour, because
formerly I have loved thee for the love of Him Who created
thee. But I pray our Creator Who created us, that He will so
temper thy heat that I may be able to sustain it. ,? And the
prayer finished, he signed the fire with the sign of the cross. But
we who were with him then did all flee, out of pity and com¬
passion for him, and the physician alone remained with him.
But when the cautery was made we returned to him, who said
to us, “ 0 cowards, and of little faith, why did you fly? In
truth I say unto you, that I have felt neither any pain r>or the
heat of the fire; nay, if it be not well burnt now, let him burn
it better.” And the physician marvelled greatly, sayipg, “ My
brethren, I say unto you that I should fear not only for him
who is so weak and ailing, but for even the strongest man, lest
he should not be able to suffer so great a cautery. But this
man neither moved npr showed the least sign of pain.” For
all the veins from the ear to the eyebrow had to be cut open,
and it did him no good. Likewise another physician bored
through both his ears with a red-hot iron, and it benefited him
nothing. Nor is it strange, if the fire and the other creatures were
obediept to him and venerated him, for, as we who were with
him haye very often seen, he was so much drawn to them, and
rejoiced in them so much, and his spirit was moved with so
much pity and compassion for them, that he would not see them
badly treated, and he used to speak with them with inward
gladness, as if they had reason, whence by their occasion, he
was ofttimes wrapt up to God.


292


The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER CXVI

THAT HE WOULD NOT QUENCH THE FIRE THAT HAD
BURNT HIS HOSE

Amongst all the lower and insensible creatures he was singu¬
larly drawn to fire on account of its beauty and use, wherefore
he never wished to hinder its office. For on a time, when he
was sitting next the fire, without his knowledge it caught hold
of his linen clothes or hosen near the knee. When he felt the
heat of the fire he did not wish to put it out. But his fellow
seeing his clothes bum, ran to him wishing to quench the fire.
But he forbade him, saying, “ Nay, dearest brother, harm not
the fire,” and thus he would by no means let him quench it.

Then he hurriedly went to the friar who was his Warden, and
led him to blessed Francis, and straightway, against the will of
the blessed Father, put out the fire. For whatever necessity
urged him, he would never extinguish a fire or a lamp or a
candle, with so much pity was he moved towards it. Also he
would not that a friar should throw out fire or smoking wood
from place to place, as is wont to be done; but they should
simply set it on the ground, on account of the reverence for Him
of Whom it is the creature.


CHAPTER CXVII

HOW HE WOULD NOT WEAR A SKIN BECAUSE HE HAD
NOT PERMITTED IT TO BE BURNT WITH FIRE

When he was keeping Lent in Mont A1 verna, on a certain day
his fellow at the hour of eating prepared a fire in the cell where
he was used to eat. And when the fire was alight he went to
another cell for the blessed man, where he was praying, carrying
with him the Missal that he might read the Gospel for that
day to him, for he always wished to hear the Gospel which was
read for the Mass of that day before he ate, when he was not
able to hear Mass. And when he came to that cell where the
fire was alight, behold, the flame of the fire had ascended to
the roof and was burning it. But his fellow as he was able began
to put out the fire, but could not do it alone. However, holy
Francis was unwilling to help him; yet he took up a certain


His Love for Creatures 293

skin which he wore over him at night and went away with it
to the wood. But the friars of the place, who dwelt far from
that cell, when they learnt that it was being burnt, immediately
came and extinguished the fire. Afterwards blessed Francis
returned to meat, and when he had eaten he said to his fellow,
“ I will not have that skin over me again, since by reason of
my avarice I would not that Brother Fire should eat it*”


CHAPTER CXVIII

OF HIS LOVE FOR WATER AND STONES AND WOOD
AND FLOWERS

After fire, he most singularly loved water, by which is figured
holy penitence and tribulation, whereby the filth of the soul is
washed away, and because the first ablution of the soul is by
the water of baptism. Whence, when he washed his hands,
he used to choose such a place that the water which fell should
not be trodden by his feet; when he would walk over stones,
moreover, he used to walk with great fear and reverence, for
the love of Him Who is called “ The Rock.” Whence when he
used to say that verse of the Psalm, Thou didst exalt me on a
rock ) he used to say, out of his great reverence and devotion,
“ Under the foot of the rock hast thou exalted me.” He used
also to say to the friar who made ready the wood for the fire,
that he should never cut down a whole tree; but so that always
some part of a tree should remain whole for the love of Him
Who did work out our salvation on the wood of the cross.
Likewise he used to say to the friar who did the garden, not to
till the whole ground for pot-herbs; but to leave some part of
it to produce green herbs, which in their time should produce
flowers for the friars, for the love of Plim Who is called the
“ flower of the field ” and “ the lily of the valley.” Nay, he
used to say to that brother gardener that he ought always to
make a fair pleasaunce in some part of the garden; setting and
planting there all sweet-smelling herbs and all herbs which bring
forth fair flowers, that in their time they might call them that
looked upon those herbs and flowers to the praise of God. For
every creature cries aloud, “ God made me for thee, O man! ”
Whence we who were with him used to see him rejoice, within
and without, as it were, in all things created; so that touching
or seeing them his spirit seemed to be not on earth but in heaven.


294 The Mirror of Perfection

And by reason of the many consolations which he used to have
in things created, a little before his death he composed certain
Praises of the Lord for His creatures, to incite the hearts of those
who should hear them to the praise of God, and that the Lord
Himself might be praised by men in His creatures.


CHAPTER CXIX

HOW HE USED TO COMMEND THE SUN AND FIRE
ABOVE ALL OTHER CREATED THINGS

Above all other creatures wanting reason, he loved the sun and
fire with most affection. For he was wont to say, “ In the
morning when the sun rises, every man ought to praise God,
Who created it for our use, because through it our eyes are
enlightened by day. Then in the even when it becomes night,
every man ought to give praise on account of Brother Fire,
by which our eyes are enlightened by night; for we be all as
it were blind, and the Lord by these two, our brothers, doth
enlighten our eyes. And therefore we ought specially to praise
the Creator Himself for these and the other creatures which we
daily use.” The which he himself always did to the day of his
death, pay, when he was struck down with great infirmity he
begun to sing the Praises of the Lord which he had made con¬
cerning created things, and afterwards he made his fellows sing,
so that in considering the praise of the Lord, he might forget
the bitterness of his pains and infirmities. And because he
deemed and said that the sun is fairer than other created things,
and js more often likened to our Lord, and that in Scripture the
Lord Himself is called “ the Sun of Righteousness,” therefore
giving that name to those Praises which he had made of the
creatures of the Lord, what time the Lord did certify him of
His kingdom, he called them “ The Song of Brother Sun.”


CHAPTER CXX

THIS IS THE PRAISE OF CREATED THINGS, WHICH HE MADE
WHEN THE LORD CERTIFIED HIM OF HIS KINGDOM

Most High, Omnipotent, Good Lord.

Thine be the praise, the glory, the honour, and all benediction.
To Thee alone. Most High, they are due,
and no man is worthy to mention Thee.


295


His Love for Creatures

Be Thou praised, my Lord, with all Thy creatures,
above all Brother Sun,
who gives the day and lightens us therewith.

And he is beautiful and radiant with great splendour,
of Thee, Most High, he bears similitude.

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of Sister Moon and the stars,
in the heaven hast Thou formed them, clear and precious
and comely.

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of Brother Wind,
and of the air, and the cloud, and of fair and of all vreather,
by the which Thou givest to Thy creatures sustenance.

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of Sister Water,
which is much useful and humble and precious and pure.

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of Brother Fire,
by which Thou hast lightened the night,
and he is beautiful and joyful and robust and strong.

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of our Sister Mother Earth,
which sustains and hath us in rule,

and produces divers fruits faith coloured flowers and herbs.

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of those who pardon for Thy love
and endure sickness and tribulations.

Blessed arfe they who will endure it in peace,
for by Thee, Most High, they shall be crowned.

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of our Sister Bodily Death,
from whom no man living may escape,
woe to those who die in mortal sin:

Blessed are they who are found in Thy most holy will,
for the second death shall not work them ill.

Praise ye and bless my Lord, and give Him thanks,
and serve Him with great humility.


SECTION XIII

OF HIS DEATH, AND OF THE GLADNESS WHICH
HE SHOWED WHEN HE FIRST KNEW FOR
CERTAIN THAT HE WAS NEAR DEATH

CHAPTER CXXI

AND FIRSTLY, HOW HE ANSWERED BROTHER ELIAS
WHEN HE REBUKED HIM FOR THIS

When he was lying sick in the palace of the Bishopric of Assisi
and the hand of the Lord did seem to be more than of wont
heavy upon him, the people of Assisi, fearing lest if he should
die by night the friars would bear away his holy body to another
city, ordered that every night ward should be diligently kept
in the circuit outside the wall of the palace. But the most holy
Father himself, that he might comfort his spirit lest it should
at any time give way by reason of the violence of the pain by
which he was daily and continually afflicted, made the Praises of
the Lord to be sung by his companions often in the day, and
thus he did also in the night, for the edification and consolation
of the lay-folk who were keeping watch in the palace. But
Brother Elias, considering that blessed Francis thus comforted
himself in the Lord and rejoiced in the midst of such sickness,
said to him, “ Dearest brother, I am greatly consoled and edified
by all the gladness which thou showest, for thee and thy fellows
in thine ailments. But though the men of this city venerate
thee as a holy man, yet for that they believe firmly that thou
art nigh unto death because of thine incurable sickness, hearing
these Praises sung by day and night, they may say within
themselves, ‘ Why doth this man show such light-heartedness,
who is near death? He ought to be thinking of death.’ ”
Blessed Francis said to him, “ Dost thou remember when thou
didst see the vision at Foligno, and didst tell me that a certain
man had said unto thee that I should not live more than two
years; before that vision thou sawest how, by the grace of God
Who suggests all good things to the heart and puts it in the
mouth of His faithful, I used often to consider my end, both
by day and by night; but from that hour in which thou hadst


His Death


297

seen the vision, I was more solicitous to daily consider the day
of my death.” And straightway he said with great fervour of
spirit, “ Suffer me, brother, to rejoice in the Lord, both in His
praises and in my infirmities; since by the grace of the Holy
Spirit helping me, I am so united and joined to my Lord, that
by His mercy may I well rejoice in the Most High.”


CHAPTER CXXII

HOW HE INDUCED THE PHYSICIAN TO TELL HIM HOW
LONG HE SHOULD LIVE

In those days there visited him in the same palace a certain
physician of Arezzo, by name Good John, who was very familiar
with blessed Francis. And blessed Francis questioned him,
saying, “ What thinkest thou, Bembenignate, of this my infirmity
of dropsy? ” For he would not call him by his name; for that
he would never name anybody who was called “ Good,” out of
reverence to the Lord, Who said, There is none good hut one ,
that is God. Likewise he would never call any one “ father ” or
“ master,” nor write it in his letters, out of reverence to the Lord,
Who said, And call no one man father on earth nor he ye called
masters , etc. And the physician said to him, “ Brother, it shall
be well with thee, by the grace of God.” And blessed Francis
said again, “ Tell me the truth; what do you think? Fear not,
since by the grace of God I am no faint-heart that I should fear
death. For by the grace of the Holy Spirit, I am so made one
with my Lord, that I am equally content with death as with
life.” Then the physician said to him openly, “ Father, accord¬
ing to our medicine-craft thine infirmity is incurable, and I
believe that either in the end of September or on the fourth of
the Nones of October, thou wilt die.” Then blessed Francis,
lying on his bed, spread his hands out to the Lord with very
great devotion and reverence, and said with great joy of mind
and body, “ Welcome, my Sister Death.”


298 The Mirror of Perfection


CHAPTER CXXI1I

THAT STRAIGHTWAY, WHEN HE HEARD THAT HE SHOULD DIE
SO SOON, HE CAUSED THE PRAISES WHICH HE HAD MADE
TO BE SUNG TO HIM

After these things a certain friar said to him, “ Father, thy life
and conversation was and is a light and a mirror, not only to
thy brethren, but also to the whole Church, and thy death shall
be the same. And though thy death will be a matter of sadness
and grief to thy brethren, and to many others, yet it will be to
thee consolation and infinite joy. For thou shalt pass from
great labour to the greatest rest, from many pains and tempta¬
tions to eternal peace, from the earthly poverty which thou
hast ever loved and perfectly observed to endless true riches,
and so from temporal death to perpetual life, where thou shalt
see thy Lord God face to face, Whom thou hast loved in this
life with so much fervour and desire.” And having said these
things, he said openly to him, “ Father, thou knowest in truth
except the Lord should send thee His medicine from heaven
thine infirmity is incurable, and thou hast little longer to live,
as the physicians but now foretold thee. Now I have said this
to thee, that thy spirit may be made strong, and that thou
mayst rejoice in the Lord within and without, so that thy
brethren and the others who visit thee may find thee always
rejoicing in the Lord, and that to those who see, and to others
who hear it after thy death, thy death may be a perpetual
memorial, as thy life and conversation was and ever shall be.”
Then blessed Francis, even though his infirmities were more than
usually heavy upon him, was seen from these words to derive
a new joy to his mind, hearing that Sister Death threatened him
so nearly, and with great fervour of spirit he praised the Lord,
saying to him, “ Therefore, if it pleases my Lord that I must
quickly die, call to me Brother Angelo and Brother Leo, that
they may sing to me of Sister Death.” And when those two
brethren had come to him, they sang, with many tears, the
“ Song of Brother Sun,” and of the other created things of the
Lord, which the saint himself had made. And then before the
last verse of the Canticle he added some verses of Sister Death,
saying:


H is Death 299

Be Thou praised, my Lord, of our Sister Bodily Death,
frpm whom no man living can escape,
woe to those who die in mortal sin:

Blessed are they who are found in Thy most holy will,
for the second death shall not work them ill.

Praise ye, and bless my Lord, and give Him thanks,
and serve Him with great humility.

CHAPTER CXXIV

HOW HE BLESSED THE CITY OF ASSISI WHEN HE WAS
BEING CARRIED TO ST. MARY THEREAT TO DIE

Now when the most holy Father was made certain, as much
by the Holy Spirit, as by the sentence of the physician, that his
death was near, seeing that up to then he had been in the palace,
and feeling that he grew continually worse, and that the forces
of his body were leaving him, he made himself be carried in
his bed to St. Mary of the Portiuncula, that there he might
finish the life of his body, where he had begun to find the light
and life of his soul. But when those who were carrying him
had come to the Hospice which is in the midst of the way by
which one goes from Assisi to St. Mary, he bade his bearers lay
down the bed on the ground. And though on account of his
long and very great disease of the eyes, he was not able to see it,
he made his bed be turned so that he should hold his face
towards Assisi. And raising himself a little in his bed, he blessed
the city, saying, “ Lord, like as this city of old was, as I believe,
a place and a habitation of wicked men, so I see that on account
of the abundance of Thy mercy, in the time which hath pleased
Thee, Thou hast singularly shown it the multitude of Thy
mercies. On account of Thy goodness alone, Thou hast chosen
it to Thyself, that it might be the place and habitation of those
who should know Thee in truth, and should give glory to Thy
Holy Name, and should show forth the odour of good fame, of
holy life, of most true doctrine, and of Evangelical Perfection
to all Christian People. I ask of Thee therefore, 0 Lord Jesus
Christ, Father of mercies, that Thou shouldst not consider our
ingratitude, but be ever mindful of Thy most abundant pity
which Thou hast shown towards it, that it may be ever the


300 The Mirror of Perfection

place and habitation of those who know Thee truly, and glorify
Thy most blessed and glorious Name, for ever and ever, Amen.”

And having said this he was carried to St. Mary of the Angels,
where, having completed forty years of his age and twenty years
of perfect penitence, he, in the year of Our Lord 1227 , on the
fourth of the Nones of October, passed away to the Lord Jesus
Christ, Whom he loved with his whole heart, with his whole
mind, his whole soul, his whole strength, his most ardent desire,
and fullest affection, following Him most perfectly, running
after Him most swiftly, and at the last reaching Him most
gloriously, Who with the Father and the Holy Spirit lives and
reigns, for ever and ever, Amen.

Here endeth the Mirror of perfection of the state of the Friar
Minor, in which one can sufficiently behold the perfection of
his vocation and profession. All praise, all glory be to God the
Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit. Alleluia! Alleluia!
Alleluia!


LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS


.


LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS


PROLOGUE

i. The grace of God our Saviour hath in these latter days
appeared in His servant Francis unto all such as be truly
humble, and lovers of holy Poverty, who, adoring the over¬
flowing mercy of God seen in him, are taught by his ensample
to utterly deny ungodliness and worldly lusts and to live after
the manner of Christ, thirsting with unwearied desire for the
blessed hope. For God Most High regarded him, as one that
truly was poor and of a contrite spirit, with so great condescen¬
sion of His favour as that not only did He raise him up in his.
need from the dust of his worldly way of life, but also made him.
a true professor, leader, and herald of Gospel perfection. Thus
He gave him for a light unto believers, that by bearing witness
of the light he might prepare for the Lord the way of light and
peace in the hearts of the faithful For Francis, even as the
morning star in the midst of a cloud, shining with the bright
beams of his life and teaching, by his dazzling radiance led into
the light them that sat in darkness and in the shadow of death,
and, like unto the rainbow giving light in the bright clouds, set
forth in himself the seal of the Lord’s covenant. He preached
the gospel of peace and salvation unto men, himself an Angel
of the true peace, ordained of God to follow in the likeness of
the Forerunner, that, preparing in the desert the way of sublimest
Poverty, he might preach repentance by his ensample and words
alike. For, firstly, he was endowed with the gifts of heavenly
grace* next, enriched by the merits of triumphant virtue; filled
with the spirit of prophecy and appointed unto angelic minis¬
tries; thereafter, wholly set on fire by the kindling of the Seraph,
and, like the prophet, borne aloft in a chariot of fire; wherefore
it is reasonably proven, and clearly apparent from the witness of
his whole life, that he came in the spirit and power of Elias.

In like wise, he is thought to be not unmeetly set forth in
the true prophecy of that other friend of the Bridegroom, the
Apostle and Evangelist John, under the similitude of the Angel
ascending from the sunrising and bearing the seal of the Living
God. For at the opening of the sixth seal, I saw, saith John

303


Life of St. Francis


3°4

in the Apocalypse, another Angel ascending from the sun¬
rising and bearing the seal of the Living God.

2. Now that this Angel was indeed that messenger of God,
beloved of Christ, our ensample and the world’s wonder, Francis,
the servant of God, we may with full assurance conclude, when
we consider the heights of lofty saintliness whereunto he attained,
and whereby, living among men, he was an imitator of the
purity of the Angels, and was also set as an ensample unto them
that do perfectly follow after Christ. That this belief should
be faithfully and devoutly held we are convinced by the voca¬
tion that he showed to call to weeping and to mourning, and to
baldness, and to girding with sackcloth, and to set a mark upon
the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry, by the sign of
his penitent’s Cross and habit fashioned like unto a Cross.
Moreover, it is further confirmed, with unanswerable witness
unto its truth, by the seal of the likeness of the Living God, to
wit, of Christ Crucified, the which was imprinted on his body,
not by the power of nature or the skill of art, but rather by the
marvellous might of the Spirit of the Living God.

3. Feeling myself unworthy and insufficient to relate the life
most worthy of all imitation of this most venerable man, I
should have in no wise attempted it, had not the glowing love
of the Brethren moved me thereunto, and the unanimous
importunity of the Chapter-General incited me, and that
devotion compelled me, which I am bound to feel for our holy
Father. For I, who remember as though it happened but
yesterday how I was snatched from the jaws of death, while yet
a child, by his invocation and merits, should fear to be convicted
of the sin of ingratitude did I refrain from publishing his praises.
And this was with me the chief motive for undertaking this
task, to wit, that I, who own my life of body and mind to have
been preserved unto me by God through his means, and have
proved his power in mine own person, and knew the virtues of
his life, might collect as best I could, albeit I could not fully, his
deeds and words—fragments, as it were, overlooked in part,
in part scattered—that they might not be utterly lost on the
death of those that lived with the servant of God.

4. Accordingly, that the true story of his life might be handed
down unto posterity by me the more assuredly and clearly, I
betook me unto the place of his birth, and there did hold diligent
converse with his familiar friends that were yet living, touching
the manner of life of the holy man and his passing away; and
with those in especial that were well acquainted with his holiness,


Prologue 305

and were his chief followers, who may be implicitly believed by
reason of their well-known truthfulness and approved upright¬
ness. But in relating the things that through His servant God
vouchsafed to work, I deemed it best to shun all fantastic
ornaments of style, forasmuch as that the devotion of the reader
mcreaseth more by a simple than by an ornate speech. Nor
have I always woven together the history according unto
chronology, that I might avoid confusion, but I rather en¬
deavoured to preserve a more coherent order, setting down
sometimes facts of divers kinds that belong unto the same
period, sometimes facts of the same kind that belong unto divers
periods, as they seemed best to fit in together.

5. Now the beginning of the life of Francis, its course, and
its consummation, are divided into fifteen chapters, as set
down below, and thuswise described.

The first treateth of his manner of life in the secular state.

The second, of his perfect conversion unto God, and of the
repairing of the three churches.

The third, of the founding of his Religion, and sanction of
the Rule.

The fourth, of the advancement of the Order under his hand,
and of the confirmation of the Rule already sanctioned.

The fifth, of the austerity of his life, and of how all created
things afforded him comfort.

The sixth, of his humility and obedience, and of the divine
condescensions shown unto him at will.

The seventh, of his love for Poverty, and of the wondrous
supplying of his needs.

The eighth, of the kindly impulses of his piety, and of how
the creatures lacking understanding seemed to be made subject
unto him.

fhe ninth, of his ardent love, and yearning for martyrdom.

Ihe tenth, of his zeal and efficacy in prayer.

fhe eleventh, of his understanding of the Scriptures, and of
his spirit of prophecy.

The twelfth, of the efficacy of his preaching, and of his gift of
healing.

The thirteenth, of the sacred stigmata.

The fourteenth, of his sufferings and death.

The fifteenth, of his canonisation, and the translation of his
body.

Thereafter is added some account of the miracles shown after
his blessed departure.


.■<«. rop, ::irr■

I r. : . • p r ’r (

j . ji — ■.;. • • ’


jii. ;r»* V


' *P‘. » i


I.t. ' • | * f V

v p


Jh;.'


r


; i i* '

r ('hi iii '

r/Pi j m


; .


| “ '


r: •


:.U j *IU’


Hi * |>IU»*


• • i ..

..i:'

•

:u; ' f ” ■ • i ‘ •

• t;. r. j


}•!*,»


;i .« :■ •


’M|

\ V "


:'!»j


"\ P


1 t» 0/

u->. k » :v !

*1 if’ " 1


•»


’Jf *v.ti

’ fcfv :


‘ li


.

" * j |' *>.(.

UK) •'] H'<

f|{ • •


:


' ti< i P; ({

.


•< • •


1 ' S'


, rr ,, |4.

■v pi

i Mi>

PLI t .


[in* r

\

1

littjru

,§ ? !'

! (, ’ « • i:

• •'.* j


•“( i


IJ • <. ■

;


f p<.


r <


.11/ '


;. n '{(•; m » • ' • ! ,! }| J * - ' v n

. ■ ,t« .. • •. • '.! ' I • } ! • »l* » '

• /I ... i; i>• Ulf . ■ , /;'< [j|<. • j.

l.ii '

L*. •• • '1 | JOU !«' -

■ ■

, )»:.• .i:• • 1 . i ' ... ' ,, 'i • \ i H j" . •>


i""*

1

:ryrt ■ ./ //-


i-i ■


ilUfO


«■: |i .. •'» i ; • . r

. i • ’ , •:


ifU

Liiure


on


:

»»|T SI

» Ilf H


'!*

i ' j H) ^ : ;


c


-.pn


V'


U1 1.* f CUT

: ;'t


! l iH"

i./MIU

:*1

V •: •

:»u

f*i ip<. t ji •

•i . M H :

ippi.n-


ihi *».

i/.f.q nbi

• .pi


Mj.


|>A


i ip flC


HERE BEGINNETH THE LIFE OF THE
BLESSED FRANCIS


CHAPTER I

OF HIS MANNER OF LIFE IN THE SECULAR STATE

i. There was a man in the city of Assisi, by name Francis,
whose memory is blessed, for that God, graciously preventing
him with the blessings of goodness, delivered him in His mercy
from the perils of this present life, and abundantly filled him
with the gifts of heavenly grace. For, albeit in his youth he
was reared in vanity amid the vain sons of men, and, after
gaining some knowledge of letters, was appointed unto a
profitable business of merchandise, nevertheless, by the aid of
the divine protection, he went not astray among the wanton
youths after the lusts of the flesh, albeit given up unto pleasures;
nor among the covetous merchants, albeit intent on his gains^
did he put his trust in money and treasure. For there was
divinely implanted in the heart of the young Francis a certain
generous compassion toward the poor, the which, growing up
with him from infancy, had so filled his heart with kindliness
that, when he came to be no deaf hearer of the Gospel, he was
minded to give unto all that asked of him, in especial if they
pleaded the love of God. But once on a time, when he had been
busied with the cares of his trading, and, contrary unto his wont,
had sent empty away a certain beggar who besought an alms
for the love of God, he forthwith, returning unto his pitiful
mind, ran after him, and bestowed alms in merciful wise upon
him; promising unto the Lord God that thenceforward he would
never, while he could, refuse any that asked of him, pleading the
love of God. And this promise with unwearied goodness he
did observe until his death, thereby winning abundant increase
of the love and grace of God. For he was wont to say in after
time, when he had perfectly put on Christ, that, even while he
was in the secular state, he could scarce ever hear words telling
of the love of God, and remain unmoved in heart. Assuredly
the charm of his gentleness and his courtly bearing, his sub¬
missiveness and docility surpassing men’s wont, his open-handed

3°7


308 Life of St. Francis

largesse even beyond his means, were all clear tokens of the fair
disposition of the youth, and seemed to be a presage of the
abundance of divine blessing that should thereafter be poured
out more richly upon him.

A certain citizen of Assisi, a simpleton as was believed, yet
one taught of God, whensoever he met Francis going through
the city, would doff his cloak and spread the garment before his
feet, declaring that Francis was worthy of all honour, as one
that should ere long do mighty deeds, and was on this account
to be splendidly honoured by all the faithful.

2. But as yet Francis knew not the intent of God concerning ;
him, forasmuch as he was both drawn away unto external things
by his father’s calling, and weighed down toward earthly things
by the corruption inborn in our nature, and had not yet learned 1
to contemplate heavenly things, nor accustomed himself to taste
of divine. And, because the infliction of tribulation giveth
understanding unto the spirit, the hand of the Lord was upon
him and the changes of the right hand of the Most High, afflicting
his body with protracted sickness, that so .He might prepare his.
soul for the anointing of the Holy Spirit. Now when he had
regained his bodily strength, and had made ready for himself
in his wonted fashion meet apparel, he met a certain soldier, of
noble birth, but poor and ill-clad; whereupon, compassionating
his poverty, with a kindly impulse he forthwith did off his
garments and put them on him, thus in one act fulfilling a two¬
fold ministry of kindliness, insomuch as he both covered the
shame of a noble knight, and relieved the destitution of a poor,
man.

3. Now on the night following, when he had yielded himself
unto sleep, the divine mercy showed him a fair and great palace,,'
together with military accoutrements adorned with the sign off
the Gross of Christ, thus setting forth unto him that the mercy
he had shown unto the poor soldier for the love of the King;
Most High was to be recompensed by this peerless reward.
Accordingly, when he enquired whose were these things, answer
was made him by a divine declaration that they all were his;
own and his soldiers’. Then, waking at early morn—since he;
had not yet practised his mind in examining the divine mysteries,,
and knew not how to pass through the appearance of things seen,
unto the beholding of the truth of things unseen—he accounted!
this strange vision a token of great good fortune. Wherefore he.
purposed, being as yet ignorant of the divine counsel, to betake^
himself into Apulia, unto a certain munificent Count, hoping in^


His Life in the World 3°9

his service to win glory in arms, as the vision shown unto him
had betokened. With but little delay, he set forth on his
journey and had gone as far as the neighbouring city; there he
heard the Lord speaking unto him by night as with the voice of
a friend, and saying, “ Francis, who can do better for thee, the
lord or the servant, the rich man or the poor? ” And when
Francis had made reply that alike the lord and the rich man
could do the best, the Voice answered forthwith, “ Why, then,
dost thou leave the Lord for the servant, the rich God for a poor
mortal? ” And Francis said, “ Lord, what wilt Thou have me
to do? ” And the Lord said unto him, “ Return unto thy
country, for the vision that thou hast seen betokeneth that
which shall be spiritually wrought, and is to be fulfilled in thee
not by mortal counsel, but by divine.” So, when it was morn¬
ing, he returned in haste toward Assisi, confident and rejoicing,
awaiting the will of the Lord. . ...

4. Thenceforward he withdrew him from the stir of public
business, devoutly praying the heavenly mercy that it would
deign to show him that which he ought to do. And so by the
constant practice of prayer the flame of heavenly yearning was
mightily kindled within him, and for the love of his heavenly
fatherland he now contemned all earthly things as naught; for
he felt that he had found the hid treasure and, like a wise
merchant man, meditated selling all that he had to buy the
pearl that he had found. But he knew not yet how to compass
this, except that it was whispered unto his spirit that spiritual
merchandise hath its beginning in the contempt of the world,
and that the warfare of Christ is to be begun by victory over
self.

5. Now on a day while he was riding over the plain that heth
beneath the city of Assisi, he met a certain leper, and this unfore¬
seen meeting filled him with loathing. But when he recalled

: the purpose of perfection that he had even then conceived in
| mind, and remembered that it behoved him first of all to conquer
i self if he were fain to become the soldier of Christ, he leapt from
his horse and ran to embrace him. When the leper stretched
forth his hand as though to receive an alms, he kissed it, and
' then put money therein. Then forthwith mounting his horse,
he looked round him on all sides, and the plain was spread before
him unbroken, and no trace of that leper might he see. Then,
filled with wonder and joy, he began devoutly to chant praises
unto the Lord, purposing from this to rise ever unto greater
heights.


3 IO Life of St. Francis

From that time forth, he would seek lonely places, dear unto
mourners, and there he devoted himself without ceasing unto
groanings which cannot be uttered, and, after long importunity in
prayer, won an answer from the Lord. For while one day he
was thus praying in seclusion, and in his exceeding fervour was
wholly absorbed in God, there appeared unto him Christ Jesus
in the likeness of One Crucified. Beholding Him, his soul was
melted within him, and so deeply was the remembrance of
Christ’s Passion imprinted inwardly on his heart that from that
hour, whensoever he recalled the Crucifixion of Christ, he could
scarce refrain from tears and from groaning aloud; even as he
himself in after time told his friends, when he was drawing nigh
his end. For in sooth by this vision the man of God understood
that Gospel saying to be addressed unto him, “ If thou wilt
come after Me, deny thyself, and take up thy cross, and follow
Me.”

6 . From that time forth, he put on the spirit of poverty, the
feeling of humility, and the love of inward godliness. For
whereas aforetime not only the company, but even the distant
sight, of lepers had inspired him with violent loathing, now, for
the sake of Christ Crucified—Who, saith the prophet, appeared
despised, and marred as a leper—and that he might fully
vanquish self, he would render unto the lepers humble and kindly
services in his benevolent goodness. For he would often visit
their dwellings, and bestow alms upon them with a bountiful
hand, and with a deep impulse of pity would kiss their hands and
faces. Unto poor folk that begged of him, he was fain to give
not his goods alone, but his very self, at times stripping off his
garments, at times tearing or cutting them, to bestow upon
them, when he had naught else at hand. Poor priests, more¬
over, he would succour reverently and piously, more especially
with ornaments for the altar, whereby he both became a sharer
in the divine worship, and supplied the needs of the worshippers.

Now about this time he was visiting, with devout reverence,
the shrine of the Apostle Peter, and beheld a host of beggars
before the doors of the church; thereupon, constrained in part
by gentle piety, in part led by the love of poverty, he bestowed
his own garments on one of the neediest, and, clad in his rags,
passed that day in the midst of the beggars, with unwonted
gladness of spirit; that so, despising worldly repute, he might
attain by gradual steps unto Gospel perfection. He kept right
strict watch over the mortification of the flesh, that he might
bear the Cross of Christ, the which he bore inwardly in his


His Perfect Conversion 3 11

heart, outwardly also in his body. So all these things were
wrought by the man of God, Francis, ere yet he had separated
himself from the world in habit or way of life.


CHAPTER II

OF HIS PERFECT CONVERSION UNTO GOD, AND OF THE
REPAIRING OF THE THREE CHURCHES

i. Forasmuch as the servant of the Most High had none to
instruct him in this way except Christ, His mercy was now
further vouchsafed unto him in visitations of His sweet grace.
For on a certain day, when he had gone forth to meditate in the
fields, he was walking nigh the church of Saint Damian, which
from its exceeding great age was threatening to fall, and, at
the prompting of the Spirit, went within to pray. Prostrating
himself before an Image of the Crucified, he was filled with no
small consolation of spirit as he prayed. And as with eyes full of
tears he gazed upon the Lord’s Cross, he heard with his bodily
ears a Voice proceeding from that Cross, saying thrice, “ Francis,
go and repair My House, which, as thou seest, is falling utterly
into ruin.” Francis trembled, being alone in the church, and
was astonied at the sound of such a wondrous Voice, and,
perceiving in his heart the might of the divine speech, was carried
out of himself in ecstasy. When at length he came unto himself
again, he prepared to obey, and devoted himself wholly unto
the behest to repair the material church; howbeit, the principal
intent of the message had regard unto that Church which Christ
had purchased with His own blood, even as the Holy Spirit
taught him, and as he himself afterward revealed unto the
Brethren.

Accordingly he rose up, and, fortifying himself with the sign
of the Cross, he put together cloth stuffs for sale, and hastened
unto the city that is called Foligno, and there sold the goods
that he had brought and the horse whereon he had ridden.
Then this joyful merchant, putting together his gains, departed
on his return for Assisi, and there did reverently enter the church
concerning whose repair he had received the command. Finding
there a poor priest, he showed him due reverence, and proffered
him the money for the repair of the church, and the use of the
poor, humbly petitioning that he would permit him to sojourn
with him for a time. The priest granted him to sojourn there.


3 12


Life of St. Francis

but, for fear of his parents, refused the money, whereupon that
true despiser of monies threw it on a window-ledge, valuing it
no more than dust that is trodden under foot.

2. But when his father learnt that the servant of God was
tarrying with the priest aforesaid, he was sore vexed in spirit,
and ran unto the place. And Francis, being yet but a newly-
recruited soldier of Christ, when he heard the threats of them that
pursued him, and knew beforehand of their coming, was fain to
give place unto wrath, and hid himself in a certain secret pit;
therein for some days he lay concealed, beseeching the Lord
without ceasing, and with floods of tears, that He would deliver
his soul from the hands of them that pursued him, and would
by His gracious favour fulfil the holy purposes wherewith He
had inspired him. Then, filled with an overflowing joy, he
began to blame himself for his craven sloth, and, leaving his
hiding-place, and casting aside his fear, he took his way toward
the city of Assisi. But when the townsfolk beheld him unkempt
in appearance, and changed in mind, and on this account deemed
him to have lost his senses, they rushed upon him with mud of
the streets and stones, and mocked him with loud shouts as a
fool and madman. But the servant of the Lord, not moved or
overborne by any insults, passed through all as one deaf unto
them. When his father heard these outcries, he ran out at once,
not to deliver him, but rather to destroy him; laying aside all
compunction, he dragged him into the house, and there afflicted
him first with words, then with stripes and bonds. But Francis
was thereby rendered but the more eager and valiant to carry
out that which he had begun, remembering that saying of the
Gospel, “ Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’
sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.”

3. After a little space, on his father’s departure from the
country, his mother—who misliked her husband’s dealings, and
deemed it hopeless to soften the unyielding constancy of her son
—freed him from his bonds, and let him go forth. Then he,
giving thanks unto the Lord Almighty, returned unto the place
where he had been afore. When his father returned, and found
him not in the house, heaping reproaches on his wife, he ran in
fury unto that place, intending, if he could not bring him back, at
least to drive him from the province. But Francis, strengthened
of God, of his own accord came forth to meet his raging father,
crying aloud that he cared naught for his bonds and stripes, yea
more, protesting that he would gladly endure all hardships for the
sake of Christ. Accordingly, when his father saw that he could


H is Perfect Conversion 3 1 3

not bring him back, he turned his thoughts unto the recovery ot
the money, the which, when he had at length found it on the
window-ledge, somewhat soothed his rage, the thirst of avarice
being relieved, as it were, by a draught of money.

4. Then this father according unto the flesh was fain to take
this son of grace, now stripped of his wealth, before the Bishop
of the city, that into his hands he might resign his claim unto
his father’s inheritance, and render up all that had been his.
This that true lover of poverty showed himself right ready to do,
and coming into the Bishop’s presence, he brooked no delays,
he was kept back of none, tarried for no speech, nor spake
himself, but at once did off all his garments, and restored them
unto his father. Then was the man of God seen to have a hair-
shirt next his skin under his rich apparel. Yea more, as one
drunk with wondrous fervour of spirit, he threw aside even his
breeches, and stood up naked in the presence of all, saying unto
his father, “ Hitherto I have called thee my father on earth,
but henceforth I can confidently say ‘ Our Father, Which art in
heaven,’ with Whom I have laid up my whole treasure, and on
Whom I have set my whole trust and hope.” The Bishop, seeing
this, and marvelling at such exceeding fervour in the man of
God, rose forthwith, and, weeping, put his arms round him;
then, devout and kindly man as he was, covered him with the
cloak wherewith he himself was clad, bidding his servants give
him something to clothe his limbs withal, and there was brought
unto him a mean and rough tunic of a farm-servant of the
Bishop. This Francis gladly received, and with his own hand
marked it with the sign of the Cross, with a piece of chalk that
he chanced upon, thus making it a garment meet for a man
crucified, poor, and half naked. Thus, then, the servant of the
Most High King was left despoiled, that he might follow the
Lord Whom he loved, Who had been despoiled and crucified;
thus he was fortified with the Cross, that he might entrust his
soul unto that wood of salvation, that should bring him forth
unscathed from the shipwreck of the world.

5. Thereafter, this despiser of the world, loosed from the
bonds of worldly desires, left the city, and, glad and free, sought
an hidden solitude where he might hearken in loneliness and
silence unto the hid treasures of the divine converse. And
while the man of God, Francis, was making his way through a
certain wood, chanting praises unto the Lord in the French
tongue, and rejoicing, it chanced that some robbers rushed out
on him from their hiding-places. With fierce mien they asked


3 1 4 Life of St. Francis

the man of God who he was, and he, full of confidence, gave a
prophetic answer, saying, “lama herald of the great King.”
Then they fell upon him, and cast him into a ditch full of snow,
crying, “Lie there, lout, thou herald of God!” But he, on
their departure, climbed out of the ditch, and, uplifted with
exceeding gladness, with yet louder voice began to make the
woods echo with praises unto the Creator of all.

6 . When he came unto a neighbouring monastery, he asked
an alms as a beggar, and received it as one unrecognised and
despised. Departing thence, he came unto Gubbio, where he
was recognised and entertained by a friend of former days, and
was clad by him with a poor tunic, such as became the little
poor one of Christ.

Thence that lover of utterest humility betook himself unto
the lepers, and abode among them, with all diligence serving
them all for the love of God. He would bathe their feet, and
bind up their sores, drawing forth the corrupt matter from their
wounds, and wiping away the blood; yea, in his marvellous
devotion, he would even kiss their ulcerated wounds, he that was
soon to be a Gospel physician. Wherefore he obtained from the
Lord such power as that he received a marvellous efficacy in
marvellously cleansing both soul and body from disease. I will
relate one instance out of many, whereby the fame of the man of
God was afterward bruited abroad.

A man in the county of Spoleto had his mouth and jaw
eaten away by the ravages of a loathsome disease, and received
no succour from any remedy of the physicians. It chanced
that, after visiting the shrines of the holy Apostles to implore
their merits, he was returning from his pilgrimage, and met
the servant of God. When out of devotion he was fain to kiss
his footprints, Francis in his humility would not brook it, but
kissed on the mouth him that had been fain to kiss his feet.
Lo, as in his wondrous goodness the servant of the lepers,
Francis, touched that loathsome sore with his holy lips, the
disease utterly vanished, and the sick man at once regained
his longed-for health. I know not which of these twain is the
more rightly to be marvelled at, the depth of humility in such
a gracious embrace, or the excellence of power in such an
astounding miracle.

7 - Francis, now stablished in the humility of Christ, recalled
unto mind the obedience laid upon him by the Crucifix as to
the repairing of the church of Saint Damian, and like one truly
obedient returned unto Assisi, that he might, if even by begging,


His Perfect Conversion 315

obtain means to accomplish the divine behest. Laying aside all
shamefastness for the love of the Poor Man Crucified, he went
about begging from those who had known him in his affluence,
bearing the loads of stones on his frail body, worn with fasting.
When the church aforesaid had been repaired, the Lord helping
him, and the devotion of the citizens coming unto his aid—
that his body after its toil might not relax in sloth, he turned
to repair the church of Saint Peter, at some distance from the
city, by reason of the especial devotion that in the purity of
his candid faith he had for the Prince of the Apostles.

8 . When this church too was at length finished, he came
unto the place that is called The Little Portion, wherein a
church had been reared in days of old in honour of the most
Blessed Virgin, Mother of God, but which was then deserted
and cared for by none. When the man of God beheld it thus
abandoned, by reason of the ardent devotion that he had toward
the Sovereign Lady of the world, he took up his abode there,
that he might diligently labour to repair it. Perceiving that
Angels ofttimes visited it —according unto the name of that
church, that from old time was called Saint Mary of the Angels
—he abode there by reason of his reverence for the Angels, and
his especial love for the Mother of Christ. This place the holy
man loved before all other places in the world; for here he
began in humility, here he made progress in virtue, here he
ended in happiness, and, dying, commended it unto the Brethren
as a place most beloved of the Virgin. Concerning this place
a certain devout Brother, before his conversion, beheld a
vision right worthy to be recounted. He beheld a countless
host of men stricken with blindness, with their faces uplifted
unto heaven, on bended knees, encircling this church, and they
all, stretching out their hands on high, cried unto God with
tears, beseeching His mercy and light. And lo, there came a
great radiance from heaven, illumining all, and this gave light
unto each one of them, and granted the longed-for salvation.
This is the place wherein the Order of Brothers Minor was
begun by Saint Francis according unto the impulse of the
divine revelation. For at the bidding of the divine providence,
by the which the servant of Christ was guided in all things, he
built three material churches before that, instituting the Order,
he preached the Gospel; thus not only did he make progress
in ordered course from things perceived by the senses unto
things perceived by the understanding, and from lesser things
unto greater, but he did also prefigure in mystic wise by his


316 Life of St. Francis

material labours the work that should be wrought thereafter.
For, like the thrice-repeated repairing of the material fabric,
the Church, under the guidance of the holy man, was to be
renewed in threefold wise, according unto the pattern given
by him, and the Rule, and teaching of Christ; and a triple army
of such as should be saved was to be triumphant, even as we
now perceive to be fulfilled.

CHAPTER III

OF THE FOUNDING OF HIS RELIGION, AND SANCTION
OF THE RULE

i. Now Francis, the servant of God, abiding at the church of
the Virgin Mother of God, with continuous sighing besought
her that had conceived the Word full of grace and truth that
she would deign to become his advocate; and, by the merits
of the Mother of Mercy, he did himself conceive and give birth
unto the spirit of Gospel truth. For while on a day he was
devoutly hearing the Mass of the Apostles, that Gospel was
read aloud wherein Christ gave unto His disciples that were
sent forth to preach the Gospel pattern for their life, to wit,
that they should'possess neither gold, nor silver, nor money in
their purses, nor scrip for their journey, neither two coats,
neither shoes, nor yet staves. Hearing this, and understanding
it, and committing it unto memory, the lover of Apostolic
poverty was at once filled with joy unspeakable. “ This,”
saith he, “ is what I desire, yea, this is what I long for with my
whole heart.” Forthwith he loosed his shoes from off his feet,
laid down his staff, cast aside his purse and his money, con¬
tented him with one scanty tunic, and, throwing aside his belt,
took a rope for girdle, applying all the care of his heart to
discover how best he might fulfil that which he had heard,
and conform himself in all things unto the rule of Apostolic
godliness.

2. From this time forward, the man of God began, by divine
impulse, to become a jealous imitator of Gospel poverty, and
to invite others unto penitence. His words were not empty, nor
meet for laughter, but full of the might of the Holy Spirit,
penetrating the heart’s core, and smiting all that heard them
with mighty amaze. In all his preaching, he would bring
tidings of peace, saying, “ The Lord give you peace,” and thus


The Founding of His Religion 317

he would greet the folk at the beginning of his discourses. This
greeting he had learnt by revelation from the Lord, even as he
himself did afterward testify. Whence it befell, according unto
the prophet’s words, that he—himself inspired by the spirit of
the prophets—brought tidings of peace, and preached salvation,
and by salutary admonitions allied many unto the true peace
who aforetime were at enmity with Christ, far from salvation.

3. Accordingly, as many remarked in the man of God alike
the truth of his simple teaching and of his life, certain of them
began by his ensample to turn their thoughts unto penitence,
and, renouncing all, to join themselves unto him in habit and
life. The first of these was that honour-worthy man, Bernard,
who, being made a partaker in the divine calling, earned the
title of the firstborn son of the blessed Father, both by being
first in time, and by being of an especial holiness. For he, having
proved the saintliness of the servant of Christ, was minded
after his ensample to utterly despise the world, and sought
counsel from him how he might accomplish this. Hearing this,
the servant of God was filled with consolation by reason of his
first offspring conceived of the Holy Spirit. From God,
saith he, “ behoveth us seek this counsel.” Forthwith, when
it was morning, they entered into the church of Saint Nicholas,
and, having first prayed, Francis, the worshipper of the Trinity,
did thrice open the book of the Gospels, seeking by a threefold
witness from God to strengthen the holy purpose of Bernard.
In the first opening of the book was discovered that saying,
“ If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give
to the poor.” In the second, “ Take nothing for your journey.”
And in the third, “ If any man will come after Me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me.” “ This,” saith
the holy man, “ is our life and Rule, and that of all that shall
be minded to join our fellowship. Do thou go, then,^if thou
wilt be perfect, and fulfil that which thou hast heard.”

4. Not long after, five men were called by the same Spirit, and
thus the sons of Francis numbered six; the third place among
them fell unto the holy Father Giles, a man verily filled with
God and worthy to be famed in remembrance. For he became
afterward noted for the practice of lofty virtues, even as the
servant of the Lord had foretold concerning him, and, albeit he
was ignorant and simple, he was exalted unto the peak of
sublime contemplation. For while for a long space of time
he was continuously absorbed in uplifting of the heart unto
God, he was so often snatched up unto Him in ecstasies even


3*8 Life of St. Francis

as I myself beheld with the witness of mine own eyes—as that
he might be deemed to live among men an angelic rather than
a mortal life.

5. Moreover, about that same time, a certain priest of the
city of Assisi, Silvester by name, a man of honourable life,
received of the Lord a vision not to be passed over in silence.
For since, in his finite judgment, he had looked askance at the
manner of life of Francis and his Brethren, he was visited—lest
he should be imperilled by his rash verdict—by the regard of
the heavenly grace. For in a dream he beheld the whole city
of Assisi beset by a great dragon, whose huge bulk seemed to
threaten all the countryside with destruction. Then he saw a
Cross of gold proceeding out of the mouth of Francis, the top
whereof touched heaven, and its arms outstretched at the side
seemed to reach unto the ends of the world, and at its glittering
aspect that foul and loathly dragon Was utterly put to flight.
When this had been thrice shown unto him, he deemed it a
divine portent, and related it in order unto the man of God
and his Brethren- and no long time thereafter he left the world,
and clave so constantly unto the footsteps of Christ as that
his life in the Order rendered true the vision that he had received
while yet in the world.

6. When this vision was related unto him, the man of God
was not puffed up with the glorying of men, but, recognising
the goodness of God in the favours shown unto him, he was the
more keenly incited to repel the craft of the ancient enemy, and
to preach the glory of the Cross of Christ. Now on a day, while
in a certain lonely place he was bitterly bewailing the remem¬
brance of past years, the joy of the Holy Spirit came upon him,
and he was assured of the full remission of all his offences!
Then, carried out of himself, and wholly wrapt into a marvellous
light, the horizons of his mind were enlarged, and he clearly
beheld the future story of himself and of his sons. Returning
after this unto the Brethren, “ Be consoled,” saith he, “ my
dearest, and rejoice in the Lord, and be not sad for that ye be
few in number, nor let my simpleness nor your own make you
afeared, for the Lord hath verily shown me that God will cause
us to wax into a great host, and will enlarge us in manifold wise
with the grace of His blessing.”

7. Whereas about this time another good man did enter the
Religion, the blessed family of the man of God reached the
number of seven. Then the holy Father called all his sons unto
him and told them many things concerning the Kingdom of


The Founding of His Religion 319

God, the contempt of the world, the sacrifice of their own
wills and the chastisement of the body, and did lay before
them his intent of sending them forth into the four quarters
of the world. For now the barren and poor humble simpleness
of the holy Father had brought forth seven sons, and he was
fain to give birth unto the whole company of the faithful in
the Lord Christ, calling them unto the mourning of penitence.

“ Go ye,” saith the sweet Father unto his sons, “ bringing
tidings of peace unto men, and preach repentance for the
remission of sins. Be ye patient in tribulation, watchful unto
prayer, zealous in toil, humble in speech, sober in manner, and
thankful for kindnesses, seeing that for all these an everlasting
kingdom is prepared for you.” Then they, humbly prostrating
themselves on the ground before the servant of God, received
with gladness of spirit the behest of holy obedience. And
Francis said unto each one singly, “ Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and He shall sustain thee.” He was wont to say these
words whensoever he was guiding any Brother unto obedience.
Then he himself, knowing that he was set as an ensample unto
the rest, that he might first do that which he had taught, set
forth with one companion toward one quarter of the world, the
remaining six being apportioned, after the fashion of a Cross,
unto the other three parts. After some little time had passed,
the kindly Father, longing for the presence of his beloved family
—since he could not of himself call them together into one place
—prayed that this might be accomplished by Him Who-
gathereth together the outcasts of Israel. And this came to
pass. For, with no mortal summoning, and all unexpectedly,
within a short time all came together according as he had
desired, by the effectual working of the divine goodness, and
to their no small marvel. Moreover, as four other honourable
men joined them about that time, their number increased unto
twelve.

8 . Now when the servant of Christ perceived that the number
of the Brethren was gradually increasing, he wrote for himself
and for his Brethren a Rule for their life, in simple words.
Herein the observance of the Holy Gospel was set as the
inseparable foundation, and some few other points were added
that seemed necessary for a consistent manner of life. But
he was fain that what he had written should be approved by
the Supreme Pontiff, wherefore he purposed to approach the
Apostolic See with that his company of simple men, relying only
on the divine guidance. God from on high had regard unto


320


Life of St. Francis


his desire, and fortified the minds of his companions, that were
afeared at the thought of his simpleness, by a vision shown
unto the man of God after this wise. It seemed unto him that
he was walking along a certain road, near by which stood a
very lofty tree When he had drawn nigh unto it, and was
standing beneath it, wondering at its height, on a sudden he
was so raised on high by the divine might as that he touched
the top of the tree, and bent down its highest branches unto its
, easll y- The portent of this vision Francis, filled
with the Spirit of God, understood to refer unto the stooping of
the Apostolic See unto his desire; wherefore he was gladdened
m spirit, and his Brethren were strengthened in the Lord, and
thus he set forth with them on the journey.

9. Now when he had come unto the Roman Curia, 1 and
had been introduced into the presence of the Supreme Pontiff,
he expounded unto him his intent, humbly and earnestly
beseeching him to sanction the Rule aforesaid for their life.
And the Vicar of Christ, the lord Innocent the Third, a man
exceeding renowned for wisdom, beholding in the man of God
the wondrous purity of a simple soul, constancy unto his
purpose, and the enkindled fervour of a holy will, was disposed
to give unto the suppliant his fatherly sanction. Howbeit, he
delayed to perform that which the little poor one of Christ
asked, by reason that unto some of the Cardinals this seemed a
thing untried, and too hard for human strength. But there was
present among the Cardinals an honour-worthy man, the lord
John of Saint Paul, Bishop of Sabina, a lover of all holiness,
and an helper of the poor men of Christ. He, inflamed by the
Divine Spirit said unto the Supreme Pontiff, and unto his
colleagues. If we refuse the request of this poor man as a
thing too hard, and untried, when his petition is that the pattern
of Gospel life may be sanctioned for him, let us beware lest
we stumble at the Gospel of Christ. For if any man saith that
in the observance of Gospel perfection, and the vowing thereof
there is contained aught that is untried, or contrary unto
reason, or impossible to observe, he is clearly seen to blaspheme
against Christ, the author of the Gospel.” When these arm-
ments had been set forth, the successor of the Apostle Peter
turning unto the poor man of Christ, said, “ Pray unto Christ’
my son, that He may show us His will through thee, and when

..'trpisa'sit. s a


The Founding of His Religion 321

we know it more surely, we will more confidently assent untc
thy holy desires.”

10. Then the servant of God Almighty, betaking himself
wholly unto prayer, gained by devout intercession that which
he might set forth outwardly, and the Pope feel inwardly. For
when he had narrated a parable of a rich King that had of free
will espoused a fair woman that was poor, and how the children
she bare showed the likeness of the King that begat them, and
so were brought up at his table, even as he had learnt this of
the Lord—he added, as an interpretation thereof, “ It is not
to be feared that the sons and heirs of the everlasting King
will perish of hunger, even they that have been born of a poor
mother in the likeness of the King, Christ, by the power of the
Holy Spirit, and that shall themselves beget sons through the
spirit of Poverty in a little poor Religion. For if the King of
heaven hath promised an everlasting kingdom unto them that
follow Him, how r much more shall He provide for them those
things that He bestoweth alike on the good and on the evil? ”
When the Vicar of Christ had diligently hearkened unto this
parable, and the interpretation thereof, he marvelled greatly,
and perceived that Christ had of a truth spoken through a man.
Moreover, he maintained, by the inspiration of the Divine
Spirit, that a vision that at that time was shown unto him
from heaven would be fulfilled in Francis. For in a dream he
saw, as he recounted, the Lateran Basilica about to fall, when a
little poor man, of mean stature and humble aspect, propped it
with his own back, and thus saved it from falling. “ Verily,”
saith he, “ he it is that by his work and teaching shall sustain
the Church of Christ.” From this vision, he was filled with an
especial devotion unto him, and in all ways disposed himself
unto his supplication, and ever loved the servant of Christ with
an especial affection. Then and there he granted his request,
and promised at a later day to bestow yet more upon him. He
sanctioned the Rule, and gave him a command to preach
repentance, and made all the lay Brethren that had accom¬
panied the servant of God wear narrow tonsures, that they might
preach the word of God without hindrance.


322


Life of St. Francis


CHAPTER IV

OF THE ADVANCEMENT OF THE ORDER UNDER HIS HAND, AND
OF THE CONFIRMATION OF THE RULE ALREADY SANCTIONED

t. Thenceforward Francis, relying on the favour of heaven
and on the Papal authority, took his way with all confidence
toward the valley of Spoleto, that he might both live and teach
the Gospel of Christ. While he was holding converse with his
companions on the road, as to how they might observe in
sincerity the Rule that they had professed, and how in all
holiness and righteousness they might walk before God, how
they might progress among themselves, and be an ensample
unto others, their discussion was prolonged, and the hours
slipped by. And at last they found themselves, wearied with
the length of their toilsome way, and an hungered, in a certain
lonely place. Then verily, when there was no means whereby
they might provide them with the needful food, the providence
of God came speedily unto their aid. For, on a sudden, there
appeared a man carrying bread in his hand, the which he gave
unto the little poor ones of Christ, and, also on a sudden, vanished,
without any man knowing whence he came or whither he went.
Hereby the Brethren in their poverty perceived that the guardian
care of heaven was about the company of the man of God, and
were refreshed more by the gift of the divine bounty than by
the food of the body; moreover, they were filled with heavenly
comfort, and firmly resolved, and strengthened themselves in
the irrevocable determination, never to retreat from their vow
of holy poverty for any goad of necessity or affliction.

2. Thus they returned in their holy intent unto the valley of
Spoleto, and began to discuss whether they ought to live among
men, or to betake them unto lonely places. But Francis, the
servant of Christ, trusting not in his own efforts or those of his
Brethren, with importunate prayer enquired the pleasure of the
divine will concerning this. Then he was illumined by a divinely
revealed oracle, and understood that he had been sent of the
Lord unto this end, that he might win for Christ the souls that
the devil was striving to carry off. Wherefore he chose to live
rather for all men than for his single self, inspired by the
ensample of Him Who brooked to die, One Man for all.

3. Accordingly, the man of God returned with the rest of his
companions unto a certain deserted hut nigh the city of Assisi,


Advancement of the Order 323

wherein, after the pattern of Holy Poverty, they lived in much
toil and necessity, seeking to be refreshed rather with the bread
of tears than of luxury. For they gave themselves up con¬
tinuously unto divine prayers, being earnest in the practice of
devout intercession—of the heart rather than of the lips—for
they had not yet any ecclesiastical books wherein they might
chant the Canonical Hours. Howbeit, in the place of such, they
meditated day and night on the book of the Cross of Christ,
continuously looking thereupon, by the ensample of their Father,
and taught by his discourse, for he continually spake unto them
concerning the Cross of Christ. When the Brethren besought
him to teach them to pray, he said, “ When ye pray, say ‘ Our
Father/ and, ‘ We adore Thee, 0 Christ, in all Thy churches that
be in the whole world, and we bless Thee for that by Thy holy
Cross Thou hast redeemed the world.’” Moreover, he taught
them to praise God in all things and through all His creatures
to reverence priests with an especial honour, to firmly hold and
simply confess the true faith, according as the Holy Roman
Church doth both hold and teach it. The Brethren observed
the instructions of the holy Father in all things, and, using the
form of prayer that he had given unto them, would humbly
prostrate themselves before all churches and crosses that they
beheld, were it even from a distance.

4. Now while the Brethren were abiding in the place aforesaid,
the holy man one Saturday entered the city of Assisi, to preach
early on the Sunday, as was his wont, in the Cathedral Church.
While the man devoted unto God was passing the night, after
his wonted manner, in a hut within the Canons’ garden, praying
unto God, and absent in the body from his sons—lo, about mid¬
night, while some of the Brethren were taking rest, others keeping
vigil in prayer, a chariot of fire of marvellous brightness, entering
by the door of the house, turned thrice hither and thither through
the dwelling, and over the chariot a shining ball of fire rested,
in appearance like unto the sun, making the night radiant!
The watchful Brethren were astounded, they that slept were
awakened and alarmed at the same moment, and felt the lio-ht
no less in their hearts than with their bodies, while by the power
of that marvellous brightness the conscience of each was laid
bare unto his fellow. For they all understood alike—all seeincr
in turn the hearts of each—that their holy Father was absent
from them in body, but present in spirit, and that, transformed
into such a likeness, illumined with heavenly rays, and flaming
with ardent heat, he was shown unto them of the Lord with


Life of St. Francis


3 2 4

supernatural might in a shining chariot of fire; so that they, as
Israelites indeed, might follow after him who, like another Elias,
had been made by God the chariot and the horseman of spiritual
men. We must verily believe that He opened the eyes of those
simple men at the prayers of Francis, that they might see the
mighty deeds of God, Who aforetime opened the eyes of the
young man that he might see the mountain full of horses and
chariots of fire round about Elisha. When the holy man
returned unto the Brethren, he began to scrutinise the secret
things of their consciences, to console them with that marvellous
vision, and to foretell many things that should come to pass
concerning the progress of the Order. And as he revealed many
things surpassing mortal sense, the Brethren perceived of a
truth that the Spirit of the Lord had rested upon His servant
Francis in such fulness as that they would walk most securely
in following his teaching and life.

5. Alter this, Francis, shepherd of a little flock, led his band
of twelve Brethren unto Saint Mary of the Little Portion—the
favour of heaven going before him—that in the place wherein,
by the merits of the Mother of God, the Order of Minors had
taken its beginning, it might by her aid gain an increase. There
too he became an herald of the Gospel, going round among cities
and fortified places, proclaiming the Kingdom of God, not in
the words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy
Ghost teacheth. He seemed unto them that beheld him a man
of another world, one, to wit, that had his heart ever set on
heaven, and his face turned toward it, and that endeavoured
to draw all men upwards. From this time, the vine of Christ
began to bring forth pleasant savour of the Lord, and the
flowers produced therefrom became the rich fruit of sweetness,
honour, and righteousness.

6. For, enkindled by the fervour of his preaching, very many
folk bound themselves by new rules of penitence, after the
pattern received from the man of God, and that same servant of
Christ ordained that their manner of living should be called the
Order of the Brethren of Penitence. Of a truth, even as the way
of penitence is known to be common unto all that strive after
heaven, so it is noted of how much worth in the sight of God
was this Order, embracing clerks and laymen, virgins, and
married folk of either sex, by the many miracles wrought by
some of its members. And there were maidens converted unto
lifelong virginity, among whom that virgin dearest unto God,
Clare, the first plant among them, like a snowy spring blossom,


Advancement of the Order 325

breathed fragrance, and shone like a star exceeding bright. She
is now glorified in heaven, and rightly honoured by the Church
on earth, she that was the daughter in Christ of the holy Father
Francis, the little poor one, and herself the Mother of the Poor
Ladies.

7. Now many were not only smitten with devotion, but also
kindled by yearning after the perfection of Christ, and, despising
all the vanity of worldly things, followed in the footsteps of
Francis; and these, increasing by daily additions, speedily
reached unto the ends of the earth. For Holy Poverty, whom
alone they took with them for their charges, made them swift
unto all obedience, strong to labour, and speedy in journeying.
And since they possessed no earthly things they set their
affections on naught, and had naught that they feared to lose;
they were everywhere at ease, weighed down by no fear, harassed
by no care; they lived like men who were removed from
vexations of the mind, and, taking no thought for it, awaited
the morrow, and their night’s lodging. Many reproaches were
hurled upon them in divers regions of the world, as on men
contemptible and unknown; howbeit, their love for the Gospel
of Christ rendered them so longsuffering as that they sought
rather to be in places where they would endure persecution in
the body, than in those where their saintliness was recognised,
and where they might be puffed up by the applause of the world.
Their very destitution of possessions seemed unto them over¬
flowing wealth, while, according unto the counsel of the Wise
King, they were better pleased with little than with much.

On a time when some of the Brethren had come unto the
regions of the infidels, it chanced that a certain Saracen, moved
by kindly feeling, offered them money for their needful food.
And when they refused to take it, the man marvelled, perceiving
that they were penniless. But when at last he understood that
they had become poor for the love of God, and were resolved
not to own money, he associated himself with them in such
affection as that he offered to supply all their needs, so long as
he should have aught in his possession. 0 priceless value of
poverty, by whose marvellous power the mind of a fierce bar¬
barian was changed into such compassionate gentleness! How
appalling and scandalous a crime it is, that any Christian should
trample on this rare pearl, that a Saracen exalted with such
honour!

8. About that time, a certain Religious of the Order of Cross¬
bearers, Morico by name, was lying in an hospital hard by Assisi


326 Life of St. Francis

suffering from an infirmity so serious and so protracted as that
he was given up unto death by the physicians; he became a
suppliant of the man of God, beseeching him earnestly through
a messenger that he would deign to intercede with the Lord
on his behalf. The blessed Father graciously acceded there-
unto, and, having first prayed, took some crumbs of bread, and
mixed with them some oil taken from the lamp that burned
before the altar of the Virgin, and sent it by the hand of the
Brethren unto the sick man, as though it were an electuary,
saying, “ Carry this medicament unto our brother Morico, by
the which the power of Christ shall not only restore him unto
full health, but shall also render him a hardy warrior, who shall
cleave with constancy unto our ranks.” Forthwith, so soon as
the sick man tasted of that remedy made by inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, he rose up healed, and gained from God such
strength of mind and body as that shortly thereafter he entered
the Religion of the holy man, and, clothing himself with one
tunic alone—beneath the which he wore for a long space of time
a shirt of mail—and satisfied with but uncooked fare—herbs
to wit, and vegetables and fruits—he thus for many years
tasted neither bread nor wine, and yet remained strong and
sound.

9. As the merits of the virtues of these little ones of Christ
waxed greater, the fragrance of their good repute was spread
on all sides, and drew much folk from divers parts of the world
to see the holy Father in person. Among whom was a certain
skilled composer of secular songs, who by reason of this gift had
been crowned by the Emperor, and thence called “ King of
Verse,” and he now was minded to seek the man of God, the
despiser of worldly things. And when he had found him
preaching in a Monastery at Borgo San Severino, the ha.nd of
the Lord was upon him, and he beheld that same preacher of
the Cross of Christ, Francis, marked after the likeness of a
Cross with two exceeding shining swords set crosswise, whereof
the one reached from his head unto his feet, the other across
his breast from hand to hand. He had not known the servant
of Christ by face, but speedily recognised him when signalled
out by so great a portent. Forthwith, all astonied at this sight,
he began to resolve on better things, and, at length, pricked by
the power of his words, and pierced as though by the sword of
the Spirit proceeding out of his mouth, he did utterly despise
worldly glories, and clave unto the blessed Father, professing
his vows. Wherefore the holy man, seeing that he had utterly


Advancement of the Order 327

turned from the disquiet of the world unto the peace of Christ,
called him Brother Pacifico. He afterward made progress in
all holiness, and, before that he became Minister in France—
being the first who held the office of Minister there—he merited
to behold once more a great T on the forehead of Francis, the
which, marked out by a diversity of colours, adorned his face
with its marvellous beauty. This sign, in sooth, the holy man
revered with deep affection, praised it often in his discourse,
and, in the letters that he dictated, signed it with his own hand
at the end, as though all his care was, in the prophet’s words,
to set a mark 1 upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and
that cry, and that be truly converted unto Christ Jesus.

xo. Now as time went by, and the Brethren were multiplied,
their watchful shepherd began to call them together unto
Chapters-General in the place of Saint Mary of the Little Portion,
so that, God dividing them an inheritance by line in the land of
poverty, he might allot unto each his portion of obedience.
Here, albeit there was destitution of all things needful, a com¬
pany of more than 5006 Brethren came together at one time,
and, the divine mercy succouring them, there was both a suffi¬
ciency of victual, and bodily health together with it, while
gladness of spirit abounded. In the provincial Chapters, albeit
Francis could not there show himself present in the body, yet
in spirit—by his zealous care for their ruling, by his urgency
in prayer, and the efficacy of his blessing — he was present
there; yea, and once, by the operation of God’s marvellous
power, he did visibly appear. For while that glorious preacher,
who is now a noted Confessor of Christ, Antony, was preaching
unto the Chapter of the Brethren at Arles on the title inscribed
on the Cross, “ Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews,” a
certain Brother of proved uprightness, Monaldo by name,
looking, by a divine impulse, toward the door of the Chapter-
house, beheld with his bodily eyes the Blessed Francis uplifted
in the air, his hands outstretched after the manner of a Cross,
blessing the Brethren. All the Brethren felt that they had
been filled with a consolation of spirit so great and so new as
that the Spirit bore indubitable witness within them of the true
presence of the holy Father, albeit this was further assured, not
alone by manifest tokens, but also by external testimony through
the words of that same holy Father. We must verily believe
that the almighty power of God—that vouchsafed unto the

1 Vulg. Ezek. ix. 4. Signa thau (T) super frontes, etc., the letter T
being in form like a Cross.


Life of St. Francis


328

holy Bishop Ambrose to be present at the burial of the glorious
Martin, that he might honour the holy Pontiff with his holy
ministry—did also make His servant Francis to appear at the
preaching of His true herald Antony, that he might sanction
his preaching of the truth, and in especial his preaching of the
Cross of Christ, whereof he was a supporter and servant.

11. Now as the Order was spreading abroad, Francis was
minded to make the Rule of their life, that the lord Innocent
had sanctioned, be confirmed in perpetuity by his successor
Honorius, and he was admonished by a revelation from God
on this wise. He seemed unto himself to have gathered from
the ground some very small crumbs of bread, and to have to
part them among many famished Brethren that stood round
about him. While he hesitated, fearing to part among them
such minute crumbs, lest haply they might slip between his
hands, a Voice from above said unto him, “ Francis, make one
Host out of all the crumbs, and give it unto these that would
fain eat.” This he did, and such as did not receive it devoutly,
or despised the gift as they received it, were speedily stricken
with leprosy, and so marked out from the rest. At morn, the
holy man narrated all these things unto his companions, grieving
that he could not interpret the mystic meaning of the vision.
But on the day following, as he kept prayerful vigil, he heard a
Voice speaking unto him from heaven on this wise, “ Francis,
the crumbs of the night past are the words of the Gospel, the
Host is the Rule, the leprosy is sin.” Being fain, therefore, to
reduce unto more convenient form the Rule that was to be con¬
firmed—it having been somewhat diffusely compiled by putting
together the words of the Gospel—and being directed there¬
unto by the vision that had been shown him, he went up into
a certain mountain with two companions, the Holy Spirit
leading him. There, fasting, or living on bread and water alone,
he made the Rule be compiled, according unto what the
divine Spirit had taught him in prayer. When he came down
from the mountain, he entrusted this Rule unto the keeping of
his Vicar, who, when a few days had gone by, affirmed that he
had lost it through negligence. Then the holy man returned
unto the lonely place, and there drew up the Rule again, like
the former one, as though he had received the very words from
the mouth of God; and he obtained its confirmation, as he had
desired, from the lord Pope Honorius aforesaid, in the eighth
year of his pontificate. When persuading the Brethren with
ardour to observe this Rule, he would say that he had set naught


The Austerity of His Life 329

therein of his own devising, but that he had made all things
be written according as they had been divinely revealed unto
him. And that this might be more assuredly confirmed by the
witness of God, it was but a few days thereafter that the stig¬
mata of the Lord Jesus were imprinted upon him by the finger
of the Living God—the seal, as it were, of the Chief Pontiff,
Christ, to sanction in all ways the Rule, and to approve its
author, even as is described in its own place below, after the
recital of his virtues.


CHAPTER V

OF THE AUSTERITY OF HIS LIFE, AND OF HOW ALL CREATED
THINGS AFFORDED HIM COMFORT

i. When therefore the man of God, Francis, perceived that by
his ensample many were incited to bear the Cross of Christ with
fervour of soul, he himself was incited, like a good leader of the
army of Christ, to reach unto the palm of victory by the heights
of unconquered valour. For, considering that saying of the
Apostle, They that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts,” and being fain to wear the armour of
the Cross upon his body, he restrained his sensual appetites with
such strict discipline as that he would barely take what was
necessary to support life. For he was wont to say that it was
difficult to satisfy the needs of the body without yielding unto
the inclinations of the senses. Wherefore he would hardly, and
but seldom, allow himself cooked food when in health, and,
when he did allow it, he would either sprinkle it with ashes, or by
pouring water thereupon would as far as possible destroy its
savour and taste. Of his drinking of wine what shall I say,
when even of water he would scarce drink what he needed, while
parched with burning thirst ? He was alway discovering methods
of more rigorous abstinence, and would daily make progress in
their use, and albeit he had already attained the summit of
perfection, yet, like a novice, he was ever making trial of some
new method, chastising the lusts of the flesh by afflicting it,
Howbeit, when he went forth abroad, he adapted himself—as
the Gospel biddeth—unto them that entertained him, in the
quality of their meats, yet only so as that, on his return unto
lus own abode, he strictly observed the sparing frugality of
abstinence. In this wise he showed himself harsh toward his

M


330 Life of St. Francis

own self, gracious toward his neighbour, and in all things subject
unto the Gospel of Christ, and did thus set an ensample of
edification, not alone by his abstinence, but even in what he
ate. The bare ground for the most part served as a couch unto
his wearied body, and he would often sleep sitting, with a log
or a stone placed under his head, and, clad in one poor tunic, he
served the Lord in cold and nakedness.

2. Once when he was asked how in such scant clothing he
could protect him from the bitterness of the winter’s cold, he
made answer in fervour of spirit, “ If through our yearning for
the heavenly fatherland we have been inwardly kindled by its
flame, we can easily endure this bodily cold.’’ He abhorred
softness in clothing, and loved harshness, declaring that for this
John the Baptist had been praised by the divine lips. In sooth,
if ever he perceived smoothness in a tunic that was given him,
he had it lined with small cords, for he would say that, according
unto the Word of Truth, it was not in poor men’s huts, but in
Kings’ houses, that softness of raiment was to be sought. And
he had learnt by sure experience that the devils be afeared of
hardness, but that by luxury and softness they be the more
keenly incited to tempt, men. # . .

Accordingly, one night when by reason of an infirmity in his
head and eyes he had, contrary unto his wont, a pillow of feathers
placed beneath his head, the devil entered thereinto, and vexed
him until the morning hour, distracting him in divers ways
from his exercise of holy prayer; until, calling his companion,
he made the pillow and the devil withal be carried afar from
the cell. But as the Brother was leaving the cell, carrying the
pillow, he lost the power and use of all his limbs, until, at the
voice of the holy Father, who perceived this in spirit, his former
powers of mind and body were fully restored unto him.

3. Stern in discipline, Francis stood continually upon the
watch-tower, having especial care unto that purity that should
be maintained in both the inner and the outer man.. Wherefore,
in the early days of his conversion, he was wont in the winter
season to plunge into a ditch full of snow, that he might both
utterly subdue the foe within him, and might preserve his white
robe of chastity from the fire of lust. He would.maintain that
it was beyond compare more tolerable for a spiritual man to
bear intense cold in his body, than to feel the heat of carnal
lust, were it but a little, in his mind.

4. When he was at the hermitage of Sartiano, and had one
night devoted himself unto prayer in his cell, the ancient enemy


The Austerity of His Life 331

called him, saying thrice, “ Francis, Francis, Francis.” When
he had enquired of him what he sought, that other made reply
to deceive him, “ There is no sinner in the world whom God
would not spare, should he turn unto Him. But whoso killeth
himself by harsh penance, shall find no mercy throughout
etermty. ’ Forthwith the man of God perceived by revelation
the deceits of the enemy, and how he had striven to render him
once more lukewarm. And this the following event proved.
For but a little after this, at the instigation of him whose breath
kindleth coals, a grievous temptation of the flesh laid hold on
him. When the lover of chastity felt its oncoming, he laid aside
his habit, and began to scourge himself severely with a cord,
saying, “ Ah, brother ass, thus must thou be led, thus must thou
submit unto the lash. The habit is the servant of Religion, it is
a token of holiness, the sensual man may not steal it; if thou
art fain to go forth anywhither, go! ” Then, impelled by a
marvellous fervour of spirit, he threw open the door of his cell,
and went out into the garden, where, plunging his now naked
body into a great snow-heap, he began to pile up therefrom with
full hands seven mounds, the which he set before him, and thus
addressed his outer man, “ Behold (saith he), this larger heap
is thy wife, these four be two sons and two daughters, the other
twain be a serving man and maid, that thou must needs have to
serve thee. Now bestir thee and clothe them, for they be
perishing with cold. But if manifold cares on their behalf
trouble thee, do thou be careful to serve the one Lord.” Then
the tempter departed, routed, and the holy man returned unto
his cell victorious, in that, by enduring the external cold in right
penitent fashion, he had so extinguished the fire of lust within
that thereafter he felt it no whit. Now a Brother, who at the
time was devoting himself unto prayer, beheld all these things
by the light of a clear shining moon. When the man of God
discovered that he had seen these things on that night he
revealed unto him how that temptation had befallen him/and
bade him tell no man, so long as he himself lived, the thing that
he had seen. 6

5. And not only did he teach that the appetites of the body
must be mortified, and its impulses bridled, but also that the
outer senses, through the which death entereth into the soul
must be guarded with the utmost watchfulness. He bade that
intimate intercourse with women, holding converse with them
and looking upon them—the which be unto manv an occasion
of falling—should be zealously shunned, declaring that by


232 Life of St. Francis

such things a weak spirit is broken, and a strong one ofttimes
weakened. He said that one who held converse with women
—unless he were of an especial uprightness—could as little avoid
contamination therefrom as he could, in the words of Scripture,
go upon hot coals and his feet not be burned. He himself so
turned away his eyes that they might not behold vanity after
this sort that he knew the features of scarce any woman—thus
he once told a companion. For he thought it was not safe to
dwell on the appearance of their persons, that might either
rekindle a spark of the vanquished flesh, or spot the radiance of
a chaste mind. For he maintained that converse with women
was a vain toy, except only for confession or the briefest
instruction, such as made for salvation, and was m accord with
decorum. “ What dealings,” saith he, “ should a Religious
have with a woman, except when she seeketh, with devout
supplication, after holy penitence, or counsel anent a better
life? In overweening confidence, the enemy is less dreaded,
and the devil, if so be that he can have a hair of his own in a
man, soon maketh it wax into a beam.”

6. He taught the Brothers zealously to shun sloth, as the sink
of all evil thoughts, showing by his ensample that the rebellious
and idle body must be subdued by unceasing discipline and
profitable toil. Wherefore he would call his body brother
ass,” as though it were meet to be loaded with toilsome burdens,
beaten with many stripes, and nourished on mean fare. If he
beheld any man wandering about in idleness, and fain to feed
on the toil of others, he thought he ought to be called brother
fly ” for that, doing no good himself, and spoiling the good done
by others, he made himself an hateful pest unto all. Wherefore
he ofttimes said, “ I would that my Brethren should labour and
employ themselves, lest, being given up unto sloth, they should
stray into sins of heart or tongue.” He was minded that a
Gospel silence should be observed by the Brethren, such as, to
wit, that they should at all times diligently refrain from every
idle word, as those that shall give account thereof m the Day
of Judgment. But if he found any Brother prone unto vain
words, he would sharply chide him, declaring a shamefast
sparingness of speech to be the guard of a pure heart, and no
small virtue, seeing that death and life are m the power of the
tongue, not so much with regard unto taste as with regard unto
speech.

7 But albeit he sought with all his might to lead the Brethren
unto the austere life, yet the utmost rigour of severity pleased


The Austerity of His Life 333

him not—such rigour as hath no bowels of compassion, nor is
flavoured with the salt of discretion. Thus, on a certain night,
when one of the Brethren by reason of his excessive abstinence
was so tormented by hunger that he could take no repose, the
kindly shepherd, perceiving the danger that threatened his
sheep, called the Brother, set bread before him, and, that he
might remove any cause for his confusion of face, began first
to eat himself, then gently bade him partake. The Brother,
laying aside his shamefastness, took the food, rejoicing exceed¬
ingly that, through the wise kindliness of his shepherd, he had
both escaped that bodily peril, and had received no small en-
sample of edification withal. When morning came, and the
Brethren had been called together, the man of God related that
which had befallen in the night, adding the sage exhortation,
“ Le the act of love, not the food, an ensample unto you, my
Brethren.” Moreover, he taught them to follow discretion, as
the charioteer of the virtues—not that discretion unto which
the flesh persuadeth, but that which. Christ taught. Whose most
holy life is acknowledged to be the express image of perfection.

8. And since it is not possible for a man beset with the
infirmity of the flesh so perfectly to follow the Crucified Lamb
without spot as to escape contracting some defilement, by his
own firm ensample he made declaration that they who keep
watch over the perfection of their life ought to cleanse them¬
selves daily with floods of tears. For, albeit he had already
attained a wondrous purity of heart and body, yet would he
not abstain from continual floods of tears whereby to cleanse
the mental vision, not weighing the detriment unto his bodily
sight. For when by incessant weeping he had sustained a very
grievous injury unto the eyes, and the physician would fain
have persuaded him to refrain from tears, if he wished to escape
blindness of his bodily sight, the holy man made answer, “ It
is not meet, brother physician, that for the love of that light
that we have in common with the flies, the visitation of the
eternal light should be impaired, be it but by little. For the
spirit did not receive the blessing of light for the sake of the
flesh, but the flesh for the sake of the spirit.” He preferred
rather to lose the light of his bodily vision than, by thwarting
the devotion of the spirit, to check the tears whereby the inner
eye is cleansed, that it may avail to see God.

9. Now on a time when he was counselled by the physicians,
and urgently importuned by the Brethren, to permit himself to
be succoured by the remedy of a cautery, the man of God did


334 Life of St. Francis

humbly assent thereunto, forasmuch as he perceived it to be
alike salutary and arduous. The surgeon, then, was summoned,
and, having come, laid his iron instrument in the fire to prepare
for the cautery. Then the servant of Christ—consoling his
body that at the sight shuddered in fear—began to address
the fire as a friend, saying, “ My brother fire, the Most High
hath created thee beyond all other creatures mighty in thine
enviable glory, fair, and useful. Be thou clement unto me in
this hour, and courteous. I beseech the great Lord, Who
created thee, that He temper thy heat unto me, so that I may
be able to bear thy gentle burning.” His prayer ended, he
made the sign of the Cross over the iron instrument, that was
glowing at white heat from the fire, and then waited fearlessly.
The hissing iron was impressed on the tender flesh, and the
cautery drawn from the ear unto the eyebrow. How much
suffering the fire caused him, the holy man himself told: “ Praise
the Most High,” saith he unto the Brethren, “ for that of a
truth I say unto you, I felt neither the heat of the fire, nor any
pain in my flesh.” And, turning unto the surgeon, “ If,” saith
he, “ the cautery be not well made, impress it again.” The
surgeon, finding such mighty valour of spirit in his frail body,
marvelled, and exalted this divine miracle, saying, “ I tell ye,
Brethren, I have seen strange things to-day.” For, by reason
that Francis had attained unto such purity that his flesh was
in harmony with his spirit, and his spirit with God, in marvellous
agreement, it was ordained by the divine ruling that the creature
that serveth its Maker should be wondrously subject unto his
will and command.

io. At another time, when the servant of God was afflicted
by a very grievous sickness, at the hermitage of Saint Urban,
and, feeling his strength failing, had asked for a draught of
wine, answer was made him that there was no wine there that
could be brought unto him; whereupon he bade that water
should be brought, and, when brought, he blessed it, making
the sign of the Cross over it. At once that which had been pure
water became excellent wine, and that which the poverty of the
lonely place could not provide was obtained by the purity of
the holy man. Tasting thereof, he forthwith so easily recovered
his strength as that the new flavour and the renewed health, by
the sense of taste and by the miracle renewing him that tasted,
attested, with twofold witness, his perfect laying aside of the
old man and putting on of the new.

n. Nor did created things alone obey the servant of God at


The Austerity of His Life 335

his beck, but everywhere the very providence of the Creator
stooped unto his good pleasure. Thus, on a time when his body
was weighed down by the suffering of many infirmities together,
he had a yearning for some tuneful sound that might incite him
unto gladness of spirit, yet discreet decorum would not allow
this to be rendered by human agency—then the Angels gave
their services to fulfil the good pleasure of the holy man. For
one night while he was wakeful, and meditating on the Lord,
on a sudden was heard the sound of a lyre of wondrous harmony
and sweetest tune. No one was to be seen, but the coming and
going of a lyrist was betokened by the volume of sound, now
here, now there. With his mind uplifted unto God, he enjoyed
such sweetness from that melodious strain as that he thought
him to have exchanged this world for another. This was not
hidden from the Brethren that were his close companions, who
ofttimes perceived, by assured tokens, that he was visited of
the Lord with such exceeding and continual consolations as
that he could not utterly hide them.

12. On another time, while the man of God, with a Brother
for companion, was making his way to preach between Lom¬
bardy and the March of Treviso, and was nigh the Po, the
shadowy darkness of night surprised them. And since their
way was beset by many and great dangers by reason of the
darkness, the river, and the marshes, his companion said unto
the holy man, “ Pray, Father, that we be delivered from instant
peril. Unto whom the man of God made answer with great
confidence, “ God is able, if it be His sweet will, to put to flight
the thick darkness, and to grant us the blessing of light.^ Scarce
had he ended his speech ere, lo! such a great light began to
shine around them with heavenly radiance that, while for others
it was dark night, they could see in the clear light not their
road only, but many things round about. By the leading of
this light they were guided in body and consoled in spirit, until
they arrived safely, singing divine hymns and lauds, at their
place of lodging that was some long way distant. Consider
how wondrous was the purity of this man, how great his merits,
that at his beck the fire should temper its heat, water should'
change its flavour, angelic music should afford him solace, and
light from heaven leading; thus it was evident that the whole
frame of the world was obedient unto the consecrated senses of
the holy man.


33 6


Life of St. Francis


CHAPTER VI

OF HIS HUMILITY AND OBEDIENCE, AND OF THE DIVINE
CONDESCENSIONS SHOWN UNTO HIM AT WILL

i. Humility, the guardian and glory of all virtues, abounded
in rich fulness in the man of God. In his own estimation, he
was naught but a sinner, whereas in very truth he was the
mirror and brightness of all saintliness. In humility he strove
to build himself up, as a wise masterbuilder laying the founda¬
tion that he had learnt of Christ. He would say that for this
end the Son of God had come down from the heights, and from.
His Father’s bosom, unto our mean estate, to wit, that both
by ensample and precept our Lord and Master might teach
humility. Wherefore Francis, as a disciple of Christ, strove
ever to make himself of no esteem in his own and other men’s
eyes, mindful of that saying of the greatest Teacher, “ That
which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight
of God.” This too he was wont to say, “ A man’s worth is
what he is in the sight of God, and no more.” Accordingly,
he deemed it a fool’s part to be uplifted by the applause of the
world, but he rejoiced in railings, and was saddened by praise.
He would liefer hear himself reviled than praised, knowing that
reviling leadeth unto amendment, while praise impelleth toward
a fall. Wherefore ofttimes when folk exalted the merits of his
saintliness, he would bid one of the Brethren offer him a con¬
trast, by pouring contemptuous words into his ears. And when
that Brother, albeit against his will, called him a lout and an
hireling, one unskilled and unprofitable, he would rejoice in
spirit and in countenance alike, and would make answer, “ The
Lord bless thee, dearest son, for thou hast spoken words most
true, and such as it becometh the son of Peter Bernardone to

hear.” n ,

2. Now that he might make himself contemned of others, he
spared not his shamefastness, but in preaching before the whole
folk laid bare his failings. It befell once that, while weighed
down by sickness, he had some little relaxed the strictness of
his abstinence, with the intent of regaining his health. But
when that he had recovered his bodily strength, this true
despiser of self was inspired to rebuke his own flesh. “ It is
not fitting,” saith he, “that the folk should believe me to
observe abstinence while that I, on the contrary, do refresh my


His Humility and Obedience 337

body in secret.” Accordingly, he arose, kindled with the spirit
of holy humility, and, calling the folk together in an open space
of the city of Assisi, he, together with many Brethren that he
had brought with him, made a solemn entrance into the Cathe¬
dral Church, and then, with a rope tied round his neck, and naked
save for his breeches, bade them drag him in the sight of all
unto the stone whereupon criminals were wont to be set for
punishment. Mounting it, albeit he was suffering from quartan
fever and weakness, and the season was bitterly cold, he preached
with much power of spirit, and, while all gave ear, declared
that he ought not to be honoured as a spiritual man, but that
rather he ought to be despised of all as a fleshly glutton. Then
they that were present and beheld this amazing sight, marvelled,
and, for that they had long known his austerities, were devoutly
pricked to the heart, exclaiming that humility after this sort
were easier admired than imitated. Yet, albeit this seemed
rather like unto the prodigy foretold of the prophet than an
ensample, it set forth a pattern of perfect humility, whereby the
follower of Christ was taught that he ought to despise the
vaunting of a transient praise, and restrain the pomp of swelling
pride, and refute the lies of a deceitful semblance.

3. Many things after this sort he ofttimes did, that outwardly
he might become as it were a vessel that perisheth, while
inwardly he possessed the spirit of sanctification. He sought to
hide in the secret places of his heart the favours of his Lord,
loth to reveal them and so gain praise, that might be an occasion
of falling. Ofttimes, when he was glorified of many, he would
speak after this wise, “ I may yet have sons and daughters,
praise me not as one that is safe. No man should be praised
before that his end be known.” This unto them that praised
him, unto himself this, “ Had the Most High shown such
favours unto a robber, he would have been better pleasing t hkn
thou, Francis.” Ofttimes he would say unto the Brethren,
“ Concerning all that a sinner can do, none aught to flatter
himself with undeserved praise. A sinner (he saith) can fast,
pray, lament, and mortify his own body—this one thing he
cannot do, to wit, be faithful unto his Lord. In this, then, we
may glory, if we render unto the Lord the glory that is His due,
and if, while serving Him faithfully, we ascribe unto Him
whatsoever He giveth.”

4. Now this Gospel merchant—that he might in many ways
make profit, and make the whole time that now is be turned
into merit—was fain not so much to be set in authority as to


338 Life of St. Francis

be set under authority, not so much to command as to obey.
Wherefore, giving up his office unto the Minister-General, he
sought a Warden, unto whose will he might submit him in all
things. For he maintained that the fruit of holy obedience
was so rich as that they who placed their necks under her yoke
spent no portion of their time without profit; wherefore he was
ever wont to promise and to render obedience unto the Brother
that was his companion. He said once unto his companions,
“ Among other gifts that the divine goodness hath deigned to
bestow upon me, it hath conferred this grace, that I would as
heedfully obey the novice of an hour, were he appointed unto
me for Warden, as I would the oldest and wisest Brother. The
subordinate (saith he) ought to regard him that is set in
authority over him not as a man, but as Him for love of Whom
he doth make himself subject. And the more despicable is he
that command eth, the more acceptable is the humility of him
that obeyeth.”

When once it was enquired of him what man should be
esteemed truly obedient, he set before them as an ensample the
similitude of a dead body. “ Lift up,” saith he, “ a dead body,
and place it where thou wilt. Thou shalt see it will not murmur
at being moved, it will not complain of where it is set, it will
not cry out if left there. If it be set in a lofty seat, it will look
not up, but down. If it be clad in purple, it but redoubleth
its pallor. This (saith he) is the truly obedient man, who
reasoneth not why he is moved, who careth not where he be
placed, who urgeth not that he should be transferred; who,
when set in authority, preserveth his wonted humility, and
the more he is honoured, considereth himself the more
unworthy.”

5. He said once unto his companion, “ I esteem not myself
to be a Brother Minor unless I be in the state that I shall
describe unto thee. Lo now, I suppose me to be one set in
authority over the Brethren; I go unto the Chapter, I preach
unto the Brethren and exhort them, and at the end they speak
against me, saying, ‘ Thou mislikest us, for that thou art un¬
lettered, slow of speech, a fool, and simple/ and thus I am cast
forth with reviling, little esteemed of all. I tell thee—unless
I can hear such words with unchanged countenance, with
unchanged gladness of spirit and unchanged holy intent—I
am vainly called a Brother Minor.” And he added, “ In
exalted place there is the fear of fall, in praises a precipice, in
the humility of a submissive spirit there is profit. Why, then,


His Humility and Obedience 339

do we look for perils rather than profits, when we have had
time bestowed on us that we may make profit therein ? ”

From this same reason of humility, Francis was minded that
his Brethren should be called by the name of Minors , and that
the rulers of his Order should be called Ministers, that thus he
might employ the very words of the Gospel that he had vowed
to observe, and that his followers might learn from their very
name that they had come to learn humility in the school of the
humble Christ. For that Teacher of humility, Christ Jesus,
when He would teach His disciples what was perfect humility,
said, “ Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be
your servant. ,,

When therefore the lord Bishop of Ostia, the protector and
chief helper of the Order of Brothers Minor (he that afterward,
as the holy man had foretold, was raised unto the dignity of
the Supreme Pontificate, under the name of Gregory the Ninth),
enquired of him whether it would be his will for his Brethren
to be promoted unto high places in the Church, he made answer,
“ Lord, my Brethren be called Minors with this very intent, that
they may not arrogate unto themselves to be called greater. If
thou art fain (saith he) that they should bear fruit in the
Church of God, maintain and keep them in the state of their
calling, and in no wise suffer them to rise unto rulership in the
Church.”

6 . Now since in himself as well as in them that obey he set
humility before all honours, God, Who loveth the humble,
deemed him worthy oi loftier heights, as a vision sent from
heaven made evident unto a Brother that was of an especial
holiness and devoutness. For he had been in the company of
the man of God, and, together with him, had been praying with
fervour of spirit in a certain deserted church, when, falling into
an ecstasy, he beheld among many seats in heaven one that
was more honourable than the rest, adorned with precious
stones, and shining with utmost splendour. Marvelling within
himself at the splendour of this exalted throne, he began to
consider with anxious thought who should be deemed worthy
to sit thereon. Then, as he considered, he heard a voice saying
unto him, “ This seat pertained unto one of the fallen Angels,
and is now kept for the humble Francis.” At length, when
the Brother had come back unto himself from that trance of
prayer, he followed the holy man as he went forth, as was his
•wont. And as they walked by the way, conversing of God


340 Life of St. Francis

each in turn, that Brother, not unmindful of his vision, enquired
of him discreetly what he thought of himself. And the humble
servant of Christ answered him, “ I think myself the chief of
sinners.” When the Brother said in opposition that he could
not, with a sound conscience, say or feel this, Francis added,
“ If any man, howsoever guilty, had received such mercy from
Christ as I, I verily think he would have been far more accept¬
able unto God than I.” Then, by the hearing of such marvel¬
lous humility, the Brother was assured of the truth of the vision
that had been shown him, knowing by the witness of the Holy
Gospel that the truly humble shall be exalted unto that excellent
glory wherefrom the proud is cast down.

7. On another time, when that he was praying in a deserted
church in the province of Massa, nigh Monte Casale, he learnt
through the Spirit that certain holy relics had been deposited
there. Perceiving with sorrow that for a long time past they
had been deprived of the reverence due unto them, he bade the
Brethren bring them unto the place, with all honour. But
when, need arising, he had departed from them, his sons were
forgetful of their Father’s behest, and neglected the merit of
obedience. Then on a day, when they were fain to celebrate
the holy mysteries, and the upper covering of the altar was
removed, they found, not without amazement, some bones right
fair and fragrant, beholding the relics that the power of God,
not men’s hands, had brought thither. Returning shortly after,
the man devoted unto God began to make diligent enquiry
whether his behest concerning the relics had been carried out.
The Brethren humbly confessed their sin of neglected obedience,
and gained pardon, with an award of penance. And the holy
man said, “ Blessed be the Lord my God, Who Himself hath
fulfilled that which ye ought to have done.” Consider heedfully
the care of the divine providence for our dust, and weigh the
goodness of the humble Francis, that did excel in the sight of
God. For when man obeyed not his bidding, God fulfilled his
desires.

8. Coming on a time unto Imola, he approached the Bishop
of the city, and humbly besought him that, with his sanction,
he might call the people together to preach unto them. The
Bishop answered him harshly, saying, “ It sufficeth, Brother,
that I myself preach unto my people.” Francis, in his true
humility, bowed his head, and went forth; howbeit, after a short
space, he returned into the house. When the Bishop, as one
in wrath, asked of him what he meant by coming again, he


His Humility and Obedience 341

replied, with humility alike of heart and voice, “ Lord, if a
father drive his son forth by one door, he must enter again by
another.” Vanquished by his humility, the Bishop embraced
him with eager mien, saying, “ Thou and all thy Brethren shall
from henceforward have a general licence to preachy throughout
my diocese, for this thy holy humility hath earned.”

9. It befell once that he came unto Arezzo at a time when
the whole city was shaken by a civil war that threatened its
speedy ruin. As he was lodging in the outskirts of the city, he
beheld the demons exulting above it, and inflaming the angry
citizens unto mutual slaughter. Then, that he might put to
flight those powers of the air that were stirring up the strife,
he sent forward as his herald Brother Silvester, a man of dovelike
simplicity, saying, “ Go out before the city gate, and, on behalf
of God Almighty, command the demons in the power of obedience
to depart with all speed.” The Brother, in his true obedience,
hastened to perform his Father’s behests, and, coming before
the presence of the Lord with thanksgiving, began to cry with a
loud voice before the city gate, “ On behalf of God Almighty,
and at the bidding of His servant Francis, depart far from hence,
all ye demons! ” At once the city was restored unto a state
of peace, and all the citizens peacefully and quietly began to
fashion anew their civil laws. Thus when the raging arrogance
of the demons had been driven out, that had held the city as it
were in a state of siege, the wisdom of the poor, to wit, the
humility of Francis, came unto its aid, and restored peace, and
saved the city. For by the merit of the difficult virtue of
humble obedience, he obtained so powerful an authority over
those rebellious and insolent spirits as that he could restrain
their fierce arrogance, and put to flight their lawless molestation.

10. The proud demons flee before the lofty virtues of the
humble, save when at times the divine mercy permitteth them
to buffet them that humility may be preserved, even as the
Apostle Paul writeth concerning himself, and as Francis learnt
bv experience. For when the lord Cardinal of Sta. Croce, Leo,
did invite him to tarry for a while with him in Rome, he humbly
agreed thereunto, for the reverence and love that he bore him.
When on the first night, his prayers ended, he was fain to sleep,
the demons rose up against the soldier of Christ, cruelly attack¬
ing him, and, when they had beaten him long and sorely, at the
last left him as it were half dead. On their departure, the man
of God called his companion, and when he came, related unto
him the whole affair, adding, “ I believe, Brother, that the


34 2 Life of St. Francis

demohs, who can avail naught save in so far as the divine
providence permitteth them, have now assailed me thus furiously
because that my lodging in the palaces of the great affordeth
no good ensample. My Brethren that sojourn in poor little
abodes, when they hear that I lodge with Cardinals, will per¬
chance surmise that I am being entangled in worldly affairs,
that I am carried away by honours paid me, and that I am
abounding in luxuries. Wherefore I deem it better that he
who is set for an ensample should shun palaces, and should walk
humbly among the humble in humble abodes, that he may make
those that bear poverty strong, by himself bearing the like.”
At morn, then, they came and, humbly excusing themselves,
took farewell of the Cardinal.

n. The holy man did in truth loathe pride—the root of all
evils—and disobedience, its most evil offspring, yet none the
less he would alway receive the humility of the penitent. It
befell once that a certain Brother was brought unto him who
had transgressed against the rule of obedience, and deserved
correction by a just discipline. But the man of God, perceiving
by manifest tokens that that Brother was truly contrite, was
moved by his love of humility to spare him. Howbeit, that the
easiness of gaining pardon should not be a pretext unto others
for wrong-doing, he bade that his hood should be taken from
that Brother, and cast into the midst of the flames, that all
might take note by what grave punishment sins of disobedience
were to be chastised. When the hood had lain for some time
in the midst of the fire, he bade that it should be withdrawn
from the flames, and restored unto the Brother that was humbly
penitent. Marvellous to relate, the hood, when withdrawn
from the midst of the flames, showed no trace of burning. Thus
it came to pass that, through this one miracle, God commended
both the virtue of the holy man, and the humility of penitence.

Thus the humility of Francis is meet to be imitated, that even
on earth gained such wondrouS honour as that God condescended
unto his desires, and changed the feelings of men, drove forth
the arrogance of demons at his bidding, and by a mere gesture
bridled the ravenous flames. Verily, this humility it is that
exalteth them that possess it, and that, while paying respect
unto all, from all gaineth honour.


His Love for Poverty


343


CHAPTER VII

OF HIS LOVE FOR POVERTY, AND OF THE WONDROUS
SUPPLYING OF HIS NEEDS

i. Among other gifts of graces that Francis had received from.!
the bounteous Giver, he merited to abound, as by an especial
prerogative all his own, in the riches of simplicity, through his-
love of sublimest Poverty. The holy man regarded Poverty
as the familiar friend of the Son of God, and as one now rejectecr
by the whole world, and was zealous to espouse her with such a
constant affection as that not only did he leave father and
mother for her sake, but he did even part with all that might
have been his. For none was ever so greedy of gold as he of
poverty, nor did any man ever guard treasure more anxiously
than he this Gospel pearl. One thing more than aught else was
displeasing in his eyes, to wit, if he beheld aught in the Brethren
that was not wholly in accord with poverty. He himself, verily,,
from his entrance into the Religion until his death was content
with, and counted himself rich with, a tunic, a cord, and breeches.
Ofttimes with tears he would recall unto mind the poverty of
Christ Jesus, and of His Mother, declaring Poverty to be the
queen of virtues inasmuch as she shone forth thus excellently
in the King of Kings and in the Queen His Mother. And when
the Brethren in council asked of him which virtue would render
a man most pleasing unto Christ, he answered, as though laying
bare the secret thought of his heart, “ Ye know, Brethren, that
poverty is an especial way of salvation, being as it were the food
of humility, and the root of perfection, and her fruits are mani¬
fold, albeit hidden. For poverty is that treasure hid in a field
of the Gospel, which to buy a man would sell all that he hath,
and the things that cannot be sold are to be despised in com¬
parison therewith.”

2. He also said, “ He that would attain this height must needs-
in all ways renounce, not alone the wisdom of the world, but even
knowledge of letters, so that, dispossessed of such an inheritance,
he may go in the strength of the Lord, and give himself up naked
into the arms of the Crucified. For in vain doth he utterly
renounce the world who keepeth in the secret places of his heart
a shrine for his own senses.” Ofttimes indeed would he dis¬
course of poverty, impressing on the Brethren that saying of the
Gospel, “ The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have


344 Life oi St. Francis

nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His Head.”
Wherefore he would teach the Brethren that, after the fashion
of the poor, they should build poor little houses, wherein they
should dwell, not as their owners, but as pilgrims and strangers
dwell in other men’s houses. For he said that the rules of
pilgrims were to abide under a strange roof, to thirst for their
fatherland, and to pass on their way in peace. More than once,
he bade houses that had been built be pulled down, or the
Brethren removed thence, if he saw in them aught that by reason
of ownership or of magnificence was opposed unto Gospel
poverty. Poverty he declared to be the foundation of his Order,
and, with this first laid as a basis, he said the whole edifice of
the Religion would so rest upon it as that, while it stood firm,
the Religion stood firm; were it overthrown, that other likewise
would be overthrown from the foundations.

3. Furthermore, he taught, as he had learnt by revelation,
that the entrance into holy Religion must be made through that
saying of the Gospel, “ If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that
thou hast, and give to the poor; ” and accordingly he would
admit none into the Order that had not dispossessed themselves,
keeping absolutely naught back, both because of the saying of
the Holy Gospel, and that there might be no treasure-chests
laid up to cause scandal. Thus, when a certain man, in the
March of Ancona, sought to be received into the Order, the true
patriarch of the poor made answer, “ If thou art fain to be joined
unto the poor of Christ, part thy goods among the poor of this
world.” Hearing this, the man arose, and, led by carnal
affection, bequeathed his goods unto his own kin, and naught
unto the poor. But when the holy man heard of this from his
own mouth, he chid him with stern reproofs, saying, “ Go thy
way, brother fly, for thou hast not yet gotten thee out from thy
kindred and from thy father’s house. Thou hast given thy
goods unto thy kin, and hast cheated the poor, thou art not meet
for the holy poor. Thou hast begun in the flesh, and hast laid
but a shaking foundation for a spiritual edifice.” Then that
carnal man returned unto his kin, and sought again his goods,
the which he was not minded to bequeath unto the poor; thus
quickly he abandoned his virtuous intent.

4. At another time, there was in the place of Saint Mary of
the Little Portion such scarcity as that they could not provide
for the guest Brethren as their needs demanded. Accordingly,
his Vicar went unto the man of God, pleading the destitution of
the Brethren, and begging that he would permit some portion


His Love for Poverty 345

of the novices’ goods to be retained on their entrance, so that
the Brethren might resort thereunto for their expenditure in
times of need. Unto whom Francis, instructed in the heavenly
counsels, made reply, “ Far be it from us, dearest Brother, to
act wickedly against the Rule for the sake of any man whom¬
soever. I had liefer that thou shouldst strip the altar of the
glorious Virgin, when our need demandeth it, than that thou
shouldst attempt aught, be it but a little thing, against our vow
of poverty and the observance of the Gospel. For the Blessed
Virgin would be better pleased that her altar should be despoiled,
and the counsel of the Holy Gospel perfectly fulfilled, than that
her altar should be adorned, and the counsel given by her Son
set aside

5. When on a time the man of God was passing, with a com¬
panion, through Apulia, and was nigh unto Bari, he found in
the road a great purse, swelling as though full of coins, such as
in the common speech is called junda. The poor man of Christ
was exhorted, and earnestly besought, by his companion, to
lift the purse from the ground, and distribute the money among
the poor. But the man of God refused, declaring that there was
some devilish contrivance in the purse that they had found, and
that what the Brother was proposing was no good deed but a sin,
to wit, taking goods not their own and giving them away. They
left the spot, and hastened to complete the journey on which
they had entered. Howbeit, that Brother would not hold his
peace, deceived by an empty piety, but still vexed the man of
God as though he were one who cared naught for relieving the
destitution of the poor. At length the gentle Francis consented
to return unto the spot, not to fulfil the desire of the Brother,
but to unmask the wiles of the devil. Accordingly, returning
where the purse lay, with the Brother and with a youth who
was on the road, he first prayed, and then bade his companion
take it up. The Brother trembled and was adread, now pre¬
saging some devilish portent; nevertheless, by reason of the
command of holy obedience, he conquered the doubts of his
heart, and stretched forth his hand unto the purse. Lo! a
serpent of no mean size leapt forth from the purse, and at once
vanished together with it, showing that it had been a snare of
the devil. The wiles of the enemy’s cunning being thus apparent,
the holy man said unto his companion, “ Money, 0 my brother,
is unto the servants of God naught else than the devil and a
poisonous serpent.”

6. After this, a wondrous thing befell the holy man while that,


Life of St. Francis


34 6

at the call of a pressing need, he was betaking him unto the city
of Siena. Three poor women, alike in all respects as to height,
age, and countenance, met him on the wide plain between
Campiglio and San Quirico, proffering a new greeting by way
of gift: “Welcome,” said they, “ Lady Poverty!” At these
words, that true lover of poverty was filled with joy unspeakable,
inasmuch as there was naught in him that he would so lief have
saluted by men as that whereof they had made mention. On
a sudden the women vanished, whereupon the Brethren that
were his companions pondered on their wondrous resemblance
each unto the other, and on the newness of their greeting, their
appearing, and their vanishing, and deemed, not without reason,
that some mystery was thereby signified concerning the holy
man. Verily, by those three poor women — for such they
seemed—with such resemblance in countenance, that met him,
that gave him such unwonted greeting, and that so suddenly
vanished, it was fittingly shown that the beauty of Gospel
perfection — touching chastity, to wit, and obedience, and
poverty—shone forth perfectly in kindred form in the man of
God; howbeit, he had chosen to make his chief boast in the
privilege of Poverty, whom he was wont to name now his
mother, now his bride, now his lady. In this, he was greedy to
surpass others, he who thereby had learnt to think himself of
less account than all others. Accordingly, if ever he saw any
man who, judging by his outward appearance, was poorer than
himself, he would forthwith blame himself, and stir himself
up unto the like, as though, striving jealously after poverty, he
feared to be outdone by that other.

It chanced once that he met a poor man on the road, and,
beholding his nakedness, was stricken to the heart, and said with
a sighing voice unto his companion, “ This man’s destitution
hath brought on us great reproach, for we have chosen Poverty
as our great riches, and lo! she shineth forth more clearly in
him.”

7. By reason of his love for holy Poverty, the servant of
Almighty God had far liefer partake of alms begged from door
to door than of food set before him. Thus, if ever he was invited
by great folk, who would fain honour him by a well-spread board,
he would first beg crusts of bread from the neighbouring houses,
and then, thus enriched in his poverty, sit down at the board.
Once he did thus when he had been invited by the lord Bishop of
Ostia, who loved the poor man of Christ with an especial affection,
and when the Bishop complained that it brought shame upon


His Love for Poverty 347

him that a guest at his table should go forth for alms, the servant
of God made answer, “ My lord, I have done you a great honour,
while honouring a greater Lord. For poverty is well-pleasing
unto the Lord, and that before all which is a free-will beggary
for the sake of Christ. This royal dignity—that the Lord Jesus
took upon Him when for our sakes He became poor, that we
through His poverty might be rich, and that He might make
them that be truly poor in spirit kings and heirs of the Kingdom
of Heaven—I am not minded to abandon for a fee of deceptive
riches lent unto you for an hour.”

8. Ofttimes when he was exhorting the Brethren to go forth
for alms, he would speak on this wise, “ Go forth,” saith he,
“ since at this eleventh hour the Brothers Minor have been lent
unto the world, that the number of the elect may be in them
fulfilled; wherefore they shall be praised by the Judge, and shall
hear those most delectable words, ‘ Inasmuch as ye have done
it unto one of the least of these My brethren, ye have done it
unto Me.’” Accordingly, he would say it was a delightsome
thing to beg under the name of Brothers Minor, since the Master
of Gospel truth had with His own mouth thus spoken of that
name—“ the least ”—in the rewarding of the just.

Moreover, on the chief Feasts, when opportunity offered, he
was wont to go begging, saying that in the holy poor was fulfilled
that prophecy, “ Man did eat Angels’ food.” For he said that
bread was truly Angels’ food that was begged for the love of
God, and with the aid of the blessed Angels, and that holy
Poverty gathered from door to door, where it was bestowed for
love of her.

9. Accordingly, when he was once sojourning on the holy
Easter Day in an hermitage so distant from the dwellings of
men as that he could not conveniently go forth to beg, mindful
of Him Who on that day had appeared unto the disciples going
unto Emmaus in the guise of a pilgrim, he, as a pilgrim and
beggar, did ask alms from the Brethren themselves. And,
having humbly received them, he taught them in holy discourse
that while passing through the wilderness of the world as pilgrims
and strangers, and Israelites indeed, they might celebrate
continually, as those poor in spirit, the Lord’s Passover, to wit,
His departure from this world unto the Father. And since in
asking alms he was moved, not by desire for gain, but by a free
spirit, God, the Father of the poor, seemed to have an especial
care of him.

10. It chanced once that the servant of the Lord had been


Life of St. Francis


34»

weighed down by sickness in the place called Nocera, and wat
being brought back unto Assisi by an honourable escort, senl
for this purpose by the devotion of the people of Assisi. And
they, escorting the servant of Christ, reached a poor little hamlet,
Satriano by name, whither, since their hunger and the hour
demanded it, they went to seek food, but, finding naught that
they could buy, returned empty handed. Then the holy man
said unto them, “ Naught have ye found, for that ye put more
trust in your flies than in God ”—for he was wont to call money
flies. “ But go back (saith he) among the houses that ye have
visited, and, offering the love of God as your payment, humbly
ask an alms. And do not by a false reckoning esteem this a
thing shameful or base, since the great Almsgiver hath in Iiis
abounding goodness granted all things as alms unto the worthy
and unworthy alike, after we have sinned.” Then those knights
laid aside their shamefastness, and of their own accord asked for
alms, and bought more for the love of God than they had been
able to for money. For the poor inhabitants of the place,
stricken to the heart by a divine impulse, freely proffered not
only their goods, but their very selves. Thus it befell that the
necessity, which money had not availed to relieve, was supplied
by the rich poverty of Francis.

11. On a time when he was lying sick in an hermitage nigh
Rieti, a certain physician did oft visit him with welcome minis¬
tries. And since the poor man of Christ was unable to give him
a recompense meet for his toil, the most bountiful God, on
behalf of His poor, rewarded his kindly service by this singular
benefit, that he might not depart with no immediate fee. The
house of the physician, which he had at that time built anew
with the whole of his savings, by a gaping cleavage of the walls
from top to bottom threatened so speedy a collapse as that it
seemed impossible that any mortal skill or toil should avert its
fall. Then the physician, entirely trusting in the merits of the
holy man, with great faith and devotion besought from his
companions the gift of some thing that that same man of God
had touched with his hands. Accordingly, having with much
importunity of pleading gained a few of his hairs, he laid them
at even in the cleavage of the wall; then, rising next morn, he
found the opening so firmly sealed as that he could not withdraw
the relics he had placed therein, nor find any trace of the former
cleavage. Thus it came to pass that he who had diligently
tended the frail body of God’s servant was able to avert the
danger from his own frail house.


His Love for Poverty


349


12 On another time, when the man of God was fain to betake
him unto a certain solitude, where he might more freely give
himself up unto contemplation, he rode, being weak in body,
upon the ass of a poor man. While this man was following the
servant of Christ in the summer heat, and up mountain ways, he
became worn out by the journey, as the path grew ever roug
and longer, and, fainting with exceeding and burning thirst, he
began to cry aloud with importunity after the saint Lo.
(salth he) I shall die of thirst, if I be not at once refreshed by
the help of some draught!” Without delay, the man of God
got o/the ass, fell on his knees, and, raising his^ hands unto
heaven, ceased not to pray until he knew that he had been
heard. His prayer at length ended, he said unto the man,

“ Hasten unto yonder rock, and there thou shalt find a spring o
water that Christ in His mercy hath at this hour caused to
flow from the rock for thee to drink.” 0 marvellous condescen¬
sion of God, that doth so readily incline unto His servants. T e
thirsty man drank the water produced from the rock by the
power of him that prayed, and drained a draughtfrom‘ * e
rock. Before that time there had been no flowing water the ,
nor from that time—as hath been carefully ascertained hath

any been found there. . TT . „

1-3. Now in what manner, by the merits of His poor one,
Christ multiplied provisions at sea, shall be related in its own
p£ hTreafL; suffice it to note this only, that by the sca t
alms brought unto him he saved the sailors from the peril of
famine and of death during many days; thus it may be clearly
seen that the servant of God Almighty, as he was made like unto
Moses in the drawing of water from the rock, was made like also
Ito Elias in the multiplying of food. Wherefore let a 1 anxiou
thought be far removed from the poor ones of Christ, for »
the poverty of Francis was of such an abundant sufficiency a
that it supplied by its wondrous power the needs of them that
assisted him—so that neither food, nor drink, nor house failed
them when the resources of money, of skill, and of nature had
proved of none avail—much more shall it merit those things
that in the wonted course of the divine providence are granted
unto all alike. If, I say, the stony rock, at the prayer of one
poor man, poured forth a copious draught for another poor man
m his thirst, naught in the whole creation will refuse its service
unto those who have left all for the sake of the Creator of .


35°


Life of St. Francis


CHAPTER VIII

OF THE KINDLY IMPULSES OF HIS PIETY, AND OF HOW THE
CREATURES LACKING UNDERSTANDING SEEMED TO BE MADE
SUBJECT UNTO HIM

i. That true godliness which, according unto the Apostle, is
profitable unto all things, had so filled the heart of Francis and
entered into his inmost parts as that it seemed to have estab¬
lished its sway absolutely over the man of God. It was this
piety that, through devotion, uplifted him toward God; through
compassion, transformed him into the likeness of Christ; through
condescension, inclined him unto his neighbour, and, through his
all-embracing love for every creature, set forth a new picture of
man’s estate before the Fall. And as by this piety he was
touched with kindly feeling for all things, so above all, when
he beheld souls redeemed by the precious Blood of Christ Jesus
being defiled by any stain of sin, he would weep over them with
such tenderness of compassion as that he seemed, like a mother
in Christ, to be in travail of them daily. And this was with
him the chief cause of his veneration for the ministers of the
word of God, to wit, that with devout care they raise up seed
unto the Brother which is dead, that is, unto Christ crucified for
sinners, by converting such, and cherish the same seed with
careful devotion. This ministry of compassion he maintained
was more acceptable unto the Father of mercies than all sacrifice,
in especial if it were performed with the zeal of perfect charity,
so that this end might be striven after by ensample rather than
by precept, by tearful prayer rather than by eloquent speech.

2. Accordingly,, he would say that that preacher should be
deplored as one without true piety, who in his preaching did not
seek the salvation of souls, but his own glory, or who by the
sins of his life pulled down that which he built up by the truth
of his teaching. He would say that the Brother simple and
unready of speech, who by his good ensample inciteth others
unto good, should be preferred before such an one. That saying,
moreover, “ The barren hath borne many,” he would thus
expound, “ The barren (saith he) is the little poor Brother, who
hath not the function of begetting sons in the Church. He in
the Judgment shall bear many, for that those whom he now
converteth unto Christ by his secret prayers shall be then added
unto his glory by the Judge. And 4 she that hath many children


His Kindly Piety


35


s waxed feeble,’ for that the empty preacher of many words
sdio now boasteth in many begotten, as it were, by his power,
ihall then perceive that there is naught of his own in them.

, Since then with heartfelt piety and glowing zeal he sought
after the salvation of souls, he would say that he was filled with
the sweetest fragrance and anointed as with precious ointmen
whensoever he heard of many being led into the way of truth
by the sweet savour of the repute of the holy Brethren scattered
throughout the world. Hearing such reports, he would rejoice
in spirit, heaping with blessings most worthy of all acceptance
those Brethren who, by word or deed, were bringing sinners un o
the love of Christ. In like wise, those who were transgressing
against holy Religion by their evil works, fell under the heaviest
sentence of his curse. “ By thee,” saith he 0 Lord most
holy, by the entire company of heaven, and by me, 1 hy little
one, be they accursed who by their evil ensample do bring unto
naught and destroy that which through the holy Brethren of
this Order Thou hast built up, and dost not cease to build
Ofttimes he was affected by such sadness, by reason of the
stumbling-block unto the weak brethren, that he thought his
strength would have failed him, had he not been sustained by

the comfort of the divine mercy. . . , ...

But when once on a time he was disquieted because of evi
ensamples, and with troubled spirit was beseeching the merciful
Father for his sons, he obtained an answer on this wise from the
lord “ Why dost thou fret thee, poor little mortal? Have I
set thee as shepherd over My Religion that thou shouldst forget
I am its chief Protector? I have appointed thee, simple as
thou art, for this very end, that the things that I shall perform
through thee may be ascribed, not unto man s working, but
unto grace from above. I have called this Religion, I will keep
it and feed it, and, when some fall off, I will raise up others in
their place, yea, so that, were none bom I would even cause
them to be born. And by whatsoever shocks this little poor
Religion may be shaken, it shall alway abide unscathed under

M 4 °The vice of slander, hateful unto the fount of goodness
and grace, Francis would shrink from as from a serpent s tooth,
declaring it to be a most hateful plague, and an abomination
unto the most holy God, forasmuch as the slanderer feedeth
on the blood of those souls that he hath slain by the sword of
his tongue. Hearing once a certain Brother blacken the repute
of another, he turned unto his Vicar, and said, Rise, rise,


35 2 Life of St. Francis

make careful enquiry, and, if thou findest the accused Brother
to be guiltless, with stern discipline make the accuser to be
marked of all.” At times, indeed, he would sentence him who
had despoiled his Brother of the praise of his good repute to
be himself despoiled of his habit, and deemed that he ought not
to be able to lift up his eyes unto God unless first he had exerted
himself to restore, as best he might, that which he had taken
away. “ The sin of slanderers,” he would say, “ is more heinous
than that of robbers, inasmuch as the law of Christ—that is
fulfilled in the observance of godliness—bindeth us to desire
more the salvation of the soul than of the body.”

5. Unto them that were afflicted with bodily suffering of any
sort he would condescend with a marvellous tenderness of
sympathy; if he perceived in any aught of destitution, aught of
lack, he would in the gentleness of his devout heart carry it
unto Christ. Mercy, verily, was inborn in him, and redoubled
by the shedding upon it of the piety of Christ. Thus his soul
was melted over the poor and the weak, and, when he could not
open his hand unto any, he opened his heart. It chanced on
a time that one of the Brethren had made somewhat harsh reply
unto a poor man that importunately asked an alms. When the
devout lover of the poor heard it, he bade that Brother throw
himself, naked, at the poor man’s feet, declare himself in fault,
and beg the favour of his prayer and his pardon. When he had
humbly done this, the Father gently added, “ When thou seest
a poor man, O Brother, a mirror is set before thee of the Lord,
and of His Mother in her poverty. In the infirm, do thou in
like manner think upon the infirmities that He took upon Him.”
In all the poor he—himself the most Christ-like of all poor
men—beheld the image of Christ, wherefore he judged that all
things that were provided for himself—were they even the
necessaries of life,—should be given up unto any poor folk whom
he met, and that not only as largesse, but even as if they were
their own property.

It befell on a time that a certain beggar met him, as he was
returning from Siena, when by reason of sickness he was wrapped
in a cloak over his habit. Beholding with pitiful eye the poor
man’s misery, “ It behoveth us,” said he unto his companion,
“ to restore the cloak unto this poor man, for his own it is. For
we received it but as a loan, until it should be our hap to find
another poorer than ourselves.” But his companion, having
regard unto the need of the kindly Father, did urgently seek to
refrain him from providing for another, leaving himself uncared


His Kindly Piety 353

for. Howbeit, “I think,” saith he, “the great Almsgiver
would account it a theft in me did I not give that I wear unto
one needing it more. ,, Accordingly he was wont to ask from
those that had given him necessities for the succour of his body
permission to give them away, did he meet a needier person, so
that he might do so with their sanction. Naught would he
withhold, neither cloak, nor habit, nor books, nor the very
ornaments of the altar, but all these he would, while he could,
bestow upon the needy, that he might fulfil the ministry of
charity. Ofttimes whenas he met on the road poor folk carrying
burdens, he would lay their burdens on his own weak shoulders.

6 . When he bethought him of the first beginning of all things,
he was filled with a yet more overflowing charity, and would
call the dumb animals, howsoever small, by the names of brother
and sister , forasmuch as he recognised in them the same origin
as in himself. Yet he loved with an especial warmth and
tenderness those creatures that do set forth by the likeness of
their nature the holy gentleness of Christ, and in the interpreta¬
tion of Scripture are a type of Him. Ofttimes he would buy
back lambs that were being taken to be killed, in remembrance
of that most gentle Lamb Who brooked to be brought unto the
slaughter for the redemption of sinners.

On a time when the servant of God was lodging at the Monas¬
tery of San Verecondo in the diocese of Gubbio, an ewe gave
birth unto a lamb one night. There was hard by a very fierce
sow, and she, sparing not the innocent life, slew him with her
greedy jaws. When the gentle Father heard thereof, he was
moved with wondrous pity, and, remembering that Lamb
without spot, mourned over the dead lamb in the presence of all,
saying, “ Woe is me, brother little lamb, innocent creature,
setting forth Christ unto men! Cursed be that evil beast that
hath devoured thee, and of her flesh let neither man nor beast
eat.” Marvellous to relate, the cruel sow forthwith began to
languish, and in three days paid the penalty in her own body,
and suffered death as her retribution. Her carcase was cast
forth into a ditch near the Monastery, and there lay for a long
time, dried up like a board, and food for no famished beast.
Let human evil-doing, then, take note by what a punishment
it shall be overtaken at the last, if the savageness of a brute
beast was smitten by a death so awful: let faithful devotion
also consider how in the servant of God was shown a piety of
such marvellous power and abundant sweetness, as that even
the nature of brute beasts, after their own fashion, acclaimed it.


354 Life of St. Francis

7. While he was journeying nigh the city of Siena, he came
on a great flock of sheep in the pastures. And when he had
given them gracious greeting, as was his wont, they left their
feeding, and all ran toward him, raising their heads, and gazing
fixedly on him with their eyes. So eagerly did they acclaim him
as that both the shepherds and the Brethren marvelled, behold¬
ing around him the lambs, and the rams no less, thus wondrously
filled with delight.

At another time, at Saint Mary of the Little Portion, a lamb
was brought unto the man of God, the which he thankfully
received, by reason of the love of guilelessness and simplicity
that the lamb’s nature doth exhibit. The holy man exhorted
the lamb that it should be instant in the divine praises, and
avoid any occasion of offence unto the Brethren; the lamb, on
its part, as though it had observed the piety of the man of God,
diligently obeyed his instructions. For when it heard the
Brethren chanting in the choir, it too would enter the church,
and, unbidden of any, would bend the knee, bleating before the
altar of the Virgin Mother of the Lamb, as though it were fain
to greet her. Furthermore, at the elevation of the most holy
Body of Christ in the solemn Mass, it would bend its knees and
bow, even as though the sheep, in its reverence, would reprove
the irreverence of the undevout, and would incite Christ’s devout
people to revere the Sacrament.

At one time he had with him in Rome a lamb, by reason of
his reverence for that Lamb most gentle, and it he entrusted unto
a noble matron, to wit, the lady Jacoba di Settesoli, to be cared
for in her bower. This lamb, like one instructed in spiritual
things by the Saint, when the lady went into church, kept
closely by her side in going and in returning. If in the early
morning the lady delayed her rising, the lamb would rise and
would butt her with its little horns, and rouse her by its bleat-
ings, admonishing her with gestures and nods to hasten unto
church. Wherefore the lamb, that had been a pupil of Francis,
and was now become a teacher of devotion, was cherished by
the lady as a creature marvellous and loveworthy.

8. At another time, at Greccio, a live leveret was brought unto
the man of God, the which—when set down free on the ground
that it might escape whither it would—at the call of the kindly
Father leapt with flying feet into his bosom. He, fondling it
in the instinctive tenderness of his heart, seemed to feel for it
as a mother, and, bidding it in gentle tones beware of being
recaptured, let it go free. But albeit it was set on the ground


His Kindly Piety 355

many times to escape, it did alway return unto the Father’s
bosom, as though by some hidden sense it perceived the tender¬
ness of his heart; wherefore at length, by his command, the
Brethren carried it away unto a safer and more remote spot.

In like manner, on an island of the lake of Perugia, a rabbit
was caught and brought unto the man of God, and, albeit it fled
from others, it entrusted itself unto his hands and bosom with
the confidence of a tame creature.

As he was hastening by the lake of Rieti unto the hermitage
of Greccio, a fisherman out of devotion brought unto him a
water-fowl, the which he gladly received, and then, opening
his hands, bade it depart; howbeit, it would not leave him.
Then he, lifting his eyes unto heaven, remained for a long space
in prayer, and, after a long hour returning unto himself as
though from afar, gently bade the little bird depart, and praise
the Lord. Then, having thus received his blessing and leave,
it flew away, showing joy by the movement of its body.

In like manner, from the same lake there was brought unto
him a fine, live fish, which he called, as was his wont, by the
name of brother , and put back into the water nigh the boat.
Then the fish played in the water nigh the man of God, and, as
though drawn by love of him, would in no wise leave the boat-
side until it had received his blessing and leave.

9. On another time, when he was walking with a certain
Brother through the Venetian marshes, he chanced on a great
host of birds that were sitting and singing among the bushes.
Seeing them, he said unto his companion, “ Our sisters the birds
are praising their Creator, let us too go among them and sing
unto the Lord praises and the Canonical Hours.” When they
had gone into their midst, the birds stirred not from the spot,
and when, by reason of their twittering, they could not hear
each the other in reciting the Hours, the holy man turned unto
the birds, saying, “ My sisters the birds, cease from singing,
while that we render our due praises unto the Lord.” Then the
birds forthwith held their peace, and remained silent until,
having said his Hours at leisure and rendered his praises, the
holy man of God again gave them leave to sing. And, as the
man of God gave them leave, they at once took up their song
again after their wonted fashion.

At Saint Mary of the Little Portion, hard by the cell of the
man of God, a cicada sat on a fig-tree and chirped; and right
often by her song she stirred up unto the divine praises the
servant of the Lord, w'ho had learnt to marvel at the glorious


Life of St. Francis


35 6

handiwork of the Creator even as seen in little things. One day
he called her, and she, as though divinely taught, lighted upon
his hand. When he said unto her, “ Sing, my sister cicada, and
praise the Lord thy Creator with thy glad lay,” she obeyed forth¬
with, and began to chirp, nor did she cease until, at the Father’s
bidding, she flew back unto her own place. There for eight days
she abode, on any day coming at his call, singing, and flying
back, according as he bade her. At length the man of God said
unto his companions, “ Let us now give our sister cicada leave to
go, for she hath gladdened us enough with her lay, stirring us
up these eight days past unto the praises of God.” And at once,
his leave given, she flew away, nor was ever seen there again, as
though she dared not in any wise transgress his command.

10. Once while he was lying ill at Siena a fresh-caught pheasant
was sent unto him, alive, by a certain nobleman. The bird, so
soon as it saw and heard the holy man, pressed nigh him with
such friendliness as that it would in no wise brook to be parted
from him. For, albeit it was several times set down in a vine¬
yard outside the abode of the Brethren, so that it might escape
if it would, it still ran back in haste unto the Father as though
it had alway been brought up by his hand. Then, when it was
given unto a certain man who was wont out of devotion to visit
the servant of God, it seemed as though it grieved to be out of
the sight of the gentle Father, and refused all food. At length,
it was brought back unto the servant of God, and, so soon as it
saw him, testified its delight by its gestures, and ate eagerly.

When he had come unto the solitudes of Alverna, to keep a
Lent in honour of the Archangel Michael, birds of divers sort
fluttered about his cell, and seemed by their tuneful chorus and
joyous movements to rejoice at his coming, and to invite and
entice the holy Father to tarry there. Seeing this, he said unto
his companion, “ I perceive, Brother, that it is in accord with
the divine will that we should abide here for a space, so greatly do
our sisters the little birds seem to take comfort in our presence.”
While, accordingly, he was sojourning in that place, a falcon
that had its nest there bound itself by close ties of friendship
unto him. For alway at that hour of night wherein the holy
man was wont to rise for the divine office, the falcon was before¬
hand with its song and cries. And this was most acceptable
unto the servant of God, the more so as that the great concern
which the bird showed for him shook from him all drowsiness
of sloth. But when the servant of Christ was weighed down
beyond his wont by infirmity, the falcon would spare him, and


His Kindly Piety 357

would not mark for him so early an aw r akening. At such times,
as though taught of God, he would about dawn strike the bell
of his voice with a light touch. Verily, there would seem to
have been a divine omen, alike in the gladness of the birds of
myriad species, and in the cries of the falcon, inasmuch as that
praiser and worshipper of God, upborne on the wings of con¬
templation, was at that very place and time to be exalted by the
vision of the Seraph.

ii. At one time while he was sojourning in the hermitage of
Greccio, the natives of that place were plagued by manifold evils.
For an herd of ravening wolves was devouring not beasts alone,
but men also, and every year a hailstorm laid waste their corn
and vineyards. Accordingly, when the herald of the Holy
Gospel was preaching unto them under these afflictions, he said,
“ I promise you—pledging the honour and glory of Almighty
God—that all this plague shall depart from you, and that the
Lord will look upon you, and multiply your temporal goods if
only, believing me, ye will take pity on your own selves, and will
first make true confession, then bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance. But again, I declare unto you that if, unthankful
for His benefits, ye shall turn again unto your vomit, the plague
will be renewed, the punishment will be redoubled, and greater
wrath will be shown upon you.” Then from that very hour
they turned at his admonition unto repentance, and the disasters
ceased, the perils passed over, nor was aught of havoc wrought
by wolves or hailstorms. Nay more, what is yet more marvel¬
lous, if a hailstorm ever fell upon their neighbours’ lands, as it
neared their borders it was there stayed, or changed its course
unto some other region. The hail observed, yea, and the wolves
observed, the pact made with the servant of God, nor did they
essay any more to break the law of natural piety by raging
against men that had turned unto piety, so long as men in their
turn, according unto the agreement, did not act wickedly against
the most holy laws of God.

With holy affection, then, must we think on the holiness of
this blessed man, that was of such wondrous sweetness and might
as that it conquered wild beasts, tamed woodland creatures,
and taught tame ones, and inclined the nature of the brutes,
that had revolted from fallen man, to obey him. For of a truth
it is this piety which, allying all creatures unto itself, is profitable
unto all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to coine.


358


Life of St. Francis


CHAPTER IX

OF HIS ARDENT LOVE, AND YEARNING FOR MARTYRDOM

i. Of the ardent love that glowed in Francis, the friend of the
Bridegroom, who can avail to tell? He seemed utterly con¬
sumed, like unto a coal that is set on fire, by the flame of the love
divine. For, at the mere mention of the love of the Lord, he
was aroused, moved, and enkindled, as though the inner chords
of his heart vibrated under the bow of the voice from without.
He would say that it was a magnificent largesse to offer such
wealth in exchange for alms, and that those who esteemed it of
less worth than money were verily fools, for that the priceless
price of the divine love alone availeth to purchase the kingdom
of heaven, and His love Who hath loved us much is much to be
loved.

That he might by all things be stirred up unto the divine love,
he triumphed in all the works of the Lord’s hands, and through
the sight of their joy was uplifted unto their life-giving cause
and origin. He beheld in fair things Him Who is the most fair,
and, through the traces of Himself that He hath imprinted on
His creatures, he everywhere followed on to reach the Beloved,
making of all things a ladder for himself whereby he might
ascend to lay hold on Him Who is the altogether lovely. For
by the impulse of his unexampled devotion he tasted that
fountain of goodness that streameth forth, as in rivulets, in
every created thing, and he perceived as it were an heavenly
harmony in the concord of the virtues and actions granted unto
them by God, and did sweetly exhort them to praise the Lord,
even as the Prophet David had done.

2. Christ Jesus Crucified was laid, as a bundle of myrrh, in
his heart’s bosom, and he yearned to be utterly transformed into
Him by the fire of his exceeding love. By reason of his chief
and especial devotion unto Him, he would betake him unto
desert places, and seclude himself in a cell, from the Feast of
the Epiphany until the end of the forty days following, to wit,
for the space of time wherein Christ had sojourned in the wilder¬
ness. There with all the abstinence from food and drink that
he might compass, he devoted himself without interruption unto
fasting, prayer, and the praises of God. With such glowing
love was he moved toward Christ, yea, and with such intimate
love did his Beloved repay his, that it seemed unto the servant


His Ardent Love 359

of God himself that he felt his Saviour almost continually present
before his eyes, even as he once revealed unto his companions
in intimate converse.

Toward the Sacrament of the Lord’s Body he felt a glowing
devotion that consumed the very marrow of his bones, mar¬
velling with utmost amazement at that most loving condescen¬
sion and condescending love. Oft did he communicate, and so
devoutly as to render others devout, while, as he tasted of the
sweetness of that Lamb without spot, he became like one
inebriated in spirit, and rapt out of himself in ecstasy.

3. He loved with an unspeakable affection the Mother of the
Lord Jesus Christ, forasmuch as that she had made the Lord
of Glory our Brother, and that through her we have obtained
mercy. In her, after Christ, he put his chief trust, making her
his own patron and that of his Brethren, and in her honour he
fasted most devoutly from the Feast of the Apostles Peter and
Paul until the Feast of the Assumption. He was bound by
ties of inseparable affection unto the Angelic spirits that do
glow with wondrous fire to approach God, and in the kindling of
elect souls, and out of devotion unto them he would fast for forty
days from the Assumption of the glorious Virgin, remaining
instant in prayer throughout that time. Unto the Blessed
Michael Archangel—inasmuch as his is the ministry of bringing
souls before God—he cherished an especial love and devotion,
by reason of the ardent zeal that he had for the salvation of all
such as should be saved. When he called to remembrance all
the Saints, he was kindled afresh, as if they had been stones of
fire, with the flame of heavenly love; he regarded with the
utmost devotion all the Apostles, and in especial Peter and Paul,
by reason of the glowing love that they bore toward Christ, and
out of reverence and love for them he dedicated unto the Lord
the fast of an especial Lent. The poor man of Christ had
naught save two mites, to wit, his body and soul, that he could
give away in his large-hearted charity. But these, for the love
of Christ, he offered up so continuously as that at all seasons,
through the rigour of his fasting, he made an offering of his
body, and through the fervour of his yearnings, of his spirit,
sacrificing in the outer court a whole burnt-offering, and within,
in the Temple, burning sweet incense.

4. Now this exceeding devotion of love uplifted him into the
divine in such wise as that his loving goodwill extended unto
those that had received with him a like nature and grace. For
it is no wonder if he, whose affectionate heart had made him


Life of St. Francis


36°

kin unto all created things, was by the love of Christ drawn into
yet closer kinship with such as were sealed with the likeness of
their Creator, and redeemed by the Blood of their Maker. He
esteemed himself no friend of Christ did he not cherish the
souls that He had redeemed. He would say that naught was
to be preferred before the salvation of souls, proving this chiefly
by the fact that the Only-Begotten Son of God deigned to hang
on the Cross for the sake of men’s souls. Unto this end he
wrestled in prayer, this was the theme of his preaching, and
this the cause of his exceeding zeal in setting an ensample.
Wherefore, whensoever some excessive austerity was blamed
in him, he would make answer that he had been given as an
ensample unto others. For albeit his guileless flesh had already
voluntarily subjected itself unto his spirit, and needed no
chastisement by reason of transgressions, nevertheless, for the
sake of ensample, he was ever renewing in it punishments and
penances, walking in hard paths for the sake of others. For
he would say, “ Though I speak with the tongues of men and
of Angels, and have not charity, I shall set no ensample of
virtues unto my neighbours, I shall profit others little, and
mine own self naught.”

5. He emulated, with an ardent flame of love, the glorious
victory of the holy Martyrs, whose burning love could not be
quenched, nor their constancy broken down. Accordingly he
too, kindled by that perfect love that casteth out fear, yearned
to offer himself up as a living sacrifice unto the Lord in martyr
flames, that he might pay back somewhat in his turn unto
Christ Who died for us, and might stir up others unto the love
of God. Wherefore, in the sixth year from his conversion,
burning with desire for martyrdom, he was minded to cross
unto the regions of Syria to preach the Christian faith, and
penitence, unto the Saracens and other infidels. When he had
embarked on a ship that he might voyage thither, contrary
winds prevailed, and he had perforce to land on the coasts of
Slavonia. When he had delayed there some time, nor could
find any ship that was then crossing the sea, feeling himself
cheated of his desire, he besought some sailors that were making
for Ancona to take him aboard, for the love of God. When
they persisted in their refusal because of his lack of money, the
man of God, putting all his trust in the goodness of the Lord,
embarked secretly on board the ship with his companion. A
certain man was present—sent, as is believed, from God on
behalf of His poor one—and he took with him the necessary


His Ardent Love


361

victual, and, calling unto him one on the ship that feared God,
spake thus unto him, “ Keep faithfully all these things for the
poor Brethren that lie hid on the ship, and in their hour of need
deal them out unto them as a friend.” It befell that, owing
unto strong winds, the sailors were unable for many days to
touch land anywhere, and had consumed all their own provisions,
and only the alms brought for the poor man Francis were left.
These, though they had been but scanty, were by the divine power
so multiplied as that, during many days’ delay at sea by reason
of incessant storms, they fully supplied the needs of all until
they made the port of Ancona. Then the sailors, seeing that
through the servant of God they had escaped manifold agonies
of death—like men that had known the dire perils of the sea,
and had seen the works of the Lord and His wonders in the
deep—rendered thanks unto Almighty God, Who doth ever
show Himself marvellous and loveworthy in His friends and
servants.

6. When, leaving the sea behind, Francis began to travel
through the land, sowing therein the seed of salvation, he gained
rich sheaves. Then, because the fruit of martyrdom had ^o
enchanted his heart that he preferred above all merits of virtues
a costly death for Christ’s sake, he took his way toward Morocco,
that he might preach unto Miramolin and his people the Gospel
of Christ, if by any means he might avail to gain the coveted
palm. For he was borne along by so mighty a desire that,
albeit weak in body, he outran the comrade of his pilgrimage,
and flew with all speed to fulfil his purpose, like one inebriated
in spirit. But when he had advanced as far as Spain, by the
divine will, that reserved him for other ends, a very heavy
sickness fell upon him, and hindered him so that he could not
fulfil his desire. Then the man of God—perceiving that his
life in the body was still needful for the family that he had
begotten, albeit he deemed that for himself to die was gain—
returned to feed the sheep that had been committed unto his
care.

7. Howbeit his glowing charity urged his spirit on unto
martyrdom, and yet a third time he essayed to set forth toward
the infidels, that by the shedding of his blood the Faith of the
Trinity might be spread abroad. Thus in the thirteenth year
of his conversion he set forth for the regions of Syria, continually
exposing himself unto many perils that so he might win entrance
into the presence of the Soldan of Babylon. For at that time
there was relentless war between the Christians and the Saracens,

N * 85


362 Life of St. Francis

and the camps of both armies were pitched each over against
the other in the plain, so that none might pass from one unto
the other without peril of death. Moreover, a cruel edict had
gone forth from the Soldan that any who should bring the head
of a Christian should receive a gold bezant as reward. Never¬
theless, the undaunted soldier of Christ, Francis, hoping that
he was shortly about to gain his end, determined to continue on
his way, not dismayed by the fear of death, but urged on by
his yearning therefor. And as he prepared himself by prayer,
he was strengthened of the Lord, and boldly chanted that verse
of the Prophet, “ Yea, though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me.’

8 . Then, taking the Brother that was his companion, Illumi-
nato by name, a man verily of illumination and virtue, they
started on their way. And, meeting two lambs, the holy man
was gladdened at the sight, and said unto his companion, Put
thy trust, Brother, in the Lord, for in us that saying of the
Gospel is fulfilled: Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of wolves.” When they had gone on further, the bands
of the Saracens met them, and they, like wolves making haste
to fall upon sheep, brutally seized the servants of God, and
cruelly and despitefully dragged them along, casting abuse at
them, vexing them with stripes and binding them in fetters.
Thus* in manifold wise tormented and beaten down, they were
brought before the Soldan, the divine counsel so disposing as
the holy man had desired. When that prince demanded of
them from whom, and for what purpose, and after what manner
they had been sent, and how they had come thither, the servant
of Christ, Francis, made answer with undaunted heart that he
had been sent not by man, but by God Most High, that he
might show unto him and his people the way of salvation, and
might preach the Gospel of truth. With such firmness of mind,
with such courage of soul, and with such fervour of spirit he
preached unto the Soldan aforesaid God Three in One and the
Saviour of all, Jesus Christ, that in him was manifestly and truly
fulfilled that saying of the Gospel, “ I will give you a mouth
and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to
gainsay nor resist.” For, as the Soldan beheld the marvellous
fervour of spirit and valour of the man of God, he heard him
gladly and did right earnestly invite him to tarry with him.
Then the servant of Christ, taught by the heavenly counsel,
said “ If thou, together with thy people, wilt be converted unto
Christ, for the love of Him I will right gladly tarry among you.


His Ardent Love 363

But if thou art hesitating whether to give up the law of Mahomet
for the faith of Christ, do thou command that a great fire
be kindled and I will enter the fire with thy priests, that even
thus thou mayest learn which faith is the surer, and holier, and
most worthy of being held. Unto whom the Soldan made
answer, “ I do not believe that any of my priests would be
ready to expose himself unto the fire in defence of his faith, or
to undergo any sort of torture.” For he had seen that, so soon
as mention of this was made, one of his priests, an aged man
and one in authority, had fled from his presence. Unto whom
the holy man replied, “ If thou wilt promise me, on behalf of
thyself and thy people, that thou wilt embrace the faith of
Christ, if I come forth from the fire unscathed, I will enter the
fire alone; if I am burned, let it be set down unto my sins, but
if the divine might protect me, ye shall know that Christ, the
power of God and the wisdom of God, is the true God and the
Lord and Saviour of all.” Howbeit, the Soldan replied that he
dare not accede unto this proposition, for that he feared a
revolt of his people. But he offered him many costly gifts, all
of which the man of God, hungering, not for worldly goods, but
for the salvation of souls, contemned like mire. The Soldan,
perceiving the holy man to be so absolute a despiser of worldly
things, was moved with amazement and conceived a greater
devotion for him. And, albeit he would not, or perchance
dared not, go over unto the Christian faith, he did nevertheless
devoutly pray the servant of Christ to receive the gifts aforesaid,
for his own salvation, and to bestow them upon Christian poor
folk, or on churches. But Francis, for that he shunned the
burden of money, and could not see in the soul of the Soldan
any root of true piety, would not agree thereunto.

9. Seeing, then, that he could neither make progress in the
conversion of that people, nor attain his purpose, warned by a
divine revelation, he returned unto the regions of the faithful.
Now the mercy of God so ordained, and the virtue of the holy
man merited, and mercifully and marvellously it befell, that
the friend of Christ—who with all his might sought a death
for His sake, and yet in no way could find it—nevertheless did
not lose the coveted merit of martyrdom, and was reserved to
be signalled out unto posterity "by an especial distinction.
Thus it befell that that divine fire glowed ever more hotly in
his heart, so that afterward it was openly manifested in his flesh.
O truly blessed man, whose flesh, albeit not stricken by the
tyrant's steel, was nevertheless not left without the likeness of


364 Life of St. Francis

the Lamb that was slain! 0 fully and truly blessed, I say,
whose life, albeit not cut off by the sword of the persecutor, did
yet not lose the palm of martyrdom!


CHAPTER X

OF HIS ZEAL AND EFFICACY IN PRAYER

i. Francis, the servant of Christ, feeling himself in the body
to be absent from the Lord, had now through the love of Christ
become wholly untouched by earthly desires, wherefore—that
he might not be without the consolation of his Beloved—he
prayed without ceasing,'striving ever to manifest a spirit present
with God. Prayer was a consolation unto him in contemplation,
while, being already made a fellow-citizen with the Angels in the
circle of the heavenly mansions, with ardent yearning he sought
his Beloved, from Whom the wall of the flesh alone parted him.
It was, moreover, a defence unto him in his labours, while in all
that he did, distrusting his own working, and relying on the
heavenly goodness, he cast all his care upon the Lord in earnest
prayer.

He would confidently affirm that the grace of prayerfulness
should be more desired than all others by the religious man,
and—believing that without it no good could be wrought in the
service of God—he would stir up his Brethren unto zeal therefor
by all means that he could. For, whether walking or sitting,
within doors or without, in toil or at leisure, he was so absorbed
in prayer as that he seemed to have devoted thereunto not only
his whole heart and body, but also his whole labour and time.

2. Nor was he ever wont to pass over heedlessly any spiritual
visitation. When it came unto him, he followed after it, and,
for as long as the Lord granted it unto him, he rejoiced in its
proffered sweetness. If, while absorbed in thought on a journey,
he felt some breathings of the divine Spirit, he would let his
companions go on before, and would himself stay his steps, and
turn the new inspiration into fruitfulness, not receiving the grace
in vain. Ofttimes he was rapt in such ecstasies of contempla¬
tion as that he was carried out of himself, and, while perceiving
things beyond mortal sense, knew naught of what was happening
in the outer world around him.

Thus, when he was passing on a time through Borgo San
Sepolcro, a very populous town, riding on an ass because of his


His Zeal in Prayer 365

bodily weakness, he met crowds of folk that ran together out
of devotion unto him. Yet albeit they touched him, and
delayed his progress, crowding round him and in many ways
pressing upon him, he seemed as one that felt naught, and, even
as though he had been a dead body, perceived no whit what
was being done around him. Accordingly, when they had long
since passed through the town and left the crowds behind them,
and had come unto a certain leper settlement, that contem-
plator of heavenly things, like one returning from another world,
anxiously enquired when they would draw nigh unto Borgo.
For his mind, intent on heavenly glories, had not perceived the
changes of place and time, nor of the folk that met them. And
that this oft befell him, the repeated experience of his com¬
panions attested.

3. Moreover—as he had experienced in prayer that the
longed-for presence of the Holy Spirit vouchsafed itself by so
much the more intimately unto suppliants as it found them
removed from the noise of worldlings—he would seek lonely
places, going to pray by night in solitudes and in deserted
churches. There ofttimes he endured dire assaults from demons,
who, struggling with him in perceptible form, strove to disturb
him in his exercise of prayer. But he, furnished with heavenly
arms, the more desperate his enemies’ attack, was rendered by
so much the more strong in might and fervent in prayer, saying
with confidence unto Christ, “ Hide me under the shadow of
Thy wings, from the wicked that oppress me.” But unto the
demons he would say, “ Do unto me aught that ye can, evil
and false spirits. For ye have no power, save that which is
granted you from the divine hand, and here am I, ready to bear
'with all gladness all things whatsoever that has decreed to
inflict upon me.” Then the proud demons, not able to brook
this constancy of mind, retreated in confusion.

4. But the man of God, remaining alone and at peace, filled
the woods with his sighing, bedewed the ground with his tears,
and beat his breast with his hands, and, like one who hath
gained a secret and hidden thing, spake familiarly with his Lord.
There he made answer unto his Judge, there he made supplica¬
tion unto his Father, there he held converse with his Friend,
there too he was at times heard by the Brethren, who out of
filial piety watched him, to invoke the divine mercy for sinners
with cries and wailings, yea, and to lament aloud as though the
Lord’s Passion were set before his eyes. There he was beheld
praying by night, his hands stretched out after the manner of

n 2 485


366 Life of St. Francis

a Cross, his whole body uplifted from the earth, and wrapt in a
shining cloud, as though the wondrous illumination of the body
were a witness unto the wondrous enlightenment of his mind.
There, moreover, as is attested by sure signs, the unknown and
hidden things of the divine wisdom were laid bare unto him,
albeit he did not publish them abroad, save in so far as the love
of Christ constrained him, and the profit of his neighbours
demanded. For he would say, “ For a trifling gain, one may
chance to lose a priceless thing, and may easily provoke him
that gave it to give no more.”

When he returned from his private prayers, in the which he
became changed almost into another man, he endeavoured with
all diligence to make himself like unto others, lest perchance
that which was shown outwardly should by the breath of popular
applause depart from the gain within. Whensoever he was rapt
on a sudden in public, and visited of the Lord, he would alway
make some pretext unto them that stood by, lest the intimate
visitations of the Spouse should be published abroad. When
that he was praying among the Brethren, he utterly avoided
coughings, groanings, hard breathing, and outward gestures,
either because he loved secrecy, or because, shutting himself
up within himself, he was wholly borne away unto God. Oft-
times he would speak on this wise unto his intimate companions,
“ When the servant of God is visited of God in prayer, he ought
to say ‘ This comfort, 0 Lord, Thou hast sent from heaven unto
me, a sinner and unworthy, and I commit it unto Thy care, for
that I feel me to be a thief of Thy treasure/ When, therefore,
he returneth from praying, he ought thus to show himself as a
little poor one and a sinner, not as one who hath attained unto
any new grace.”

5. Once when the man of God was praying in the place of
the Little Portion, it chanced that the Bishop of Assisi came to
visit him, as was his wont. He at once on entering the place
betook him unto the cell wherein the servant of Christ was
praying, with more boldness than was seemly, and, knocking at
the door, was about to enter; but, as he thrust in his head, and
beheld the Saint in prayer, a sudden trembling gat hold of him,
his limbs became rigid, and he lost the power of speech; then
suddenly he was driven forth by force, by the divine will, and
with returning steps was led afar off. All astonied, the Bishop
hastened unto the Brethren with all the speed he might, and,
God restoring unto him his speech, with his first words he
declared his fault.


His Zeal in Prayer 367

It befell on a time that the Abbot of the Monastery of Saint
Justin in the diocese of Perugia met the servant of Christ,
Beholding him, the devout Abbot with all speed alighted from
his horse, that he might both do reverence unto the man of God
and hold some converse with him concerning his soul’s welfare.
At length, their sweet conference over, the Abbot, as he departed,
humbly besought that prayers should be offered on his behalf.
Unto whom the man dear unto God made answer, “ I will pray
for thee with goodwill.” Accordingly, when the Abbot had
departed a little space, the faithful Francis spake unto his
companion, “ Tarry for me awhile, Brother, for I am minded to
pay the debt that I have promised.” While, then, he was pray¬
ing, on a sudden the Abbot felt in his spirit an unwonted glow
and a sweetness hitherto unknown, in such wise as that he was
carried out of himself in an ecstasy, and wholly loosed from
himself and absorbed in God. This lasted but for a brief space,
after which he came unto himself again, and recognised the
efficacy of the prayer of Saint Francis. Thenceforward he did
alway burn with greater love toward the Order, and recounted
this event unto many as a miracle.

6 . The holy man was wont to say the Canonical Hours before
God not less reverently than devoutly. For albeit he suffered
from infirmities of the eyes, the stomach, spleen, and liver, yet
would he never lean against an outer or inner wall, while he was
intoning them, but alway said the Hours standing upright, and
without his hood, not letting his eyes roam about, nor cutting
short his words. If he were on a journey, he would, when the
time came, stay his steps, nor would he omit this reverent and
holy habit for any storm of rain. For he would say, “ If the
body needeth quiet when it partaketh of the bread that, like
itself, shall become food for worms, with how much peace and
calm doth it behove the soul to receive the Bread of Life? ”
Grievously did he consider himself to have stumbled if ever,
while giving himself unto prayer, his mind was led astray of
empty fantasies. When anything of the like happened, he made
mention thereof in confession, that he might forthwith atone for
it. This earnestness he had so turned into an habit that right
seldom did he suffer from flies of this sort.

One Lent, he had made a little vase, that he might fill up his
spare moments, and they not be utterly wasted. But forasmuch
as while saying Tierce this came into his memory and a little
distracted his mind, he, moved by the fervour of his spirit, burnt
the little vase in the fire, saying, “ I will sacrifice it unto the


368 Life of St. Francis

Lord, Whose sacrifice it hath hindered.” It was his wont to
say the Psalms with mind and spirit as attent as though he saw
God present before his eyes, and when the Name of the Lord
occurred therein, he seemed to refresh his very lips with the
savour of its sweetness. He was fain that that same Name of
the Lord, not alone when it was meditated upon, but also when
it was uttered or written, should be honoured with an especial
reverence, and at times he would prevail on the Brethren to
collect all papers with writing upon them, wheresoever they
might find them, and to lay them in some seemly place, lest
perchance that sacred Name might happen to be written thereon,
and so trodden underfoot. And when he uttered or heard the
Name of Jesus, he was filled with an inward rejoicing, and seemed
all transfigured outwardly, as though some honey-sweet taste
had soothed his palate, or some melodious sound his ear.

7. Now three years before his death it befell that he was
minded, at the town of Greccio, to celebrate the memory of the
Birth of the Child Jesus, with all the added solemnity that he
might, for the kindling of devotion. That this might not seem
an innovation, he sought and obtained licence from the Supreme
Pontiff, and then made ready a manger, and bade hay, together
with an ox and an ass, be brought unto the spot. The Brethren
were called together, the folk assembled, the wood echoed with
their voices, and that august night was made radiant and solemn
with many bright lights, and with tuneful and sonorous praises.
The man of God, filled with tender love, stood before the manger,
bathed in tears, and overflowing with joy. Solemn Masses were
celebrated over the manger, Francis, the Levite of Christ, chant¬
ing the Holy Gospel. Then he preached unto the folk standing
round of the Birth of the King in poverty, calling Him, when he
wished to name Him, the Child of Bethlehem, by reason of his
tender love for Him. A certain knight, valorous and true,
Messer John of Greccio, who for the love of Christ had left the
secular army, and was bound by closest friendship unto the man
of God, declared that he beheld a little Child right fair to see
sleeping in that manger, Who seemed to be awakened from
sleep when the blessed Father Francis embraced Him in both
arms. This vision of the devout knight is rendered worthy of
belief, not alone through the holiness of him that beheld it, but
is also confirmed by the truth that it set forth, and withal proven
by the miracles that followed it. For the ensample of Francis,
if meditated upon by the world, must needs stir up sluggish
hearts unto the faith of Christ, and the hay that was kept back


His Spirit of Prophecy 369

from the manger by the folk proved a marvellous remedy for
sick beasts, and a prophylactic against divers other plagues,
God magnifying by all means His servant, and making manifest
by clear and miraculous portents the efficacy of his holy prayers.


CHAPTER XI

OF HIS UNDERSTANDING OF THE SCRIPTURES, AND
OF HIS SPIRIT OF PROPHECY

i. Unto such a tranquillity of mind had his unwearied zeal for
prayer and continuous practice of virtue brought the man of God
that—albeit he had no instruction or learning in the sacred
writings—yet, illumined by the beams of eternal light, he
searched the deep things of the Scriptures with marvellous
intellectual discernment. For his genius, pure from all stain,
penetrated into the hidden places of the mysteries, and, where
the learning of a theologian tarrieth without, the feelings of the
lover led him in. At times he would read in the sacred books,
and whatsoever had once been presented unto his mind became
indelibly imprinted on his memory, for it was not in vain that
he comprehended by hearing and by an attent mind that which
he ever meditated upon with the love of an unceasing devotion.
Once when the Brethren asked whether it were his will that the
clerks that had been already received into the Order should
devote themselves unto the study of Holy Scripture, he made
answer, “ It is indeed my will, yet for so long alone as they follow
the example of Christ, Who, we read, prayed more than He read,
and for so long as they do not lose their zeal for prayer, nor
study only that they may know how they ought to speak; rather
let them study that they may be doers of the word, and, when
they have done it, may set forth unto others what they too
should do. I am fain (saith he), that my Brethren should be
learners of the Gospel, and thus make progress in knowledge of
the truth, that they should grow in the purity of guilelessness,
so that they sever not the harmlessness of the dove from the
wisdom of the serpent, which twain the greatest Teacher hath
joined together with His blessed mouth.”

2. Being asked at Siena by a certain devout man, a doctor of
sacred theology, concerning sundry problems hard of under¬
standing, he laid bare the hidden things of the divine wisdom
with such luminous exposition that that learned man was


370 Life of St. Francis

mightily astonied, and exclaimed in amazement, “ Verily, the
theology of this holy Father, borne aloft by purity and medita¬
tion as though by wings, is as a flying eagle, while our learning
creepeth on its belly on the earth.” For, albeit he were unskilled
in speech, yet, full of learning, he unravelled the knots of
problems, and the thing that was hid he brought forth into the
light. Nor was it unfitting that the holy man should receive
from God an understanding of the Scriptures, seeing that by
the imitation of Christ he fulfilled and set forth in his deeds their
perfect truth, and by the abundant anointing of the Holy Spirit
had within him, in his own heart, an instructor therein.

3. So mightily did the spirit of prophecy shine forth in him
that he both foreknew what was to come, and beheld the secrets
of men’s hearts, and perceived absent things as though they
were present, and in wondrous wise manifested his own presence
unto them that were absent. For on a time when the Christian
army was besieging Damietta, the man of God was present,
fortified not by arms but by faith. When on the day of battle
the Christians were preparing them for the conflict, and the
servant of Christ heard thereof, he groaned bitterly, and said
unto his companion, “ If they essay to join battle, the Lord
hath shown me that it will not fare well with the Christians;
but, if I say this, I shall be accounted a fool; if I keep silence,
I shall not escape the reproaches of my conscience. What, then,
dost thou advise?” His companion replied, “ Brother, do
thou esteem it but a light thing to be judged of men, for that
thou dost not now make a beginning of being accounted a fool.
Unburden thy conscience, and fear God rather than men.”
Hearing this, the herald of Christ hastened forth, and approached
the Christians with salutary warnings, forbidding the battle,
and prophesying its issue. The truth was unto them as a vain
tale, they hardened their hearts and would not turn back.
They went into the field, they joined battle, they fought, and the
entire Christian host was put to the rout, thus winning shame, not
triumph, as the ending of the warfare. In this dread defeat, the
Christian host was so diminished that there were about six
thousand slain or captured. Thereby was it clearly made
manifest that the wisdom of the poor man, Francis, had not
been meet for contempt, for the mind of a righteous man is
sometime wont to tell him more than seven watchmen, that
sit above in an high tower.

4. At another time, when he was returned from beyond seas,
and had come unto Celano to preach, a certain Knight with


His Spirit of Prophecy 371

humble devoutness and great importunity invited him to dine
with him. He came accordingly unto the house of the Knight,
and the whole household rejoiced over the coming of their poor
guests. Before they partook of the meal, Francis, as he was
wont, stood with eyes uplift to heaven, with a devout mind
offering unto God prayers and praises. His prayer ended, he
called aside his kindly host in familiar wise, and thus addressed
him, “ Lo, my brother and host, yielding unto thine impor¬
tunity I have come unto thy house to eat. Do thou now yield
speedily unto my exhortations, forasmuch as thou shalt eat not
here, but elsewhere. Confess now thy sins, and be contrite
with the grief of a true repentance, nor let aught abide in thee
that thou dost not lay bare in sincere confession. The Lord
will reward thee this day for that thou hast received His poor
with such devoutness.” The Knight yielded forthwith unto
the words of the holy man, unto whose companion he disclosed
all his sins in confession, and then set his house in order, and
prepared himself, in so far as he might, for death. At length
they sat down to table, and, while the rest were beginning to
eat, the host on a sudden gave up the ghost, carried off by a
sudden death according unto the word of the man of God.
And thus it befell, by the merits of his gracious hospitality, that,
according unto the Word of truth, “ He that receiveth a prophet
shall receive a prophet’s reward;” for by the prophetic pre¬
diction of the holy man that devout Knight made himself ready
against the sudden onset of death, inasmuch as, fortified by the
weapons of penitence, he was able to escape eternal condemna¬
tion and enter into the everlasting tabernacles.

5. Once on a time, while the holy man was lying sick at Rieti,
a prebendary, Gideon by name, a man unstable and worldly*
that had been stricken with a sore disease and was lying in his
bed, was brought unto him, and with tears besought him—as
did the bystanders—that he would make over him the sign of
the Cross. Unto him he said, “ Since aforetime thou wert living
after the lusts of the flesh, not fearing the judgments of God,
how can I sign thee with the Cross? Howbeit, for the sake of
the devout prayers of these that plead for thee, I will make
over thee the sign of the Cross in the name of the Lord. Yet
be thou well assured that a worse thing will befall thee if, when
thou hast been set free, thou shalt return unto thv vomit. For
the sin of ingratitude ever bringeth with it worse evils than
were suffered afore.” Then, when the sign of the Cross was
made over him, at once he that had lain paralysed rose up


372 Life of St. Francis

whole, and, breaking forth into God : s praises, “ I,” saith he,
“ am set free! ” His bones cracked within him, in the hearing
of many, even as when dry wood is broken by the hand. Yet
when but a short time had passed by, he forgat God, and again
yielded his body unto unchastity. When one evening he had
supped in the house of a certain Canon, and was sleeping there
that night, on a sudden the roof of the house fell in above them
all. But while the rest escaped death, that wretched man
alone was overtaken and cut off. Thus by a righteous judg¬
ment of God the last state of that man was worse than the first,
by reason of his sin of ingratitude, and contempt of God, since
it had behoved him to be grateful for the pardon that he had
gained, and since a crime when repeated is twofold an offence.

6. On another time, a devout woman of noble birth came
unto the holy man to unfold her grief unto him and to ask a
remedy. Now she had a right cruel husband, from whom she
suffered opposition in the service of Christ, wherefore she be¬
sought the holy man that he would pray for him that God
would deign to soften his heart with His own mercy. Hearing
this, Francis said unto her, “ Go in peace, and confidently await
from thine husband the comfort that he shall speedily afford
thee.” And he added, “ Say unto him from God and from me
that now is the day of mercy, hereafter that of justice.” When
he had blessed her, the woman returned, found her husband,
and declared what had been spoken, lhen the Holy Spirit fell
upon him and changed him into a new man, making him in all
gentleness reply thus, “ Lady, let us serve the Lord, and save
our souls.” Then by the persuasions of his devout wife for
many years they lived a life of continence, and both on the
same day departed unto the Lord. Of a truth, we must marvel
at the might of the spirit of prophecy that was found in the
man of God, through the which he restored unto withered limbs
their power, and impressed on hard hearts godliness; albeit no
less must we be astonied at the clear perception of that spirit,
whereby he so foreknew the issue of future events that he could

cti even the secret things of men s consciences, having
obtained, like another Elisha, a double portion of the spirit of

Elias. . .

7. Once when at Siena he had decisively foretold unto a
certain friend some events that should come to pass, that
learned man—of whom mention hath been made above as to
his conferring with him about the Scriptures—heard thereof,
and, doubting, asked the holy Father whether he had said the


His Spirit of Prophecy 373

things that he had heard from the narration of that other.
Then Francis not only declared that he had so spoken, but also
foretold by prophecy that man’s own end, who was thus asking
concerning another. And that he might the more surely im¬
press this on his heart, he revealed unto him a certain hidden
scruple of his conscience, which that man had never laid bare
unto any living, and by thus marvellously revealing the same
he explained it, and by his salutary counsels laid it low. To
confirm the truth of all this, it befell that that same devout
man came unto his end at the last in the manner foretold him
by the servant of Christ.

8. Once, moreover, when he was returning from beyond sea,
with Brother Leonard of Assisi as Iris companion, it chanced
that, worn out and weary as he was, he was riding on an ass.
His companion, as he followed him—himself no little wearied—
began to say within himself, with a touch of human weakness,
“ This man’s family was not of equal standing with mine own.
And now, look you, he rideth, and I on foot lead his ass.” Even
as he thus reasoned, the holy man forthwith dismounted from
the ass, saying, “ It is not fitting, Brother, that I should ride,
and thou walk afoot, for that in the world thou wert of nobler
birth and more standing than I.” Then the Brother was dumb
with amazement, and blushed for shame, and, perceiving his
fault, fell at the other’s feet, which he bedewed with tears, and
laid bare what had been his thought, and implored pardon.

9. A certain Brother, devoted unto God, and unto the servant
of Christ, oft meditated in his heart how that one must be
meet for the divine grace whom the holy man embraced with
intimate friendship, yet nevertheless he thought himself con¬
sidered of God as a stranger, outside the number of the elect.
Being, then, ofttimes harassed by the oncoming of such thoughts,
he ardently desired the intimate friendship of the man of God,
yet did not lay bare unto any the secret of his heart; him the
kindly Father called gently unto him, and thus addressed,
“ Let no thoughts disturb thee, my son, for I hold thee most
dear, and amongst those most especially dear unto me I do
gladly bestow upon thee the gift of my friendship and my love.”
Thereat the Brother marvelled, and from being devout became
ever more devout, and not only increased in love of the holy
man, but was also laden, through the gift of the grace of the
Holy Spirit, with greater endowments.

Now while Francis was sojourning on Mount Alvema, secluded
in his cell, one of his companions did mightily desire to possess


374 Life of St. Francis

some of the words of the Lord written by his hand, and with
brief notes thereupon. For, having it, he believed that he might
escape a grievous temptation, not of the flesh, but of the spirit,
by the which he was distressed, or assuredly might be enabled
to bear it more easily. While he was pining with such a desire,
he suffered torments within, being overcome with shamefastness,
nor daring to lay the matter before his venerated Father. But
though man told it not unto him, the Spirit revealed it. For
he bade the Brother aforesaid bring unto him ink and parch¬
ment, and according unto the desire of the Brother he wrote
with his own hand the praises of the Lord thereon, and finally,
a blessing for him, saying, “ Take unto thyself this parchment,
and keep it with care until the day of thy death.” The Brother
received the gift he had so desired, and forthwith that tempta¬
tion utterly departed from him. The writing was preserved,
and forasmuch as in later days it wrought miracles, it became a
witness unto the virtues of Francis.

io. Now there was a Brother eminent, in so far as outward
appearance went, for his sanctity, distinguished in his converse,
yet somewhat singular in bearing. Devoting his whole time
unto prayer, he observed silence with such rigour as that he was
wont to make his confession not by words, but by nods. Now it
chanced that the holy Father came unto that place and beheld
the Brother, and spake concerning him with the other Brethren.
When they all praised and glorified him, the man of God made
answer, “ Beware, Brethren, lest ye praise unto me in him the
deceitful semblances of the devil. Know in truth that this is a
temptation of the devil, and a deceitful snare.” The Brethren
were loth to believe this, judging it almost impossible that the
devices of a false seeming should adorn themselves with so many
evidences of perfection. Yet of a truth, on his leaving the
Religion not many days after, it was manifestly seen with what
clearness of inward vision the man of God had discerned the
secrets of his heart.

After this manner he would predict with irrefragable truth the
fall of many who seemed to stand, but also the conversion unto
Christ of many who were turned aside, so that he seemed to have
approached unto the mirror of eternal light to gaze therein, and
by its wondrous radiance the sight of his mind surely perceived
things that were absent in bodily form, even as though they were
present.

n. Thus, on a time when his Vicar was holding a Chapter,
and he himself was in his cell praying, he was a mediator between


His Spirit of Prophecy 375

the Brethren and God. For when one of them, sheltering him¬
self under some cloak of defence, would not yield himself up unto
discipline, the holy man beheld this in spirit, and called one of
the Brethren, and said unto him, “ I saw, Brother, the devil
sitting upon the back of that disobedient Brother, holding his
neck gripped, for he, driven by such a master, spurning the bridle
of obedience, had given the reins unto his instincts. And when
I besought God for the Brother, at once the devil withdrew in
confusion. Go then and bid the Brother yield his neck with
all speed unto the yoke of holy obedience.” The Brother,
exhorted by the messenger, forthwith turned unto God, and
humbly threw himself at the feet of the Vicar.

12. Again, it befell on a time that two Brethren had come
from afar unto the hermitage of Greccio, that they might behold
the man of God, and carry away with them his blessing, the
which they had long time coveted. They came and found him
not, for that he had returned from the common dwelling-place
unto his cell, wherefore they were departing disconsolately.
Lo, as they were withdrawing, Francis, who could have known
naught by human perception of their arrival or departure,
contrary unto his wont came forth of his cell, called after them,
and, according unto their desire, made the sign of the Cross over
them, blessing them in the name of Christ.

13. Once two Brethren were come from Terra di Lavoro, the
elder of whom had given some offence unto the younger. But
when they came before the Father, he asked of the younger how
the Brother that was his companion had behaved toward him on
the way. On his making answer, “ Well enough,” he responded,
“ Beware, Brother, that thou lie not under pretext of humility,
for I know, I know—do thou wait a while and thou shalt see.”
The Brother was mightily astonied in what wise he had perceived
in spirit what had taken place so far off. Accordingly, not many
days after, he that had given the offence unto the Brother,
spuming the Religion, went out utterly, not seeking pardon
from the Father, nor submitting unto the discipline of correction
that was his due. Thus two things were made manifest at the
same time in the ruin of this one man, to wit, the justice of the
divine judgments, and the clear vision of the spirit of prophecy.

14. In what wise Francis showed himself present unto them
that were absent, by the working of the divine power, is clearly
apparent from what hath been afore related, if we recall unto
mind how in his absence he appeared unto the Brethren as one
transfigured, in a chariot of fire, and how at the Chapter of Arles


376 Life of St. Francis

he showed himself with arms outstretched after the likeness of
a Cross. This we must believe to have been wrought by the
divine ruling, that by the miraculous appearance of his bodily
presence it might be abundantly evident how that his spirit was
present in and penetrated by the light of the eternal wisdom,
which is more moving than any motion, and goeth through all
things by reason of her pureness, and entering into holy souls
maketh them friends of God, and prophets. For the most
exalted Teacher is wont to reveal His mysteries unto the babes
and simple, as was first seen in David, the most lofty of the
Prophets, and afterward in the Prince of the Apostles, Peter, and
lastly in Francis, the little poor one of Christ. For these, albeit
they were simple, and unskilled in letters, were made famous by
the teaching of the Holy Spirit; the first a shepherd, to feed the
flock of the Synagogue that was brought forth out of Egypt;
the second a fisher, to fill the great net of the Church with a
multitude of believers; the last a merchantman, to buy the pearl
of Gospel life, when that he had sold and disposed of all things
for the sake of Christ,


CHAPTER XII

OF THE EFFICACY OF HIS PREACHING, AND OF HIS
GIFT OF HEALING

i. The truly faithful servant and minister of Christ, Francis,
that he might faithfully and perfectly fulfil all things, strove
most chiefly to exercise those virtues that he knew, by the
guidance of the Holy Spirit, were most pleasing unto his God.
Wherefore it came to pass that he fell into great striving with
himself by reason of a doubt, the which that he might end—on
his return after many days of prayer—he set before the Brethren
that were his intimates. “ What,” saith he, “ do ye counsel,
Brethren, what do ye commend? Shall I devote myself unto
prayer, or shall I go about preaching? Of a truth, I that am
little, and simple, and rude in speech have received more grace
of prayer than of speaking. Now in prayer, there seemeth to
be the gain and heaping up of graces, in preaching, a certain
giving out of the gifts received from heaven; in prayer, again,
a cleansing of the inward feelings, and an union with the one,
true, and highest good, together with a strengthening of virtue;
in preaching, the spiritual feet wax dusty, and many things


His Preaching 377

distract a man, and discipline is relaxed. Finally, in prayer, we
speak with God and hear Him, and live as it were the life of
Angels, while we converse with Angels; in preaching, we must
needs practise much condescension toward men and living
among them as fellow-men must think, see, say, and hear such
things as pertain unto men. Yet one thing is there to set
against these, the which in God’s sight would seem to weigh more
than they all, to wit, that the only-begotten Son of God, Who
is the highest wisdom, left His Father’s bosom for the salvation
of souls, that, instructing the world by His ensample, He might
preach the word of salvation unto men, whom He both redeemed
at the cost of His sacred Blood, and cleansed in a laver and gave
them to drink, keeping back naught of Himself, but for our
salvation freely bestowing all. And forasmuch as we ought to
do all things after the pattern of those things that was shown
us in Him as on the lofty mount, it seemeth that it might be
more acceptable unto God that, laying aside leisure, I should go
forth unto the work.” And albeit for many days he pondered
over such sayings with the Brethren, he could not of a surety
discern whether of the twain he should choose as more truly
pleasing unto Christ. For albeit he had known many w r ondrous
things through the spirit of prophecy, he was not able thereby
to resolve this question clearly, the providence of God better
ordaining, so that the merit of preaching might be made evident
by an heavenly oracle, and the humility of Christ’s servant be
kept intact.

2. He, true Brother Minor, was not ashamed to ask little
things from those less than himself, albeit he had learnt great
things from the greatest Teacher. For with an especial zeal
he was wont to enquire after what way and manner of life he
might most perfectly serve God according unto His will. This
was his highest philosophy, this his highest desire, so long as
he lived, so that he would enquire of wise and simple, of perfect
and imperfect, of young and old, in what wise he might with
most holiness attain unto the summit of perfection. Therefore,
calling unto him twain of the Brethren, he sent them unto
Brother Silvester—he that had seen the Cross proceeding from
his mouth, and was at that time giving himself up unto con¬
tinuous prayer in the mountain above Assisi—that he might
seek an answer from God concerning this doubt, and announce
it unto him from the Lord. This same bidding he laid upon the
holy virgin Clare, that through some of the purer and simpler
of the virgins that were living under her rule, yea, and through


378 Life of St. Francis

her own prayers united with those of the other Sisters, she
might ascertain the will of the Lord touching this matter. The
reverend priest and the virgin vowed unto God were marvel¬
lously in agreement concerning this, the Holy Spirit revealing
it unto them, to wit, that it was the divine will that the herald
of Christ should go forth to preach. When, therefore, the
Brethren returned, and, according unto what they had heard,
pointed out the will of God, Francis forthwith rose and girded
himself, and without any delay set forth on his journey. And
with such fervour did he go, to fulfil the divine behest, and with
such speed did he hasten on his way, that he seemed—the hand
of the Lord being upon him—to have put on new power from
heaven.

3. When he drew nigh unto Bevagna he came unto a spot
wherein a great multitude of birds of divers species were
gathered together. When the holy man of God perceived them,
he ran with all speed unto the place and greeted them as if they
shared in human understanding. They on their part all awaited
him and turned toward him, those that were perched on bushes
bending their heads as he drew nigh them, and looking on him
in unwonted wise, while he came right among them, and dili¬
gently exhorted them all to hear the word of God, saying, “ My
brothers the birds, much ought ye to praise your Creator, Who
hath clothed you with feathers and given you wings to fly, and
hath made over unto you the pure air, and careth for you
without your taking thought for yourselves.” While he was
speaking unto them these and other like words, the little birds—
behaving themselves in wondrous wise—began to stretch their
necks, to spread their wings, to open their beaks, and to look
intently on him. He, with wondrous fervour of spirit, passed
in and out among them, touching them with his habit, nor did
one of them move from the spot until he had made the sign of
the Cross over them and given them leave; then, with the
blessing of the man of God, they all flew away together. All
these things were witnessed by his companions that stood
awaiting him by the way. Returning unto them, the simple
and holy man began to blame himself for neglect in that he had
not afore then preached unto the birds.

4. Thence, while going among the neighbouring places to
preach, he came unto a town named Alviano, where, when the
folk were gathered together and silence had been bidden, he
could yet scarce be heard by reason of the swallows that were
there building their nests, and twittering with shrill cries. The


His Preaching 379

man of God, in the hearing of all, addressed them, and said,
“ My sisters the swallows, ’tis now time that I too should speak,
seeing that until now ye have said your say. Hearken unto
the word of God, and keep silence, until the preaching of the
Lord be ended.” Then they, as though gifted with under¬
standing, on a sudden fell silent, nor moved from the spot until
the whole preaching was finished. All they that saw it were
filled with amazement, and glorified God. The report of this
marvel spread on all sides, and kindled in many reverence for
the Saint, and devotion unto the faith.

5. Again, in the city of Parma, a scholar of good disposition
that with his comrades was busily intent on study, was troubled
by the importunate twittering of a certain swallow, and began
to say unto his comrades, “ This swallow is one of those that
troubled the man of God, Francis, on a time when he was
preaching, until he bade them be silent.” Then, turning unto
the swallow, with all confidence he said, “ In the name of
Francis, the servant of God, I bid thee come hither to me
forthwith, and keep silence.” Then the bird, hearing the name
Francis, like one instructed by the teaching of the man of God,
at once fell silent, and withal gave herself up into his hands as
though into safe keeping. The scholar, in amazement, forth¬
with set her free again, and heard her twittering no more.

6. On another time, when the servant of God was preaching
on the seashore at Gaeta, crowds gathered about him out of
devotion, that they might touch him; whereupon the servant
of Christ, shrinking from such homage of the folk, leapt alone
into a little boat that was lying by the beach. And the boat,
as though impelled by a reasoning power from within, without
any rowing put out unto some distance from land, while all
beheld it and marvelled. But when it was withdrawn some
little distance into deep water, it stayed motionless among the
waves, while the holy man preached unto the waiting crowds
upon the shore. When the discourse was ended, and the
miracle perceived, and his blessing given, the throng gave
place, in order that they might no more disturb him, and the
little boat of its own guidance put in again unto land.

Who then could be of so obstinate and wicked mind as to
despise the preaching of Francis, by whose wondrous might it
came to pass that not only creatures lacking reason were
amenable unto his correction, but that even lifeless objects, as
though they had life, ministered unto him while preaching?.

7. Thus there was ever present with His servant Francis,


380 Life of St. Francis

in whatsoever he did, He Who had anointed him and sent him,
the Spirit of the Lord, yea, and Christ Himself, Who is the
power of God and the wisdom of God, that he might abound in
words of healthful teaching and shine in the light of miracles
of great power. For his speech was as a burning fire, penetrating
the secrets of the heart, and he filled the minds of all with
amazement, since he set forth no adornments of men’s invention,
but savoured of the breath of divine revelation. Thus on a
time, when he was about to preach in the presence of the Pope
and the Cardinals, at the suggestion of the lord Bishop of Ostia
he had committed unto memory a certain carefully prepared
sermon, and, standing in the midst to set forth the words of
edification, found that he had so utterly forgotten it all as that
he knew not how to speak a word thereof. When with fruitful
humility he had confessed this, he set himself to invoke the
grace of the Holy Spirit, and forthwith began to pour forth
words so mighty in effect, and of such wondrous power to move
the minds of those illustrious men unto repentance, as that it
was manifestly seen that it was not himself that spake, but the
Spirit of the Lord.

8. And forasmuch as he did himself first practise that which
he afterward preached unto others, he feared none that might
blame him, but did most faithfully preach the truth. It was
not his way to smooth over the faults of any, but to smite them,
nor to flatter the life of sinners, but rather to aim at it with
stern reproofs. Unto great and small alike he spake with the
same firm spirit, and he would as joyfully address him unto few
as unto many. Folk of every age and either sex hastened to
see and to hear this man, newly given unto the world from
heaven. He, indeed, as he went throughout divers districts,
preached the Gospel with fervour, the Lord working with him
and confirming the word with signs following. For in the power
of His Name Francis, the herald of the truth, did cast forth
demons, heal the sick, and, what is more, by the might of his
preaching did soften and make penitent hard hearts, restoring
health unto body and mind at the same time, even as the
instances of his working to be cited below give proof.

9. In the city of Toscanella, he was devoutly entertained as
guest by a certain Knight, whose only son was crippled from
birth; at his own urgent entreaty, he raised him with his hands,
and so suddenly made him whole that, in the sight of all, his
limbs were all forthwith strengthened, and the boy, made whole
and strong, rose up at once, walking and leaping and praising God.


His Preaching 381

In the city of Narni, when, at the entreaty of the Bishop, he
had made the sign of the Cross from head to foot over a certain
paralytic who had lost the use of all his limbs, he restored him
perfectly unto health.

In the diocese of Rieti, a boy that from the age of four had
been so swollen that he could in no wise look on his own legs,
was brought unto him by his mother with tears, and forthwith,
when the Saint touched him with his holy hands, was healed.

In the city of Orte, a boy was so deformed that his head
rested on his feet, and some of his bones were broken; he, when
Francis at the tearful entreaties of his parents had made the
sign of the Cross over him, on a sudden stood upright and was
from that moment unloosed.

10. A certain woman in the city of Gubbio had both her
hands so withered and paralysed that she could do no work
with them; she, when Francis had made the sign of the Cross
over her in the name of the Lord, gained such absolute healing
that, returning home forthwith, she prepared with her own
hands food for him and for the poor, even as Peter’s wife’s
mother did.

A girl in the town of Bevagna had lost her sight, but when
her eyes had been thrice anointed with his spittle in the name
of the Trinity she regained her longed-for sight.

A woman in the city of Narni, stricken with blindness, when
the sign of the Cross was made over her by Francis, recovered
the sight she yearned for.

A boy in Bologna had one of his eyes so clouded by a spot
that he could see nothing therewith, nor find relief by any
remedy; howbeit when the servant of the Lord had made the
sign of the Cross over him from head to foot, he recovered his
sight perfectly, insomuch as that, entering the Order of Brothers
Minor thereafter, he affirmed that he saw far better with the eye
that aforetime was clouded than with the eye that had been
alway sound.

In the town of San Gemini, the servant of God was received
as guest by a certain devout man whose wife was tormented
by a demon; after he had prayed, he commanded the demon
on obedience to go out from her, and by the divine power put
him so instantly to flight as that it became clearly evident that
the audacity of demons availeth not to resist the power of holy
obedience.

In Citta di Castello, a raging and evil spirit possessed a woman;
he, charged on obedience by the holy man, went out in wrath,


382 Life of St. Francis

leaving the woman that had been possessed free alike in nind
and body.

11. One of the Brethren was afflicted with such an horrible
disease as that it was asserted of many to be rather a tormenting
from demons than a natural sickness. For ofttimes he was
quite dashed down on the ground, and wallowed foaming, with
his limbs now drawn up, now stretched forth, now folded, now
twisted, now become rigid and fixed. At times he was quite
stretched out and stiff, and with his feet on a level with his head,
would be raised into the air, and would then fall back again in
dreadful fashion. The servant of Christ, full of compassion,
pitied him in his so lamentable and incurable sickness, and sent
unto him a morsel of the bread wherefrom he had been eating.
When the sick man had tasted the bread, he received such power
as that never thenceforward did he suffer trouble from that
sickness.

In the province of Arezzo, a woman for many days had laboured
in childbirth, and was now nigh unto death; she was utterly
despairing of her life, and no resource was left her but in God.
Now the servant of Christ, by reason of his bodily weakness,
had travelled on horseback through those regions, and it chanced
that the beast was led back through the village wherein the
woman lay suffering. The men of the place, seeing the horse
whereon the holy man had sat, took off the bridle, that they
might lay it on the woman, and at the marvellous touch thereof
all danger was banished, and the woman forthwith was delivered
in safety.

A certain man of Citta della Pieve, devout and one that feared
God, had by him a cord wherewith the holy Father had been
girt. Whereas a great number of men and women in that city
were afflicted by divers diseases, he went among the homes of
them that were sick, and, dipping the cord in water, gave drink
therefrom unto the sufferers, and thus by this means very many
were cured. Moreover, the sick who tasted of bread touched
by the man of God, by the efficacy of the divine power obtained
right speedily healing cures.

12. Forasmuch as the preaching of the herald of Christ was
illuminated by these and many other portents and miracles, the
words that fell from him were listened for as eagerly as though
it were an Angel of the Lord speaking. For there was in him
a surpassing excellence of the virtues, the spirit of prophecy,
power of miracles, an eloquence in preaching inspired from
heaven, the submission unto him of the creatures that lack


The Sacred Stigmata 383

reason, a mighty moving of men’s hearts at the hearing of his
words, a learning given him of the Holy Spirit beyond all human
teaching, licence to preach granted him by the supreme Pontiff
as the result of a revelation, yea, and the Rule too, wherein the
manner of the preaching was set forth, confirmed by that same
Vicar of Christ, and, finally, the signs of the King Most High t
imprinted on his body after the manner of a seal; these gave
unanswerable evidence unto the whole world, as it were by ten
witnesses, that Francis the herald of Christ was worthy of
reverence in his ministry, was of authority in his teaching, and
was to be marvelled at in his saintliness, and that through these
virtues he had preached the Gospel of Christ like one that was
indeed a messenger of God.


CHAPTER XIII

OF THE SACRED STIGMATA

i. It was the custom of that angelic man, Francis, never to be
slothful in good, but rather, like the heavenly spirits on Jacob’s
ladder, to be ever ascending toward God, or stooping toward his
neighbour. For he had learnt so wisely to apportion the time
granted unto him for merit that one part thereof he would spend
in labouring for the profit of his neighbours, the other he would
devote unto the peaceful ecstasies of contemplation. Where¬
fore, when according unto the demands of time and place he had
stooped to secure the salvation of others, he would leave behind
the disturbances of throngs, and seek a hidden solitude and a
place for silence, wherein, giving himself up more freely unto the
Lord, he might brush off any dust that was clinging unto him
from his converse with men. Accordingly, two years before he
yielded his spirit unto heaven, the divine counsel leading him,
he was brought after many and varied toils unto an high moun¬
tain apart, that is called Mount Alverna. When, according unto
his wont, he began to keep a Lent there, fasting, in honour of Saint
Michael Archangel, he was filled unto overflowing, and as never
before, with the sweetness of heavenly contemplation, and was
kindled with a yet more burning flame of heavenly longings,
and began to feel the gifts of the divine bestowal heaped upon
him. He was borne into the heights, not like a curious examiner
of the divine majesty that is weighed down by the glory thereof,
but even as a faithful and wise servant, searching out the will of


Life of St. Francis


3 8 4

God, unto Whom it was ever his fervent and chief desire to
conform himself in every way.

2. Thus by the divine oracle it was instilled into his mind
that by opening of the Book of the Gospels it should be revealed
unto him of Christ what would be most pleasing unto God
in him and from him. Wherefore, having first prayed very
devoutly, he took the holy Book of the Gospels from the altar,
and made it be opened, in the name of the Holy Trinity, by his
companion, a man devoted unto God, and holy. As in the
threefold opening of the Book the Lord’s Passion was each time
discovered, Francis, full of the Spirit of God, verily understood
that, like as he had imitated Christ in the deeds of his life, so it
behoved him to be made like unto Him in the trials and suffer¬
ings of His Passion before that he should depart from this world.
And, albeit by reason of the great austerity of his past life, and
continual sustaining of the Lord’s Cross, he was now frail in
body, he was no whit afeared, but was the more valorously in¬
spired to endure a martyrdom. For in him the all-powerful
kindling of love of the good Jesu had increased into coals of fire,
which hath a most vehement flame, so that many waters could
not quench his love, so strong it was.

3. When, therefore, by seraphic glow of longing he had been
uplifted toward God, and by his sweet compassion had been
transformed into the likeness of Him Who of His exceeding love
endured to be crucified—on a certain morning about the Feast
of the Exaltation of Holy Cross, while he was praying on the side
of the mountain, he beheld a Seraph having six wings, flaming
and resplendent, coming down from the heights of heaven.
When in his flight most swift he had reached the space of air
nigh the man of God, there appeared betwixt the wings the
Figure of a Man crucified, having his hands and feet stretched
forth in the shape of a Cross, and fastened unto a Cross. Two
wings were raised above His head, twain were spread forth to
fly, while twain hid His whole body. Beholding this, Francis
was mightily astonied, and joy, mingled with sorrow, filled his
heart. He rejoiced at the gracious aspect wherewith he saw
Christ, under the guise of the Seraph, regard him, but His
crucifixion pierced his soul with a sword of pitying grief. He
marvelled exceedingly at the appearance of a vision so un¬
fathomable, knowing that the infirmity of the Passion doth in
no wise accord with the immortality of a Seraphic spirit. At
length he understood therefrom, the Lord revealing it unto him,
that this vision had been thus presented unto his gaze by the


The Sacred Stigmata 385

divine providence, that the friend of Christ might have fore¬
knowledge that he was to be wholly transformed into the like¬
ness of Christ Crucified, not by martyrdom of body, but by
enkindling of heart. Accordingly, as the vision disappeared,
it left in his heart a wondrous glow, but on his flesh also it im¬
printed a no less wondrous likeness of its tokens. For forthwith
there began to appear in his hands and feet the marks of the
nails, even as he had just beheld them in that Figure of the
Crucified. For his hands and feet seemed to be pierced through
the midst with nails, the heads of the nails showing in the palms
of the hands, and upper side of the feet, and their points showing
on the other side; the heads of the nails were round and black
in the hands and feet, while the points were long, bent, and as
it were turned back, being formed of the flesh itself, and pro¬
truding therefrom. The right side, moreover, was—as if it had
been pierced by a lance—seamed with a ruddy scar, where from
ofttimes welled the sacred blood, staining his habit and breeches.

4. Now the servant of Christ perceived that the stigmata
thus manifestly imprinted on his flesh could not be hidden from
his intimate friends; nevertheless, fearing to make public the
holy secret of the Lord, he was set in a great strife of questioning,
to wit, whether he should tell that which he had seen, or should
keep it silent. Wherefore he called some of the Brethren, and,
speaking unto them in general terms, set before them his doubt,
and asked their counsel. Then one of the Brethren, Uluminato
by name, and illuminated by grace, perceiving that he had
beheld some marvellous things, inasmuch as that he seemed almost
stricken dumb with amaze, said unto the holy man, “ Brother,
thou knowest that at times the divine secrets are shown unto
thee, not only for thine own sake, but for the sake of others also.
Wherefore, meseemeth thou wouldst have reason to fear lest
thou shouldst be judged guilty of hiding thy talent, didst thou
keep hidden that which thou hast received, which same would
be profitable unto many.” At this speech, the holy man was
moved, so that, albeit at other times he was wont to say, “ My
secret to me,” 1 he did then with much fear narrate in order the
vision aforesaid, adding that He who had appeared unto him
had said some words the which, so long as he lived, he would
never reveal unto any man. Verily we must believe that those
utterances of that holy Seraph marvellously appearing on the
Cross were so secret that perchance it was not lawful for a man to
utter them.


1 Isa. xxiv. 16 (marg. A.V.).


386 Life of St. Francis

5. Now after that the true love of Christ had transformed
His lover into the same image, and after that he had spent forty
days in solitude, as he had determined, when the Feast of Saint
Michael Archangel came, this angelic man, Francis, descended
from the mountain, bearing with him the likeness of the Cruci¬
fied, engraven, not on tables of stone or of wood, by the crafts¬
man’s hand, but written on his members of flesh by the finger of
the Living God. And forasmuch as it is good to keep close the
secret of a King, the man that shared this so royal secret did
ever hide those sacred signs as best he might. Howbeit, since
it pertaineth unto God to reveal the great things that He doth
for His glory, the Lord Himself, Who had imprinted those seals
upon him in secret, wrought divers miracles openly by means
thereof, that the hidden and wondrous power of those stigmata
might be demonstrated by the well-known fame of the signs
that followed.

6. Thus, in the province of Rieti, there had prevailed a very
grievous plague, the which devoured all oxen and sheep so
cruelly that no succour had been of any avail. But a certain
man that feared God was warned at night by a vision to go in
haste unto an hermitage of the Brethren, and obtain some water
that had washed the hands and feet of the servant of God,
Francis, who at that time was sojourning there, and to sprinkle
it over all the animals. Accordingly, he rose at dawn, and
came unto the place, and, having secretly obtained this water
from the companions of the holy man, he sprinkled therewith
the sheep and oxen that were diseased. Wondrous to relate,
so soon as the sprinkling, were it but a drop, fell upon the sick
animals as they lay on the ground, they recovered their former
strength, and got up forthwith, and, as though they had felt no
sickness, hastened unto the pastures! Thus it befell, through
the marvellous virtue of that water that had touched the sacred
wounds, that the whole plague was at once stayed, and the
contagious sickness banished from the flocks and herds.

7. In the neighbourhood of the aforesaid Mount Alvema,
before that the holy man had sojourned there, a cloud was wont
to arise from the mountain, and a fierce hailstorm to lay waste
the fruits of the earth. But after that blessed vision, to the
amazement of the inhabitants, the hail ceased, that the excel¬
lence of that heavenly apparition and the virtue of the stigmata
that were there imprinted might be attested by the very face
of the heavens, made calm beyond its wont.

Moreover, it befell one winter season that, by reason of his


The Sacred Stigmata 387

bodily infirmity, and of the roughness of the roads, he was
riding on a poor man’s ass, and was obliged to pass the night
under the edge of an overhanging rock, that he might by any
means escape the inconveniences of the snow and night that
had overtaken them, the which hindered him so that he was
not able to reach the place wherein he was to lodge. And when
Francis perceived that this man was muttering, sighing, and
complaining, and was tossing himself to and fro, like one thinly
clad, and unable to sleep by reason of the bitter cold—he,
kindled with the glow of the love divine, touched him with his
outstretched hand. Marvellous to relate, so soon as that holy
hand that bore the burning of the live coal of the Seraph touched
him, his sense of cold was utterly banished, and as great a
warmth came upon him within and without as if the flaming
breath from the mouth of a furnace had blown upon him.
Strengthened thereby in mind and body, he slept more sweetly
until the morning among the rocks and snow than he had ever
done resting in his own bed, even as he himself did thereafter
declare.

Wherefore it is proven by sure tokens that those sacred seals
were imprinted by the might of Him Who doth by the ministry
of Seraphs purify, enlighten, and kindle, seeing that they
brought health out of pestilence by driving it forth, and with
wondrous efficacy bestowed ease and warmth upon men’s bodies,
even as after his death was shown by yet more clear portents
that shall be related hereafter in their own place.

8. Francis himself, albeit he strove with great diligence to
hide the treasure found in the field, could nevertheless not so
conceal it as that some should not behold the stigmata in his
hands and feet, although he almost always kept his. hands
covered, and from that time forth wore sandals on his feet.
For, while he yet lived, many Brethren saw them, who, albeit
they were men worthy of all trust by reason of their especial
holiness, did yet for the removal of all doubt swear a solemn
oath, laying their hands on thrice-holy things, that so it was,
and that they had seen it. Moreover, some Cardinals, during
the intimate intercourse that the}?’ held with the holy man,
beheld them, and these composed truthful praises of the sacred
stigmata, in prose, and verse, and antiphons, which they pub¬
lished in his honour, giving their witness alike in word and
in writing unto the truth. The Supreme Pontiff, moreover,
the lord Alexander, w T henas he was preaching in the presence of
many Brethren, myself among them, declared that he, during


388 Life of St. Francis

the lifetime of the Saint, had beheld with his own eyes those
sacred stigmata. At the time of his death, more than fifty
Brethren beheld them, as did Clare, that virgin most devoted
unto God, with the rest of her Sisters, and countless seculars,
many of whom, as shall be told in its own place, both kissed
them with devout emotion, and touched them with their hands,
to confirm their witness.

Howbeit, the wound in his side he so heedfully concealed
as that during his lifetime none might behold it, save by stealth.
Thus one of the Brethren, who was wont solicitously to tend
having prevailed on him with holy caution to doff his
habit that it might be shaken out—by looking closely, beheld
the wound, and moreover, by laying three fingers upon it with
an hasty touch, learnt the extent thereof alike by sight and by
touch. With a like precaution the Brother that was then his
Vicar beheld it. And a Brother of wondrous simplicity, that
was his companion, while he was rubbing his shoulder-blades
by reason of a pain and weakness that he suffered therein, put
his hand within his hood, and by an accident let it fall on the
sacred wound, inflicting great pain on him. Thenceforward he
wore his under-garments so made as that they reached right
unto his armpits, to cover the wound in the side. Moreover,
the Brethren who washed these, or shook out his habit as
occasion demanded, finding them stained with blood, by this
manifest token arrived at an assured knowledge of the sacred
wound, whose appearance, revealed thereafter at his death,
they too, in company with very many others, gazed upon and
venerated withal.

9. Up then, most valiant knight of Christ! Bear the armour
of that most invincible Captain, equipped and adorned where¬
with thou shalt overcome all enemies. Bear the standard of
the King Most High, the which to look upon inspireth all the
warriors of the host of God. Bear no less the seal of the Chief
Priest, Christ, whereby thy words and deeds shall be deservedly
received as blameless and authoritative by all men. For from
henceforth, by reason of the marks of the Lord Jesus, which
thou dost bear in thy body, let no man trouble thee, nay rather,
let whosoever is the servant of Christ be constrained unto deepest
devotion and love for thee. For now by these most clear
tokens—proven, not by the two or three witnesses that be
enough to establish a matter, but by a multitude, over and
above what was necessary—the witness of God in thee, and the
tilings wrought through thee worthy of all belief, take from the


The Sacred Stigmata 389

infidels every pretext or excuse, while that they strengthen
believers in faith, uplift them by confidence of hope, and kindle
them with the fire of charity.

10. Now, verily, is that first vision fulfilled, which thou sawest,
to wit, that thou shouldst become a captain in the warfare
of Christ, and shouldst be accoutred with heavenly armour,
marked with the sign of the Cross. Now that vision of the
Crucified, that, at the outset of thy conversion, pierced thy
soul with a sword of pitying sorrow, yea, and the sound of the
Voice from the Cross, proceeding as though from the exalted
throne of Christ and His hidden place of atonement—as thou
didst declare in thy holy converse—are shown to have been
true beyond a doubt. Now, too, the Cross that, as thou madest
progress in thy conversion, was seen of Brother Silvester mar¬
vellously coming forth from thy mouth—the swords, too, that
the holy Pacifico saw laid crosswise upon thee, piercing thine
heart—and thine appearance uplifted in the air with arms
outstretched after the manner of a Cross, while the holy Antony
was preaching on the title of the Cross, as that angelic man,
Monaldo, beheld;—these all are verily shown and proven to
have been seen, not in imaginations of the brain, but by revela¬
tion from heaven. Now, finally, that vision that was vouch¬
safed thee toward the end of thy life—to wit, the exalted like¬
ness of the Seraph, and the lowly Image of Christ shown in one
—kindling thee inwardly and marking thee outwardly as another
Angel ascending from the sunrising, having the seal of the
Living God in thee—giveth a confirmation of faith unto those
visions aforesaid, and likewise receiveth from them a witness
unto its own truth. Lo, by these seven appearances of the
Cross of Christ in thee and about thee, marvellously set forth
and shown in order of time, thou hast attained, as though by
six steps, unto that seventh, where thou dost make an end, and
rest. For the Cross of Christ was at the outset of thy conver¬
sion both set before thee, and taken up by thee, and thence¬
forward as thou madest progress in thy conversion, it was
unceasingly sustained by thee throughout thy most holy life,
and was shown as an ensample unto others with such clearness
and certainty that it demonstrateth that at the end thou didst
arrive at the summit of Gospel perfection; thus none that is
truly devout will reject this showing-forth of Christ-like wisdom
written in thy mortal dust, none that is a true believer will
impeach it, none that is truly humble will lightly esteem it,
seeing that it is verily set forth of God, and right worthy of all
acceptation.


39 °


Life of St. Francis


CHAPTER XIV

OF HIS SUFFERINGS AND DEATH

i. Francis, now crucified with Christ alike in flesh and in
spirit, while glowing with seraphic love toward God, did also
thirst, even as did Christ Crucified, for the multitudes of them
that should be saved. Wherefore, being unable to walk by
reason of the nails protruding from his feet, he caused himself
to be borne round cities and castled villages, emaciated as he
was, that he might incite others to bear the Cross of Christ.
And unto the Brethren also he would say, “ Let us begin,
Brethren, to serve our Lord God, for until now we have made
but little progress.” So mightily did he yearn to return unto
the first beginnings of humility that he would serve the lepers
as he had done at the outset, and would recall unto its early
ministries his body that was now broken down by toils. Under
Christ’s leadership, he was minded to do mighty deeds, and,
albeit his limbs were waxing feeble, yet, strong and glowing in
spirit, he hoped in this new contest to vanquish the foe. For
there is no room for languor or sloth where the spur of love ever
urgeth on unto greater things. Yet in him the flesh was so
much in agreement with the spirit, and so ready to obey, as
that when the spirit strove to attain unto perfect holiness, the
flesh not only refrained from thwarting it, but did even hasten
to forestall it.

2. Now in order that the merits of the man of God might be
increased—merits that of a truth do all find their consumma¬
tion in endurance—he began to suffer from divers ailments so
grievously that scarce one of his limbs was free from pain and
sore suffering. At length by divers sicknesses, prolonged and
continuous, he was brought unto such a point that his flesh
was wasted away, and only as it were the skin clave unto his
bones. While he was afflicted by such grievous bodily suffering,
he would call his pangs not punishments, but sisters. And
when once he was harassed more sorely than usual by sharp
pains, a certain simple Brother said unto him, “ Brother, pray
the Lord that He deal more gently with thee, for meseemeth
that His hand is laid more heavily on thee than is right.”
Hearing this, the holy man groaned, and cried out, saying,
“ Did I not know the simple purity that is in thee, I would from
henceforth have shunned thy company, for that thou hast


His Sufferings and Death 391

dared to deem the divine counsels concerning me meet for blame.”
And albeit he was wholly worn out by the long continuance of
his grievous sickness, he cast himself on the ground, jarring his
frail bones in the hard fall. And, kissing the ground, he cried,
“ I give Thee thanks, 0 Lord God, for all these my pains, and
I beseech Thee, my Lord, that, if it please Thee, Thou wilt add
unto them an hundredfold; for this will be most acceptable unto
me if laying sorrow upon me Thou dost not spare, since the
fulfilling of Thy holy will is unto me an overflowing solace.”
Thus he seemed unto the Brethren like another Job, whose powers
of mind increased even as his bodily weakness increased. But
he himself knew long before his death when it should be, and,
when the day of his departure was at hand, said unto the
Brethren that he was about to put off the tabernacle of his
body, even as it had been revealed unto him of Christ.

3. When, therefore, during the two years after the impression
of the sacred stigmata, to wit, in the twentieth year from his
conversion, he had been shaped by many trial blows of painful
sicknesses, like unto a stone meet to be set in the building of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and as it were an hammered work that
under the mallet of manifold trials is brought unto perfection—
he asked to be borne unto Saint Mary of the Little Portion, that
he might yield up the breath of life there, where he had received
the breath of grace. When he had been brought thither—that
he might give an ensample of the truth that he had naught in
common with the world—in that most severe weakness that
followed after all his sickness, he prostrated himself in fervour
of spirit all naked on the naked earth, that in that last hour,
wherein the foe might still rise up against him, he might wrestle
in his nakedness with that naked spirit. As he lay thus on the
ground, his habit of haircloth laid aside, he lifted his face, as
was his wont, toward heaven, and, wholly absorbed in that
glory, covered with his left hand the wound in his right side,
that it might not be seen, and said unto the Brethren, “ I have
done what was mine to do, may Christ teach you what is yours.”

4. While the companions of the Saint were weeping, stricken
with keen pangs of pity, one of them, whom the man of God had
said should be his Warden, knowing by divine inspiration his
wish, rose in haste, and taking an habit, with the cord and
breeches, brought it unto the little poor one of Christ, saying,
“ These I lend unto thee, as unto a beggar, and do thou receive
them at the bidding of holy obedience.” At this the holy man
rejoiced, and exulted in gladness of heart, for that he saw that


Life of St. Francis


39 2

he had kept faith with the Lady Poverty even unto the end,
and raising his hands unto heaven, he glorified his Christ for
that, freed from all burdens, he was going unhindered unto Him.
For all this he had done in his zeal for poverty, being minded to
possess not even an habit, unless it were lent him by another.
He was verily minded in all things to be made like unto Christ
Crucified, Who had hung on the Cross in poverty, and grief, and
nakedness. Wherefore, as at the outset of his conversion he
had stood naked before the Bishop, so in the ending of his life
he was minded to quit the world naked. He charged the
Brethren that stood around him, on their loving obedience,
that when they saw that he was dead, they should leave him
lying naked on the ground for so long time as a man would take
leisurely to compass the distance of a thousand paces. 0 truly
Christ-like man, who strove alike in life to imitate the life of
Christ; in dying, His dying; in death, His death, by a perfect
likeness, and was found worthy to be adorned with an outward
likeness unto Him!

5. Then, as the hour of his departure was fast approaching, he
made all the Brethren that were in the place be called unto him
and, consoling them for his death with words of comfort, ex¬
horted them with fatherly tenderness unto the love of God.
He spake long of observing patience, and poverty, and fidelity
unto the Holy Roman Church, placing the Holy Gospel before all
other ordinances. Then as all the Brethren sat around him,
he stretched his hands over them, crossing his arms in the like¬
ness of the Cross, for that he did ever love that sign, and he
blessed all the Brethren, present and absent alike, in the might
and in the Name of the Crucified. He added, moreover, “ Be
strong, all ye my sons, in the fear of the Lord, and abide therein
for ever. And, since temptation will come, and trials draw
nigh, blessed are they who shall continue in the works that they
have begun. I for my part make haste to go unto God, unto
Whose grace I commend you all.” When he had made an end
of gentle exhortations after this wise, this man most beloved of
God asked them to bring him the book of the Gospels, and to
read unto him from the Gospel according unto John, beginning
at that place, “ Before the feast of the Passover.” Then he
himself, as best he could, brake forth into the words of that
Psalm, “ I cried unto the Lord with my voice, with my voice
unto the Lord did I make my supplication,” and went through
even unto the end, saying, “ The righteous shall compass me
about, for Thou shalt deal bountifully with me.”


His Sufferings and Death 393

6. At length, when all the mysteries had been fulfilled in him,
and his most holy spirit was freed from the flesh, and absorbed
into the boundless depths of the divine glory, the blessed man
fell on sleep in the Lord. One of his Brethren and disciples saw
that blessed soul, under the likeness of a star exceeding bright,
borne on a dazzling cloudlet over many waters, mounting in a
straight course unto heaven, as though it were radiant with
the dazzling whiteness of his exalted sanctity, and filled with
the riches of divine wisdom and grace alike, by the which the
holy man was found worthy to enter the abode of light and
peace, where with Christ he resteth for evermore. Moreover,
a Brother named Augustine, who was then Minister of the
Brethren in Terra di Lavoro, an holy and upright man, having
come unto his last hour, and some time previously having lost
the power of speech, in the hearing of them that stood by did
on a sudden cry out and say, “ Tarry for me, Father, tarry for
me, lo, even now I am coming with thee! ” When the Brethren
asked and marvelled much unto whom he thus boldly spake,
he made answer, “ Did ye not see our Father, Francis, who goeth
unto heaven ?” And forthwith his holy soul, departing from
the body, followed the most holy Father.

The Bishop of Assisi at that time had gone on pilgrimage
unto the Oratory of Saint Michael on Monte Gargano, and unto
him the Blessed Francis, appearing on the night of his departure,
said, “ Behold, I leave the world and go unto heaven.” The
Bishop, then, rising at dawn, related unto his companions that
which he had seen, and returned unto Assisi; there, when he had
made diligent enquiry, he learnt of a certainty that in that hour
whereof the vision had notified him, the blessed Father had
departed from this world.

At the hour of the passing of the holy man, the larks—birds
that love the light, and dread the shades of twilight—flocked in
great numbers unto the roof of the house, albeit the shades of
night were then falling, and, wheeling round it for a long while
with songs even gladder than their wont, offered their witness,
alike gracious and manifest, unto the glory of the Saint, who had
been wont to call them unto the divine praises.


394


Life of St. Francis


CHAPTER XV

OF HIS CANONISATION, AND THE TRANSLATION OE
HIS BODY

i. Francis, then, the servant and friend of the Most High, the
founder and leader of the Order of Brothers Minor, the professor
of poverty, the pattern of penitence, the herald of truth, the
mirror of holiness, and ensample of all Gospel perfection—the
heavenly grace preventing him—did make progress in ordered
course from the depths unto the heights. This wondrous man,
in poverty exceeding rich, in humility exalted, in mortification
full of life, in simplicity wise, and in every grace of character
noteworthy, whom in life the Lord had marvellously made
illustrious, was made of Him in death incomparably more illus¬
trious. For as that blessed man departed from this world, his
holy spirit entered the eternal mansions and was made glorious
by a full draught of the fountain of life, while he left set forth
in his body certain tokens that were to be his glory, so that his
most undefiled flesh, that had been crucified with its lusts, and
had become a new creature, did both set forth the image of
Christ’s Passion by its unexampled distinction, and prefigure
the semblance of the Resurrection by the newness of the
miracle.

2. For in those blessed limbs were seen the nails marvellously
fashioned out of his flesh by the divine might, and so implanted
in that flesh that if they were pressed on one side they at once
sprang back unto the other, like nerves that be joined together
and taut. Moreover, there was manifestly seen in his body the
scar of the wound in the side, nor inflicted nor wrought by man,
but like unto the wounded side of the Saviour, the which, in
Our Redeemer Himself, afforded us the holy mystery of man’s
redemption and regeneration. The appearance of the nails was
black like iron, but the wound in the side was ruddy, and by a
contraction of the flesh shaped as it were into a circle, in appear¬
ance like a rose most fair. The rest of his flesh—which afore¬
time both from his infirmities and from natural complexion had
tended toward swarthiness—now shone with a dazzling white¬
ness, and was a type of the beauty of its second state and royal
apparel.

3. His limbs were so soft and pliant when touched as that
they seemed to have returned unto the softness of childhood,


His Canonisation


395

and were seen to be adorned by divers clear tokens of innocence.
Since, then, the nails showed forth black on this most dazzlingly
white flesh, and the wound in the side showed ruddy as a rosy
flower in Spring, it is no wonder that so fair and marvellous a
contrast filled the beholders with gladness and marvelling. His
sons were weeping for the loss of so loveworthy a Father, and
yet they were filled with no small joy as they kissed the seals of
the Most High King in him. The newness of the miracle changed
mourning into exultation, and turned the examination of the
reason into dumb amazement. Verily, this sight so unparalleled
and so noteworthy was, unto all that beheld it, alike a confirma¬
tion of faith and an incitement unto love, while unto them that
heard thereof it was a subject for marvelling, and the kindling
of a yearning to behold it withal.

4. When the departure of the blessed Father became known,
and the report of the miracle was spread abroad, the folk
gathered in haste unto the spot, that with their bodily eyes they
might behold that which should dispel all doubt from their
reasons, and should add rejoicing unto their love. Accordingly,
very many of the citizens of Assisi were admitted to behold
and to kiss those sacred stigmata. Now one among them, a
learned and wise Knight, Jerome by name, a man illustrious and
renowned, having had doubts concerning these sacred tokens,
and having been an unbeliever like Thomas, did very eagerly
and boldly, in the presence of the Brethren and of the other
citizens, move the nails, and touch with his own hands the
hands, feet, and side of the Saint; and thus it befell that, while
touching those authentic marks of the wounds of Christ, he cut
away every wound of unbelief from his own heart and the hearts
of all. Wherefore he became thereafter a constant witness,
among others, unto this truth that he had learnt with such
certainty, and confirmed it by an oath, laying his hands on
thrice-holy things.

5. Now his Brethren and sons, that had been summoned for
the passing of their Father, together with the entire assembly
of the folk, devoted that night wherein Christ’s dear Confessor
had departed unto divine praises, in such wise that they seemed
no mourners for the dead, but a watch of Angels. When morn¬
ing came, the crowds that had come together, carrying branches
of trees and many wax lights, brought the holy body unto the
city of Assisi, with hymns and chants. Moreover, they passed
by the church of Saint Damian, where at that time that noble
virgin Clare, now glorified in heaven, abode cloistered with her


396 Life of St. Francis

Sisters; and there for a space they stayed, and set down the
holy body, adorned with those heavenly pearls, that it might
be seen and embraced by those holy virgins. Coming at length
with rejoicing unto the city, they laid the precious treasure that
they were bearing in the church of Saint George, with all
reverence. In that very place, Francis as a little boy had learned
his letters, and there it was that he first preached in after days,
and there, finally, he found his first resting-place.

6. Now the holy Father departed from the shipwreck of this
world in the year 1226 of the Lord’s Incarnation, on the fourth
day of October, at late even of a Saturday, and on the Sunday
he was buried.

At once the holy man began to shine in the glory of many
and great miracles, the light of the divine countenance being
uplifted upon him, so that the loftiness of his holiness that,
during his life, had been conspicuous in the world for the ruling
of men’s lives through its ensample of perfect uprightness, was,
now that he himself was reigning with Christ, approved from
heaven by miracles of divine power, so that belief might be
thoroughly confirmed. And since in divers parts of the world
the glorious marvels wrought by him, and the great blessings
won through him, were kindling many unto devotion unto
Christ, and inciting them unto veneration for the Saint himself
—so that men’s tongues, as well as these deeds, were loud in his
praise—it came unto the ears of the Supreme Pontiff, the lord
Gregory the Ninth, what great things God was working through
His servant Francis.

7. Of a truth, that Shepherd of the Church had been fully
assured of his marvellous holiness, not alone by hearing of the
miracles wrought after his death, but also by proofs during his
life of what he had seen with his own eyes, and handled with
his own hands, and he had put perfect faith therein; so that,
by reason of this, he now in no wise doubted but that Francis
was glorified of the Lord in heaven. Wherefore, that he might
act in accord with Christ, Whose Vicar he was, he was minded,
with devout consideration, to make the Saint famous on earth,
as one most worthy of all reverence. Moreover, to gain the
fullest assurance throughout the whole world for the glorifica¬
tion of that most holy man, he caused the miracles that were
known of him to be written and approved by trusty witnesses,
and then examined by those of the Cardinals that seemed least
favourable unto the business. When they had been diligently
discussed and approved of all, with the unanimous counsel and


His Canonisation


397

consent of his Brethren, and of all the Prelates that were then
in the Curia, he decreed that he should be canonised. Accord¬
ingly, he came in person unto the city of Assisi in the year of
the Lord’s Incarnation 1228, on the sixteenth day of July, a
Sunday, and with rites exceeding solemn, that it would take
long to narrate, he enrolled the blessed Father in the list of the
Saints.

8. Now in the year of the Lord 1230, the Brethren assembled
for a Chapter-General that was held at Assisi, and his body
consecrated unto the Lord was translated unto the Church built
in his honour on the twenty-fifth day of May. While that holy
treasure, signed with the seal of the Most High King, was being
removed, He Whose image it set forth deigned to work many
miracles, that by the fragrance of its healing power the hearts
of the faithful might be drawn to follow after Christ. Verily,
it was right fitting that the blessed bones of him, whom God
had made well-pleasing unto Him and beloved of Him in life,
and whom He had carried unto heaven by the grace of con¬
templation, like Enoch, and had borne aloft into the sky in a
fiery chariot, by his fervour of love, like Elias — being now
among the heavenly Spring flowers of the everlasting planting,
should flourish out of their place with a marvellous fragrance.

9. Furthermore, even as that blessed man in life had been
distinguished by marvellous tokens of virtue, so too- from the
day of his departure unto this present time, he doth shine
throughout the divers parts of the world in the light of famed
marvels and miracles, the divine power glorifying him. For
the blind and the deaf, the dumb and the lame, the dropsical
and the paralysed, the possessed and the leper, the shipwrecked
and the captive, have found succour by has merits, and in all
diseases, needs, and perils he hath been an aid. But in that
many dead have been miraculously raised through him, there
is made manifest unto the faithful the glorious working of the
power of the Most High, exalting His Saint, and His is the
honour and glory throughout the endless ages of eternity*
Amen.


HERE ENDETH THE LIFE OF THE
BLESSED FRANCIS


PRINTED BV THE TEMPLE PRESS AT LETCHWORTH IN GREAT BRITAIN


A LIST OF SOME VOLUMES

IN THE

THEOLOGY & PHILOSOPHY SECTION

(Full catalogue on application)

37-39. Robertson's Sermons. (3 vols.) Introduction by
Canon Barnett.

These three volumes include the complete series of sermons of F. W. Robertson of
Brighton (1816-1853). The original four volumes have been re-arranged by Canon
Barnett, who supplies a “ Commendation.”

40. Latimer’s Sermons. Introduction by Canon Beeching.

The powerful sermons of Hugh Latimer (1490-1555), Protestant Martyr and some
time Bishop of Worcester, are here edited in one vol., including the curious “ Sermons
on the Cards ”—“ Let therefore every Christian man and woman play at these cards.”

90. Butler’s Analogy of Religion. Intro, by Rev. R. Bayne.

By “ The Analogy of Religion Natural and Revealed ” Bishop Butler (1692-1752) is
said to have done for theology what Bacon did for science. “ Others had established
the historical and prophetical grounds of the Christian religion ”—the words are from
the inscription written by Southey for his monument in Bristol Cathedral—“ it was
reserved for him to develop its analogy to the constitution and course of nature.”

91. Law’s Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life.

The work of William Law (1686-1761) is still exercising the profound influence which
it originally had on the Wesleys.

92. Browne’s Religio Medici, etc. Introduction by Prof.

C. H. Herford.

This volume contains not only the most famous work of Sir Thomas Browne (1605-
1682), but also “ Hydriotaphia: Urn Burial” (1658), “ Letter to a Friend upon the
occasion of the death of his intimate Friend ” (1690), “ The Garden of Cyrus ” (1658),
and “ Christian Morals ” (1690).

93. The New Testament.

The various books of the New Testament are here arranged by Principal Lindsay as
far as possible in chronological order: that is, “ in the order in which they came to those
in the first century who believed in Our Lord.” The arbitrary divisions into chapters
and verses have been omitted, but are indicated at the top of the page.

146,147. The Kingdom of Christ. (2 vols.) By F. D. Maurice.

“ Hints on the Principles, Ordinances, and Constitution of the Catholic Church, in
letters to a member of the Society of Friends.” Frederick Denison Maurice (1805-1872)
was with Charles Kingsley the leader of the Christian Socialist movement, founder of
the Working Men’s College, and friend of Gladstone, Tennyson, and John Sterling.

200. The Confessions of Saint Augustine. Translated with

an Introduction by E. B. Pusey, D.D.

“ The greatest of the Latin fathers ” was bom in Numidia in 353 a.d., baptised by
St. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, in 387, and about ten years later produced the Con¬
fessions, a spiritual autobiography, which even in his own lifetime was deeply studied.

201, 202. Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity. (2 vols.)

By Richard Hooker. Intro, by Rev. Ronald Bayne.

Richard Hooker (1554-1600), whose life was written by Izaak Walton, died before
completing his great work on Church government and discipline, which was probably
suggested by the Puritan attacks on the moderation of his own attitude. He is still an
authority upon the whole range of moral and political principles.

253-256. Ancient Hebrew Literature, being the Old Testa¬
ment and Apocrypha arranged with an Introduction by
Rev. R. Bruce Taylor. (4 vols.)

It was obviously impossible to adopt for the Old Testament and the Apocrypha, a
national literature extending over a period of nearly a thousand years, the chronological
arrangement adopted by Principal Lindsay in the New Testament {see vol. 93).

The Rev. R. Bruce Taylor has followed a topical arrangement, grouping the books
of the Old Testament with those of the Apocrypha according to their subjects, under
the headings *' Pentateuch,” “ Early and Later Historical Books,” “ Prophets,” etc.


•JTIldS aq; TIO aOUOJSIXa

Xjsa s;i joj ;uapuadap Xfpai si ppoM jBuaa;xa aq; ;uq; uoi;daoaad-asuas jo sisXjbub ub
Xq SMoqs aq ‘ajX;s oiuo;Big jsoiups ‘jBap siq UJ ‘oiunn pub aqooq uaaA\;aq Xqdosopqd
qsqSug ui aanSg ;sa;Bao3 aq; si ‘auXojg jo doqsig ‘(ES^i- 589 1 ) Xapqaag a3aoa0

■X-espun ‘a ‘V ; ojjui *noisia aho:eihx Avajtf
aNv ‘snoNOxmg onv svxah NaaAvxaa sanooxvig
‘aoaaaAvoNX nykoh saaxiONiHg s^AsxaHHag aoHSig *£8' t7
•pjojxo 'oSonoo loni'Bg jo Moipg 'iC'esping
•q -y Aq uotpnpoxpii nTH u q°f ^8L ’J^w

-NasAOO aAixvxNasaxaag ‘Axaaaig ‘wsiNvravxraxQ ’z%b

•saaqdosopqd uBima^ tuapoui jo poqos aq; puB (0991-9651) sa;jBOsaa P
uia;sXs aq; uaaM;aq qui j Suijoauuoo aq; si ‘z£9i ui uiBpaa;suiy ;« uaoq Maf asanSnjaog
b ‘papBo os <t ‘uBui pa;BOixo;ui-po0 „ aq; ‘szouids up pipauag jo Xqdosopqd aqx

■Aq.isj0Ainfi p’j'baj^h P ‘vweAmu'es -jojg Aq 'oxjui
•opCog AVQjpuy Aq po^su^ix 'oxa ‘somxg s.vzonixs ’ 18 *

•q;Bap jo aoua;uas aapun uosiad ui aiojAi Xq ua;;iJM sbm ‘uiioj ;uasaid
sqi ui pa;uiadaa aaojaq jaAau <t ‘;aojuio3 jo anSopia „ aqx M '«ido;fl „ siq ui si qo;qA\ jo
jo’oad aq; rpuBjSug ui aousssiBuag aq; jo sppaaq aq; jo auo Xguaa sbm ‘q;Bap siq ;aiu
aq qaiqM joj q;iBj aq; jo a;ids'ui ‘££Si ui *hia Xauan Xq papsaqaq ‘aaopi SBUioqx *S

•treS'ejxO sSpnf

Aq Av ssg Ajojonpoijui *0JO]y s^rnoqx J TS ^3 'NOixva
-narax xsniyov xaoarcoo ao anooavia an x aNV viaoxQ *19^

*XBp-o; jBiptHBj si ;i qoiqM ui
rmnj gq; o;ur XpBoipBJd ;qSnoaq sbm ‘1991 puB to9i ui suoisiaoj ^uanbasqns Xq ‘qoog
jaXBjg siqx •p UE I 9a a u ? pspaaooid X;iBd Suis;ubii§uimz aq; Xq pa;BOOApB saSuuqa
poi3jn;if aq; qoiqM o; ;iui‘q auiai;xa aq; sqjBin ‘.ia;Bi sjBaX aajq; pasuoq;nB ‘puooas sqx
•auu;oop uiBpaoun ao asps; jo paanoABS ;Bq; Suiq;XuB uioa; uiaq; Xjiond puB ‘qsijSug ui
piBS Suiaq aiaq; Xq ajdoad aq; jossbui aq; o; aiqiStna;ui saoiAias aq; aqBiu ;nq a[;;H saop
*6t5i jo X;iiuaojiun jo ;oy aq^ Xq pasuoqjnB ‘;saig sq; ‘‘HIA^ n3 H Xqqoaqo ui ppq uaaq
pBq iStSi in *ia pJBMpg jo uoissaooB aq; ot I M ‘saauuojaa aq; jo aouanpui aq; puu
jauiuBJO doqsiqqoay aapun paaudaad ‘qoanqg qsijSug aq; jo saoiAjas om; ;sag aq; jo

ua^saonoto JO doqsig -A9g jqSxg 0qj Aq uoijonpoijux
XA a^YAvag ao sxoog-aaAVHX onooss aNV xsaig *8^^

^•XassXpo ,, aq; qqiAV uouiuioo ui Suiq;
-auios jbj os SBq ‘Bipuj ujaq;nos jo sassanaappM aq; ui aouiad b jo saanjuaApu puB sSui
-aapuBAV aq; 3uiqiaosap <4 ‘bubXbuib>j ,, aqx ^/pTBJH ,, aq; o; paasduioo aq aaojaaaq; Xbui
pus ‘aiBqs b qoo; Bipuj uaaq;aofq jo saoBa aqqaBM oq; pe qoiqA\ ui ibm ;b 30 § b o; sa;Bpj
ti BjBJBqqBqBpt „ ail! 'soida ;b 3 j 2 om; jo s;sBoq ‘aoaaaQ ;uaiouy aqp ‘Bipuj ;uaiouy

•310 'JPQ qs0inog 0qj Aq p 0 ptqsiiuix
pm? p0SU0pnOQ -YXYaYHaYHY]/^ 3 HX ONV VNVAVHVg 3 HX

•SBJUS

aq; jo ;uauia3uBJJB iBOi^ojonoaqo aq; ui puB aaaqdsouijB jBjuaiao aq; jo uoi;ua;aa aq;
ui q;oq aps jo uoisaaA UMOuq-aa;;aq aq; o; jouadns aq o; piBS si paA\pog *f jo uoi;
-bisubj; aqx ‘spiXpug jo oaan b ‘pauiuiBqoj^ jo Xppuosaad ;b3j3 aq; jo uoissaadxo aq;
;nq ‘ppoM^oq; jo suoi3paa ;BaaS aq; jo auo jo qoog paaoBS aq; Xpo ;ou si uBaog aqx

•qjnoqoSi'BH -q *A 0g

Aq uoijonpojjux •noij'B{su , eJX sqpAvpog -nvho^x ^hx ' 08 ^

•ppoM aq; jo sqooq snoiSipa ;BaaS
aq; jo auo sb quBa ;snui ^aouanqui s;i jo ;ua;xa aq; Xq paSpnC aq ;i ji 'zLL i uopuog ui
pgip ‘g 89 i uqoqqoo;s ui uaoq ‘oqM ‘3aoquapaA\s pnuBuig jo qaoM ajqB;ou ;soui aqx

"n^H onv NaAvapj s^aoaNaaaMS ‘6l£

<4 -;siaqg jo X;iuBainq qSnojoq; aq; jo uoi;iuSooaa b o;
aiaq; pBoaa o; ua;;iJM sbm qooq b ua’qM paqooqs ;BqMauios puB pasudans aaaM ajdoad
snoi9ipa jo X;uofBui aq; „ ‘aSpog JaAijo J !S s ^ s « <o2b sre9it ^ ‘xopoq;ao

Xj;oia;s si qooq aqx u *ouioh aaoH »» P uoipopqnd suouiXuoub aq; aa;jB SjBaX anoj ‘6981
ui aSpiaquiBg ;b Xjo;sih uaapojv jo aossajoig auiBoaq (£68i-t£8i) Xapag •£ ajs

•02pog j0aijo *\S uoijonpoijuj *^01005 *f jig Ag
•jsxrqg snsojf jo x-iom. pn'B ojij sqj jo Azaius y : okoh aooa *£o£

XjBaqig s ( UBUiXaaAg


Works on Theology and Philosophy

484. A Kempis’ Imitation of Christ.

485. The Little Flowers, The Mirror of Perfection,

and The Life of St. Francis. The Little Flowers
* has been translated anew and an Introduction written
by Thomas Okey.

little works, the first is a storehouse of miracle and legend woven
round the life of the Saint; the second a book of devotion compiled by one of his
followers; and the last the official biography written by his firm friend.

547. Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle. Translated by

W. P. Chase. Introduction by Prof. J. A. Smith, M.A.

The most original book of the practical conduct of life we have, this is by no means
a dry treatise on morals; but a handbook for citizens and students alike* and Prof.
Smith clearly shows its place in the scheme of Aristotle’s philosophy.

548, 549* Treatise of Human Nature. (2 vols.) By David

Hume. Introductions by A. D. Lindsay.

Hume as an exponent of Human Nature, bringing its science to a final test, will never
be out of date; and his wonderfully modem style makes this book a comparatively easy
one, as philosophy goes.

569. The Signature of all Things; with Other Writings.

By Jacob Boehme. Introduction by Clifford Bax.

The true mystic and “ Teutonick Philosopher ” (as he was called by his first. English
readers) and William Law’s inspirer is here represented by three works which best
serve to introduce his divine philosophy to the outer public.

570. Descartes: A Discourse of Method and Meditation

on the First Philosophy. Translated by Prof. John
Veitch. Introduction by A. D. Lindsay.

Two essential treatises of the Cartesian philosophy, showing his theory of the priority
of mind over matter, and their divine origin.

63 5 * Swedenborg’s The Divine Love and Wisdom. Intro¬
duction by Sir Oliver Lodge.

636. Apologia Pro Vita Sua. By Cardinal John Henry

Newman.

Charles Kingsley by his impulsive attack of 1864 reflecting on the Roman Catholic
easy conception of truth roused Newman to the point of resentment which led to the
writing of this unique religious autobiography.

637. Wade Robinson’s Sermons. Intro, by Rev. F. B. Meyer.

The Rev. Wade Robinson exerted a powerful influence in his lifetime over the
thinkers and religious students in all churches. His conception of the Christ who was,
and is now, a citizen, and his “ Philosophy of the Atonement,” are often quoted.

658. Ihe Divine Providence. By Emanuel Swedenborg.

Emerson said that the moral and spiritual insight of Swedenborg entitled him to a
place among the law-givers of mankind that has been vacant for ages.

690. The Christian Year. Intro, by the late Principal Shairp.

The Christian Year” as much as Keble College, Oxford, is Keble’s monument.
Besides its interest as a book of the sincere devotional verse, it reflects nature and the
life of the English countryside with delicate lyric grace and melody.

691. Hobbes’ Leviathan. Introduction by A. D. Lindsay.

692-693. Malthus on the Principles of Population. (2 vols.)

Introduction by Walter T. Layton, M.A. Camb.

The Rev. T. R. Malthus was a true political economist, and a philosophical reformer*
and his work is one which seriously attempts to solve a problem that lies at the root of
our political economy.


LONDON: J. M. DENT AND SONS LTD.
