The Crime of Sylvestre Bonnard (Anatole France, 1906)
==========================================================
France's beloved debut novel; the kindly-scholar archetype of French letters. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (cu31924027269079).

57173X8 >'«>•;


/96C


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


THE

Joseph Whitmore Barry
dramatic library


THE GIFT OF
TWO FRIENDS

OF Cornell University


1934


D^e


3 1924 027 269 079


Cornell University
Library


The original of tliis book is in
tine Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


E En-glish Review


-\TOLE FR AXCK


]3Y W. ROTHliXSTETN


THE

CRIME OF SYLYESTRE BONMRD

{MEMBER OF TEE INSTITUTE)


BY

ANATOLE FEANOE


THE TRANSLATION AND INTRODUCTION BY

lafcadIo hearn


NEW YORK

HARPEK & BROTHERS, FRANKLIN SQUARE

1906



4.lt rig/itt raservatU


CONTENTS.


©art IT. Pio.

THE LOG 1

©art iriT.

THE DAUGHTER OF CLEMENTINE 80

The Fairy 80

Thb Little Saint-Geokge ....... ill


INTRODUCTION.


" Let us love the books which please us," observes
that exceUent French critic, Jules Lemaitre — "and
cease to trouble ourselves about classifications and
schools of literature." This generous exhortation
seems especially appropriate in the case of Anatole
France. The author of " Le Crime de Sylvestre Bon-
nard" is not classifiable, — though it would be difficult
to name any other modern French writer by whom
the finer emotions have been touched with equal deU-
cacy and sympathetic exquisiteness.

If by EeaUsm we mean Truth, which alone gives
value to any study of human nature, we have in Ana-
tole France a very dainty realist ; — ^if by Romanticism
we understand that unconscious tendency of the artist
to elevate truth itself beyond the range of the famil-
iar, and into the emotional realm of aspiration, then
Anatole France is betimes a romantic. And, never-
theless, as a hterary figure he stands alone : neither
by his distinctly Parisian refinement of method, nor
yet by any definite characteristic of style, can he be


vi INTRODUCTION.

successfully attached to any special group of writers.
He is essentially of Paris, indeed;— Ms Hterary train-
ing could have been acquired in no other atmosphere :
,his light grace of emotional analysis, his artistic epi-
cureanism, the vividness and quickness of his sensa-
tions, are French as his name. But he has followed
no school-traditions; and the charm of his art, at
once so impersonal and sympathetic, is wholly his
own. -How marvellously well the author has suc-
ceeded in disguising himself ! It is extremely diffi-
cult to believe that the diary of Sylvestre Bonnard
could have been written by a younger man ; yet the
dehghtful octogenarian is certainly a young man's
dream.

M. Anatole France belongs to a period of change, —
a period in which a new science and a new philosophy
have transfigured the world of ideas with unprece-
dented suddenness. All the arts have been more or
less influenced by new modes of thought, — ^reflecting
the exaggerated materialism of an era of transition.
The reaction is now setting in ; — ^the creative work of
fine minds already reveals that the Art of the Future
must be that which appeals to the higher emotions
alone. Material Nature has already begun to lure
less, and human nature to gladden more ; — the knowl-
edge of Spiritual Evolution follows luminously upon
our recognition of Physical Evolution ; — and the hori-


INTRODUCTION. vii

zon of human fellowship expands for us with each
fresh acquisition of knowledge, — as the sky-circle ex-
pands to those who climb a height. The works of
fiction that will live are not the creations of men who
have blasphemed the human heart, but of men who,
like Anatoie France, have risen above the literary ten-
dencies of their generation, — never doubting humanity,
and keeping their pages Irreproachably pure. In the
art of Anatoie France there is no sensuousness : his
study is altogether of the nobler emotions. What the
pessimistic coarseness of self-called "Naturalism" has
proven itself totally unable to feel, he paints for us
truthfully, simply, and touchingly, — the charm of age,
in aU its gentleness, lovableness, and indulgent wis-
dom. The dear old man who talks about his books to
his cat, who has remained for fifty years true to the
memory of the girl he could not win, and who, in spite
of his world-wide reputation for scholarship, finds him-
self so totally helpless in aU business matters, and so
completely at the mercy of his own generous impulses,
— may be, indeed, as the most detestable Mademoiselle
Pr6f ere observes, " a child " ; but his childishness is
only the dehghtful freshness of a pure and simple
heart which could never become aged. His artless
surprise at the malevolence of evil minds, his toler-
ations of juvenile impertinence, his beautiful compre-
hension of the value of fife and the sweetness of youth,


viii INTRODUCTION.

his self-disparagements and delightful compunctions
of conscience, his absolute unselfishness and incapacity
to nourish a resentment, his fine gentle irony which ,
never wounds and always amuses : these, and many
other traits, combine to make him one of the most
intensely living figures created in modern French
literature. It is quite impossible to imagine him as
unreal ; and, indeed, we feel to him as to some old
friend unexpectedly met with after years of absence, \
whose face and voice are perfectly familiar, but whose
name wiU not be remembered until he repeats it him-,
self. "We might even imagine ourselves justified in
doubting the statement of M. Lemaitre that Anatole
France was not an old bachelor, but a comparative-
ly young man, and a married man, when he imag-
ined Sylvestre Bonnard ; — we might, in short, refuse
to beheve the book not strictly autobiographical, —
but for the reflection that its other personages five
with the same vividness for us as does the Mem-
ber of the Institute. Therese, the grim old house-
keeper, so simple and faithful; Madame and Mon-
sieur de Gabry, those dehghtf ul friends ; the glorious,
brutal, heroic Uncle Victor; the perfectly lovable
Jeanne: these figures are not less sympathetic in
their several roles.

But it is not because M. Anatole France has rare
power to create original characters, or to reflect for


THE CRIME OF SYLYESTRE BONNARD.


IPart 11.— THE LOG.

Becemh&r ^, 1849.

I HAD put on my slippers and my dressing-gown. I
wiped away a tear with, which the north wind blowing
over the quay had obscured my vision. A bright fire
was leaping in the chimney of my study. Ice-crystals,
shaped Mke fern-leaves, were sprouting over the win-
dow-panes, and concealed from me the Seine with its
bridges and the Louvre of the Valois.

I drew up my easy-chair to the hearth, and my
tahl&^olcmte, and took up so much of my place by the
fire as Hamilcar deigned to allow me. Hamilcar was
lying in front of the andirons, curled up on a cushion,
with his nose between his paws. His thick fine fur
rose and feU with his regular breathing. At my com-
ing, he slowly slipped a glance of his agate eyes at me
from between his half-opened lids, which he closed
again almost at once, thinking to himself, " It is noth-
ing ; it is only my friend."

" Hamilcar," I said to him, as I stretched my legs —
1


2 THE CRIME OF SYLVESTSE BONNARD.

" Hamilcar, somnolent Prince of the City of Books —
thou guardian nocturnal ! Like that Divine Cat who
combated the impious in Heliopolis— in the night of
the great combat — thou dost defend from vile nibblers
those books which the old savant acquired at the cost
of his slender savings and indefatigable zeal. Sleep,
Hamilcar, softly as a sultana, in this library, that shel-
ters thy military virtues ; for verily in thy person are
united the formidable aspect of a Tartar warrior and
the slumbrous grace of a woman of the Orient. Sleep, i
thou heroic and voluptuous HamUcar, while awaiting \
that moonlight hour in which the mice will come forth
to dance before the 'Acta Sanctorum' of the learned
Bollandists!"

The beginning of this discourse pleased Hamilcar,
who accompanied it with a throat-sound like the song
of a kettle on the fire. But as my voice waxed louder,
Hamilcar notified me by lowering his ears and by
wrinkling the striped skin of his brow that it was bad
taste on my part to so declaim.

" This old-book man," evidently thought Hamilcar, ,
"talks to no purpose at all, while our housekeeper
never utters a word which is not full of good sense, ,
fuU of signification — containing either the announce- 1
ment of a meal or the promise of a whipping. One
knows what she says. But this old man puts together
a lot of sounds signifying nothing."

So thought Hamilcar to himself. Leaving him to
his reflections, I opened a book, which I began to read


THE CRIME OF 8TL7E8TRE BONNABD. 3

with interest ; for it was a catalogue of manuscripts.
I do not know any reading more easy, more fascinat-
ing, more delightful than that of a catalogue. The
one which I was reading — edited in 1824 by Mr.
Thompson, librarian to Sir Thomas Ealeigh — sins, it
is true, by excess of brevity, and does not offer that
character of exactitude which the archivists of my
own generation were the first to introduce into works
upon diplomatics and paleography. It leaves a good
deal to be desired and to be divined. This is perhaps
why I find myself aware, while reading it, of a state
of mind which in a nature more imaginative than
mine might be called reverie. I had allowed myself
to drift away thus gently upon the current of my
thoughts, when my housekeeper announced, in a tone
of ni-humor, that Monsieur Coccoz desired to speak
with me.

In fact, some one had sMpped into the Hbrary after
her. He was a little man — a poor little man of puny
appearance, wearing a thin jacket. He approached
me with a number of Uttle bows and sndles. But he
was very pale, and, although stiU young and alert, he
looked iU. I thought, as I looked at him, of a wound-
ed squirrel. He carried under his arm a green toilette,
which he put upon a chair ; then unfastening the four
corners of the toilette, he uncovered a heap of httle
yellow books.

" Monsieur," he then said to me, " I have not the
honor to be known to you. I am a book-agent, Mon-


4 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNARD.

sieur. I represent the leading houses of the capital,
and in the hope that you will kindly honor me with
your confidence, I take the Uberty to offer you a few
novelties."

Kind gods ! just gods ! such novelties as the homun-
culus Coccoz showed me ! The first volume that he
put in my hand was " L'Histoire de la Tour de Nesle,"
with the amours of Marguerite de Bourgogne and the
Captain Buridan.

"It is a historical book," he said to me, with a
smile — " a book of real history."

" In that case," I replied, " it must be very tiresome ;
for all the historical books which contain no lies are
extremely tedious. I write some authentic ones my-
self ; and if you were unlucky enough to carry a copy
of any of them from door to door you would run the
risk of keeping it all your life in that green-baize of
yours, without ever finding even a cook foolish enough
to buy it from you."

" Certainly, Monsieur," the little man answered, out
of pure good-nature.

And, all smiling again, he offered me the " Amours
d'Heloise et d'Abeilard ;" but I made him understand
that, at my age, I had no use for love-stories.

Still smiling, he proposed me the " Eegle des Jeux
de la Society" — piquet, besigue, 6carte, whist, dice,
draughts, and chess.

" Alas !" I said to him, " if you want to make me
remember the rules of besigue, give me back my old


THE CBIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNARD. 5

friend Bignan, with ■whom I used to play cards every
evening before the Five Acadenaies solemnly escorted
him to the cemetery ; or else bring down to the friv-
olous level of human amusements the grave intelli-
gence of Hamilcar, whom you see on that cushion,
for he is the sole companion of my evenings."

The little man's smile became vague and uneasy.

" Here," he said, " is a new oolleotion of society
amusements — ^jokes and puns — with a recipe for chang-
ing a red rose to a white rose^"

I told him that I had fallen out with roses for a long
time, and that, as to jokes, I was satisfied with those
which I unconsciously permitted myself to make in
the course of my scientific labors.

The homunculus offered me his last book, with his
last smile. He said to me :

"Here is the 'Clef de Songes' — the 'Key of
Dreams' — with the explanation of any dreams that
anybody can have ; dreams of gold, dreams of robbers,
dreams of death, dreams of falling from the top of a
tower. ... It is exhaustive."

I had taken hold of the tongs, and, brandishing
them energetically, I repHed to my commercial vis-
itor:

" Yes, my friend ; but those dreams and a thousand
others, joyous or tragic, are aU summed up in one —
the Dream of Life ; is your little yellow book able to
give me the key to that 1"

" Tes, Honsieur," answered the homunculus ; " the


6 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD.

book is complete, and is not dear — one franc twenty-
five centimes, Monsieur."

I called my housekeeper — for there is no beU in my
room — and said to her :

" Th6rese, Monsieur Coccoz — ^whom I am going to
ask you to show out — ^has a book here which might
interest you : the ' Key of Dreams.' I Will be very
glad to buy it for you."

My housekeeper responded :

" Monsieur, when one has not even time to dream
awake, one has stUl less time to dream asleep. Thank
God, my days are just enough for my work and my
work for my days, and I am able to say every night,
' Lord, bless Thou the rest which I am going to take.'
I never dream, either on my feet or in bed; and I
never mistake my eider-down coverlet for a devil, like
my cousin did ; and, if you will allow me to give my
opinion about it, I think you have books .enough
here now. Monsieur has thousands and thousands of
books, which simply turn his hesld ; and as for me, I
have just two, which are quite enough for all my wants
and purposes — my Catholic prayer-book and my ' Cui-
siniere Bourgeoise.' "

And with these words my housekeeper helped the
little man to fasten up his stock again within the green
toilette.

The homunculus Coccoz had ceased to smile. His
relaxed features took such an expression of suffering
that I felt sorry to have made fun of so unhappy a


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 7

man. I called him back, and told him that I had
caught a glimpse of a copy of the " Histoire d'EsteUe
et de Nemorin," which he had among his books ; that
I was very fond of shepherds and shepherdesses, and
that I would be quite willing to purchase, at a rea-
sonable price, the story of those two perfect lovers.

" I will sell you that book for one franc twenty-five
centimes, Monsieur," replied Coccoz, whose face at once
beamed with joy. " It is historical ; and you will be
pleased with it. I know now just what suits you. I
see that you are a connoisseur. To-morrow I wiU bring
you the ' Crimes des Papes.' It is a good book. I
will bring you the edition d^amatev/r, with colored
plates."

I begged him not to do anything of the sort, and
sent him away happy. "When the green toilette and
the agent had disappeared in the shadow of the corri-
dor I asked my housekeeper whence this httle man
had dropped upon us.

" Dropped is the word," she answered ; " he dropped
on us from the roof. Monsieur, where he lives with his
wife."

" You say he has a wife, Therese ? That is marvel-
lous ! women are very strange creatures ! This one
must be a very unfortunate httle woman."

" I don't reaUy know what she is," answered The-
rese ; " but every morning I see her trailing a silk
dress covered with grease-spots over the stairs. She
makes soft eyes at people. And, in the name of com-


8 THE CBIMB OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

mon-sense ! does it become a woman that has been re-
ceived here out of charity to make eyes and to wear
dresses like that ? For they allowed the couple to oc-
cupy the attic during the time the roof was being re-
paired, in consideration of the fact that the husband
is sick and the wife in an interesting condition. The
concierge even says that the pains came on her this
morning, and that she is now confined. They must
have been very badly off for a child !"

" Therese," I replied, " they had no need of a child,
doubtless. But Nature had decided they should bring
one into the world ; Nature made them faU into her
snare. One must have exceptional prudence to defeat
Nature's schemes. Let us be sorry for them, and not
blame them ! As for silk dresses, there is no young
woman who does not Kke them. The daughters of
Eve adore adornment. Tou yourself, Therese — who
are so serious and sensible — what a fuss you make
when you have no white apron to wait at table in!
But, tell me, have they got everything necessary in
their attic?"

" How could they have it, Monsieur ?" my house-
keeper made answer. " The husband, whom you have
just seen, used to be a jewelry-peddler — at least, so
the concierge teUs me — and nobody knows why he
stopped selling watches. Tou have just seen that he
is now selhng almanacs. That is no way to make an
honest living, and I never will believe that God's bless-
ing can come to an almanac-peddler. Between our-


THE CBIME OF 8YLVMBTBE BONNABD. 9

selves, the wife looks to me for all the world like a
good-for-nothing — a Marie-couohe-toi-ld. I think she
would be just as capable of bringing up a child as I
would be of playing the guitar. Nobody seems to
know where they came from; but I am sure they
must have come by Misery's coach from the country
of Scms-souci.

" Wherever they have come from, Therese, they are
unfortunate ; and their attic is cold."

'■'■ Pwrdi! — ^the roof is broken in several places, and
the rain comes in by streams. They have neither
furniture nor clothing. I don't think cabinet-mak-
ers and weavers work much for Christians of that
sect !"

"That is very sad, Therese; a Christian woman
much less weU provided for than this pagan, Hamil-
car here! — ^what does she have to say?"

" Monsieur, I never speak to those people ; I don't
know what she says or what she sings. But she sings
aU day long ; I hear her from the stairway whenever
I am going out or coming in."

" "Well ! the heir of the Coccoz family will be able
to say, hke the Egg in the village riddle : ' Jfa mere
me fit en chcmtcmt.' * The Uke happened in the case of
Henry lY. When Jeanne d'Albret felt herself about
to be confined she began to sing an old Beamaise
canticle :

" My mother sang when she brought me into the world."


10 THE CRIME OF STL7E8TBE BONNABD.

" ' Notre-Dame du bout du pont,
Venez S mon aide en cette heure!
Priez le Dieu du ciel
Qu'il me dfilivre vite,
Qu'il me donne un gar9on!'

" It is certainly unreasonable to bring little unfortu-
nates into the world. But the thing is done every
day, my dear Th^rese, and aU the philosophers on earth
will never be able to reform the siUy custom. Madame
Coccoz has followed it, and she sings. That is credit-
able, at all events ! But, tell me, Th^rese, have you
not put on the soup to boil to-day ?"

" Yes, Monsieur ; and it is time for me to go and
skim it."

" Good ! but don't forget, Therese, to take a good
bowl of soup out of the pot and carry it to Madame
Coccoz, our Attic neighbor."

My housekeeper was on the point of leaving the
room when I added, just in time :

" Therese, before you do anything else, please call
your friend the porter, and tell him to take a good bun-
dle of wood out of our stock and carry it up to the attic
of those Coccoz folks. See, above all, that he puts a
first-class log in the lot — a real Christmas log. As for
the homunculus, if he comes back again, do not allow
either himself or any of his yeUow books to come in

here."

Having taken aU these little precautions with the
refined egotism of an old bachelor, I returned to my
catalogue again.


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNARD. n

With what surprise, with what emotion, with what
anxiety did I therein discover the following mention,
which I cannot even now copy without feeling my
hand tremble :

"LA LiOENBE D0R£E BE JACQUES BE GENES (Jacques
de Voragine); — traduction fransaABe, petit in-i.

"This MS. of the fourteenth century contains, besides the tolerably
complete translation of the celebrated work of Jacques de Voragine,
1. The Legends of Saints Ferr^ol, Ferrution, Germain, Vincent, and
Droctoveus; 2. A poem On the JUiraeulous Burial of Monsieur Saint- Ger-
main of Auxerre. This translation, as well as the legends and the poem,
are due to the Clerk Alexander.

"This MS. is written upon vellum. It contains a great number of
illuminated letters, and two finely executed miniatures, in a rather im-
perfect state of conservation: — one represents the Purification of the
Virgin, and the other the Coronation of Proserpine."

What a discovery! Perspiration moistened my
forehead, and a veil seemed to come before my eyes.
I trembled; I flushed; and, without being able to
speak, I felt a sudden impulse to cry out at the top
of my voice.

What a treasure! For more than forty years I
had been making a special study of the history of
I Christian Gaul, and particularly of that glorious Ab-
' bey of Saint-Germain-des-Pres, whence issued forth
those King-Monks who founded our national dynasty.
Now, despite the culpable insufficiency of the descrip-
tion given, it was evident to me that the MS. of the
Clerk Alexander must have come from the great Ab-
bey. Everything proved this fact. All the legends
added by the translator related to the pious foundation


12 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD.

of the Abbey by King Cbildebert. Then the legend
of Saint-Droctoveus was particularly significant ; be-
ing the legend of the first abbot of my dear Abbey.
The poem in French verse on the burial of Saint-
Germain led me actually into the nave of that vener-
able basilica which was the wmhiTAGus of Christian
Gaul.

The " Golden Legend " is in itself a vast and gra-
cious work. Jacques de Voragine, Definitor of the
Order of Saint-Dominic, and Archbishop of Gtoes,
collected in the thirteenth century the various legends
of Catholic saints, and formed so rich a compilation
that from aU the monasteries and castles of the time
there arose the cry : " This is the ' Golden Legend.' "
The " Legende Doree " was especially opulent in Koman
hagiography. Edited by an Italian monk, it reveals
its best merits in the treatment of matters relating to
the terrestrial domains of Saint Peter. Voragine can
only perceive the greater saints of the Occident as
through a cold mist. For this reason the Aquitanian
and Saxon translators of the good legend-writer were
careful to add to his recital the lives of their own
national saints.

I have read and collated a great many manuscripts
of the " Golden Legend." I know aU those described
by my learned colleague, M. Pauhn Paris, in his hand-
some catalogue of the MSS. of the Bibhotheque du
Eoi. There were two among them which especially
drew my attention.' One is of the fourteenth cen-


THE CRIME OF BTLVE8TBE BONNABD. 13

tury, and contains a translation of Jean Belet; the
other, younger by a century, includes the version of
Jacques Vignay. Both come from the Colbert collec-
tion, and were placed on the shelves of that glorious
Colbertine library by the Librarian Baluze — whose
name I can never pronounce without uncovering my
head; for even in the century of the giants of erudi-
tion, Baluze astounds by his greatness. I know also
a very curious codex of the Bigot collection; I know
seventy-four printed editions of the work, commenc-
ing with the venerable ancestor of all — ^the Gothic of
Strasburg, begun in 1471, and finished in 1476. But
no one of those MSS., no one of those editions, con-
tains the legends of Saints Ferreol, Ferrution, Grer-
main, Vincent, and Droctoveus; no one bears the
name of the Clerk Alexander ; no one, in fine, came
from the Abbey of Saint-Germain-des-Pres. Com-
pared with the MS. described by Mr. Thompson, they
are only as straw to gold. I have seen with my eyes,
I have touched with my fingers, an incontrovertible
testimony to the existence of this document. But the
document itself — ^what has become of it ? Sir Thomas
Kaleigh went to end his days by the shores of the
Lake of Como, whither he carried with him a part
of his literary wealth. Where did the books go
after the death of that aristocratic collector? Where
could the manuscript of the Clerk Alexander have
gone?
"And why," I asked myself, "Vhy should I have


14 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

learned that this precious book exists, if I am never
to possess it — never even to see it? I would go to
seek it in the burning heart of Africa, or in the icy
regions of the Pole if I knew it were there. But
I do not know where it is. I do not know if it be
guarded in a triple-locked iron case by some jealous
bibliomaniac. I do not know if it be growing mouldy
in the attic of some ignoramus. I shudder at the
thought that perhaps its torn-out leaves may have
been used to cover the pickle-jars of some house-
keeper."


Atigust 30, 1850.

The heavy heat compelled me to walk slowly. I
kept close to the walls of the north quays; and, in
the lukewarm shade, the shops of the dealers in old
books, engravings, and antiquated furniture drew my
eyes and appealed to my fancy. Eummaging and
idling among these, I hastily enjoyed some verses
spiritedly thrown off by a poet of the Pleiad. I ex-
amined an elegant Masquerade by "Watteau. I felt,
with my eye, the weight of a two-handed sword,
a steel gorgerin, a morion. "What a thick helmet!
What a ponderous breastplate — Seignewr! A giant's
garb? No — ^the carapace of an insect. The men of
those days were cuirassed like beetles; their weak-
ness was within them. To-day, on the contrary, our
strength is interior, and our armed souls dwell in
feeble bodies.


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 15

. . . Here is a pastel-portrait of a lady of the old
time — the face, vague Mke a shadow, smiles ; and a
hand, gloved with an openwork mitten, retains upon
her satiny knees a lap-dog, with a ribbon about its
neck. That picture fills me with a sort of charming
melancholy. Let those who have no half-effaced pas-
tels in their own hearts laugh at me ! Like the horse
that scents the stable, I hasten my pace as I near
my lodgings. There it is— that great human hive,
in which I have a cell, for the purpose of therein
distilling the somewhat acrid honey of erudition. I
climb the stairs with slow efEort. Only a few steps
more, and I shall be at my own door. But I divine,
rather than see, a robe descending with a sound of
rustling silk. I stop, and press myself against the
balustrade to make room. The lady who is coming
down is bareheaded; she is young; she sings; her
eyes and teeth gleam in the shadow, for she laughs
with lips and eyes at the same time. She is cer-
tainly a neighbor, and a very familiar one. She holds
in her arms a pretty child, a little boy — quite naked,
like the son of a goddess ; he has a medal hung round
his neck by a little silver chain. I see him sucking
his thumbs and looking at me with those big eyes
so newly opened on this old universe. The mother
simultaneously looks at me in a sly, mysterious way ;
she stops — I think blushes a little — and holds out the
little creature to me. The baby has a pretty wrinkle
between wrist and arm, a pretty wrinkle about his


16 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD.

neck, and all over him, from head to foot, the dain-
tiest dimples laugh in his rosy flesh.

The mamma shows him to me with pride.

" Monsieur," she says, " don't you think he is very
pretty — ^my little boy?"

She takes one tiny hand, Mfts it to the child's own
lips, and, drawing out the darling pink fingers again
towards me, says,

" Baby, throw the gentleman a kiss."

Then, folding the little being in her arms, she flees
away with the agility of a cat, and is lost to sight in
a corridor which, judging by the odor, must lead to
some kitchen.

I enter my own quarters.

" Th^rese, who can that young mother be whom I
saw bareheaded in the stairway just now, with a
pretty little boy?"

And Therese rephes that it was Madame Oocooz.

I stare up at the ceiling, as if trying to obtain some
further illumination. Therese then recalls to me the
little book-peddler who tried to sell me almanacs last
year, while his wife was being confined.

"And Coccoz himself?" I asked.

I was answered that I would never see him again.
The poor little man had been laid away under ground,
without my knowledge, and, indeed, with the knowl-
edge of very few people, only a short time after the
happy delivery of Madame Coccoz. I learned that his
wife had been able to console herself ; I did likewise.


THE CRIME OF STL7E8TBE BONNABD. 17

" But, Th^rese," I asked, " has Madame Coccoz got
everything she needs in that attic of hers ?"

"You would be a great dupe, Monsieur," replied
my housekeeper, " if you should bother yourself about
that creature. They gave her notice to quit the attic
when the roof was repaired. But she stays there yet —
ia spite of the proprietor, the agent, the concierge,
and the bailiffs. I think she has bewitched every one
of them. She will leave that attic when she pleases.
Monsieur ; but she is going to leave in her own car-
riage. Let me teU you that !"

Therese reflected for a moment ; and then uttered
these words :

" A pretty face is a curse from Heaven."

" Then I ought to thank Heaven for having spare4
me that curse. But here ! put my hat and cane away.
I am going to amuse myself with a few pages of Mo-
r6ri. If I can trust my old fox-nose, we are goiag to
have a nicely flavored pullet for dinner. Look after
that estimable fowl, my girl, and spare your neigh-
bors, so that you and your old master may be spared
by them in turn."

Having thus spoken, I proceeded to follow out the
tufted ramifications of a princely genealogy.


Mwy 7, 1851.

I HAVE passed the winter according to the ideal of
the sages, in amgello cum Ubello; and now the swal-


18 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD.

lows of the Quai Malaquais find me on their return
about as when they left me. He who lives little,
changes little ; and it is scarcely living at all to use
up one's days over old texts.

Yet I feel myself to-day a little more deeply im-
pregnated than ever before with that vague melan-
choly which life distils. The economy of my intel-
ligence (I dare scarcely confess it to myself!) has re-
mained disturbed ever since that momentous hour in
which the existence of the manuscript of the Clerk
Alexander was first revealed to me.

It is strange that I should have lost my rest simply
on account of a few old sheets of parchment ; but it
is unquestionably true. The poor man who has no
desires possesses the greatest of riches ; he possesses
himself. The rich man who desires something is only
a wretched slave. I am just such a slave. The sweet-
est pleasures — ^those of converse with some one of a
dehcate and well-balanced mind, or dining out with a
friend — are insufficient to enable me to forget the
manuscript which I know that I want, and have been
wanting from the moment I knew of its existence.
I feel the want of it by day and by night : I feel the
want of it in all my joys and pains ; I feel the want
of it whUe at work or asleep.

I recall my desires as a child. How well I can now
comprehend the intense wishes of my early years !

I can see once more, with astonishing vividness, a
certain doU which, when I was eight years old, used


TEE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNARD. 19

to be displayed in the window of an ugly little shop
of the Eue de la Seiae. I cannot tell how it hap-
pened that this doll attracted me. I was very proud
of being a boy ; I despised little girls ; and I longed
impatiently for the day (which, alas ! has come) when
a strong white beard should bristle on my chin. I
played at being a soldier ; and, imder the pretext of
obtaining forage for my rocking-horse, I used to make
sad havoc among the plants my poor mother used to
keep on her window-sill. Manly amusements those,
I should say! And, nevertheless, I was consumed
with longing for a doU. Characters like Hercules
have such weaknesses occasionally. Was the one I
had fallen in love with at aU beautiful ? No. I can
see her now. She had a splotch of vermilion on either
cheek, short soft arms, horrible wooden hands, and
long sprawling legs. Her flowered petticoat was fas-
tened at the waist with two pins. Even now I can
see the black heads of those two pins. It was a de-
cidedly vulgar doU — smelt of the faubcmrg. I re-
member perfectly well that, even child as I was then,
before I had put on my first pair of trousers, I was
quite conscious in my own way that this doU lacked
grace and style — ^that she was gross, that she was
coarse. But I loved her in spite of that ; I loved her
just for that ; I loved her only ; I wanted her. My
soldiers and my drums had become as nothing in my
eyes. I ceased to stick sprigs of hehotrope and ve-
ronica into the mouth of my rocking-horse. That


20 THE CRIME OF BTLVE8TBE BONNASD.

doll was all the world to me. I invented ruses worthy
of a savage to oblige Yirginie, my nurse, to take me
by the little shop in the Eue de la Seine. I would
press my nose against the window until my nurse had
to take my arm and drag me away. " Monsieur Syl-
vestre, it is late, and your mamma will scold you."
Monsieur Sylvestre in those days made very little of
either scoldings or whippings. But his nurse lifted
him up like a feather, and Monsieur Sylvestre yielded
to force. In after-years, with age, he degenerated,
and sometimes yielded to fear. But at that time he
used to fear nothing.

I was unhappy. An unreasoning but irresistible
shame prevented me from telling my mother about
the object of my love. Thence all my sufferings.
For many days that doll, incessantly present in fancy,
danced before my eyes, stared at me fixedly, opened
her arms to me, assuming in my imagination a sort
of life which made her appear at once mysterious and
weird, and thereby all the more charming and desi^
able.

Finally, one day— a day I shall never forget— my
nurse took me to see my uncle. Captain Victor, who
had invited me to breakfast. I admired my uncle a
great deal, as much because he had fired the last
French cartridge at Waterloo, as because he used to
make with his own hands, at my mother's table, cer-
tain cJmpona-arVml, which he afterwards put into the i
chicory-salad. I thought that was very fine I My


THE CRIME OF S7LVESTBE BONNARD. 21

Uncle Victor also inspired me with much respect by
his f rogged coat, and still more by his way of turning
the whole house upside down from the moment he
came into it. Even now I cannot tell just how he
managed it, but I can affirm that whenever my Uncle
Victor found himself in any assembly of twenty per-
sons, it was impossible to see or to hear anybody but
him. My excellent father, I have reason to beheve,
never shared my admiration for Uncle Victor, who
used to sicken him with his pipe, gave him great
thumps in the back by way of friendhness, and ac-
cused him of lacking energy. My mother, though
always showing a sister's indulgence to the captain,
sometimes advised him to fondle the brandy-bottle a
little less frequently. But I had no part either in
these repugnances or these reproaches, and Uncle
Victor inspired me with the purest enthusiasm. It
was therefore with a feeling of pride that I entered
into the little lodging-house where he hved, in the
Eue Gu6n6gaud. The entire breakfast, served on a
small table close to the fire-place, consisted of pork-
meats and confectionery.

The Captain stuffed me with cakes and pure wine.
He told me of numberless injustices to which he had
been a victim. He complained particularly of the
Bourbons^ and as he neglected to tell me who the
Bourbons were, I got the idea — I can't tell how — ^that
the Bourbons were horse dealers established at "Water-
loo. The Captain, who never interrupted his talk ex-


22 THE OBIME OF 8TLYESTBE BONNABD.

cept for the purpose of pouring out wine, furthermore
made charges against a number of morveux, of jecm-
f esses, and " good-for-nothings" whom I did not know
anything about, but whom I hated from the bottom
of my heart. At dessert I thought I heard the Cap-
tain say my father was a man who could be led any-
where by the nose ; but I am not quite sure that I un-
derstood him. I had a buzzing in my ears; and it
seemed to me that the table was dancing.

My uncle put on his frogged coat, took his cha-
peau tromblon, and we descended to the street, which
seemed to me singularly changed. It looked to me as
if I had not been in it before for ever so long a time.
ISTevertheless, when we came to the Eue de la Seine,
the idea of my doll suddenly returned to my mind and
excited me in an extraordinary way. My head was
on fire. I resolved upon a desperate expedient. We
were passing before the window. She was there, be-
hind the glass — with her red cheeks, and her flow-
ered petticoat, and her long legs.

" Uncle," I said, with a great effort, " will you buy
that doll for me?"

And I waited.

" Buy a doll for a boy — sacrehleu !" cried my uncle,
in a voice of thunder. "Do you wish to dishonor
yourself? And it is that old Mag there that you
want ! "Well, I must compliment you, my young fel-
low ! If you grow up with such tastes as that, you
will never have any pleasure in Mf e ; and your com-


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNARD. 23

rades will call you a precious ninny. If you asked me
for a sword or a gun, my boy, I would buy them for
you with the last silver crown of my pension. But to
buy a doll for you — a thousand thunders ! — ^to disgrace
you ! Never in the world ! "Why, if I were ever to
see you playing with a puppet rigged out like that,
Monsieur, my sister's son, I would disown you for my
nephew !"

On hearing these words, I felt my heart so wrung
that nothing but pride — a diabolic pride — kept me
from crying.

My uncle, suddenly calming down, returned to his
ideas about the Bourbons ; but I, still smarting from
the blow of his indignation, felt an unspeakable shame.
My resolve was quickly made. I promised myself
never to disgrace myself — I firmly and forever re-
nounced that red-cheeked doll.

I felt that day, for the first time, the austere sweet-
ness of sacrifice.

Captain, though it be true that aU your life you
swore like a pagan, smoked like a beadle, and drank
like a bell-ringer, be your memory nevertheless hon-
ored — ^not merely because you were a brave soldier,
but also because you revealed to your little nephew in
petticoats the sentiment of heroism ! Pride and lazi-
ness had made you almost insupportable, O my Uncle
Victor ! — ^but a great heart used to beat under those
frogs upon your coat. You always used to wear, I
now remember, a rose in your button-hole. That rose


24 THE CRIME OF 8TLYESTRE BONNABD.

which you allowed, as I now have reason to believe,
the shop-girls to pluck for you — that large, open-
hearted flower, scatteriQg its petals to aU the winds,
was the symbol of your glorious youth. Tou despised
neither absinthe nor tobacco; but you despised life.
Neither delicacy nor common-sense could have been
learned from you, Captain ; but you taught me, even
at an age when my nurse had to wipe my nose, a les-
son of honor and self-abnegation that I wiU never
forget.

You have now been sleeping for many years in the
Cemetery of Mont-Parnasse, under a plain slab bear-
ing this epitaph :

CI-GIT

ARISTIDE VICTOR MALDENT,

CAPITAINE D'INFANTERIE,
CHEVALIER DE LA LEGION D'HONNEUR.

But such. Captain, was not the inscription devised by
yourself to be placed above those old bones of yours
— ^knocked about so long on fields of battle and in
haunts of pleasure. Among your papers was found
this proud and bitter epitaph, which, despite your last
wiU, none could have ventured to put upon your tomb :

CI-GIT
UN BRIGAND DE LA LOIRE.

" Thirese, we wiU get a wreath of immortelles to-
morrow, and lay them on the tomb of the ' Brigand
of the Loire.'" . . .

But Th^rese is not here. And how, indeed, could


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNARD. 25

she be near me, seeing that I am at the rond-pomt of
the Champs-Slys^es ? There, at the termination of the
avenue, the Arc de Triomphe, which bears under its
vaults the names of Uncle Victor's companions-in-
arms, opens its giant gate against the sky. The trees
of the avenue are unfolding to the sun of spring their
first leaves, stiU aU pale and chilly. Beside me the
carriages keep rolling by to the Bois de Boulogne.
Unconsciously I have wandered into this fashionable
avenue on my promenade, and halted, quite stupidly,
in front of a booth stocked with gingerbread and
decanters of Uquorice-water, each topped by a lemon.
A miserable little boy, covered with rags, which ex-
pose his chapped sMn, stares with widely opened eyes
at those sumptuous sweets which are not for such as
he. With the shamelessness of innocence he betrays
his longing. His round, fixed eyes contemplate a cer-
tain gingerbread man of lofty stature. It is a general,
and it looks a little like Uncle Victor, I take it, I
pay for it, and present it to the little pauper, who
dares not extend his hand to receive it — for, by reason
of precocious experience, he cannot believe in luck;
he looks at me, in the same way that certain big dogs
do, with the air of one saying, " You are cruel to make
fun of me like that !"

" Come, little stupid," I say to him, in that rough
tone I am accustomed to use, " take it — take it, and eat
it ; for you, happier than I was at your age, you can
satisfy your tastes without disgracing yourself." . . .


26 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

And you, Uncle Yiotor — ^you, whose manly figure has
been recalled to me by that gingerbread general, come,
glorious Shadow, help me to forget iny new doll. "We
remain forever children, and are always running after
new toys.


Scmwday.

In the oddest way that Coccoz family has become
associated in my mind with the Clerk Alexander.

" Th^r^se," I said, as I threw myself into my easy-
chair, " teU me if the httle Coccoz is well, and whether
he has got his first teeth yet — and bring me my shp-
pers."

" He ought to have them by this time. Monsieur,"
replied Ther^se ; " but I never saw them. The very
first fine day of spring the mother disappeared with
the child, leaving furniture and clothes and everything
behind her. They found thirty-eight empty pomade-
pots in the attic. It exceeds aU behef ! She had visit-
ors latterly ; and you may be quite sure she is not now
in a convent of nuns. The niece of the concierge says
she saw her driving about in a carriage on the boule-
vards. I always told you she would end badly."

" Th^rese," I replied, " that young woman has not
ended either badly or well as yet. "Wait until the
term of her life is over to judge her. And be careful
not to talk too much with that concierge. It seemed
to me — ^though I only saw her for a moment on the
stairs — ^that Madame Coccoz was very fond of her


THE CRIME OF STLVESTSE BONNABD. 21

child. For that mother's-love, at least, she deserves
credit."

" As far as that goes, Monsieur, certainly the little
one never wanted for anything. In all the Quarter
one could not have found a child better kept, or better
nourished, or more petted and coddled. Every God's-
day she puts a clean bib on him, and sings to him to
make him laugh from morning tiU night."

" Th6rese, a poet has said, ' That child whose mother
has never smiled upon him is worthy neither of the
table of the gods nor of the couch of the goddesses.' "


July 8, 1852.

Having been informed that the Chapel of the Virgiu
at Saint- Germain -des-Pres was being repaved, I en-
tered the church vnth the hope of discovering some
old inscriptions, possibly exposed by the labors of the
workmen. I was not disappointed. The architect
kindly showed me a stone which he had just had
raised up against the wall. I knelt down to look at
the inscription engraved upon that stone ; and then,
half aloud, I read in the shadow of the old apsis these
words, which made my heart leap :

" Oy-gist Al&xcmd/ife, moyne de cette egUse, qtd fist
mebbre em, a/rgent le rrwnton de Samt-Vineent et de Scdnt-
Amant et lejpie des Irmocens ; qui tovjov/rs en son vi-
vamtfutprewd^homme etvayllcmt. Priez powr VSme
de VmP


28 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

I wiped gently away with my handkerchief the dust
covering that burial-stone ; I could have kissed it.

" It is he ! it is Alexander !" I cried out ; and from
the height of the vaults the name feU back upon me
with a clang, as if broken.

The silent severity of the beadle, whom I saw ad-
vancing towards me, made me ashamed of niy enthu-
siasm ; and I fled between the two holy-water sprink-
lers with which two rival '■^rats d^egUse''' seemed de-
sirous of barring my way.

At aU events it was certainly my own Alexander I
there could be no more doubt possible ; the translator
of the " Golden Legend," the author of the lives of
Saints Germain, Vincent, Ferr^ol, Ferrution, and Droc-
toveus was, just as I had supposed, a monk of Saint-
Germain-des-Pr6s. And what a good monk, too — pious
and generous! He had a silver chin, a silver head,
and a silver foot made, that certain precious remains
should be covered with an incorruptible envelope!
But will I never be able to know his work ? or is this
new discovery only destined to increase my regrets ?


August W, 1859.
" I, that please some, try all ; both joy and terror
Of good and bad ; that make and unfold error—
Now take upon me, in the name of Time
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me or my swift passage, that I slide
O'er years."


THE OBIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 29

"Who speaks thus ? 'Tis an old man whom I know
too well. It is Time.

Shakespeare, after having terminated the third act
of the " Winter's Tale," pauses in order to leave time
for little Perdita to grow up in wisdom and in beauty ;
and when he raises the curtain again he evokes the
ancient Scythe-bearer upon the stage to render account
to the audience of those many long days which have
weighed down upon the head of the jealous Leontes.

Like Shakespeare in his play, I have left in this
diary of mine a long interval to oblivion ; and after
the fashion of the poet, I make Time himself intervene
to explain the omission of ten whole years. Ten whole
years, indeed, have passed since I wrote one single line
in this diary ; and now that I take up the pen again,
I have not the pleasure, alas! to describe a Perdita
"now grown in grace." Youth and beauty are the
faithful companions of poets; but those charming
phantoms scarcely visit the rest of us, even for the
space of a season. "We do not know how to retain
them with us. If the fair shade of some Perdita should
ever, through some inconceivable whim, take a notion
to traverse my brain, she would hurt herself horribly
against heaps of dog-eared parchments. Happy the
poets ! — their white hairs never scare away the hover-
ing shades of Helens, Francescas, Juliets, Julias, and
Dorotheas ! But the nose alone of Sylvestre Bonnard
would put to flight the whole swarm of love's heroines.

Yet I, like others, have felt beauty ; I have known


30 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNARD.

that mysterious charm which Nature has lent to ani-
mate form ; and the clay which hves has given to me
that shudder of delight which makes the lover and the
poet. But I have never known either how to love or
how to sing. I^ow, in my memory — all encumbered
as it is with the rubbish of old texts — I can discern
again, like a miniature forgotten in some attic, a cer-
tain bright young face, with violet eyes. . . . Why,
Bonnard, my friend, what an old fool you are becom-
ing ! Read that catalogue which a Florentine book-
seller sent you this very morning. It is a catalogue
of Manuscripts ; and he promises you a description of
several famous ones, long preserved by the collectors
of Italy and Sicily. There is something better suited
to you, something more in keeping with your present
appearance.

I read; I cry out! Hamilcar, who has assumed
with the approach of age an air of gravity that in-
timidates me, looks at me reproachfully, and seems to
ask me whether there is any rest in this world, since he
cannot enjoy it beside me, who am old also like himself.

In the sudden joy of my discovery, I need a confi-
dant ; and it is to the sceptic Hamilcar that I address
myself with all the effusion of a happy man.

"No, Hamilcar! no," I said to him; "there is no
rest in this world, and the quietude you long for is in-
compatible with the duties of life. And you say that
we are old, indeed 1 Listen to what I read in this cat-
alogue, and then tell me whether this is a time to be
reposing :


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 31

"'LA LEGENDS DOBEE BE JACQUES SE VOBA&INE;—
tradv^Uonfra/nsaiae du quatorzUme »iSde,par le Clere Ale-
xcmdre.

" ' Superb MS. , ornamented with two miniatures, wonderfully executed,
and in a perfect state of conservation : — one representing the Purification
of the Virgin ; the other the Coronation of Proserpine.

" ' At the termination of the " L^gende Dorde " are the Legends of Saints
Ferrfel, Ferrution, Germain, and Droctoveus (xxviij pp.), and the Mirac-
ulous Sepulture of Monsieur Saint-Germain d'Auxerre (xij pp.).

" 'This rare manuscript, which formed part of the collection of Sir
Thomas Raleigh, is now in the private study of Signor Micael-Angelo
Folizzi, of Girgenti.'

" You hear that, Hamilcar ? The manuscript of the
Clerk Alexander is in Sicily, at the house of Micael-
Angelo Polizzi. Heaven grant he may be a friend of
learned men ! I am going to write to him !"

"Which I did forthwith. In my letter I requested
Signor Polizzi to allow me to examine the manuscript
of Clerk Alexander, stating on what grounds I ven-
tured to consider myself worthy of so great a favor.
I offered at the same time to put at his disposal several
unpubhshed texts in my own possession, not devoid of
interest. I begged him to favor me with a prompt
reply, and below my signature I wrote down all my
honorific titles.

" Monsieur ! Monsieur ! where are you running like
that ?" cried Therese, quite alarmed, coming down the
stairs in pursuit of me, four steps at a time, with my
hat in her hand.

"I am going to post a letter, Therese."

" Seiqneur-Dieu! is that a way to run out in the
street, bareheaded, like a crazy man ?"


32 THE CRIME OF S7LVESTBE BONNABD.

" I am crazy, I know, Therese. But who is not i

G-ive me my hat, quick !"
" And your gloves, Monsieur ! and your umbrella !"
I had reached the bottom of the stairs, but still

heard her protesting and lamenting.


Octoler 10, 1859.

I AWAITED Signor Pohzzi's reply with iU-oontained
impatience. I could not even remain quiet ; I would
make sudden nervous gestures — open books and violent-
ly close them again. One day I happened to upset a
book with my elbow — a volume of Moreri. Hamil-
car, who was washing himself, suddenly stopped, and
looked angrily at me, with his paw over his ear. Was
this the tumultuous existence he must expect under
my roof? Had there not been a tacit understanding
between us that we should live a peaceful hfe ? I had
broken the covenant.

" My poor dear comrade," I made answer, " I am the
victim of a violent passion, which agitates and masters
me. The passions are enemies of peace and quiet, I
acknowledge ; but without them there would be no
arts or industries in the world. Everybody would
sleep naked on a manure-heap ; and you would not be
able, Hamilcar, to repose aU day on a silken cushion,
in the City of Books."

I expatiated no further to Hamilcar on the theory
of the passions, however, because my housekeeper


THE OBIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABB. 33

brought me a letter. It bore the postmark of Naples,
and read as f oUows :

" Most Illustrious Sir,— •! do indeed possess that incompar-
able manuscript of the ' Golden Legend ' which could not escape
your keen observation. All-important reasons, however, forbid
me, imperiously, tyrannically, to let the manuscript go out of my
possession for a single day, for even a single minute. It will be a
joy and pride for me to have you examine it in my humble home
at Girgenti, which will be embellished and illuminated by your
presence. It is with the most anxious expectation of your visit
that I presume to sign myself. Seigneur Academician,

" Tour humble and devoted servant,

" Micael-Angelo Polizzi,
" -Wine-merchant and Archaeologist at Girgenti, Sicily."

"Well, then ! I wiU. go to Sicily :

" Extremum hunc, Arethusa, mdhi concede Idborem.''''


October ^5, 1859.
Mt resolve had been taken and my preparations
made ; it only remained for me to notify my house-
keeper. I must acknowledge it was a long time be-
fore I could make up my mind to tell her I was going
away. I feared her remonstrances, her railleries, her
objurgations, her tears. " She is a good, kind girl," I
said to myself ; " she is attached to me ; she will want
to prevent me from going ; and the Lord knows that
when she has her mind set upon anything, gestures
and cries cost her no effort. In this instance she will
be sure to caU the concierge, the scrubber, the mattress-
3


34 TEE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

maker, and the seven sons of the fruit-seller ; they wilj
all kneel down in a circle around me ; they "wiU begin
to cry, and then they wiU look so ugly that I shaU be
obhged to yield, so as not to have the pain of seeing
them any more."

Such were the awful images, the sick dreams, which
fear marshalled before my imagination. Yes, fear —
" fecund Fear," as the poet says — gave birth to these
monstrosities in my brain. For — I may as weU make
the confession in these private pages — I am afraid
of my housekeeper. I am aware that she knows I am
weak ; and thip fact alone is sufficient to dispel all my
courage in any contest with her. Contests are of fre-
quent occurrence ; and I invariably succumb.

But for all that, I had to announce my departure to
Therese. She came into the library with an armful
of wood to make a little fire — '■'■ wne jkmhee^'' she said.
For the mornings are chilly. I watched her out of
the corner of my eye while she crouched down at the
hearth, with her head in the opening of the fire-place. ■
I do not know how I then found the courage to speak,
but I did so without much hesitation. I got up, and,
walking up and down the room, observed in a careless
tone, with that swaggering manner characteristic of
cowards,

" By the way, Therese, I am going to Sicily."

Having thus spoken, I awaited the consequence with
great anxiety. Th&ese did not reply. Her head and
her vast cap remained buried in the fire-place; and


THE CRIME OF SYLVESTBE BONNABD. 35

nothing in her person, which I closely watched, be-
trayed the least emotion. She poked some paper
under the wood, and blew up the fire. That was all !

Finally I saw her face again ; — ^it was cahn — so calm
that it made me vexed. " Surely," I thought to my-
self, " this old maid has no heart. She lets me go away
without saying so much as 'AhP Can the absence
of her old master reaUy affect her so Uttle ?"

" Well, then go. Monsieur," she answered, at last,
" only be back here by six o'clock ! There is a dish
for dinner to-day which wiU not wait for anybody."


Na/ples, November 10, 1859.
" Co tra calle vvoe, magna, e lame afacciaP
I understand, my friend — for three centimes I can
eat, drink, and wash my face, aU by means of one of
those slices of watermelon you display there on a lit-
tle table. But Occidental prejudices would prevent
me from enjoying that simple pleasure freely and
frankly. And how could I suck a watermelon? I
have enough to do merely to keep on my feet in this
crowd. What a luminous, noisy night in the Strada
di Porto ? Mountains of fruit tower up in the shops,
illuminated by multi-colored lanterns. Upon charcoal
furnaces lighted in the open air water boUs and steams,
and ragouts are singing in frying-pans. The smell of
fried fish and hot meats tickles my nose and makes
me sneeze. At this moment I find that my handker-


36 TEE CBIME OF 8TLVESTRE BONN ABB.

,,chief has left the pocket of my frock-coat. I am
pushed, lifted up, and turned about in every direction
by the gayest, the most talkative, the most animated,
and the most adroit populace possible to imagine ; and
suddenly a young vroman of the people, while I am
admiring her magnificent hair, with a single shock of
her powerful elastic shoulder, pushes me staggering
three paces back at least, without injury, into the arms
of a maccaroni-eater, who receives me with a smile.

I am in Naples. How I ever managed to arrive
here, with a few mutilated and shapeless remains of
baggage, I cannot tell, because I am no longer myself.
I have been travelling in a condition of perpetual fright ;
and I think that I must have looked awhile ago in this
bright city like an owl bewildered by sunshine. To-
night it is much worse ! "Wishing to obtain a ghmpse
of popular manners, I went to the Strada di Porto,
where 1 now am. All about me animated throngs of
people crowd and press before the eating-places ; and
I float like a waif among these living surges, which,
even while they submerge you, stiU caress. For this
Neapolitan people has, in its very vivacity, something
indescribably gentle and polite. I am not roughly
jostled, I am merely swayed about ; and I think that
by dint of thus rocking me to and fro, these good
folks want to luU me asleep on my feet. I admire,
as I tread the lava pavements of the strada, those por-
ters and fishermen who move by me chatting, singing,
smoking, gesticulating, quarrelling, and embracing each


THE CRIME OF 8TL7E8TBE BONNARD. 37

other the next moment with astonishing versatility of
mood. They live through all their senses at the same
time; and, being philosophers without knowing it,
keep the measure of their desires in accordance with
the brevity of life. I approach a much-patronized
tavern, and see inscribed above the entrance this
quatrain in NeapoUtan patois:

^^ Amice, alliegre magna/mmo e ievimmo
Nfin che rCce atcux noglio a la l/ucerna :
Ghi sa g'a Vautro munno ri'ee uedimmo f
Chi sa s^a Vamt/ro m/mmo rCce taverna .'" *

Even such counsels was Horace wont to give to his
friends. You received them, Posthumus ; you heard
them also, Leuconoe, perverse beauty who wished to
know the secrets of the future. That future is now
the past, and we know it well. Of a truth you were
foolish to worry yourselves about so small a matter ;
and your friend showed his good sense when he told
you to take life wisely and to filter your Greek wines —
"Sa^pias, vma Uques." Even thus the sight of a fair
land under a spotless sky urges to the pursuit of quiet
pleasures. But there are souls forever harassed by
some subhme discontent ; those are the noblest. You
were of such, Leuconoe ; and I, visiting for the first
time, in my declining years, that city where your beau-
ty was famed of old, I salute with deep respect your

* " Friends, let us merrily eat and drink as long as oil remains in
the lamp. Who knows if we shall meet again in the other worid ?
Who knows if in the other world there be a tavern ?"


38 TBE GBIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

melancholy memory. Those souls of Mn to your own
who appeared in the age of Christianity were souls of
saints ; and the " Golden Legend " is full of the miracles
they wrought. Tour friend Horace left a less noble
posterity, and I see one of his descendants in the person
of that tavern poet, who at this moment is serving out
wine in cups under the epicurean motto of his sign.

And yet life decides in favor of friend Flaccus, and
his philosophy is the only one which adapts itself to
the course of events. There is a fellow leaning against
that treUis-work covered with vine-leaves, and eating
an ice, while watching the stars. He would not stoop
even to pick up the old manuscript I am going to seek
with so much trouble and fatigue. And in truth man
is made rather to eat ices than to pore over old texts.

I continued to wander about among the drinkers
and the singers. There were lovers biting into beau-
tiful fruit, each with an arm about the other's waist.
Man must be naturally bad ; for all this strange joy
only evoked in me a feeling of uttermost despondency.
That thronging populace displayed such artless de-
light in the simple act of living, that all the shynesses
begotten by my old habits as an author awoke and
intensified into something like fright. Furthermore, I
found myself much discouraged by my inability to
understand a word of aU the storm of chatter about
me. It was a humiliating experience for a philologist.
Thus I had begun to feel quite sulky, when I was
startled to hear some one just behind me observe :


THE OBIME OF STLYESTBE BONNABD. 39

" Dimitri, that old man is certainly a Frenchman.
He looks so bewildered that I reaUy feel sorry for him.
Shall I speak to him ? . . . He has such a good-natured
look, with that round back of his — do you not think
so, Dimitri ?"

It was said in French by a woman's voice. For the
moment it was disagreeable to hear myself spoken of
as an old man. Is a man old at sixty-two ? Only the
other day, on the Pont des Arts, my colleague Perrot
d'Avrignac complimented me on my youthful appear-
ance ; and I should think him a better authority about
one's age than that young chatterbox who has taken
it on herself to make remarks about my back. My
back is round, she says. Ah ! ah ! I had some suspi-
cion myself to that effect, but I am not going now to
believe it at aU, since it is the opinion of a giddy-headed
young woman. Certainly I will not turn my head
round to see who it was that spoke ; but I am sure it
was a pretty woman. Why ? Because she talks hke''
a capricious person and like a spoiled child. Ugly
women may be naturally quite as capricious as pretty
ones ; but as they are never petted and spoiled, and as
no allowances are made for them, they soon find them-
selves obliged either to suppress their whims or to hide
them. On the other hand, the pretty women can be
just as fantastical as they please. My neighbor is
evidently one of the latter. . . . But, after aU, coming
to think it over, she really did nothing worse than to
express, in her own way, a kindly thought about me,
for which I ought to feel gra,teful.


40 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

These reflections — including the last and decisive
one — passed through my mind in less than a second ;
and if I have taken a whole minute to teU them, it is
only because I am a bad writer, which failing is char-
acteristic of most philologists. In less than a second,
therefore, after the voice had ceased, I did turn round,
and saw a pretty Uttle woman — a sprightly brunette.

" Madame," I said, with a bow, " excuse my invol-
untary indiscretion. I could not help overhearing
what you have just said. Tou would like to be of ser-
vice to a poor old man. And the wish, Madame, has al-
ready been fulfilled — the mere sound of a French voice
has given me such pleasure that I must thank you."

I bowed again, and turned to go away ; but my foot
slipped upon a melon-rind, and I would certainly have
embraced the Parthenopean soil had not the young
lady put out her hand and caught me.

There is a force in circumstances — -even in the very
smallest circumstances — against which resistance is
vain. I resigned myself to remain the protege of the
fair unknown.

" It is late," she said ; " do you not wish, to go back
to your hotel, which must be quite cloae to ours — un-
less it be the same one ?"

" Madame," I replied, " I do not know what time
it is, because somebody has stolen my watch; but I
think, as you say, that it must be time to retire ; and
I vsdU be very glad to regain my hotel in the com-
pany of such courteous compatriots."


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 41

So saying, I bowed once more to the young lady,
and also saluted her companion, a silent colossus with
a gentle and melancholy face.

After having gone a httle way with them, I learned,
among other matters, that my new acquaintances were
the Prince and Princess Tr^pof, and that they were
making a trip round the world for the purpose of finding
match-boxes, of which they were making a collection.

We proceeded along a narrow, tortuous vicoletto,
lighted only by a single lamp burning in the niche of
a Madonna. The purity and transparency of the air
gave a celestial softness and clearness to the very dark-
ness itself ; and one could find one's way without diffi-
culty under such a hmpid night. But in a little while
we began to pass through a "veneUa," or, in Near
politan parlance, a sottaportioo, which led under so
many archways and so many far-projecting balconies
that no gleam of light from the sky could reach us.
My young guide had made us take this route as a
short cut, she assured us ; but I think she did so quite
as much simply in order to show that she felt at home
in Naples, and knew the city thoroughly. Indeed, she
needed to know it very thoroughly to venture by
night into that labryinth of subterranean alleys and
flights of steps. If ever any man showed absolute docil-
ity in allowing himself to be guided, that man was my-
self. Dante never followed the steps of Beatrice with
more confidence than I felt in following those of Prin-
cess Trepof .


42 TSE OBIME OV 8YLVB8TBB BONNABD.

The lady appeared to find some pleasure in my con-
versation, for she invited me to take a carriage-drive
with her on the morrow to visit the grotto of Posi-
lippo and the tomb of Virgil. She declared she had
seen me somewhere before ; but she could not remem-
ber if it had been at Stockholm or at Canton. In the
former event I was a very celebrated professor of
geology; in the latter, a provision-merchant whose
courtesy and kindness had been much appreciated.
One thing certain was that she had seen my back
somewhere before.

" Excuse me," she added ; " we are continually travel-
ling, my husband and I, to coUect match-boxes and to
change our ermui by changing country. Perhaps it
would be more reasonable to content ourselves with a
single variety ot emnui. But we have made aU our
preparations and arrangements for travelling : aU our
plans have been laid out in advance, and it gives us no
trouble, whereas it would be very troublesome for us
to stop anywhere in particular. I teU you all this so
that you may not be surprised if my recollections
have become a httle mixed up. But from the mo-
ment I first saw you at a distance this evening, I felt
—in fact I knew — ^that I had seen you before. Now
the question is, ' "Where was it that I saw you V Tou
are not, then, either the geologist or the provision- "n
merchant ?" " ■

" No, Madame," I replied, " I am neither the one nor
the other ; and I am sorry for it — since you have had


THE GRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNARD. 43

reason to esteem them. There is really nothing about
me worthy of your interest. I have spent aU my
life poring over books, and I have never travelled:
you might have known that from my bewilderment,
which excited your compassion. I am a member of
the Institute."

" You are a member of the Institute ! How nice !
WiU you not write something for me in my album ?
Do you know Chinese ? I would like so much to have
you write something in Chinese or Persian in my al-
bum. I wiU introduce you to my friend, Miss Fergus-
son, who travels everywhere to see aU the famous
people in the world. She wUl be deUghted! . . .
Dimitri, did you hear that ? — ^this gentleman is a mem-
ber of the Institute, and he has passed all his hfe over
books."

The prince nodded approval.

"Monsieur," I said, trying to engage him in our
conversation, " it is true that something can be learned
from books ; but a great deal more can be learned by
traveUing, and I regret that I have not been able to
go round the world like you. I have lived in the
same house for thirty years, and I scarcely ever go
out."

" Lived in the same house for thirty years !" cried
Madame Trepof ; is it possible ?"

" Yes, Madame," I answered. " But you must know
the house is situated on the bank of the Seine, and in
the very handsomest and most famous part of the


44 THE OBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

world. From my window I can see the Tuileries and
the Louvre, the Pont-Neuf , the towers of Notre-Dame,
the turrets of the Palais de Justice, and the spire of
the Sainte-ChapeUe. AJl those stones speak to me ;
they tell me stories about the days of Saint-Louis, of
the Yalois, of Henri IV., and of Louis XIV. I under-
stand them, and I love them aU. It is only a very
smaU corner of the world, but honestly, Madame,
where is there a more glorious spot ?"

At this moment we found ourselves upon a pubHc
square — a la/rgo steeped in the soft glow of the night.
Madame Trepof looked at me in an uneasy manner ;
her lifted eyebrows almost touched the black curls
about her forehead.

" Where do you live, then ?" she demanded, brusquely.

" On the Quai Malaquais, Madame, and my name is
Bonnard. It is not a name very vpidely known, but I
am contented if my friends do not forget it."

This revelation, unimportant as it was, produced an
extraordinary effect upon Madame Tr6pof . She im-
mediately turned her back upon me and caught her
husband's arm.

" Come, Dimitri !" she exclaimed, " do walk a httle
faster. I am horribly tired, and you will not hurry
yourself in the least. We shaU never get home. ... As
for you, monsieur, your way lies over there !"

She made a vague gesture in the direction of some
dark vicolo, pushed her husband the opposite way, and
called to me, without even turning her head,


THE GRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 45

" Adieu, Monsieur ! We shall not go to PosUippo
to-morrow, nor the day after, either. I have a fright-
ful headache ! . . . Dimitri, you are unendurable ! "Will
you not walk faster ?"

I remained for the moment stupefied, vainly trying
to think what I could have done to offend Madame
Trepof . I had also lost my way, and seemed doomed
to wander about all night. In order to ask my way,
I would have to see somebody ; and it did not seem
likely that I should find a single human being who
could understand me. In my despair I entered a
street at random — a street, or rather a horrible alley
that had the look of a murderous place. It proved so
in fact, for I had not been two minutes in it before I
saw two men fighting with knives. They were attack-
ing each other even more fiercely with their tongues
than with their weapons ; and I concluded from the
nature of the abuse they were showering upon each
other that it was a love affair. I prudently made my
way into a side aUey while those two good fellows
were still much too busy with their own affairs to
think about mine. I wandered hopelessly about for
a while, and at last sat down, completely discouraged,
on a stone bench, inwardly cursing the strange ca-
prices of Madame Trepof.

"How are you, Signor? Are you back from San
Carlo? Did you hear the diva sing? It is only at
Naples you can hear singing like hers."

I looked up, and recognized my host. I had seated


46 THE CBIMSl OF STLVESTRE BONNABD.

myself with my back to the fagade of my hotel, un-
der the window of my own room.


Monte-Allegro, November 30, 1859.

We were all resting — myself, my guides, and their
mules — on the road from Sciacca to Girgenti, at a
tavern in the miserable village of Monte -Allegro,
whose inhabitants, consumed by the maV a/ria, con-
tinually shiver in the sun. But nevertheless they are
Greeks, and their gayety triumphs over all circum-
stances. A few gather about the tavern, fuU of smil-
ing curiosity. One good story would have sufficed,
had I known how to tell it to them, to make them
forget aU the woes of Ufe. They had all a look of
intelligence ; and their women, although tanned and
faded, wore their long black cloaks with much grace.

Before me I could see old ruins whitened by the
sea-wind — ruins about which no grass ever grows.
The dismal melancholy of deserts prevails over this
arid land, whose cracked surface can barely nourish
a few shrivelled mimosas, cacti, and dwarf pahns.
Twenty yards away, along the course of a ravine,
stones were gleaming whitely like a long line of scat-
tered bones. They told me that was the bed of a
stream.

I had been about fifteen days in Sicily. On com-
ing into the Bay of Palermo — which opens between
the two mighty naked masses of the PeUigrino and


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNAKD. 47

the CataJfano, and extends inward along the " Golden
Conch" — the view inspired me with such admiration
that I resolved to travel a little in this island, so en-
nobled by historic memories, and rendered so beauti-
ful by the outlines of its hiUs, which reveal the prin-
ciples of Greek art. Old pUgrim though I was, grown
hoary in the Gothic Occident — I dared to venture upon
that classic soil ; and, seciiring a guide, I went from
Palermo to Trapani, from Trapani to SeMnonte, from
Selinonte to Sciacca — which I left this morning to
go to Girgenti, where I am to find the MS. of Clerk
Alexander. The beautiful things I have seen are stiU
so vivid in my mind that I feel the task of writing
them would be a useless fatigue. Why spoU my
pleasure-trip by collecting notes? Lovers who love
truly do not write down their happiness.

Wholly absorbed by the melancholy of the present
and the poetry of the past, my thoughts peopled with
beautiful shapes, and my eyes ever gratified by the
pure and harmonious lines of the landscape, I was
resting in the tavern at Monte- Allegro, sipping a
glass of heavy, fiery wine, when I saw two persons
enter the waiting-room, whom, after a moment's hesi-
tation, I recognized as the Prince and Princess Trepof.

This time I saw the princess in the light — and what
a light ! He who has known that of Sicily can better
comprehend the words of Sophocles : " O holy light !
. . . Eye of the Golden Day!'''' Madame Trepof,
dressed in brown-hoUand and wearing a broad-brimmed


48 THE CRIME OF SYLVE8TRE BONNABJ).

straw hat, appeared to me a very pretty woman of
about twenty-eight. Her eyes were luminous as a
child's ; but her slightly plump chin indicated the
age of plenitude. She is, I must confess it, quite an
attractive person. She is supple and changeful ; her
mood is like water itself — and, thank Heaven ! I am
no navigator. I thought I discerned in her manner
a sort of iU-humor, which I attributed presently, by
reason of some observations she uttered at random,
to the fact that she had met no brigands upon her
route.

" Such things only happen to us !" she exclaimed,
with a gesture of discoui^agement.

She called for a glass of iced water, which the land-
lord presented to her with a gesture that recalled
to me those scenes of funeral offerings painted upon
Greek vases.

I was in no hurry to introduce myself to a lady
who had so abruptly dropped my acquaintance in the
pubhc square at ITaples ; but she perceived me in my
corner, and her frown notified me very plainly that
our accidental meeting was disagreeable to her.

After she had sipped her ice-water for a few mo-
ments — whether because her whim had suddenly
changed, or because my loneliness aroused her pity,
I did not know — she walked directly to me.

"Good-day, Monsieur Bonnard," she said. "How
do you do ? "What strange chance enables us to meet
again in this frightful country ?"


TEE OBIME OF STLVEBTBE BONNABD. 49

" This country is not frightful, Madame," I replied.
Beauty is so great and so august a quality that centu-
ries of barbarism cannot efface it so completely that
adorable vestiges of it will not always remain. The
majesty of the antique Ceres still overshadows these
arid valleys; and that Greek Muse who made Are-
thusa and Msenalus ring with her divine accents, stiU
sings for my ears upon the barren mountain and in
the place of the dried-up spring. Yes, Madame, when
our globe, no longer inhabited, shall, Mke the moon,
roU a wan corpse through space, the soil which bears
the ruins of Selimonte will still keep the seal of beauty
in the midst of universal death ; and then, then, at
least there will be no frivolous mouth to blaspheme
the grandeur of these sohtudes."

I knew well enough that my words were beyond
the comprehension of the pretty little empty -head
which heard them. But an old fellow hke myself
who has worn out his life over books does not know
how to adapt his tone to circumstances. Besides, I
wished to give Madame Tr^pof a lesson in politeness.
She received it with so much submission, and with
such an air of comprehension, that I hastened to add,
as good-naturedly as possible,

" As to whether the chance which has enabled me
to meet you again be lucky or unlucky, I cannot de-
cide the question untU I am sure that my presence be
not disagreeable to you. You appeared to become
weary of my company very suddenly at Naples the
4


50 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

other day. I can only attribute that misfortune to
my naturally unpleasant manner — since, on that occa-
sion, I had had the honor of meeting you for the first
time in my life."

These words seemed to cause her inexplicable joy.
She smiled upon me in the most gracious, mischievous
way, and said very earnestly, holding out her hand,
which I touched with my lips,

" Monsieur Bonnard, do not refuse to accept a seat
in my carriage. You can chat with me on the way
about , antiquity, and that will amuse me ever so
much."

" My dear," exclaimed the prince, " you can do just
as you please ; but you ought to remember that one
is horribly cramped in that carriage of yours; and
I fear you are only offering Monsieur Bonnard the
chance of getting a frightful attack of lumbago."

Madame Trepof simply shook her head by way of
explaining that such considerations had no weight
with her whatever; then she untied her hat. The
darkness of her black curls descended over her eyes,
and bathed them in velvety shadow. She remained
a little while quite motionless, and her face assumed a
surprising expression of reverie. But all of a sudden
she darted at some oranges which the tavern-keeper
had brought in a basket, and began to throw them,
one by one, into a fold of her dress.

" These will be nice on the road," she said. " We
are going just where you are going — to Girgenti. I


I I I 1


TEE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 51

must tell you all about it. You know that my hus-
band is making a collection of match-boxes. We
bought thirteen hundred match-boxes at Marseilles,
But we heard there was a factory of them at Gir-
genti. According to what we were told, it is a very
small factory, and its products — which are very ugly
— never go outside the city and its suburbs. So we
are going to Girgenti just to buy match-boxes. Dimi-
tri has been a collector of all sorts of things ; but the
only kind of collection which can now interest him is
a collection of match-boxes. He has already got five
thousand two hundred and fourteen diEferent kinds.
Some of them gave us frightful trouble to find. For
instance, we knew that at Naples boxes were once
made with the portraits of Mazzini and Garibaldi on
them ; and that the police had seized the plates from
which the portraits were printed, and put the manu-
facturer in jail. Well, by dint of searching and in-
quiring for ever so long a wMle, we found one of
those boxes at last for sale at one hundred francs,
instead of two sous. It was not really too dear at
that price; but we were denounced for buying it.
We were taken for conspirators. AU our baggage
was searched; they could not find the box, because
I had hidden it so well ; but they found my jewels,
and carried them off. They have them stiU. The
incident made quite a sensation, and we were going
to get arrested. But the king was displeased about
it, and he ordered them to leave us alone. Up to


52 'i'SE CHIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

that time, I used to think it was very stupid to col-
lect match-boxes ; but when I found that there were
risks of losiag liberty, and perhaps even life, by doing
it, I began to feel a taste for it. Now I am an abso-
lute fanatic on the subject. We are goiag to Sweden
next sumnaer to complete our series. . . . Are we not,
Dimitri?"

I felt — must I confess it? — a thorough sympathy
with these intrepid collectors, l^o doubt I would
rather have found Monsieur and Madame Trepof en-
gaged in collecting antique marbles or painted vases
in Sicily. I should have liked to have found them in-
terested in the ruins of Syracuse, or the poetical tra-
ditions of the Eryx. But at all events, they were
making some sort of a collection — they belonged to
the great confraternity — and I could not possibly
make fun of them without making fun of myself.
Besides, Madame Trepof had spoken of her collection
with such an odd mingling of irony and enthusiasm
that I could not help finding the idea a very good one.

We were getting ready to leave the tavern, when
we noticed some people coming down-stairs from the
upper room, carrying carbines under their dark cloaks.
To me they had the look of thorough bandits ; and
after they were gone I told Monsieur Trepof my
opinion of them. He answered me, very quietly, that
he also thought they were regular bandits ; and the
guides begged us to apply for an escort of gendarmes,
but Madame Trepof besought us not to do anything


THE CRIME OF SYLVE8TBE BONNABD. 53

of the kind. She declared that we must not "spoil
her journey."

Then, turning her persuasive eyes upon me, she
asked,

" Do you not believe. Monsieur Bonnard, that there
is nothing in life worth having except sensations ?"

" "Why, certainly, Madame," I answered ; " but then
we must take into consideration the nature of the sen-
sations themselves. Those which a noble memory or
a grand spectacle creates within us certainly represent
what is best in human hf e ; but those merely resulting
from the menace of danger seem to me sensations
which one should be very careful to avoid as much as
possible. For example, would you think it a very
pleasant thing, Madame, while travelhng over the
mountains at midnight, to find the muzzle of a car-
bine suddenly pressed against your forehead ?"

"Oh, no!" she replied; "the comic-operas have
made carbines absolutely ridiculous, and it would be a
great misfortune to any young woman to find herself
in danger from an absurd weapon. But it would be
quite different with a knife — a very cold and very
bright knife-blade, which makes a cold shudder go
right through one's heart."

She shuddered even as she spoke ; closed her eyes,
and threw her head back. Then she resumed :

" People Hke you are so happy ! Tou can interest
yourselves in aU sorts of things !"

She gave a sidelong look at her husband, who was


64 THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNARD.

talking with the innkeeper. Then she leaned tow-
ards me, and murmured very low :

" Tou see, Dimitri and I, we are both suffering from
emmd ! We have still the match-boxes. But at last
one gets tired even of match-boxes. Besides, our col-
lection wiU soon be complete. And then what are
we going to do ?"

" Oh, Madame F' I exclaimed, touched by the moral
unhappiness of this pretty person, " if you only had a
eon, then you would know what to do. You would
then learn the purpose of your Hfe, and your thoughts
would become at once more serious and yet more
cheerful."

" But I have a son," she replied. " He is a big boy ;
he is eleven years old, and he suffers from ermm hke
the rest of us. Tes, my George has ennui, too ; he is
tired of everything. It is very wretched."

She glanced agaiu towards her husband, who was
superintending the harnessing of the mules on the
road outside — testing the condition of girths and
straps. Then she asked me whether there had been
many changes on the Quai Malaquais during the past
ten years. She declared she never visited that neigh-
borhood because it was too far away.

" Too far from Monte- Allegro ?" I queried.

" "Why, no !" she replied. " Too far from the Avenue
des Champs-ifilysees, where we hve."

And she murmured over again, as if talkiug to her-
self, "Too far!— too far!" in a tone of reverie which


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 55

I could not possibly account for. AU at once she
smiled again, and said to me,

" I like you. Monsieur Bonnard ! — I like you very,
very much !"

The mules had been harnessed. The young woman
hastily picked up a few oranges which had rolled oflf
her lap ; rose up ; looked at me, and burst out laugh-
ing.

" Oh !" she exclaimed, " how I should like to see you
grappling with the brigands ! You would say such ex-
traordinary things to them ! . . . Please take my hat,
and hold my umbrella for me, Monsieur Bonnard."

" What a strange little mind !" I thought to myself,
as I followed her. " It could only have been in a mo-
ment of inexcusable thoughtlessness that Nature gave
a child to such a giddy little woman !"


OirgenU. 8a/me day.

Hee manners had shocked me. I left her to ar-
range herself in her letUca, and I made myself as com-
fortable as I could in my own. These vehicles, which
have no wheels, are carried by two mules — one before
and one behind. This kind of htter, or chaise, is of
ancient origin. I had often seen representations of
similar ones in the French MSS. of the fourteenth cen-
tury. I had no idea then that one of those vehicles
would be at a future day placed at my own disposal.
We must never be too sure of anything.


66 TEE CRIME OF 8TLVB8TRE BONNAEB.

For three hours the mules sounded their little bells,
and thumped the calcined ground with their hoofs.
On either hand there slowly defiled by us the barren
monstrous shapes of a nature totally African.

Half-way we made a halt to allow our animals to
recover breath.

Madame Trepof came to me on the road, took my
arm, and drew me a little away from the party. Then,
very suddenly, she said to me in a tone of voice I had
never heard before :

"Do not think that I am a wicked woman. My
George knows that I am a good mother."

We walked side by side for a moment in silence.
She looked up, and I saw that she was crjdng.

" Madame," I said to her, " look at this soil which
has been burned and cracked by five long months of
fiery heat. A little white Mly has sprung up from it."

And I pointed with my cane to the frail stalk,
tipped by a double blossom.

"Your heart," I said, "however arid it be, bears
also its white hly ; and that is reason enough why I
do not believe that you are what you say — a wicked
woman."

" Yes, yes, yes !" she cried, vdth the obstinacy of a
child — " I am a wicked woman. But I am ashamed
to appear so before you who are so good — so very,
very good."

" You do not know anything at all about it," I said
to her.


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 57

" I know it ! I know all about you, Monsieur Bon-
nard !" she declared, with a smile.
And she jumped back into her letUca.


Gi/rgenU, November 30, 1859.

I AWOKE the following morning in the House of Gel-
lias. GeUias was a rich citizen of ancient Agrigentum.
He was equally celebrated for his generosity and for
his wealth; and he endowed his native city with a
great number of free inns. GeUias has been dead for
thirteen hundred years ; and to-day there is no more
gratuitous hospitality among civilized peoples. Eut
the name of Gelhas has become that of a hotel in
which, by reason of fatigue, I was able to obtain one
good night's sleep.

The modern Girgenti lifts its high, narrow, solid
streets, dominated by a sombre Spanish cathedral,
upon the site of the acropoMs of the antique Agri-
gentum. I can see from my windows, half-way on
the hiUside towards the sea, the white range of tem-
ples partially destroyed. The ruins alone have some
aspect of coolness. All the rest is arid. Water and
life have forsaken Agrigentum. Water — ^the divine
Nestis of the Agrigentine Empedocles — ^is so neces-
sary to animated beings that nothing can live far from
the rivers and the springs. But the port of Girgenti,
situated at a distance of three kilometres from the
city, has a great commerce. " And it is in this dis-


58 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTRE BONNABD.

mal city," I said to myself, "upon this precipitous
rock, that the manuscript of Clerk Alexander is to
be found !" I asked my way to the house of Signer
Michael- Angelo Polizzi, and proceeded thither.

I found Signor Polizzi, dressed all in white from
head to feet, busy cooking sausages in a frying-pan.
At the sight of me, he let go the handle of the frying-
pan, threw up his arms in the air, and uttered shrieks
of enthusiasm. He was a little man whose pimply
features, aquiline nose, round eyes, and projecting
chin formed a very expressive physiognomy.

He called me "Excellence," said he was going to
mark that day with a white stone, aiid made me sit
down. The hall in which we were represented the
union of kitchen, reception-room, bedchamber, studio,
and wine-cellar. There were charcoal furnaces visi-
ble, a bed, paintings, an easel, bottles, strings of
onions, and a magnificent lustre of colored glass pen-
dants. I glanced at the paintings on the wall. '

" The arts ! the arts !" cried Signor Polizzi, throw-
ing up his arms again to heaven — " the arts ! What dig-
nity ! what consolation ! Excellence, I am a painter!"

And he showed me an unfinished Saint-Erancis,
which indeed could very well remain unfinished for-
ever without any loss to religion or to art. Next he
showed me some old paintings of a better style, but
apparently restored after a decidedly reckless manner.

" I repair," he said — " I repair old paintings. Oh,
the Old Masters ! What genius ! what soul !"


TJSE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 59

"Why, then," I said to hun, "you must be a
painter, an archaeologist, and a wine-merchant all
in one?"

"At your service, Excellence," he answered. "I
have a zucco here at this very moment — a zucco of
which every single drop is a pearl of fire. I want
your Lordship to taste of it."

" I esteem the wiues of Sicily," I responded ; " but
it was not for the sake of your flagons that I came
to see you, Signor PohzzL"

He : " Then you have come to see me about paint-
ings. You are an amateur. It is an immense delight
for me to receive amateurs. I am going to show you
the chef-dPwvwe of Monrealese ; yes, Excellence, his
'chef-oPcewm'e !. An Adoration of Shepherds ! It is the
pearl of the whole Sicilian school !"

I : " Later on I will be glad to see the chef-Wcenmre;
but let us first talk about the business which brings
me here."

His little quick bright eyes watched my face curi-
ously ; and I perceived, with anguish, that he had not
the least suspicion of the purpose of my visit.

A cold sweat broke out over my forehead ; and in
the bewilderment of my anxiety I stammered out
something to this effect :

" I have come from Paris expressly to look at a
manuscript of the 'Legende Doree,' which you in-
formed me was in your possession.""

At these words he threw up his arms, opened his


60 THB CRIME OF STLVMSTBE BONNABD.

mouth and eyes to the widest possible extent, and
betrayed every sign of extreme nervousness.

" Oh ! the manuscript of the ' Golden Legend !' A
pearl, Excellence ! a ruby, a diamond ! Two miniatures
so perfect that they give one the feeling of ghmpses
of Paradise ! What suavity ! Those colors ravished
from the corollas of flowers make a honey for the
eyes ! Even a Sicilian could have done no better !"

" Let me see it, then," I asked ; unable to conceal
either my anxiety or my hope.

" Let you see it !" cried PoMzzi. " But how can I,
Excellence ? I have not got it any more ! I have not
got it !"

And he seemed determined to tear out his hair.
He might indeed have pulled every hair in his head
out of his hide before I should have tried to prevent
him. But he stopped of his own accord, before he
had done himself any grievous harm.

" "What !" I cried out in anger — " what ! you make
me come all the way from Paris to Girgenti, by prom-
ising to show me a manuscript, and now, when I come,
you tell me you have not got it ! It is simply in-
famous, Monsieur ! I shall leave your conduct to be
judged by all honest men !"

Anybody who could have seen me at that moment
would have been able to form a good idea of the as-
pect of a furious sheep.

" It is infamous ! it is infamous !" I repeated, waving
my arms, which trembled from anger.


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD. 61

Then Micael-Angelo Polizzi let himself fall into a
chair in the attitude of a dying hero. I saw his eyes
fiU with tears, and his hair — untH then flamboyant and
erect upon his head — ^faU down in Mmp disorder over
his brow.

"I am a father, Excellence! I am a father!" he
groaned, wringing his hands.

He continued, sobbing :

" My son Eaf ael — the son of my poor wife, for whose
death I have been mourning fifteen years — ^Eafael, Ex-
cellence, wanted to settle at Paris ; he hired a shop in
the Eue Lafitte for the sale of curiosities. I gave him
everything precious which I had — I gave him my
finest majolicas; my most beautiful Urbino ware;
my masterpieces of art : what paintings, Signor ! Even
now they dazzle me when I see them only in imagina-
tion ! And all of them signed ! Finally, I gave him
the manuscript of the 'Golden Legend!' I would
have given him my flesh and my blood ! An only son,
Signor ! the son of my poor saintly wife !"

" So," I said, " while I — relying upon your written
word. Monsieur — was travelling to the very heart of
Sicily to find the manuscript of the Clerk Alexander,
the same manuscript was actually exposed for sale in
a window in Eue Lafitte, only fifteen hundred yards
from my house ?"

"Tes, it was there! that is positively true!" ex-
claimed Signor Polizzi, suddenly growing calm again ;
" and it is there stiU — at least I hope it is. Excellence."


62 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNARD.

He took a card from a shelf as he spoke, and offered
it to me, saying,

" Here is the address of my son. Make it known to
your friends, and you will oblige me. Faience and
enamelled wares ; hangings ; pictures. He has a com-
plete stock of objects of art — all at the fairest possible
prices — and everything authentic, I can vouch for it,
upon my honor ! Go and see him. He wiU show you
the manuscript of the ' Golden Legend.' Two min-
iatures miraculously fresh in color !" ,

I was feeble enough to take the card he held out to
me.

The feUow was taking further advantage of my
weakness to make me circulate the name of Eafael
Polizzi among the societies of learning !

My hand was already on the door-knob, when the
Sicilian caught me by the arm ; he had a look as of
sudden inspiration.

"Ah! Excellence!" he cried, "what a city is this
city of ours ! It gave birth to Empedocles ! Empedo-
cles ! "What a great man ! what a great citizen ! What
audacity of thought ! what virtue ! what soul ! At the
port over there is a statue of Empedocles, before which I
bare my head each time that I pass by ! When Eafael,
my son, was going away to found an establishment of
antiquities in the Eue Lafitte, at Paris, I took him to
the port, and there, at the foot of that statue of Em-
pedocles, I bestowed upon him my paternal benedic-
tion ! ' Always remember Empedocles !' . I said to him.


TEE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 63

Ah ! Signer, what our unhappy country needs to-day
is a new Empedocles ! Would you not like me to show
you the way to his statue, Excellence ? 1 will be your
guide among the ruins here. I wiU show you the tem-
ple of Castor and Pollux, the temple of the Olympian
Jupiter, the temple of the Lucinian Juno, the antique
well, the tomb of Theron, and the Gate of Gold ! AU
the professional guides are asses ; but we — we shall
make excavations, if you are willing — and we shall
discover treasures ! I know the science of discovering
hidden treasures — ^the secret art of 'finding their where-
abouts — a gift from Heaven !"

I succeeded in tearing myself away from his grasp.
But he ran after me again, stopped me at the foot of
the stairs, and said in my ear, .

" Listen, Excellence. I will conduct you about the
city ; I will introduce you to some Girgentines ! "What
a race ! what types ! what forms ! Sicilian girls, Sig-
nor ! — the antique beauty itself !"

"Go to the devil!" I cried, at last, in anger, and
rushed into the street, leaving him stiU writhing in the
loftiness of his enthusiasm.

When I had got out of his sight, I sank down upon
a stone, and began to think, with my face in my hands.

"And it was for this," I said to myself — "it was to
hear such propositions as this that I came to Sicily !"
That PoUzzi is simply a scoundrel, and his son an-
other ; and they made a plan together to ruin me."
But what was their scheme ? I could not unravel it.


64 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABB.

Meanwhile, it may be imagined how discouraged and
humiliated I felt.

A merry burst of laughter caused me to turn my
head, and I saw Madame Tr6pof running in advance
of her husband, and holding up something which I
could not distinguish clearly.

She sat down beside me, and showed me — ^laughing
more merrily aU the whUe — an abominable little paste-
board box, on which was printed a red-and-blue face,
which the inscription declared to be the face of Em-
pedocles.

" Tes, Madam," I said, " but that abominable Polizzi,
to whom I advise you not to send Monsieur Tr6pof,
has made me fall out forever with Empedocles; and
this portrait is not at all of a nature to make me feel
more kindly to the ancient philosopher."

" Oh !" declared Madame Trepof, " it is ugly, but it
is rare! These boxes are not exported at aU; you
can buy them only where they are made. Dimitri
has six others just like this in his pocket. We got
them so as to exchange with other collectors. You
understand ? At nine o'clock this morning we were at
the factory. You see we did not waste our time."

" So I certainly perceive, Madame," I replied, bitter-
ly ; " but I have lost mine."

I then saw that she was naturally a good-hearted
woman. AU her merriment vanished.

"Poor Monsieur Bonnard! poor Monsieur Bon-
nard !" she murmured.


THE CRIME OF SYL7E8TBE BONNARD. 65

And, taking my hand in hers, she added :

" Tell me about your troubles."

I told her about them. My story was long ; but
she was evidently touched by it, for she asked me
quite a number of circumstantial questions, which I
took for proof of friendly interest. She wanted to
know the exact title of the manuscript, its shape, its
appearance, and its age ; she asked me for the address
of Signor Kaf ael Poh^ai.

And I gave it to her ; thus doing (O destuiy !) pre-
cisely what the abominable Polizzi had told me to
do.

It is sometimes difficult to check one's self. I recom-
menced my plaints and my imprecations. But this
time Madame Trepof only burst out laughing.

" Why do you laugh ?" I asked her.

" Because I am a wicked woman," she answered.

And she fled away, leaving me aU disheartened on
my stone.


Paris, Decemher 8, 1859.

My unpacked trunks still encumbered the hall. I
was seated at a table covered with all those good things
which the land of France produces for the delectation
of gmi/rmets. I was eating a pate de Chartores, which
is alone sufficient to make one love one's country.
Therese, standing before me with her hands joined
over her white apron, was looking at me with benig-
5


66 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

nity, with anxiety, and with pity. Hamilcar was rub-
bing himself against my legs, wild with delight.
These words of an old poet came back to my memory :

" Happy is he who, like Ulysses, hath made a goodly journey,"

..." Well," I thought to myself, " I travelled to no
purpose ; I have come back with empty hands ; but,
like Ulysses, I made a goodly journey."

And having taken my last sip of coffee, I asked
Therese for my hat and cane, which she gave me not
without dire suspicions : she feared I might be goiQg
upon another journey. But I reassured her by telling
her to have dinner ready at six o'clock.

It had always been a keen pleasure for me to breathe
the air in those Parisian streets whose every paving-
slab and every stone I love devotedly. But I had an
end in view, and I took my way straight to the Kue
Lafitte. I was not long in finding the establishment
of Signor Eafael Polizzi. It was distinguishable by
a great display of old paintings which, although all
bearing the signature of some illustrious artist, had a
' certain family air of resemblance that might have
suggested some touching idea about the fraternity of
genius, had it not still more forcibly suggested the
professional tricks of Polizzi S^ Enriched by these
doubtful works of art, the shop was further ren-
dered attractive by various petty curiosities : poniards,
drinking-vessels, goblets, figulines, brass gcmdrons, and
Hispano- Arabian wares of metallic lustre.


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNABD. 67

Upon a Portuguese arm -chair, decorated with an
escutcheon, lay a copy of the "Heures" of Simon
Yostre, open at the page which has an astrological
figure on it ; and an old Vitruvius, placed upon a
quaint chest, displayed its masterly engravings of
caryatides and telamones. This apparent disorder
which only masked cunning arrangement, this fac-
titious hazard which had placed the best objects in
the most favorable light, would have increased my
distrust of the place, but that the distrust which the
mere name of Polizzi had already inspired could not
have been increased by any circumstances — ^being al-
ready infinite.

Signor Eafael, who sat there as the presiding ge-
nius of all these vague and incongruous shapes, im-
pressed me as a phlegmatic young man, with a sort of
EngUsh character. He betrayed no sign whatever of
those transcendent faculties displayed by his father
in the arts of mimicry and declamation.

I told him what I had come for ; he opened a cabi-
net and drew from it a manuscript, which he placed on
a table that I might examine it at my leisure.

Never in my life did I experience such an emotion
'■ — except, indeed, during some few brief months of my
youth, months whose memories, though I should live
a hundred years, would remain as fresh at my last
hour as in the first day they came to me.

It was, indeed, the very manuscript described by the
hbrarian of Sir Thomas Kaleigh ; it was, indeed, the


68 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

manuscript of the Clerk Alexander which I saw, which
I touched ! The work of Yoragine himself had been
perceptibly abridged; but that made little difference
to me. All the inestimable additions of the monk of
Saint- Germain -des-Pres were there. That was the
main point ! I tried to read the Legend of Saint Droc-
toveus ; but I could not — aU the hues of the page quiv-
ered before my eyes, and there was a sound in my ears
like the noise of a windmill in the country at night.
Nevertheless, I was able to see that the manuscript .
offered every evidence of indubitable authenticity.
The two drawings of the Purification of the Virgitt
and the Coronation of Proserpine were meagre in de-
sign and vulgar in violence of coloring. Considerably
damaged iu 1824, as attested by the catalogue of Sir
Thomas, they had obtained during the interval a new
aspect of freshness. But this miracle did not surprise
me at aU. And, besides, what did I care about the two
miniatures ? The legends and the poem of Alexander
■ — those alone formed the treasure I desired. My
eyes devoured as much of it as they had the power
to absorb.

I affected indiiference while asking Signor Poli^zi
the price of the manuscript; and, while awaiting his
reply, I offered up a secret prayer that the price might
not exceed the amount of ready money at my disposals
— already much diminished by the cost of my expen-
sive voyage. Signor Pohzzi, however, informed me
that he was not at liberty to dispose of the article, in-


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 69

asmuch as it did not belong to him, and was to be sold
at auction shortly, at the Hotel des Ventes, with a
number of other MSS. and several mbimabula.

This was a severe blow to me. I tried to preserve
my calmness, notwithstanding, and rephed somewhat
to this effect :

" You surprise me. Monsieur ! Tour father, whom I
talked with recently at Girgenti, told me positively
the manuscript was yours. You cannot now attempt
to make me discredit your father's word."

"I did own the manuscript, indeed," answered
Signor Eafael with absolute frankness ; '^but I do not
own it any longer. I sold that manuscript — the re-
markable interest of which you have not faUed to
perceive — to an amateur whom I am forbidden to
name, and who, for reasons which I am not at hberty
to mention, finds himself obliged to sell his coUeotion.
I am honored with the confidence of my customer,
and was commissioned by him to draw up the cata-
logue and manage the sale, which takes place the 24:th
of December. Now, if you wiU be kind enough to
give me your address, I will have the pleasure of send-
ing you the catalogue, which is already in press. You
will find the 'Legende Dor^e' described in it as 'No.
42.'"

I gave my address, and left the shop.

The polite gravity of the son impressed me quite as
disagreeably as the impudent buffoonery of the father.
I hated, from the bottom of my heart, the tricks of the


70 THE OBIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD.

vile hagglers ! It was perfectly evident that the two
rascals had a secret imderstanding, and had only de-
vised this auction-sale, with the aid of a professional
appraiser, to force the bidding on the manuscript I
wanted so much up to an outrageous figure. I was
completely at their mercy. There is one evil in all
passionate desires, even the noblest — ^namely, that they
leave us subject to the will of others, and in so far de-
pendent. This reflection made me suffer cruelly ; but
it did not conquer my longing to own the work of
Clerk Alexander. WhUe I was thus meditating, I
heard a coachman swear. And I discovered it was I
whom he was swearing at only when I felt the pole
of a carriage poke me in the ribs. I started aside,
barely in time to save myself from being run over;
and whom did I perceive through the windows of the
cffwpe? Madame Trepof, being taken by two beauti-
ful horses, and a coachman aU wrapped up in furs hke
a Eussian loyard, into the very street I had just left.
She did not notice me; she was laughing to herself
with that artless grace of expression which still pre-
served for her, at thirty years, all the charm of her
early youth.

" WeU, weU !" I said to myself, " she is laughing ! I
suppose she must have just found another match-box."

And I made my way back to the Fonts, f eehng very
miserable.

N'ature, eternally indifferent, neither hastened nor


THE GRIME OF aTLVESTBE BOWNABD. Yi

hurried the twenty-fourth day of December. I went
to the H6tel Bullion, and took my place in Salle No.
4, immediately below the high desk at which the auc-
tioneer Bouloze and the expert Polizzi were to sit. I
saw the hall gradually fill with familiar faces. I shook
hands with several old booksellers of the quays ; but
that prudence which any large interest inspires in even
the most self-assured caused me to keep silence in re-
gard to the reason of my unaccustomed presence in the
haUs of the Hotel BuUion. On the other hand, I ques-
tioned those gentlemen closely about the purpose of
their attendance at the auction-sale; and I had the
satisfaction of finding them all interested about mat-
ters in no wise related to my affair.

Little by Httle the hall became thronged with inter-
ested or merely curious spectators ; and. after half an
hour's delay, the auctioneer, with his ivory hammer,
the clerk with his bundle of memorandum-papers, and
the crier, carrying his collection-box fixed to the end
of a pole, all took their places on the platform in the
most solemn business manner. The hall-boys ranged
themselves at the foot of the desk. The presiding ofii-
cer having declared the sale open, a partial hush fol-
lowed.

A commonplace lot of Preces piw, with miniatures,
were first sold off at mediocre prices. Needless to say,
the illuminations of these books were in perfect con-
dition !

The lowness of the bids gave courage to the gather-


72 THE CRIME OF 8TLVEBTBE BONNABD.

ing of second-hand booksellers present, who began to
mingle with us, and became familiar. The dealers
in old brass and iric-d-hrac pressed forward in their
turn, waiting for the doors of an adjoining room to be
opened ; and the voice of the auctioneer was drowned
by the jests of the Auvergnats.

A magnificent codex of the " Guerre des Juif s " revived
attention. It was long disputed for. " Five thousand
francs ! five thousand !" called the crier, while the hric-
aAyrac dealers remained silent with admiration. Then
seven or eight antiphonaries brought us back again to
low prices. A fat old woman, in loose gown and bare-
headed — a dealer in second-hand goods — encouraged
by the size of the books and the low prices bidden,
had one of the antiphonaries knocked down to her for
thirty francs.

At last the expert Polizzi announced No 42 : " The
' Golden Legend;' French MS. ; inedited; two superb
miniatures. Started with a bid of three thousand
francs."

" Three thousand ! three thousand bid !" yelled the
crier.

" Three thousand !" dryly repeated the auctioneer.

There was a buzzing in my head, and, as through a
cloud, I saw a host of curious faces all turning towards
the manuscript, which a boy was carrying open through
the audience.

" Three thousand and fifty !" I said.

I was frightened by the sound of my own voice, and


THE CRIME OF STLVB8TBE BONNABD. 73

further confused by seeing, or thinMng that I saw, all
eyes turned upon me.

" Three thousand and fifty on the right !" called the
crier, taking up my bid.

" Three thousand one hundred !" responded Signor
Polizzi.

Then began a heroic duel between the expert and
myself.

" Three thousand five hundred !"

"Six hundred!"

" Seven hundred !"

" Four thousand !"

" Four thousand five hundred."

Then, by a sudden bold stroke, Signor Pohzzi raised
the bid at once to six thousand.

Six thousand francs was all the money I could dis-
pose of. It represented the possible. I risked the
impossible.

" Six thousand one hundred !"

Alas ! even the impossible did not suffice.

"Six thousand five hundred!" rephed Signor Po-
hzzi, with calm.

I bowed my head and sat there stupefied, unable to
answer either yes or no to the crier, who called to me :

" Six thousand five hundred, by me — not by you on
the right there ! — it is my bid — no mistake ! Six thou-
sand five hundred !"

"Perfectly understood!" declared the auctioneer.
"Six thousand five hundred, Perfectly clear; per-


74 THE GBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNARD.

f eotly plain. . . . Any more bids ? The last bid is six
thousand five hundred francs!"

A solemn silence prevailed. Suddenly I felt as if
my head had burst open. It was the hammer of the
ministerial officer, who, with a loud blow on the plat-
form, adjudged No. 42 irrevocably to Signor Pohzzi.
Forthwith the pen of the clerk, coursing over the por
pier-tmibre, registered that great fact- in a single hne.

I was absolutely prostrated, and I felt the utmost
need of rest and quiet. Nevertheless, I did not leave
my seat. My powers of reflection slowly returned.
Hope is tenacious. I had one more hope. It occurred'to
me that the new owner of the " Legende Doree " might
be some intelligent and liberal bibliophile who would
allow me to examine the MS., and perhaps even to
publish the more important parts. And, with this
idea, as soon as the sale was over I approached the
expert as he was leaving the platform.

" Monsieur," I asked him, " did you buy in No. 42
on your own account, or on commission ?"

" On commission. I was instructed not to let it go
at any price."

" Can you teU me the name of the purchaser ?"

" Monsieur, I regret that I cannot serve you in that
respect. I have been strictly forbidden to mention
the name."

I went home in despair.


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 75

December 30, 1859.

"Theeese! don't you hear the bell ? Somebody has
been ringing at the door for the last quarter of an
hour !"

Therese does not answer. She is chattering down-
stairs with the concierge, for sure. So that is the way
you observe your old master's birthday ? Tou desert
me even on the eve of Saint-Sylvestre ! Alas! if I
am to hear any kind wishes to-day, they must come up
from the ground ; for aU who love me have long been
buried. I reaUy don't know what I am stiU living
for. There is the beU. again ! . . . I get up slowly from
my seat at the fire, with my shoulders stiU bent from
stooping over i^, and go to the door myself. Who do
I see. at the threshold? It is not a dripping Love,
and I am not an old Anacreon ; but it is a very pretty
little boy of about ten years old. He is alone; he
raises his face to look at me. His cheeks are blush-
ing ; but his httle pert nose gives one an idea of mis-
chievous pleasantry. He has feathers in his cap, and a
great lace-ruff on his jacket. The pretty httle fellow !
He holds in both arms a bundle as big as himself, and
asks me if I am Monsieur Sylvestre Bonnard. I tell
him yes ; he gives me the bundle, tells me his mamma
sent it to me, and then he runs down-stairs.

I go down a few steps ; I lean over the balustrade,
and see the little cap whirling down the spiral of the
stairway like a feather m the wind. " Good-by, my


76 THE CHIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD.

little boy !" I should have liked so much to question
him. But what, after all, could I have asked ? It is
not polite to question children. Besides, the package
itself win probably give me more information than
the messenger could.

It is a very big bundle, but not very heavy. I take
it into my library, and there untie the ribbons and
unfasten the paper wrappings; and I see — what? a
log! a first-class log! a real Christmas log, but so
light that I know it must be hollow. Then I find that
it is indeed composed of two separate pieces, opening
on hinges, and fastened with hooks. I shp the hooks
back, and find myself inundated with violets ! Yio-
lets ! they pour over my table, over my knees, over the
carpet. They tumble into my vest, into my sleeves.
I am all perfumed with them.

" Therese ! Therese ! fill me some vases with water,
and bring them here, quick ! Here are violets sent to
us I know not from what country nor by what hand ;
but it must be from a perfumed country, and by a very
gracious hand. . . . Do you hear me, old crow ?"

I have put all the violets on my table — now com-
pletely covered by the odorous mass. But there is
still something in the log ... a book — a manuscript.
It is ... I cannot believe it, and yet I cannot doubt it.
... It is the "Legende Doree" ! — it is the manuscript
of the Clerk Alexander ! Here is the " Purification of
the Virgin " and the " Coronation of Proserpine ;"—
here is the legend of Saint Droctoveus, I contemplate


THJS CRIME OF 8TL7E8TBE BONNABD. 11

this violet-perfumed relic. I turn the leaves of it —
between which the dark rich blossoms have slipped
in here and there; and, right opposite the legend
of Saint-Ceciha, I find a card bearing this name :

"JPrmcess Trepof."

Princess Trepof ! — ^you who laughed and wept by
turns so sweetly imder the fair sky of Agrigentum ! —
you, whom a cross old man beheved to be only a
foolish little woman ! — to-day I am convinced of your
rare and beautiful folly; and the old fellow whom
you now overwhelm with happiness will go to kiss
your hand, and give you back, in another form, this
precious manuscript, of which both he and science
owe you an exact and sumptuous publication !

Therese entered my study just at that moment ;
she seemed to be very much excited.

"Monsieur!" she cried, "guess whom I saw just
now in a carriage, with a coat-of-arms painted on it,
that was stopping before the door?"

" PwrUeu ! — Madame Trepof," I exclaimed.

"I don't know anything about any Madame Tre-
pof," answered my housekeeper. "The woman I
saw just now was dressed like a duchess, and had a
little boy with her, with lace-frills aU along the seams
of his clothes. And it was that same little Madam©
Coccoz you once sent a log to, when she was confined
here about eleven years ago. I recognized her at once."


>J8 THE CRIME OF BTLVE8TBE BONNABD.

"What!" I exclaimed, "you mean to say it was
Madame Coccoz, the widow of the almanac-peddler?"

" Herself, Monsieur ! The carriage-door was open
for a minute to let her little boy, who had just come
from I don't know where, get in. She hasn't changed
scarcely at aU. "Well, why should those women
change? — they never worry themselves about any-
thing. Only the Coccoz woman looks a little fatter
than she used to be. And the idea of a woman that
was taken in here out of pure charity coming to show
off her velvets and diamonds in a carriage with a crest
painted on it ! Isn't it shameful !"

" Therese !" I cried, in a terrible voice, " if you
ever speak to me again about that lady except in
terms of the deepest respect, you and I will fall out!
. . . Bring me the Sevres vases to put those violets in,
which now give the City of Books a charm it never
had before."

"While Therese went off with a sigh to get the
Sevres vases, I continued to contemplate those beauti-
ful scattered violets, whose odor spread aU about me
hke the perfume of some sweet presence, some
charming soul ; and I asked myself how it had been
possible for me never to recognize Madame Coccoz in
the person of the Princess Trepof. But that vision
of the young widow, showing me her little child on
the stairs, had been a very rapid one. I had much
more reason to reproach myself for having passed by
a gracious and lovely soul without knowing it.


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNARD. 79

"Bonnard," I said to myself, "thou knowest how-
to decipher old texts ; but thou dost not know how to
read in the Book of Life. That giddy little Madame
Trepof, whom thou once beheved to possess no more
soul than a bird, has expended, in pure gratitude,
more zeal and finer tact than thou didst ever show for
anybody's sake. Eight royally hath she repaid thee
for the log-fire of her churching-day !

" Therese ! Awhile ago you were a magpie ; now
you are becoming a tortoise ! Come and give some
water to these Parmese violets."


part Iff THE DAUGHTER OF CLEMENTINE.


I.

THE FAIRY.

When I left the train at the Melun station, night
had ab-eady spread its peace over the silent country.
The soU, heated through aU the long day by a strong
sun — by a " gros soleil" as the harvesters of the Yal
de Vire say — stiU exhaled a warm heavy smeU. Lush
dense odors of grass passed over the level of the fields.
I brushed away the dust of the railroad car, and joy-
fully inhaled the pure air. My traveUing-bag — filled
by my housekeeper with linen and various small toilet
articles, mMnd/iUs, seemed so Ught in my hand that I
swung it about just as a schoolboy swings his strapped
package of rudimentary books when the class is let
out.

"Would to Heaven that I were again a little urchin
at school ! But it is fuUy fifty years since my gooli||
dead mother made me some ta/rtines of bread and
preserves, and placed them in a basket of which she
slipped the handle over my arm, and then led me,
thus prepared, to the school kept by Monsieur Douloir,


THE CRIME OF 87LVE8TRE BONNARD. 81

at a corner of the Passage du Commerce well known
to the sparrows, between a court and a garden. The
enormous Monsieur Douloir smiled upon us genially,
and patted my cheek to show, no doubt, the affection-
ate interest which my first appearance had inspired.
But when my mother had passed out of the court,
startling the sparrows as she went, Monsieur Douloir
ceased to smile — he showed no more afEectionate in-
terest ; he appeared, on the contrary, to consider me as
a very troublesome little fellow. I discovered, later
on, that he entertained the same feelings towards all
his pupils. He distributed whacks of his ferule with
an agility no one could have expected on the part of
so corpulent a person. But his first aspect of ten-
der interest invariably reappeared when he spoke to
any of our mothers in our presence ; and always at
such times, whUe warmly praising our remarkable
aptitudes, he would cast down upon us a look of in-
tense affection. StiU, those were happy days which I
passed on the benches of Monsieur Douloir with my
Mttle playfellows, who, like myself, cried and laughed by
turns with all their might, from morning tiU evening.
After a whole half -century these souvenirs float up
again, fresh and bright as ever, to the surface of
memory, under this starry sky, whose face has in no
wise changed since then, and whose serene and im-
mutable lights wUl doubtless see many other school-
hoys such as I was slowly turn into gray -headed
savants, afflicted with catarrh.
6


82 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

Stars, who have shone down upon each wise or fool-
ish head among all my f orgptten ancestors, it is under
your soft light that I now feel stir within me a certain
poignant regret ! I would that I could have a son
■ who might be able to see you when I shall see you no
more. How I should love him ! Ah ! such a son
would — what am I saying ? — why, he would be now
just twenty years old if you had only been wUling,
Clementine — ^you whose cheeks used to look so ruddy
under your pink hood ! But you married that young
bank clerk, IS^oel Alexandre, who made so many mill-
ions afterwards ! I never met you again after your
marriage, Clementine, but I can see you now, with your
bright curls and your pink hood.

A looking-glass ! a looking-glass ! a looking-glass !
Eeally, I would be curious to see what I look hke now,
with my white hair, sighing Clementine's name to the
stars ! Still, it is not right to end with sterile irony
the thought begun in the spirit of faith and love, l^o,
Clementine, if your name came to my Mps by chance
this beautiful night, be it forever blessed, your dear
name ! and may you ever, as a happy mother, a happy
grandmother, enjoy to the very end of life with your
rich husband the utmost degree of that happiness
which you had the right to believe you could not win
with the poor young scholar who loved you! If—
though I cannot even now imagine it — if your beauti;|;
ful hair has become white, Clementine, bear worthily
the bundle of keys confided to you by Noel Alex-


THE CRIME OF STL7ESTBE BONNAEB. 83

andre, and impart to your grandchildren the knowl-
edge of all domestic virtues !

The beautiful Night ! She rules, with such noble
repose, over men and animals ahke, kindly loosed by
her from the yoke of daily toil ; and even I feel her
beneficent influence, although my habits of sixty years
have so changed me that I can feel most things only
through the signs which represent them. My world
is wholly formed of words — so much of a philologist
I have become ! /Each one dreams the dream of life
in his own wayVj I have dreamed it in my library ; and
when the hour shall come in which I must leave this
world, may it please God to take me from my ladder
— ^from before my shelves of books ! . . .

""Well, well! it is really himself, j?Q5?'(^'eM/ How
are you. Monsieur Sylvestre Bonnard ? And where
have you been travelling to aU this time, over the
country, while I was waiting for you at the station
with my cabriolet ? You escaped me when the train
came in, and I was driving back, quite disappointed, to
Lusance. Give me your valise, and get up here be-
side me in the carriage. Why, do you know it is fully
seven kilometres from here to the chateau ?"

Who addresses me thus, at the very top of his voice,
from the height of his cabriolet? Monsieur Paul de
Gabry, nephew and heir of Monsieur Honore de Ga-
bry, peer of France in 1842, who recently died at
Monaco. And it was precisely to Monsieur Paul de
Gabry's house that I was going with that valise of


84 THE CRIME OF S7LYESTBE BONNABD.

mine, so carefully strapped by my housekeeper. This
excellent young man has just inherited, conjointly with
his two brothers-iu-law, the property of his uncle, who,
belonging to a very ancient family of distinguished
lawyers, had accumulated in his chateau at Lusance a
library rich in MSS., some dating back to the four-
teenth century. It was for the purpose of makuig an
inventory and a catalogue of these MSS. that I had
come to Lusance at the urgent request of Monsieur
Paul de Gabry, whose father, a perfect gentleman and
distinguished bibliophile, had maintained the most
pleasant relations with me during his lifetime. To
tell the truth. Monsieur Paul has not inherited the fine
tastes of his father. Monsieur Paul likes sporting ; he
is a great authority on horses and dogs ; and I much
fear that of all the sciences capable of satisfying or of
duping the inexhaustible curiosity of mankindj^ those
of the stable and the dog-kennel are the only ones
thoroughly mastered by him.

I cannot say I was surprised to meet him, since we
had made a rendezvous ; but I acknowledge that I
had become so preoccupied with my own thoughts
that I had forgotten all about the Chateau de Lusancej
and its inhabitants, and that the voice of the gen-
tleman calling out to me as I started to follow the
country road winding away before me — "tm honru-
hem de queue," as they say — had given me quite a
start.

I fear my face must have betrayed my incongruous


THE OBIME OF 87LVE8TBE BONNABD. 85

distraction by a certain stupid expression which it is
apt to assume in most of my social transactions. My
valise was pulled up into the carriage, and I followed
my valise. My host pleased me by his straightfor-
ward simphcity.

"I don't know anything myself about your old
parchments," he said; "but I think you will find
fiome folks to talk to at the house. Besides the cure,
who writes books himself, and the doctor, who is a
very good fellow — although a radical — you wiU meet
somebody able to keep you company. I mean my
wife. She is not a very learned woman, but there
are few things which she can't divine pretty well.
Then I count upon being able to keep you with us
long enough to make you acquainted with Mademoi-
selle Jeanne, who has the fingers of a magician and
the soul of an angel."

" And is this delightfully gifted young lady one of
your family ?" I asked.

"Not at all," rephed Monsieur Paul.

" Then she is just a friend of yours ?" I persisted,
rather stupidly.

"She has lost both her father and mother," an-
swered Monsieur de Gabry, keeping his eyes fixed
upon the ears of his horse, whose hoofs rang loudly
over the road blue-tinted by the moonshine. "Her
father managed to get us into some very serious
trouble ; and we did not get off with a fright either!"

Then he shook his head, and changed the subject.


86 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD.

He gave me due warning of the ruinous condition in
which I would find the chateau and the park ; they
had been absolutely deserted for thirty-two years.

I learned from him that Monsieur Honore de Ga-
bry, his uncle, had been on very bad terms with some
poachers, whom he used to shoot at like rabbits. One
of them, a vindictive peasant, who had received a
whole charge of shot ia his face, lay in wait for the
Seigneur one evening behind the trees of the maU,
and very nearly succeeded in killing him, for the ball
took off the tip of his ear.

"My uncle," Monsieur Paul continued, "tried to
discover who had fired the shot ; but he could not see
any one, and he walked back slowly to the house.
The day after he called his steward, and ordered him
to close up the manor and the park, and allow no
living soul to enter. He expressly forbade that any-
thing should be touched, or looked after, or any rep-
arations maxie on the estate during his absence. He
added, between his teeth, that he would return at
Easter, or Trinity Sunday, as they say in the song;
and, just as the song has it. Trinity Sunday passed
without a sign of him. He died last year at Monaco ;
my brother-in-law and myself were the first to enter
the chdteau after it had been abandoned for thirty-
two years. We found a chestnut-tree growing in the
middle of the parlor. As for the park, it was useless
trying to visit it, because there were no more
no alleys."


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 87

My companion ceased to speak ; and only the regu-
lar hoof -beat of the trotting horse, and the chirping
of insects in the grass, broke the silence. On either
hand, the sheaves standing in the fields took, in the
vague moonlight, the appearance of tail white women
kneehng down; and I abandoned myself awhile to
those wonderful childish fancies which the charm of
night always suggests. After driving under the heavy
shadows of the maU, we turned to the right and roUed
up a lordly avenue, at the end of which the chateau
suddenly rose iuto view — a black mass, with turrets
en poivriere. "We followed a sort of causeway, which
gave access to the court-of-honor, and which, passing
over a moat f uU of running water, doubtless replaced
a long-vanished drawbridge. The loss of that draw-
bridge must have been, I think, the first of various hu-
miliations to which the warhke manor had been sub-
jected ere being reduced to that pacific aspect with
which it received me. The stars reflected themselves
with marvellous clearness in the dark water. Mon-
sieur Paul, Hke a courteous host, escorted me to my
chamber in the very top of the building, at the end
of a Jong corridor ; and then, excusing himself for not
preseiiting me at once to his wife by reason of the
lateness of the hour, bade me good-night.

My apartment, painted in white, and hung with
chintz, seemed to keep some traces of the elegant
gallantry of the eighteenth century. A heap of still-
glowing ashes — which testified to the pains taken to


88 TEE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

dispel humidity — filled the fireplace, whose marble
mantelpiece supported a bust of Marie Antoinette
in liscwit. Attached to the frame of the tarnished
and discolored mirror, two brass hooks, that had once
doubtless served the ladies of old-fashioned days to
hang their chatelaines on, seemed to offer a very
opportune means of suspending my watch, which I
took care to wind up beforehand ; for, contrary to the
opinion of the Thelemites, I hold that man is only
master of time, which is Life itself, when he has
divided it into hours, minutes, and seconds — ^that is
to say, into parts proportioned to the brevity of hu-
man existence.

And I thought to myself that life really seems
short to us only because we measure it irrationally by
our own mad hopes. "We have aU of us, Mke the old
man in the fable, a new wing to add to our building.
I want, for example, before I die, to finish my " History
of the Abbots of Saint-Germain-des-Pres." The time
God allots to each one of us is like a precious tissue
which we embroider as we best know how. I had
begun my woof with aU sorts of philological Ulustrar
tions. ... So my thoughts wandered on ; and at last,
as I bound vaj foulard about my head, the notion of
Time led me back to the past ; and for the second
time within the same round of the dial I thought of
you, OMmentine — to bless you again in your pos-
terity, if you have any, before blowing out my candle
and falling asleep amidst the chanting of the f rogs.y^


THE CBIME OF 8TLVESTEE BONNABD. 89

/ II.

DtTRiNG breakiast I had many opportunities to ap-
preciate the goda taste, tact, and intelligence of Ma-
dame de Gabm who told me that the chdteau had
its ghosts, and was especially haunted by the " Lady-
with-three-wrinkles-in- her -back," a poisoner during
her lifetime, and thereafter a Soul-in-pain. I could
never describe how much wit and animation she gave
to this old nurse's tale. "We took our coflfee on the
terrace, whose balusters, clasped and forcibly torn
away from their stone coping by a vigorous growth of
ivy, remained suspended in the grasp of the amorous
plant Uke bewildered Athenian women in the arms
of ravishing Centaurs.

The chateau, shaped something like a four-wheeled
wagon, with a turret at each of the four angles, had
lost all original character by reason of repeated re-
modeUings. It was merely a fine spacious building,
nothing more. It did not appear to me to have suf-
fered much damage during its abandonment of thirty-
two years. But when Madame de Gabry conducted
me into the great salon of the ground-floor, I saw that
the planking was bulged in and out, the plinths rotten,
the Wainscotings split apart, the paintings of the piers
turned black and hanging more than half out of their
settings. A chestnut-tree, after forcing up the planks
of the floor, had grown taU under the ceihng, and was
reaching out its large-leaved branches towards the
glassless windows.


90 THE CHIME OE SYLYESTRE BONNABD.

This spectacle was not devoid of charm; but I
could not look at it without anxiety, as I remembered
that the rich library of Monsieur Honore de Gabry,
in an adjoining apartment, must have been exposed
for the same length of time to the same forces of de-
cay. Yet, as I looked at the young chestnut-tree in
the salon, I could not but admire the magnificent vigor
of Nature, and that resistless power which forces every
germ to develop into life. On the other hand I felt
saddened to think that, whatever effort we scholars
may make to preserve dead things from passing away,
we are laboring painfully in vain. Whatever has
hved becomes the necessary food of new existences.
And the Arab who builds himself a hut out of the
marble fragments of a Palmyra temple is reaUy more
of a philosopher than aU the guardians of museums at
London, Munich, or Paris.


August 11.

All day long I have been classifying MSS. . . . The
sun came in through the lofty uncurtained windows ;
and, during my reading, often very interesting, I could
hear the languid bumble-bees bump heavily against;
the windows, and the flies, intoxicated with light and
heat, making their vsdngs hum in circles round my
head. So loud became their humming about three
o'clock that I looked up from the document I was
reading — a document containing very precious mate-


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 91

rials for the history of Melun iu the thirteenth centu-
ry — to watch the concentric movements of those
tiny creatures. ^^ JBesUons" Lafontaine calls them: he
found this form of the -word in the old popular speech,
whence also the term, tapisserie-a-iestions, applied to
figured tapestry. I was compelled to confess that
the effect of heat upon the wings of a fly is totally
different from that it exerts upon the brain of a pale-
ographical archivist ; for I found it very difficult to
think, and a rather pleasant languor weighing upon
me, from which I could rouse myself only by a very
determined effort. The dinner-bell then startled me
in the midst of my labors ; and I had barely time to
put on my new dress-coat, so as to make a respectable
appearance before Madame de Gabry.

The repast, generously served, seemed to prolong it-
self for my benefit. I am more than a fair judge of
wine ; and my hostess, who discovered my knowledge
in this regard, was friendly enough to open a certain
bottle of Chdteau-Margaux in my honor. "With deep
respect I drank of this famous and knightly old wine,
which comes from the slopes of Bordeaux, and of
which the flavor and exhilarating power are beyond
aU praise. The ardor of it spread gently through raj
veins, and filled me with an almost juvenile animation.
Seated beside Madame de Gabry on the terrace, un-
der the gloaming which gave a charming melancholy
to the park, and lent to every object an air of mys-
tery, I took pleasure in communicating my impres-


92 THE CRIME OF STL7E8TRE BONNARD.

sions of the scene to my hostess. I discoursed with
a vivacity quite remarkable on the part of a man
so devoid of imagination as I am. I described to her
spontaneously, mtKout quoting from any old texts,
the caressing melancholy of the evening, and the beau-
ty of that natal earth which feeds us, not only with
bread and wine, but also with ideas, sentiments, behef s,
and which vsdU at last take us aU back to her mater-
nal breast again, like so many tired little children at
the close of a long day.

" Monsieur," said the kind lady, " you see these old
towers, those trees, that sky ; is it not quite natural
that the personages of the popular tales and folk-
songs should have been evoked by such scenes ? "Why,
over there is the very path which Little Eed Eiding-
hood followed when she went to the woods to pick
nuts. Across this changeful and always vapory sky
the fairy chariots used to roll ; and the north tower
might have sheltered under its pointed roof that same
old spinning woman whose distaff pricked the Sleep-
ing Beauty ia the "Wood."

I continued to muse upon her pretty fancies, whUe
Monsieur Paul related to me, as he puffed a very
strong cigar, the history of some suit he had brought
against the commune about a water-right. Madame
de Gabry, feeling the chUl night-air, began to shiver
under the shawl her husband had wrapped about her,
and left us to go to her room. I then decided, instead
of going to my own, to return to the library and con-


THE GRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 93

tinue my examination of the manuscripts. In spite
of the protests of Monsieur Paul, I entered what I
may call, in old-fashioned phrase, "the book-room,"
and started to work by the light of a lamp.

After having read fifteen pages, evidently written
by some ignorant and careless scribe, for I could
scarcely discern their meaning, I plunged my hand
into the pocket of my coat to get my snuff-box ; but
this movement, usually so natural and almost instinc-
tivcj this time cost me some effort and even fatigue.
Nevertheless, I got out the silver box, and took from it
a pinch of the odorous powder, which, somehow or
other, I managed to spDl all over my shirt-bosom un-
der my baffled nose. I am sure my nose must have
expressed its disappointment, for it is a very expres-
sive nose. More than once it betrayed my secret
thoughts, and especially upon a certain occasion at
the public library of Ooutances, where I discovered,
right in front of my colleague Brioux, the " Cartulary
of Notre-Dame-des-Anges."

What a delight ! My little eyes remained as duU
and expressionless as ever behind my spectacles. But
at the mere sight of my thick pug-nose, which quiver-
ed with joy and pride, Brioux knew that I had found
something. He noted the volume I was looking at,
observed the place where I put it back, pounced upon
it as soon as I turned my back, copied it secretly, and
published it in haste, for the sake of playing me a
trick. But his edition swarms with errors, and I had


94 THE CRIME OF BTLVE8TBE BONNABD.

the satisfaction of afterwards criticising some of the
gross blunders he made.

But to come back to the point at which I left off :
I began to suspect that I was getting very sleepy in-
deed. I was looking at a chart of which the interest
may be divined from the fact that it contained men-
tion of a hutch sold to Jehan d'EstonviUe, priest, in
1312. But although, even then, I could recognize the
importance of the document, I did not give it that
attention it so strongly invited. My eyes would keep
turning, against my will, towards a certain corner
of the table where there was nothing whatever inter-
esting to a learned mind. There was only a big
German book there, bound in pigskin, with brass studs
on the sides, and very thick cording upon the hack.
It was a fine copy of a compilation which has little
to recommend it except the wood engravings it con-
tains, and which is well known as the "Cosmog-
raphy of Munster." This volume, with its covers
slightly open, was placed upon edge, with the back
upwards.

I could not say for how long I had been staring
causelessly at the sixteenth-century folio, when my eyes
were captivated by a sight so extraordinary that even
a person as devoid of imagination as I could not but
have been greatly astonished by it.

I perceived, aU of a sudden, without having noticed
her coming into the room, a little creature seated on
the back of the book, with one knee bent and one leg


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNARD. 95

hanging down — somewhat in the attitude of the ama-
zons of Hyde Park or the Bois de Boulogne on horse-
back. She was so small that her swinging foot did
not reach the table, over which the trail of her dress
extended in a serpentine line. But her face and fig-
ure were those of an adult. The fulness of her cor-
sage and the roundness of her waist could leave no
doubt of that, even for an old samcmt like myself. I
will venture to add that she was very handsome, with
a proud mien ; for my iconographic studies have long
accustomed me to recognize at once the perfection of
a type and the character of a physiognomy. The
countenance of this lady who had seated herself in-
opportunely on the back of a " Cosmography of Mun-
ster " expressed a mingling of haughtiness and mis-
chievousness. She had the air of a queen, but a
capricious queen; and I judged, from the mere ex-
pression of her eyes, that she was accustomed to
wield great authority somewhere, in a very whimsical
manner. Her mouth was imperious and mocking, and
those blue eyes of hers seemed to laugh in a disquiet-
ing way under her finely arched black eyebrows. I
have always heard that black eyebrows are very be-
coming to blondes ; and this lady was very blonde.
On the whole, the impression she gave me was one
of greatness.

It may seem odd to say that a person who was no taller
than a wine-bottle, and who naight have been hidden
in my coat pocket — but that it would have been very


96 THE CRIME OF BTLVESTBE BONNABD.

disrespectful to put her in it — gave me precisely an
idea of greatness. But in the fine proportions of the
lady seated upon the " Cosmography of Munster " there
was such a proud elegance, such a harmonious majesty,
and she maintained an attitude at once so easy and
so noble, that she really seemed to me a very great
person. Although my ink-bottle, which she examined
with an expression of such mockery as appeared to
indicate that she knew in advance every word that
could ever come out of it at the end of my pen, was
for her a deep basin in which she would have black-
ened her gold-clocked pink stockings up to the garter,
I can assure you that she was great, and imposing
even in her sprightliness.

Her costume, worthy of her face, was extremely
magnificent ; it consisted of a robe of gold-and-silver
brocade, and a mantle of nacarat velvet, fined with
vair. Her head-dress was a sort of hemvm, with two
high points ; and pearls of splendid lustre made it
bright and luminous as a crescent moon. Her fittle
white hand held a wand. That wand drew my at-
tention very strongly, because my archaeological stud-
ies had taught me to recognize with certainty every
sign, by which the notable personages of legend and
of history are distinguished. This knowledge came
to my aid during various very queer conjectures with
which I was laboring. I examined the wand, and
saw that it appeared to have been cut from a branch
of hazel.


THE OBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. d7

" Then it is a fairy's wand," I said to myself ; — '' con-
sequently the lady who carries it is a fairy."

^appy at thus discovering what sort of a person
was before me, I tried to collect my mind sufficiently
to make her a graceful compliment. It would have
given me much satisfaction, I confess, if I could have
talked to her about the part taken by her people, not
less in the life of the Saxon and Germanic races, than
in that of the Latin Occident. Such a dissertation,
it appeared to me, would have been an ingenious
method of thanking the lady for having thus ap-
peared to an old scholar, contrary to the invariable
custom of her kindred, who never show themselves
but to iimocent children or ignorant village-folk.

Because one happens to be a fairy, one is none the
less a woman, I said to myself ; and since Madame
Eecamier, according to what I heard J. J. Ampere
say, used to blush with pleasure when the httle chim-
ney-sweeps opened their eyes as wide as they could
to look at her, surely the supernatural lady seated
upon the "Cosmography of Munster" might feel flat-
tered to hear an erudite man discourse learnedly about
her, as about a medal, a seal, a fibula, or a token. But
such an undertaking, which would have cost my timid-
ity a great deal, became totally out of the question
when I observed the Lady of the Cosmography sud-
denly take from an alms-purse hanging at her girdle
the very smallest nuts I had ever seen, crack the
shells between her teeth, and throw them at my nose,


98 THE GRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNAHD.

while she nibbled the kernels with the gravity of a
suckling child.

At this conjuncture, I did what the dignity of science
demanded of me — I remained silent. But the nut-
shells caused such a painful tickling that I put up my
hand to my nose, and found, to my great surprise, that
my spectacles were straddling the very end of it — so
that I was actually looking at the lady, not through
my spectacles, but over them. This was incompre-
hensible, because my eyes, worn out over old texts,
cannot ordinarily distinguish anything without glasses
— could not tell a melon from a decanter, though the
two were placed close up to my nose.

That nose of mine, remarkable for its size, its shape,
and its coloration, legitimately attracted the attention
of the fairy ; for she seized my goose-quiU pen, which
was sticking up from the ink-bottle like a plume, and
she began to pass the feather-end of that pen over my
nose. I had had more than once, in company, occasion
to suffer cheerfully from the innocent mischief of
young ladies, who made me join their games, and
would offer me their cheeks to kiss through the back
of a chair, or invite me to blow out a candle which
they would lift suddenly above the range of my breath.
But until that moment no person of the fair sex had
ever subjected me to such a whimsical piece of famil-
iarity as that of tickling my nose with my own feather
pen. . Happily I remembered the maxim of my late
grandfather, who was accustomed to say that every-


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABB. 99

thing was permissible on. the part of ladies, and that
whatever they do to us is to be regarded as a grace and
a favor. Therefore, as a grace and a favor I received
this nutshells and the titillations with my own pen, and
I tried to smile. Much more ! — I even found speech.

"Madame," I said, with dignified poUteness, "you
accord the honor of a visit not to a sUly child, nor to
a boor, but to a bibhophile who is very happy to make
your acquaintance, and who knows that long ago you
used to make elf -knots in the manes of mares at the
crib, drink the milk from the skimming-pails, shp
grames-d-gratt&r down the backs of our great-grand-
mothers, make the hearth sputter in the faces of the
old folks, and, in short, fill the house with disorder
and gayety. Tou can also boast of giving the nicest
frights in the world to lovers who stayed out in the
woods too late of evenings. But I thought you had
vanished out of existence at least three centuries ago.
Can it reaUy be, Madame, that you are still to be seen
in this age of railroads and telegraphs ? My concierge,
who used to be a nurse in her young days, does not
know your story ; and my httle boy-neighbor, whose
nose is still wiped for him by his ionme, declares that
you do not exist."

" What do you yourself think about it ?" she cried,
in an argentine voice, straightening up her royal httle
figure in a very haughty fashion, and whipping the
back of the " Cosmography of Munster" as though it
were a hippogriffe.


100 THE CRIME OF 87L7E8TBE BONNABD.

" I don't really know," I answered, rubbing my eyes.
This reply, indicating a deeply scientific scepticism,
had the most deplorable effect upon my questioner.

"Monsieur Sylvestre Bonnard," she said to me,
*'you are nothing but an old pedant. I always sus-
. pected as much. The smallest little ragamuffin who
goes along the road with his shirt-tail sticking out
through a hole in his pantaloons knows more about
me than all the old spectacled folks in your Institutes
and your Academies. To know ii; Tn^thiTigL^i aU;
t,r> jmaginP! ip pverythiTig. "K[at.tHwg exi^tTJ-eseept that
w hich isJ ^Tflng^"'^ — I am imaginary. That is to ex-
ist, I should certainly think ! I am dreamed of, and I
appear. TJ^.v^ryAMTiir ]^ onl y dream; and as a obody
eYer-dreftms~ahQiit.4ri3U. Sylvestre Bonnard. it is you
wheH-do-nofexist. I charm the world; i am every-
where — on a moonbeam, in the trembling of a hidden
spring, in the moving of leaves that murmur, in the
white vapors that rise each morning from the hollow
meadow, in the thickets of pink brier — everywhere !
... I am seen ; I am loved. There are sighs uttered,
weird thrills of pleasure felt by those who foUow the
light print of my feet, as I make the dead leaves whis-
per. I make the little children smile ; I give wit to
j the dullest-minded nurses. Leaning above the cra-
I dies, I play, I comfort, I luU to sleep — and you doubt
; whether I exist ! Sylvestre Bonnard, your warm coat
tcovers the hide of an ass !"

She ceased speaking; her delicate nostrils swelled


THE CRIME OF 8TL7E8TRE BONNABD. \Q\

with indignation ; and while I admired, despite my
vexation, the heroic anger of this Uttle person, she
pushed my pen about in the iak-bottle, backward and
forward, hke an oar, and then suddenly threw it at
my nose, point first.

I rubbed my face, and felt it all covered with ink.
She had disappeared. My lamp was extiuguished.
A ray of moonlight streamed down through a win-
dow and descended upon the " Cosmography of Mun-
ster." A strong cool wind, which had arisen very
suddenly without my knowledge, was blowing my
papers, pens, and wafers about. My table was all
stained with ink. I had left my window open during
the storm. "What an imprudence !


III.

I WEOTE to my housekeeper, as I promised, that
I was safe and sound. But I took good care not to
tell her that I had caught cold from going to sleep ia
the library at night with the window open ; for the
good woman would have been as unsparing in her
remonstrances to me as parhaments to Mngs. " At
your age, Monsieur," she would have been sure to say,
"one ought to have more sense." She is simple
enough to beheve that sense grows with age. 1 seem
to her an exception to this rule.

Not having any similar motive for concealing my


102 THE CRIME OF STLYESTBE BONNAMD.

experiences from Madame de Gabry, I told her all
about my vision, which she seemed to enjoy very much.

" "Why, that was a charming dream of yours," she
said ; " and one must have real genius to dream such
a dream."

"Then I am a real genius when I am asleep," I
responded.

" When you dream," she rephed ; " and you are al-
ways dreaming."

I know that Madame de Gabry, in making this re-
mark, only wished to please me ; but that intention
alone deserves my utmost gratitude ; and it is there-
fore in a spirit of thankfulness and kindliest remem-
brance that I write down her words, which I will read
over and over again until my dying day, and which
wiU never be read by any one save myself.

I passed the next few days in completing the in-
ventory of the manuscripts in the Lusance library.
Certain confidential observations dropped by Monsieur
Paul de Gabry, however, caused me some painful sur-
prise, and made me decide to pursue the work after a
different manner from that in which I had begun it.
From those few words I learned that the fortune of
Monsieur Honore de Gabry, which had been badly
managed for many years, and subsequently swept
away to a large extent through the failure of a banker
whose name I do not know, had been transmitted to
the heirs of the old French nobleman only under the
form of mortgaged real estate and irrecoverable assets.


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 103

Monsieur Paul, by agreement with his joint heirs,
had decided to sell the library, and I was intrusted
with the task of making arrangements to have the
sale effected upon advantageous terms. But, totally
ignorant as I was of aU business methods and trade-
customs, I thought it best to get the advice of a pub-
lisher who was one of my private friends. I wrote
him at once to come and join me at Lusance; and
while waiting for his arrival I took my hat and cane
and made visits to the dififerent churches of the dio-
cese, in several of which I knew there were certain
mortuary inscriptions to be found which had never
been correctly copied.

So I left my hosts and departed on my pilgrimage.
Exploring the churches and the cemeteries every day,
visiting the parish priests and the village notaries,
supping at the public inns with peddlers and cattle-
dealers, sleeping at nights between sheets scented
with lavender, I passed one whole week in the quiet
but profound enjoyment of observing the hving en-
gaged in their various daily occupations even while I
was thinking of the dead. As for the purpose of my
researches, I made only a few mediocre discoveries,
which caused me only a mediocre joy, and one there-
fore salubrious and not at aU fatiguing. I copied
a few interesting epitaphs ; and I added to this Mttle
collection a few recipes for cooking country dishes,
which a certain good priest kindly gave me.

With these riches, I returned to Lusance; and I


104 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

crossed the court-of -honor with such secret satisfac-
tion as a loitrgeois feels on entering his own home.
This was the effect of the kindness of my hosts ; and
the impression I received on crossing their threshold
proves, better than any reasoning could do, the excel-
lence of their hospitahty.

I entered the great parlor without meeting any-
body; and the young chestnut-tree there spreading
out its broad leaves seemed to me like an old friend.
But the next thing which I saw — on the pier-table-^
caused me such a shock of surprise that I readjusted
my glasses upon my nose with both hands at once,
and then felt myself over so as to get at least some
superficial proof of my own existence. In less than
one second there thronged into my mind twenty dif-
ferent conjectures — ^the most rational of which was
that I had suddenly become crazy. It seemed to me
absolutely impossible that what I was looking at could
exist ; yet it was equally impossible for me not to
see it as a thing actually existing. "What caused my
surprise was resting on the pier-table, above which
rose a great duU speckled mirror.

I saw myself in that mirror ; and I can say that I
saw for once in my life the perfect image of stupefac-
tion. But I made proper allowance for myself ; I ap-
proved myself for beiug so stupefied by a really stupe-
fying thing.

The object I was thus examining with a degree of
astonishment that aU my reasoning power failed to


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTRE BONNARB. 105

lessen, obtruded itself on my attention though quite
motionless. The persistence and fixity of the phe-
nomenon excluded any idea of hallucination. I am
totally exempt from aU nervous disorders capable of
influencing the sense of sight. The cause of such
visual disturbance is, I think, generally due to stom-
ach trouble ; and, thank God ! I have an excellent
stomach. Moreover, visual illusions are accompanied
with special abnormal conditions which impress the
victims of hallucination themselves, and inspire them
with a sort of terror. Now, I felt nothing of this
kind; the object which I saw, although seemingly
impossible in itself, appeared to me under aU the
natural conditions of reality. I observed that it had
three dimensions, and colors, and that it cast a shadow.
Ah ! how I stared at it ! The water came into my
eyes so that I had to wipe the glasses of my spec-
tacles.

Finally I found myself obhged to yield to the evi-
dence, and to affirm that I had really before my eyes
the Fairy, the very same Fairy I had been dream-
ing of in the library a few evenings before. It was
she, it was her very self, I assure you ! She had the
same air of child-queen, the same proud supple poise ;
she held the same hazel wand in her hand; she
stm wore her double-peaked head-dress, and the trail
of her long brocade robe undulated about her little
feet. Same face, same figure. It was she indeed;
and to prevent any possible doubt of it, she was seated


106 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTRE BONNABD.

on the back of a huge old-fashioned book strongly-
resembling the " Cosmography of Munster." Her im-
mobility but half reassured me ; I was reaUy afraid
that she was going to take some more nuts out of her
alms-purse and throw the shells at my face.

I was standing there, waving my hands and gaping,
when the musical and laughing voice of Madame de
Gabry suddenly rang in my ears.

" So you are examining your fairy. Monsieur Bon-
nard !" said my hostess. " "Well, do you think the
resemblance good?"

It was very quickly said ; but even while hearing
it I had time to perceive that my fairy was a statuette
in colored wax, modelled with much taste and spirit by
some novice hand. But the phenomenon, even thus
reduced by a rational explanation, did not cease to
excite my surprise. How, and by whom, had the
Lady of the Cosmography been enabled to assume
plastic existence ? That was what remained for me to
learn.

Turning towards Madame Gabry, I perceived that
she was not alone. A young girl dressed in black
was standing beside her. She had large intelligent
eyes, of a gray as sweet as that of the sky of the
Isle of France, and at once artless and characteristic
in their expression. At the extremities of her rather
thin arms were fidgeting uneasily two slender hands,
supple, but slightly red, as it becomes the hands of
young girls to be. Sheathed in her closely fitting


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. io7

merino robe, she had the slim grace of a young tree ;
and her large mouth bespoke frankness. I could not
describe how much the child pleased me at first sight !
She was not beautiful ; but the three dimples of her
cheeks and chin seemed to laugh, and her whole per-
son, which revealed the awkwardness of innocence,
had something in it indescribably good and sincere.

My gaze alternated from the statuette to the young
girl ; and I saw her blush — so frankly and fully ! —
the crimson passing over her face as by waves.

"WeU," said my hostess, who had become suffi-
ciently accustomed to my distracted moods to put the
same question to me twice, " is that the very same
lady who came in to see you through the window that
you left open ? She was very saucy ; but then you
were quite imprudent! Anyhow, do you recognize
her?"

" It is her very self," I rephed ; " I see her now on
that pier-table precisely as I saw her on the table in
the library."

" Then, if that be so," rephed Madame de Gabry, " you
have to blame for it, in the first place, yourself, as a
man who, although devoid of all imagination, to use
your own words, knew how to depict your dream in
such vivid colors ; in the second place, me, who was
able to remember and repeat faithfully all your dream ;
and, lastly. Mademoiselle Jeanne, whom I now intro-
duce to you, for she herself modelled that wax-figure
precisely according to my instructions."


108 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABB.

Madame de Gabry had taken the young girl's hand
as she spoke ; but the latter had suddenly broken away
from her, and was already running through the park
with the speed of a bird.

"Little crazy creature!" Madame de Gabry cried
after her. " How can one be so shy ? Come back
here to be scolded and kissed !"

But it was all of no avail ; the frightened child dis-
appeared among the shrubbery. Madame de Gabry
seated herself in the only chair remaining in the dilap-
idated parlor.

" I should be much surprised," she said, " if my hus-
band had not already spoken to you of Jeanne. She
is a sweet child, and we both love her very much.
Tell me the plain truth; what do you think of her
statuette?"

I replied that the work was full of good taste and
spirit, but that it showed some want of study and prac-
tice on the author's part; otherwise I had been ex-
tremely touched to think that those young fingers
should have thus embroidered an old man's rough
sketch of fancy, and figured so brUhantly the dreams
of a dotard Uke myself.

" The reason I ask your opinion," replied Madame
de Gabry, seriously, " is that Jeanne is a poor orphan.
Do you think she could earn her living by modelling
statuettes like this one ?"

" As for that, no !" I rephed ; " and I think there is
no reason to regret the fact. You say the girl is affec-


THE OBIME OF 87LVE8TBE BONNARD. 109

tionate and sensitive ; I can well believe you ; I could
believe it from her face alone. There are excitements
in artist-life which impel generous hearts to act out of
all rule and measure. This young creature is made to
love ; keep her for the domestic hearth. There only
is real happiness."

"But she has no dowry!" replied Madame de
Gabry.

Then, extending her hand to me, she continued :

"Tou are our friend; I can tell you everything.
The father of this child was a banker, and one of our
friends. He went into a colossal speculation, and it
ruined him. He survived only a few months after his
failure, in which, as Paul must have told you, three
fourths of my uncle's fortune were lost, and more than
half of our own.

" We had made his acquaintance at Monaco, during
the winter we passed there at my uncle's house. He
had an adventurous disposition, but such an engaging
manner ! He deceived himself before he ever deceived
others. After aU, it is in the abihty to deceive one's
self that the greatest talent is shown, is it not ? Well,
we were captured — my husband, my uncle, and I ; and
we risked much more than a reasonable amount in a
very hazardous undertaking. But, bah ! as Paul says,
since we have no children we need not worry about it.
Besides, we have the satisfaction of knowing that the
friend in whom we trusted was an honest man. . . .
You must know his name, it was so often in the pa-


110 THE CBIME OF 8TLVESTRE BONNARD.

pers and on public placards — Noel Alexandre. His
wife was a very sweet person. I knew her only when
she was already past her prime, with traces of having
once been very pretty, and a taste for fashionable
style and display which seemed quite becoming to
her. She was naturally fond of social excitement;
but she showed a great deal of courage and dignity
after the death of her husband. She died a year after
him, leaving Jeanne alone in the world."

" Clementine !" I cried out.

And on thus learning what I had never even imag-
ined — ^the mere idea of which would have set all the
forces of my soul in revolt— upon hearing that Clemen-
tine was no loiiger in this world, something hke a great
silence came within me ; and the feeling which flooded
my whole being was not a keen, strong pain, but a
quiet and solemn sorrow. Yet I was conscious of
some incomprehensible sense of alleviation, and my
thought rose suddenly to heights before unknown.

" From wheresoever thou art at this moment, Cle-
mentine," I said to myself, "look down upon this
heart now indeed cooled by age, yet whose blood once
boiled for thy sake, and say whether it is not reani-
mated by the mere thought of being able to love all
that remains of thee on earth. Everything passes away
since thou thyself hast passed away ; but Life is im-
mortal ; it is that Life we must love in its forms eter-
nally renewed. All the rest is child's play ; and I my-
self, with all my books, am only like a child playiag


THE CRIME OF S7LVESTBE BONNABD. m

with marbles. The purpose of life — it is thou, Clemen-
tine, who hast revealed it to me !". . .

Madame de Gabry aroused me from my thoughts
by murmuring,

" The child is poor."

" The daughter of Clementine is poor!" I exclaimed
aloud; "how fortunate that it is so! I would not
wish that any one but myself should provide for her
and dower her! No! the daughter of Clementine
must not have her dowry from any one but me."

And, approaching Madame de Gabry as she rose
from her chair, I took her right hand ; I kissed that
hand, and placed it on my arm, and said,

" You will conduct me to the grave of the widow
of Noel Alexandre."

And I heard Madame de Gabry asking me,

" "Why are you crying ?"


IV.

THE LITTLE SAINT-GEORGE.

April 16.

Saint Deoctoveus and the early abbots of Saint-
Germain-des-Pres have been occupying me for the
past forty years ; but I do not know if I shall be able
to write their history before I go to join them. It is
already quite a long time since I became an old man.
One day last year, on the Pont des Arts, one of my


112 TEE OBIME OF BYLVESTBE BONNARD.

fellow-members at the Institute was lamenting before
me over the ennui of becoming old.

" Still," Saint-Beuve replied to him, " it is the only I
way that has yet been found of living a long time." /

I have tried this way, and I know just what it is
worth. The trouble of it is not that one lasts too
long, but that one sees all about him pass away —
mother, wife, friends, children. Nature makes and
unmakes all these divine treasures with gloomy indif-
ference, and at last we find that we have not loved,
we have only been embracing shadows. But how
sweet some shadows are ! If ever creature glided
Mke a shadow through the life of a man, it was cer-
tainly that young girl whom I fell in love with when
— incredible, though it now seems — I was myself a
youth.

A Christian sarcophagus from the catacombs of
Kome bears a formula of imprecation, the whole ter-
rible meaning of which I only learned with time. It
says: " Whatsoever mvpious vna/n violates this sepul-
chre, may he die the last of his own people .'" In my
capacity of archaeologist, I have opened tombs and
disturbed ashes in order to collect the shreds of ap-
parel, metal ornaments, or gems that were mingled
with those ashes. But I did it only through that sci-
entific curiosity which does not exclude the feehngs
of reverence and of piety. May that malediction
graven by some one of the first followers of the apos-
tles upon a martyr's tomb never faU upon me! I


THE CRIME OF SYLVESTRM BONNABD. 113

ought not to fear to survive my own people so long
as there are men in the world ; for there are always
some whom one can love.

But the power of love itself weakens and gradually
becomes lost with age, like aU the other energies of
man. Example proves it ; and it is this which terri-
fies me. Am I sure that I have not myself already
suffered this great loss ? I would surely have felt it,
but for the happy meeting which has rejuvenated me.
Poets speak of the Fountain, of Youth : it does exist ;
it gushes up from the earth at every step we take.
And one passes by without drinking of it !

The young girl I loved, married of her own choice
to a rival, passed, all gray-haired, into the eternal rest.
I have found her daughter — so that my life, which
before seemed to me without utihty, now once more
finds a purpose and a reason for being.

To-day I " take the sun," as they say in Provence ;
I take it on the terrace of the Luxembourg, at the
foot of the statue of .Marguerite de Navarre. It is
a spring sun, intoxicating as young wine. I sit and
dream. My thoughts escape from my head Uke the
foam from a bottle of beer. They are Mght, and their
fizzing amuses me. I dream : such a pastime is cer-
tainly permissible to an old fellow who has published
thirty volumes of texts, and contributed to the Jov/r-
nal des Smmits for twenty-six years. I have the
satisfaction of feeling that I performed my task as
well as it was possible for me to do, and that I util-
8


114 THE CRIME OF 8YLVESTRE BONNABD.

ized to their fullest extent those mediocre faculties
with which l^ature endowed me. My efforts were
not aJl in vain, and I have contributed, in my own
modest way, to that renaissance of historical labors
which will remain the honor of this restless century.
I shall certainly be counted among those ten or twelve
who revealed to France her own literary antiquities.
My publication of the poetical works of Gautier de
Coincy inaugurated a judicious system and made a
date. It is in the austere calm of old age that I de-
cree to myself this deserved credit, and God, who sees
miy heart, knows whether pride or vanity have aught
to do with this self-award of justice.

But I am tired ; my eyes are dim ; my hand trem-
bles, and I see an image of myself in those old men
of Homer, whose weakness excluded them from the
battle, and who, seated upon the ramparts, lifted up
their voices like crickets among the leaves.

So my thoughts were wandering when three young
men seated themselves near me. I do not know
whether each one of them had come in three boats,
like the monkey of Lafontaine, but the three cer-
tainly displayed themselves over the space of twelve
chairs. I took pleasure in watching them, not be-
cause they had anything very extraordinary about
them, but because I discerned in them that brave
joyous manner which is natural to youth. They were
from the schools. I was less assured of it by the
books they were carrying than by the character of


THE GRIME OF 8TLVESTRE BONNABD. 115

their physiognomy. (For all who busy themselves
with the things of the mind can be at once recog-
nized by an indescribable something which is com-
mon to all of them.) I am very fond of young people ;
and these pleased me, in spite of a certain provoking
wild manner which recalled to me my own college
days with marvellous vividness. But they did not
wear velvet doublets and long hair, as we used to do ;
they did not walk about, as we used to do, with a
death's-head ; they did not cry out, as we used to do,
" HeU and malediction !" They were quite properly
dressed, and neither their costume nor their language
had anything suggestive of the Middle Ages. I must
also add that they paid considerable attention to the
women passing on the terrace, and expressed their
admiration of some of them in very animated lan-
guage. But their reflections, even on this subject,
were not of a character to obHge me to flee from my
seat. Besides, so long as youth is studious, I think it
has a right to its gayeties.

One of them, having made some gallant pleasantry
which I forget, the smallest and darkest of the three
exclaimed, with a slight Gascon accent,

" "What a thing to say ! Only physiologists like us
have any right to occupy ourselves about living mat-
ter. As for you, GeUs, who only live in the past —
like all your fellow archivists and paleographers —
you wiU do better to confine yourself to those stone
women over there, who are your contemporaries."


116 THE GRIME OF 8YLVESTBE BONNABD.

And he pointed to the statues of the Ladies of An-
cient France which towered up, all white, in a half-
circle under the trees of the terrace. This joke,
though in itself trifling, enabled me to know that the
young man called Gelis was a student at the Ecole des
Chartes. From the conversation which followed I
was able to learn that his neighbor, blond and wan
almost to diaphaneity, taciturn and sarcastic, was
Boulmier, a fellow - student. Gelis and the future
doctor (I hope he will become one some day) dis-
coursed together with much fantasy and spirit. In
the midst of the loftiest speculations they would
play upon words, and make jokes after the peculiar
fashion of really witty persons — that is to say, in a
style of enormous absurdity. I need hardly say, I
suppose, that they only deigned to maintain the most
monstrous kind of paradoxes. They employed all their
powers of imagination to make themselves as ludicrous
as possible, and all their powers of reasoning to assert
the contrary of common - sense. All the better for
them ! I do not like to see young folks too rational.

The student of medicine, after glancing at the title
of the book that Boulmier held in his hand, exclaimed,

" What ! — you read Michelet — you ?"

"Yes," replied Boulmier, very gravely. "I like
novels."

Gelis, who dominated both by his fine stature, im-
perious gestures, and ready wit, took the book, turned
ever a few pages rapidly, and said,


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. \\1

" Michelet always had a great propensity to emo-
tional tenderness. He wept sweet tears over MaiUard,
that nice httle man who introduced la jpa^erass&rie
into the September massacres. But as emotional ten-
derness leads to fury, he becomes aU at once furious
against the victims. There was no help for it. It is
the sentimentality of the age. The assassin is pitied,
but the victim is considered quite unpardonable. In
his later manner Michelet is more Michelet than ever
before. There is no common-sense iu it ; it is simply
wonderful ! Neither art nor science, neither criticism
nor narrative ; only furies and f aiating-spells and epi-
leptic fits over matters which he never deigns to ex-
plain. Childish outcries — ewoies de fetrnne groase ! —
and a style, my friends ! — not a single finished phrase !
It is astounding !"

And he handed the book back to his comrade. "This
is amusing madness," I thought to myself, " and not
quite so devoid of common-sense as it appears. This
young man, though only playing, has sharply touched
the defect in the cuirass."

But the Provengal student declared that history was
a thoroughly despicable exercise of rhetoric. Accord-
ing to him, the only true history was the natural his-
tory of man. Michelet was in the right path when he
came in contact with the fistula of Louis XIY., but he
f eU back into the old nit almost immediately after-
wards.

After this judicious expression of opinion, the young


118 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

physiologist went to join a party of passing friends.
The two archivists, less well acquainted in the neigh-
borhood of a garden so far from the Hue Paradis-aux-
Marais, remained together, and began to chat about
their studies. G61is, who had completed his third
class-year, was preparing a thesis on the subject of
which he expatiated with youthful enthusiasm. In-
deed, I thought the subject a very good one, particu-
larly because I had recently thought myself caRed
upon to treat a notable part of it. It was the MonasH-
cum Gallicammi. The young erudite (I give him the
name as a presage) wants to describe all the engrav-
ings made about 1690 for the work which Dom Michel
Germain would have had printed but for the one irre-
mediable hindrance which is rarely foreseen and never
avoided. Dom Michel Germain left his manuscript
complete, however, and in good order when he died.
WiU I be able to do as much with mine ? — but that is
not the present question. So far as I am able to un-
derstand, Monsieur G6hs intends to devote a brief
archaeological notice to each of the abbeys pictured by
the humble engravers of Dom Michel Germain.

His friend asked him whether he was acquainted
with aUthe manuscripts and printed documents relating
to the subject. It was then that I pricked up my ears.
They spoke at first of original sources ; and I must
confess they did so in a satisfactory manner, despite
their innumerable and detestable puns. Then they be-
gan to speak about contemporary studies on the subject.


THE CRIME OF STLVE8TRE BONNABD. 119

" Have you read," asked Boulmier, " the notice of
Courajod ?"

" Good !" I thought to myself.

" Yes," replied G^hs ; " it is accurate."

" Have you read," said Boulmier, " the article by
Tamisey de Larroque in the ' Eevue des Questions His-
toriques' ?"

" Good !" I thought to myself, for the second time.

"Yes," rephed Gelis, "it is fuU of things.". . .

" Have you read," said Boulmier, " the ' Tableau des
Abbayes Benedictines en 1600,' by Sylvestre Bonnard?"

" Good !" I said to myself, for the third time.

" Mafoi ! no !" replied Gelis. " Bonnard is an idiot !"

Turning my head, I perceived that the shadow had
reached the place where I was sittiag. It was grow-
ing chilly, and I thought to myself what a fool I was
to have remained sitting there, at the risk of getting
the rheumatism, just to listen to the impertinence of
those two young fellows !

" WeU ! well !" I said to myself as I got up. " Let
this prattling fledghng write his thesis, and sustain
it! He wiU find my colleague Quicherat, or some
other professor at the school, to show him what an
ignoramus he is. I consider him neither more nor
less than a rascal; and really, now that I come to
think of it, what he said about Michelet awhile ago
was quite insufferable, outrageous ! To talk in that
way about an old master replete with genius ! It was
simply abominable !"


120 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABB.

" Theebsb, give me my new hat, my best frock-coat,
and my silver-headed cane."

But Therese is deaf as a sack of charcoal and slow-
as Justice. Years have made her so. The worst is
that she thinks she can hear well and move about well;
and, proud of her sixty years of upright domesticity,
she serves her old master with the most vigilant des-
potism.

"What did I teU you?" . . . And now she wiU not
give me my silver-headed cane, for fear that I might
lose it ! It is true that I often forget umbrellas and
walking-sticks in the omnibuses and booksellers' shops.
But I have a special reason for wanting to take out
with me to-day my old cane with the engraved silver
head representing Don Quixote charging a wuidmiU,
lance in rest, while Sancho Panza, with uplifted arms,
vainly conjures hini to stop. That cane is all that
came to me from the heritage of my uncle. Captain
Victor, who in his lifetime resembled Don Quixote
much more than Sancho Panza, and who loved blows
quite as much as most people fear them.

Por thirty years I have been iu the habit of carry-
ing this cane upon all memorable or solemn visits
which I make ; and those two figures of knight and
squire give me inspiration and counsel. I imagine I
can hear them speak. Don Quixote says,
{ "Think well about great things; and know that


TEE CRIME OF SY17ESTEE BONNABD. 121

thought is the only reality in this world. Lift up
Nature to thine own stature ; and let the whole uni-
verse be for thee no more than the reflection of thine
own heroic souD Combat for honor's sake : that alone
is worthy of a man ! and if it should fall to thee to re-
ceive wounds, shed thy blood as a beneficent dew, and
smile."

And Sancho Panza says to me in his turn,
( "Kemain just what heaven made thee, comrade!
Prefer the bread-crust which has become dry in thy
wallet to aU the partridges that roast in the kitchens
of lords. ) Obey thy master, whether he be a wise
man or a fool, and do not cumber thy brain with too
many useless things. Fear blows ; 'tis verUy tempting
God to seek after danger !"

But if the incomparable knight and his matchless
squire are imaged only upon this cane of mine, they
are realities to my inner conscience. Within every
one of us there lives both a Don Quixote and a Sancho
Pan2;a to whom we hearken by turns; and though,
Sancho most persuades us, it is Don Quixote that we
find ourselves obhged to admire. . . . But a truce to
this dotage ! — and let us go to see Madame de Gabry
about some matters more important than the every-
day details of Ufe. . . .


Same dm/.

I FOUND Madame de Gabry dressed in black, just
buttoning her gloves.


122 THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNABD.

" I am ready," she said.

Eeady ! — so I have always found her upon any oc-
casion of doing a kindness.

After some compliments about the good health of
her husband, who was taking a walk at the time, we
descended the stairs and got into the carriage.

I do not know what secret influence I feared to dis-
sipate by breaking silence, but we followed the great
deserted drives without speaking, looking at the cross-
es, the monumental columns, and the mortuary wreaths
awaiting sad purchasers.

The vehicle at last halted at the extreme verge of
the land of the hving, before the gate upon which
words of hope are graven.

" Follow me," said Madame de Gabry, whose tail
stature I noticed then for the first time. She first
walked down an aUey of cypresses, and then took a
very narrow path contrived between the tombs. Fi-
jiaUy, halting before a plain slab, she said to me,

" It is here."

And she knelt down. I could not help noticing
the beautiful easy manner in which this Christian
woman f eU upon her knees, leaving the folds of her
robe to spread themselves at random about her. I
had never before seen any lady kneel down with such
frankness and such forgetfulness of self, except two
fair Polish exiles, one evening long ago, in a deserted
church in Paris.

This image passed Mke a flash ; and I saw only the


THE GRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD. 123

sloping stone on which was graven the name of Cle-
mentine. What I then felt was something so deep and
vague that only the sound of some rich music could
convey any idea of it. I seemed to hear instruments
of celestial sweetness make harmony in my old heart.
With the solemn accords of a funeral chant there
seemed to mingle the subdued melody of a song of
love ; for my soul blended into one f eehng the grave
sadness of the present with the famiUar graces of the
past.

I cannot teU whether we had remained a long time
at the tomb of Clementine before Madame de Garby
arose. We passed through the cemetery again with-
out speaking to each other. Only when we found
ourselves among the Uving once more did I feel able
to speak.

" While following you there," I said to Madame de
Gabry, "I could not help thinking of those angels
with whom we are said to meet on the mysterious
confines of life and death. That tomb you led me to,
of which I knew nothing — as I know nothing, or
scarcely anything, concerning her whom it covers —
brought back to me emotions which were unique in
my hfe, and which seem in the dulness of that life
like some light gleaming upon a dark road. The light
recedes farther and farther away as the journey
lengthens ; I have now almost reached the bottom of
the last slope ; and, nevertheless, each time I turn to
look baQk I see the glow as bright as ever.


124 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD.

"You, iVTadame, who knew Clementine as a wife
and mother after her hair had become gray, you can-
not imagine her as I see her stOl ; a young fair girl,
all pink and white. Since you have been so kind as
to be my guide, dear Madame, I ought to teU you
what f eehngs were awakened in me by the sight of
that grave to which you led me. Memories throng
back upon me. I feel myself like some old gnarled
and mossy oak which awakens a nesthng world of
birds by the shaking of its branches. Unfortunately
the song my birds sing is old as the world, and can
amuse no one but myself."

" Tell me your souvenirs," said Madame de Gabry.
" I cannot read your books, because they are written
only for scholars ; but I like very much to have you
talk to me, because you know how to give interest to
the most ordinary things in life. And talk to me just
as you would talk to an old woman. This morning I
found three gray threads in my hair,"

"Let them come without regret, Madame," I re-
plied. " Time deals gently only with those who take
it gently. And when in some years more you wiU
have a silvery fringe under your black fillet, you wiU
be reclothed with a new beauty, less vivid but more
touching than the first ; and you wiU find your hus-
band admiring your gray tresses as much as he did
that black curl which you gave him when about to be
married, and which he preserves in a locket as a thing
sacred. . . . These boulevards are broad and very


THE CRIME OF 8YLVE8TBE BONNABD. 125

quiet. We can talk at our ease as we walk along. I
will teU you, to begin with, how I first made the ac-
quaintance of Clementine's father. But you must not
expect anything extraordinary, or anything even re-
markable ; you would be greatly deceived.

"Monsieur de Lessay used to live in the second
story of an old house in the Avenue de I'Observatoire,
having a stuccoed front, ornamented with antique
busts, and a large unkept garden attached to it. That
fagade and that garden were the first images my
child -eyes perceived; and they will be the last, no
doubt, which I shall still see through my closed eye-
lids when the Inevitable Day comes. For it was
in that house that I was born ; it was in that gar-
den I first learned, while playing, to feel and know
some particles of this old universe. Magical hours ! —
sacred houry! — when the soul, aU fresh from the
making, first discovers the world, which for its sake
seems to assume such caressing brightness, such mys-
terious charm ! And that, Madame, is indeed because
the universe itself is only the reflection of our soul.

" My mother was a being very happily constituted.
She rose with the sun, like the birds ; and she herself
resembled the birds by her domestic iadustry, by her
maternal instinct, by her perpetual desire to sing, and
by a sort of brusque grace, which I could feel the
charm of very well even as a chUd. She was the soul
of the house, which she filled with her systematic and
joyous activity. My father was just as slow as she


126 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNARD.

was brisk. I can recall very well that placid face of
Ms, over which at times an ironical smile used to flit.
He was fatigued with active life; and he loved Ms
fatigue. Seated beside the fire in his big arm-chair,
he used to read from mormng till mght; and it is
from him that I inherit my love of books. I have in
my hbrary a Mably and a Kaynal, which he annotated
with his own hand from beginmng to end. But it was
utterly useless attempting to interest Mm in anything
practical whatever. When my mother would try, by
all kinds of gracious little ruses, to lure Mm out of his
retirement, he would simply shake his head with that
inexorable gentleness which is the force of weak char-
acters. He used in this way to greatly worry the
poor woman, who could not enter at all into his own
sphere of meditative wisdom, and could understand
notMng of Ufe except its daily duties and the merry
labor of each hour. She thought Mm sick, and feared
he was going to become still more so. But Ms apathy
had a different cause.

" My father, entering the Naval Office under Mon-
sieur Decres, in 1801, gave early proof of Mgh admin-
istrative talent. There was a great deal of activity in
the marine department in those times; and in 1805
my father was appointed chief of the Second Admin-
istrative Division. That same year, the Emperor,
whose attention had been called to Mm by the Minis-
ter, ordered him to make a report upon the organiza-
tion of the English navy. TMs work, which reflected


THE GRIME OF 8YLVESTBE BOlflNARD. 127

a profoundly liberal and philosophic spirit, of which
the editor himself was unconscious, was only finished
in 1807 — about eighteen months after the defeat of
Admiral Yilleneuve at Trafalgar. Napoleon, who,
from that disastrous day, never wanted to hear the
word ship mentioned in his presence, angrily glanced
OYer a few pages of the memoir, and then threw it
into the fire, vociferating, ' "Words ! — words ! I said
once before that I hated ideologists.' My father was
told afterwards that the Emperor's anger was so in-
tense at the moment that he stamped the manuscript
down into the fire with his boot-heels. At all events,
it was his habit, when very much irritated, to poke
down the fire mth his feet until he had scorched his
boot-soles. My father never fully recovered from this
disgrace ; and the fruitlessness of aU his efforts tow-
ards reform was certainly the cause of the apathy
which came upon him at a later day. Nevertheless,
Napoleon, after his return from Elba, sent for him,
and ordered him to prepare some liberal and patriotic
bulletins and proclamations for the fleet. After Wa-
terloo, my father, whom the event had rather sad-
dened than surprised, retired into private hf e, and was
not interfered with — except that it was generally
averred of him that he was a Jacobin, a hwvev/r-de-
scmg — one of those men with whom no one could af-
ford to be on intimate terms. My mother's eldest
brother, Victor Maldent, an infantry captain — retired
on half-pay in 1814, and disbanded in 1815 — aggravat-


128 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

ed by his bad attitude the situation m. which the fall
of the Empire had placed my father. Captain Victor
used to shout in the cafes and the public balls that
the Bourbons had sold France to the Cossacks. He
used to show everybody a tricolored cockade hidden
in the lining of his hat ; and carried with much osten-
tation a walking-stick the handle of which had been
so carved that the shadow thrown by it made the sil-
houette of the Emperor.

" Unless you have seen certain lithographs by Char-
let, Madame, you could form no idea of the physiog-
nomy of my Uncle Victor, when he used to stride
about the garden of the Tuileries with a fiercely ele-
gant manner of his own — buttoned up in his frogged
coat, with" his cross-of-honor upon his breast, and a
bouquet of violets in his button-hole.

" Idleness and intemperance greatly intensified the
vulgar recklessness of his political passions. He used
to insult people whom he happened to see reading the
QuotiMemne, or the Drapecm Blcmc, and compel them
to fight with him. In this way he had the pain and
the shame of wounding a boy of sixteen in a duel.
In short, my Uncle Victor was the very reverse, of a
well-educated person ; and as he came to breakfast
and dine at our house every blessed day in the year,
his bad reputation became attached to our family.
My poor father suffered cruelly from somp of his
guest's pranks ; but being very good-natured, he never
made any remarks, and continued to give the free-


TEE CRIME OF S7LVE8TBE BONNABD. 129

dom of his house to the captain, who only despised
him for it.

" All this which I have told you, Madame, was ex-
plained to me afterwards. But at the time in ques-
tion, my uncle the captain filled me with the very
enthusiasm of admiration, and I promised myself to
try to become some day as Mke him as possible. So
one fine morning, in order to begin the likeness, I put
my arms akimbo, and swore like a trooper. My ex-
cellent mother at once gave me such a box on the ear
that I remained half stupefied for some Mttle while
before I could even burst out crying. I can still see
the old arm-chair, covered with yellow Utrecht velvet,
behind which I wept innumerable tears that day.

" I was a very little fellow then. One morning my
father, lifting me upon his knees, as he was in the
habit of doing, smiled at me with that slightly ironi-
cal smUe which gave a certain piquancy to his per-
petual gentleness of manner. As I sat on his knee,
playing with his long white hair, he told me some-
thing which I did not understand very well, but which
interested me very much, for the simple reason that
it was mysterious to me. I think, but am not quite
sure, that he related to me that morning the story of
the little King of Tvetot, according to the song. All
of a sudden we heard a great report ; and the win-
dows rattled. My father slipped me down gently on
the floor at his feet ; he threw up his trembling arms,
with a strange gesture ; his face became aU inert and
9


130 THE CRIME OF SYLVESTBE BONNABD.

white, and his eyes seemed enormous. He tried to
speak, but Ms teeth were chattering. At last he mur-
mured, "They have shot him!" I did not know
what he meant, and felt -only a vague terror. I knew
afterwards, however, that he was speaking of Marshal
Ney, who fell on the 7th of December, 1815, under
the wall enclosing a vacant lot beside our house.

" About that time I used often to meet on the stair-
way an old man (or, perhaps, not exactly an old man)
with httle black eyes which flashed with extraordi-
nary vivacity, and an impassive swarthy face. He
did not seem to me alive — or at least he did not seem
to me alive in the same way that other men were
alive. I had once seen, at the residence of Monsieur
Denon, where my father had taken me with him on
a visit, a mummy brought from Egypt; and I be-
lieved in good faith that Monsieur i)enon's mummy
used to get up when no one was looking, leave its
gilded case, put on a brown coat and powdered wig,
and become transformed into Monsieur de Lessay.
And even to-day, dear Madame, while I reject that
opinion as being without foundation, I must confess
that Monsieur de Lessay bore a very strong resem-
blance to Monsieur Denon's mummy. The fact is
enough to explain why this person inspired me with
fantastic terror.

" In reality. Monsieur de Lessay was a small gentle-
man and a great philosopher. As a disciple of Mably
and Eousseau, he flattered himself on being a man with-


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 131

out any prejudices ; and this pretension itself is a very
great prejudice.

" He professed to hate fanaticism, yet was himself a
fanatic on the topic of toleration. I am telling you,
Madame, about a character belonging to an age that
is past. I fear I will not be able to make you under-
stand, and I am sure I wiU not be able to interest you.
It was so long ago ! But I will abridge as much as
possible : besides, I did not promise you anything in-
teresting ; and you could not have expected to hear
of remarkable adventures in the life of Sylvestre Bon-
nard."

Madame de Gabry encouraged me to proceed, and
I resumed :

"Monsieur de Lessay was brusque with men and
courteous to ladies. He used to kiss the hand of my
mother, whom the customs of the Eepublic and the
Empire had not habituated to such gallantry. In him,
I touched the age of Louis XYI. Monsieur de Lessay
was a geographer ; and nobody, I believe, ever showed
more pride than he in occupying himself with the face
of the earth. Under the Old Eegime he had attempted
philosophical agriculture, and thus squandered his es-
tates to the very last acre. "When he had ceased to
own one square foot of ground, he took possession of
the whole globe, and prepared an extraordinary num-
ber of maps, based upon the narratives of travellers.
But as he had been mentally nourished with the very
marrow of the " Encyclopedie," he was not satisfied with


132 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD.

merely parking off human beings witHn so many de-
grees, minutes, and seconds of latitude and longitude.
He also occupied himself, alas ! with the question of
their happiness. It is worthy of remark, Madame,
that those who have given themselves the most con-
cern about the happiness of peoples have made their
neighbors very miserable. Monsieur de Lessay, who
was more of a geometrician than D'Alembert, and
more of a philosopher than Jean Jacques, was also
more of a royalist than Louis XYIII. But his love
for the King was as nothing to his hate for the
Emperor. He had joined the conspiracy of Georges
against the First Consul ;, but in the framing of the
indictment he was not included among the inculpated
parties, having been either ignored or despised, and
this injury he never could forgive Bonaparte, whom
he called the Ogre of Corsica, and to whom he used to
say he would never have confided even the command
of a regiment, so pitiful a soldier he judged him to be.

" In 1820, Monsieur de Lessay, who had then been a
widower for many years, married again, at the age of
sixty, a very young woman, whom he pitilessly kept
at work preparing maps for him, and who gave him a
daughter some years after their marriage, and died in
childbed. My mother had nursed her during her
brief illness, and had taken care of the child. The
name of that child was Clementine.

"It was from the time of that birth and that death
that the relations, between our family and Monsieur de


THE CRIME OF STLVE8TRE BONNABD. 133

LesBay began. In the meanwhile I had been growing
dull as I began to leave my true childhood behind me.
I had lost the charming power of being able to see and
feel ; and things no longer caused me those delicious
surprises which form the enchantment of the more
tender age. For the same reason, perhaps, I have no
distinct remembrance of the period following the birth
of Clementine ; I only know that a few months after-
wards I had a misfortune, the mere thought of which
still wrings my heart. I lost my mother. A great
silence, a great coldness, and a great darkness seemed
aU at once to fill the house.

" I fell into a sort of torpor. My father sent me to
the lycee, but I could only arouse myself from my
lethargy with the greatest effort.

" StiU, I was not altogether a dullard, and my pro-
fessors were able to teach me almost everything they
wanted, namely, a little Greek and a great deal of
Latin. My acquaintances were confined to the ancients.
I learned to esteem Miltiades, and to admire Themisto-
cles. I became familiar with Quintus Fabius, as far,
at least, as it was possible to become familiar with so
great a Consul. Proud of these lofty acquaintances, I
scarcely ever condescended to notice little Clementine
and her old father, who, in any event, went away
to Normandy one fine morning without my having
deigned to give a moment's thought to their possible
return.

They came back, however, Madame, they came back !


134 TEE CBIME OF STLVEaTRE BONNABD.

Influences of Heaven, forces of nature, all ye. mysteri-
ous powers wMch vouchsafe to man tlie ability to love,
you know how I again beheld Clementine ! They re-
entered our melancholy home. Monsieur de Lessay
no longer wore a wig. Bald, with a few gray locks
about his ruddy temples, he had all the aspect of ro-
bust old age. But that divine being whom I saw aU
resplendent, as she leaned upon his arm — she whose
presence illuminated the old faded parlor — she was not
an apparition ! It was Clementine herself ! I am
speaking the simple truth : her violet eyes seemed to
me in that moment supernatural, and even to-day I
cannot imagine how those two living jewels could
have endured the fatigues of Mfe, or become subjected ^
to the corruption of death.

" She betrayed a httle shyness in greeting my father,
whom she did not remember. Her complexion was
slightly pink, and her half-open Ups smiled with that
smile which makes one think of the Infinite — perhaps
because it betrays no particular thought, and expresses
only the joy of living and the bhss of being beautiful.
Under a pink hood her face shone like a gem in an
open casket ; she wore a cashmere scarf over a robe of
white mushn plaited at the waist, from beneath which
protruded the tip of a httle Morocco shoe. ... Oh !
you must not make fun of me, dear Madame, that was
the fashion of the time ; and I do not know whether
our new fashions have nearly so much simplicity,
brightness, and decorous grace.


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 135

"Monsieur de Lessay informed us that, in conse-
quence of having undertaken the publication of a his-
torical atlas, he had come back to hve in Paris, and
that he would be pleased to occupy his former room,
if it was still vacant. My father asked Mademoiselle
de Lessay whether she was pleased to visit the capi-
tal. She appeared to be, for her smile blossomed out
in reply. She smiled at the windows that looked out
upon the green and luminous garden ; she smiled at
the bronze Marius seated among the ruins of Car-
thage above the dial of the clock ; she smiled at the
old yellow-velveted arm-chairs, and at the poor stu-
dent who was afraid to lift his eyes to look at her.
From that day — how I loved her !

"But here we are already at the Eue de Sevres,
and in a little while we shall be in sight of your win-
dows. I am a very bad story-teUer; and if I were
— by some impossible chance — to take' it into my
head to compose a novel, I know I should never suc-
ceed. I have been drawing out to tiresome length a
narrative which I must finish briefly ; for there is a
certain delicacy, a certain grace of soul, which an old
man could not help offending by any complacent ex-
patiation upon the sentiments of even the purest love.
Let us take a short turn on this boulevard, lined with
convents ; and my recital wiU be easily finished with-
in the distance separating us from that little spire you
see over there. . . .

" Monsieur de Lessay, on finding that I had gradu-


136 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

ated at tlie Ecole des Chartes, judged me worthy to
assist him in preparing his historical atlas. The plan
was to illustrate, by a series of maps, what the old phi-
losopher termed the Vicissitudes of Empires from the
time of Noah down to that of Charlemagne. Mon-
sieur de Lessay had stored up in his head all the errors
of the eighteenth century in regard to antiquity. I
belonged, so far as my historical studies were con-
cerned, to the new school ; and I was just at that age
when one does not know how to dissemble. The
manner in which the old man understood, or, rather,
misunderstood, the epoch of the Barbarians, — ^his ob-
stinate determination to find in remote antiquity only
ambitious princes, hypocritical and avaricious prelates,
virtuous citizens, poet-philosophers, and other person-
ages who never existed outside of the novels of Mar-
montel, — ^made me dreadfully unhappy, and at first
used to excite me into attempts at argument, — rational
enough, but perfectly useless and sometimes danger-
ous, for Monsieur de Lessay was very irascible, and
Clementine was very beautiful. Between her and him
I passed many hours of torment and of delight. I
was in love ; I was a coward, and I granted to him
aU that he demanded of me in regard to the political
and historical aspect which the Earth — that was at a
later day to bear Clementine — presented in the time
of Abraham, of Menes, and of Deucalion.

"As fast as we drew our maps Mademoiselle de
Lessay tinted them in water -colors. Bending over


THE CRIME OF 8TLYESTBE BONNABD. 137

the table, she held the brush lightly between two fin-
gers; the shadow of her eyelashes descended upon
her cheeks, and bathed her half-closed eyes in a deh-
cious penumbra. Sometimes she would lift her head,
and I would see her lips pout. There was so much
expression in her beauty that she could not breathe
without seeming to sigh ; and her most ordinary poses
used to throw me into the deepest ecstasies of adnaira-
tion. "Whenever I gazed at her I fuUy agreed with
Monsieur de Lessay that Jupiter had once reigned as
a despot-king over the mountainous regions of Thes-
saly, and that Orpheus had committed the imprudence
of leaving the teaching of philosophy to the clergy.
I am not now quite sure whether I was a coward or a
hero when I accorded all this to the obstinate old man.

" Mademoiselle de Lessay, I must acknowledge, paid
very httle attention to me. But this indifference
seemed to me so just and so natural that I never even
dreamed of thinking I had a right to complain about
it ; it made me unhappy, but without my knowing that
I was unhappy at the time. I was hopeful ; — we had
then only got as far as the First Assyrian Empire.

"Monsieur de Lessay came every evening to take cof-
fee with my father. I do not know how they became
such friends ; for it would have been difficult to find
two characters more oppositely constituted. My fa-
ther was a man who admired very few things, but
was capable of excusing a great many. Still, as he
grew older, he evinced more and more dislike of every-


138 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

thing in. the shape of exaggeration. He clothed hia
ideas with a thousand delicate shades of expression,
and never pronounced an opinion without all sorts of
reservations. These conversational habits, natural to
a finely trained mind, used to greatly irritate the dry,
terse old aristocrat, who was never in the least dis-
armed by the moderation of an adversary — quite the
contrary ! I always foresaw one danger. That dan-
ger was Bonaparte. My father had not himself re-
tained any particular affection for his memory ; but,
having worked under his direction, he did not like to
hear him abused, especially in favor of the Bourbons,
against whom he had serious reason to feel resent-
ment. Monsieur de Lessay, more of a Voltairea,n and
a Legitimist than ever, now traced back to Bona-
parte the origin of every social, poHtical, and rehgious
evil. Such being the situation, the idea of Uncle Vic-
tor made me feel particularly uneasy. This terrible
uncle had become absolutely insufferable now that his
sister was no longer there to calm him down. The
harp of David was broken, and Saul was whoUy de-
livered over to the spirit of madness. The fall of
Charles X. had increased the audacity of the old
Napoleonic veteran, who uttered aU imaginable bra-
vadoes. He no longer frequented our house, which
had become too silent for him. But sometimes, at
the dinner-hour, we would see him suddenly make his
appearance, all covered with flowers, like a mauso-
leum. Ordinarily he would sit down to table with


THE CBIME OF STLVE8TRE BONNABD. 139

an oath, growled out from the very bottom of Ms
chest, and brag, between every two mouthfuls, of his
good fortune with the ladies as a vieux lyra/oe. Then,
when the dinner was over, he would fold up his nap-
kin in the shape of a bishop's mitre, gulp down half a
decanter of brandy, and rush away with the hurried
air of a man terrified at the mere idea of remaining
for any length of time, without drinking, in conversa-
tion with an old philosopher and a young scholar. I
felt perfectly sure that, if ever he and Monsieur de
Lessay should come together, all would be lost. But
that day came, madame !

"The captain was almost hidden by flowers that
day, and seemed so much like a monument commem-
orating the glories of the Empire that one would
have liked to pass a garland of immortelles over each
of his arms. He was in an extraordinarily good hu-
mor; and the first person to profit by that good
humor was our cook — for he put his arm round
her waist while she was placing the roast on the
table.

"After dinner he pushed away the decanter pre-
sented to him, observing that he was going to burn
some brandy in his coffee later on. I asked him
trembhngly whether he would not prefer to have his
coffee at once. He was very suspicious, and not at
aU duU. of comprehension — my Uncle Victor. My
precipitation seemed to him in very bad taste ; for he
looked at me in a pecuUar way, and said.


140 THE CBIME OF STLVESTBB BONNABD.

"'Patience! my nephew. It isn't the business of
the baby of the regiment to sound the retreat!
i)evii take it ! You must be in a great hurry, Master
Pedant, to see if Pve got spurs on my boots !'

" It was evident the captain had divined that I
wanted him to go. And I knew him weU enough to
be sure that he was going to stay. He stayed. The
least circumstances of that evening remain impressed
on my memory. My uncle was extremely jovial.
The mere idea of being in somebody's way was
enough to keep him in good humor. He told us, in
regular barrack style, mafoi! a certain story about
a monk, a trumpet, and five bottles of Chambertin,
which must have been much enjoyed in garrison so-
ciety, but which I would not venture to repeat to
you, Madame, even if I could remember it. When
we passed into the parlor, the captain called atten-
tion to the bad condition of our andirons, and learn-
edly discoursed on the merits of rottenstone as a
brass-polisheir. Not a word on the subject of politics.
He was husbanding his forces. Eight o'clock sounded
from the ruins of Carthage on the mantelpiece. It
was Monsieur de Lessay's hour. A few moments
later he entered the parlor with his daughter. The
ordinary evening chat began. Clementine sat down
and began to work on some embroidery beside the
lamp, whose shade left her pretty head in a soft
shadow, and threw down upon her fingers a radiance
that made them seem almost self-luminous, Mou-


THE CRIME OF 8YLVE8TBE BONNARD. 141

sieur de Lessay spoke of a comet announced by the
astronomers, and developed some theories in relation
to the subject, which however audacious, betrayed at
least a certain degree of intellectual culture. My
father, who knew a good deal about astronomy, ad-
vanced some sound ideas of his own, which he ended
up with his eternal, ' But what do we know about it,
after aU?' In my turn I cited the opinion of our
neighbor of the Observatory — ^the great Arago. My
Uncle Victor declared that comets had a peculiar in-
fluence on the quahty of wines, and related in sup-
port of this view a jolly tavern-story. I was so de-
lighted with the turn the conversation had taken that
I did all in my power to maintain it in the same
groove, with the help of my most recent studies, by
a long exposition of the chemical composition of those
nebulous bodies which, although extending over a
length of biUions of leagues, could be contained in a
small bottle. My father, a little surprised at my un-
usual eloquence, watched me with his pecuhar, placid,
ironical smile. But one cannot always' remain in
heaven. I spoke, as I looked at Clementine, of a
certain ' comete ' of diamonds, which I had been ad-
miring in a jeweler's window the evening before. It
was a most unfortunate inspiration of mine.

" ' Ah ! my nephew,' cried Uncle Victor, ' that
comete of yours was nothing to the one which the
Empress Josephine wore in her hair when she came
to Strasburg to distribute crosses to the army.'


142 THE CHIME OF SYLVESTBE BONNARD.

" ' That little Josephine was very fond of finery and
display,' observed Monsieur de Lessay, between two
sips of coffee. ' I do not blame her for it ; she had
good qualities, though rather frivolous in character.
She was a Tasoher, and she conferred a great honor
on Bonaparte in marrying him. To say a Tascher
does not, of course, mean a great deal ; but to say a
Bonaparte simply means nothing at all.'

" ' "What do you mean by that, Monsieur the Mar-
quis V demanded Captain Victor.

" ' I am not a marquis,' dryly responded Monsieur
de Lessay ; ' and I mean simply that Bonaparte would
have been very well suited had he married one of
those cannibal women described by Captain. Cook in
his yoyages — naked, tattooed, with a ring in her nose —
devouring with delight putrefied human flesh.'

" I had foreseen it, and in my anguish (O pitiful
human heart !) my first idea was about the remark-
able exactness of my anticipations. I must say that
the Captain's reply belonged to the sublime order.
He put his arms akimbo, eyed Monsieur de Lessay
contemptuously from head to foot, and said,

"'Napoleon, Monsieur the Vidame, had another
spouse besides Josephine, another spouse besides
Marie-Louise. That companion you know nothing
of ; but I have seen her, close to me. She wears a
mantle of azure gemmed with stars ; she is crowned
with laurels ; the Cross - of - Honor flames upon her
breast. Her name is GLORY !'


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD. 143

" Monsieur de Lessay set his cup on the mantle-
piece, and quietly observed,

" ' Your Bonaparte was a blackguard !'

" My father rose up calmly, extended his arm, and
said very softly to Monsieur de Lessay,

"'Whatever the man was who died at St. Helena,
I worked for ten years in his government, and my
brother-in-law was three times wounded under his
eagles. I beg of you, dear sir and friend, never to
forget these facts in future.'

""What the subhme and burlesque insolence of the
Captain could not do, the courteous remonstrance of
my father effected immediately, throwing Monsieur
de Lessay into a furious passion.

" ' I did forget,' he exclaimed, between his set teeth,
Uvid in his rage, and fairly foaming at the mouth ; 'the
herring-cask always smeUs of herring, and when one
has been in the service of rascals — '

" As he uttered the word, the Captain sprang at his
throat ; I am sure he would have strangled him upon
the spot but for his daughter and me.

" My father, a little paler than his wont, stood there
with his arms folded, and watched the scene with a
look of inexpressible pity. What followed was stiU
more lamentable — but why dwell further upon the
folly of two old men. Finally I succeeded in separat-
ing them. Monsieur de Lessay made a sign to his
daughter and left the the room. As she was follow-
ing him, I ran out into the stairway after her.


144 THE GRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNARD.

" ' Mademoiselle,' I said to her, wildly, taking her
hand as I spoke, ' I love you ! I love you!'

"For a moment she pressed my hand; her lips
opened. What was it that she was going to say to
me ? But suddenly, lifting her eyes towards her father
ascending the stairs, she drew her hand away, and
made me a gesture of farewell.

" I never saw her again. Her father went to live in
the neighborhood of the Pantheon, in an apartment
which he had rented for the sale of his historical atlas.
He died in it a few months afterwards of an apoplec-
tic stroke. His daughter, I was told, retired to Caen
to live with some aged relative. It was there that,
later on, she married a bank-clerk, the same ISToel Al-
exandre who became so rich and died so poor.

" As for me, Madame, I have lived alone, at peace
with myself ; my existence, equally exempt from great
pains and great joys, has been tolerably happy. But
for many years I could never see an empty chair be-
side my own of a winter's evening without feehng a
sudden painful sinking at my heart. Last year I
learned from you, who had known her, the story of
her old age and death. I saw her daughter at your
house. I have seen her; but I cannot yet say like
the aged man of Scripture, ' And now, O Lord, let thy
servamt d&pa/rt in peace P For if an old fellow like me
can be of any use to anybody, I would wish, with your
help, to devote my last energies and abilities to the
care of this orphan."


THE CRIME OF 8YLYE8TRE BONNABD. 145

I had uttered these last words in Madame de Gabry's
own vestibule ; and I was about to take leave of my
kind guide when she said to me,

" My dear Monsieur, I cannot help you in this mat-
ter as much as I would like to do. Jeanne is an
orphan and a minor. Tou cannot do anything for her
without the authorization of her guardian."

" Ah !" I exclaimed, " I did not have the least idea
in the world that Jeanne had a guardian !"

Madame de Gabry looked at me with visible surprise.
She had not expected to find the old man quite so simple.

She resumed :

"The guardian of Jeanne Alexandre is Maitre
Mouche, notary at Levallois-Perret. I am afraid you
wiU not be able to come to any understanding with
him ; for he is a very serious person."

" "Why ! good God !" I cried, " with what kind of
people can you expect me to have any sort of under-
standing at my age, except serious persons."

She smiled with a sweet mischievousness — just like
my father used to smile — and answered :

" With those who are like you — the innocent folks
who wear their hearts on their sleeves. Monsieur
Mouche is not exactly a man of that kind. He is
cunning and Hght-fingered. But although I have very
httle liking for him, we will go together and see him,
if you wish, and ask his permission to visit Jeanne,
whom he has sent to a boarding-school at Les Ternes,
where she is very unhappy."
10


146 THE CRIME OF STLVEBTBE BONNABD.

We agreed at once upon a day ; I kissed Madame
de Gabry's hands, and we bid each other good-by.


From May 2 to May 5.

I HAVE seen him in his office, Maitre Mouohe, the
guardian of Jeanne. Small, thin, and dry ; his com-
plexion looks as if it was made out of the dust of his
pigeon-holes. He is a spectacled animal ; for to im-
agine him without his spectacles would be impossible.
I have heard him speak, this Maitre Mouche ; he has
a voice like a tin rattle, and he uses choice phrases ;
but I would have been better pleased if he had not
chosen his phrases so carefully. I have observed
him, this Maitre Mouche ; he is very ceremonious, and
watches his visitors slyly out of the corner of his eye.

Maitre Mouche is quite pleased, he informs us ; he
is delighted to find we have taken such an interest in
his ward. But he does not think we are placed in
this world just to amuse ourselves. No : he does not
believe it ; and I am free to acknowledge that any-
body in his company is likely to reach the same con-
clusion, so little is he capable of inspiring joyfulness.
He fears that it would be giving his dear ward a false
and pernicious idea of life to allow her too much en-
joyment. It is for that reason that he requests Ma-
dame de Gabry not to invite the young girl to her
house but at very long intervals.

"We left the dusty notary and his dusty study with


THE CRIME OF 8TLVEBTBE BONNABD. 147

a permit in due form (everything which issues from
the office of Maitre Mouohe is in due form) to visit
Mademoiselle Jeanne Alexandre on the first Thursday
of each month at Mademoiselle Pref ere's private school,
Eue Demours, Aux Temes.

The first Thursday in May I set out to pay a visit
to Mademoiselle Pref ere, whose estabMshment I dis-
cerned from afar off by a big sign, painted with blue
letters. That blue tint was the first indication I re-
ceived of Mademoiselle Prefere's character, which I
was able to see more of later on. A scared-looking
servant took my card, and abandoned me without one
word of hope at the door of a chiUy parlor, f uU of
that stale odor peculiar to the dining-rooms of educar
tional establishments. The floor of this parlor had
been waxed with such pitiless energy, that I remained
for a while in distress upon the threshold. But hap-
pily observing that little strips of woollen carpet had
been scattered over the floor in front of each horse-
hair chair, I succeeded, by cautiously stepping from
one carpet-island to another, in reaching the angle of
the mantlepiece, where I sat down quite out of breath.

Over the mantlepiece, in a large gilded frame, was a
written document, entitled, in flamboyant Gothic letter-
ing, TcMecm dJ'Sonneij/r, with a long array of names
underneath, among which I did not have the pleasure
of finding that of Jeanne Alexandre. After having
read over several times the names of those girl-pupils
who had thus made themselves honored in the eyes


148 THE OBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABB.

of Mademoiselle Pref ere, I began to feel uneasy at not
hearing any one coming. Mademoiselle Pref ere would
certainly have succeeded in establishing the absolute
silence of the interstellar spaces throughout her peda-
gogical domains, had it not been that the sparrows
had chosen her yard to assemble in by legions, and
chirp at the top of their voices. It was a pleasure to
hear them. But there was no way of seeing them —
through the ground-glass windows. I had to content
myself with the sights of the parlor, decorated from
floor to ceiling, on all of its four walls, with drawings
executed by the pupils of the institution. There were
Vestals, flowers, thatched cottages, column - capitals,
and an enormous head of Tatius, King of the Sabines,
bearing the signature Estelle Mouton.

I had already passed some time in admiring the
energy with which Mademoiselle Mouton had deline-
ated the bushy eyebrows and the fierce gaze of the an-
tique warrior, when a sound, faint like the rustling
of a dead leaf moved by the wind, caused me to turn
my head. It was not a dead leaf at all — it was Made-
moiselle Prefere. "With hands joined before her, she
came gliding over the mirror-poMsh of that wonderful
floor as the Saints of the " Golden Legend " were
wont to ghde over the crystal surface of the waters.
But upon any other occasion, I am sure. Mademoiselle
Prefere would not have made me think in the least
about those virgins dear to mystical fancy. Her face
rather gave me the idea of a russet-apple preserved


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 149

for a whole winter in an attic by some economical
housekeeper. Her shoulders were covered with a
fringed pelerine, which had nothing at all remarkable
about it, but which she wore as if it were a sacerdotal
vestment, or the symbol of some high civic function.

I explained to her the purpose of my visit, and gave
her my letter of introduction.

"Ah! — so you saw Monsieur Mouche!" she ex-
claimed. " Is his health very good ? He is the most
upright of men, the most — "

She did not finish the phrase, but raised her eyes to
the ceiling. My own followed the direction of their
gaze, and observed a httle spiral of paper lace, sus-
pended from the place of the chandeHer, which was
apparently destined, so far as I could discover, to at-
tract the flies away from the gilded mirror-frames and
the Tahlecm cPhonnewr.

"I have met Mademoiselle Jeanne Alexandre," I
observed, " at the residence of Madame de Gabry, and
had reason to appreciate the excellent character and
quick intelligence of the young girl. As I used to
know her parents very well, the friendship which I
felt for them naturally inchnes me to take an interest
in her."

Mademoiselle Pref ere, in lieu of making any reply,
sighed profoundly, pressed her mysterious pelerine to
her heart, and again contemplated the paper spiral.

At last she observed,

" Since you were once the friend of Monsieur and


150 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

Madame Alexandre, I hope and trust that, like Mon-
sieur Mouche and myself, you deplore those crazy
speculations" which led them to ruin, and reduced their
daughter to absolute poverty !"

I thought to myself, on hearing these words, how
very wrong it is to be unlucky, and how unpardonable
such an error on the part of those previously in a
position worthy of envy. Their faU at once avenges
and flatters us ; and we are wholly pitUess.

After having answered, very frankly, that I knew
nothing whatever about the history of the bank, I
asked the schoolmistress if she was satisfied with
Mademoiselle Alexandre.

"That child is iadomitable !" cried Mademoiselle
Prefere.

And she assumed an attitude of lofty resignation,
to symbolize the difficult situation she was placed in
by a pupil so hard to traia. Then, with more calm-
ness of manner, she added :

" The young person is not unintelligent. But she
cannot resign herself to learn things by principles."

What a strange old maid this Mademoiselle Prefere
is! She walks without lifting her legs, and speaks
without moving her lips ! Without, however, consider-
ing her peculiarities for more than a reasonable in-
stant, I replied that principles were, no doubt, very
excellent things, and that I could trust myself to her
judgment in regard to their value ; but that, after aU,
when one had learned something, it made very little


THE CBIME OP 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 151

difference what method had been followed in the learn-
ing of it.

Mademoiselle made a slow gesture of dissent. Thus,
with a sigh, she declared,

" Ah, Monsieur ! those who do not understand edu-
cational methods are apt to have very false ideas on
these subjects. I am certain they express their opin-
ions with the best intentions in the world ; but they
would do better, a great deal better, to leave all such
questions to competent people."

I did not attempt to argue further ; and simply
asked her whether I could see Mademoiselle Alex-
andre at once.

She looked at her pelerine, as if trying to read
in the entanglement of its fringes, as in a conjuring-
book, what sort of answer she ought to make ; then
said,

"Mademoiselle Alexandre has a penance to per-
form, and a class-lesson to give ; but I should be very
gorry to let you put yourself to the trouble of coming
here aU to no purpose. I am going to send for her.
Only first allow me. Monsieur — as it is our custom —
to put your name on the visitors' register." -

She sat down at the table, opened a large copy-
book, and, taking out Maitre Mouche's letter again
from under her pelerine, where she had placed it,
looked at it, and began to write.

" ' Bonnard ' — with a d, is it not ?" she asked. " Ex-
cuse me for being so particular; but my opinion is


152 TEE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

that proper names have an orthography. "We have
dictation-lessons in proper names, Monsieur, at this
school — historical proper names, of course !"

After I had written down my name in a running
hand, she inquired whether she should not put down
after it my profession, title, quality — such as "re-
tired merchant," "employe," "independent gentle-
man," or sometMng else. There was a column in her
register expressly for that purpose.

" My goodness, Madame !" I said, " if you must ab-
solutely fiU that column of yours, put down ' Member
of the Institute.' "

It was stUl Mademoiselle Prefere's pelerine I saw
before me ; but it was not Mademoiselle Pref^re now
who wore it ; it was a totally different person, obhg-
ing, gracious, caressing, radiant, happy. Her eyes
smiled ; the little wrinkles of her face (there were a
vast number of them !) also smiled ; her mouth smiled
Hkewise, but only on one side. I discovered afterwards
that was her best side. She spoke : her voice had
also changed with her manner ; it was now sweet as
honey.

" You said, Monsieur, that our dear Jeanne was very
intelligent. I discovered the same thing myself, and
I am proud of being able to agree with you. This
young girl has really made me feel a great deal of
interest in her. She has what I call a happy dispo-
sition. . . . But excuse me for thus drawing upon your
valuable time."


TEE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 163

She summoned the servant-girl, who looked much
more hurried and scared than before, and who van-
ished with the order to go and tell Mademoiselle Alex-
andre that Monsieur Sylvestre Bonnard, Member of
the Institute, was waiting to see her in the parlor.

Mademoiselle Prefere had barely time to confide to
me that she had the most profound respect for aU de-
cisions of the Institute — whatever they might be —
when Jeanne appeared, out of breath, red as a poppy,
with her eyes very wide open, and her arms dangling
helplessly at her sides — charming in her artless awk-
wardness.

"What a state you are in, my dear child!" mur-
mured Mademoiselle Prefere, with maternal sweet-
ness, as she arranged. the girl's collar.

Jeanne certainly did present an odd aspect. Her
hair combed back, and imperfectly held by a net from
which loose curls were escaping; her slender arms,
sheathed down to the elbows in lustring sleeves ; her
hands, which she did not seem to know what to do
with, all red with chilblains ; her dress, much too short,
revealing that she had on stockings much too large
for her, and shoes worn down at the heel ; and a skip-
ping-rope tied round her waist in Ueu of a belt, — aU
combined to lend Mademoiselle Jeanne an appearance
the reverse of presentable.

" Oh, you crazy girl !" sighed Mademoiselle Prefere,
who now seemed no longer Mke a mother^ but rather
like an elder sister.


154 THE CBIME OF SYLYE8TBE BONNARD.

Then she suddenly left the room, gliding like a
shadow over the polished floor.

I said to Jeanne,

" Sit down, Jeanne, and talk to me like you would
to a friend. Are you not better satisfied here now
than you were last year ?"

She hesitated ; then answered with a good-natured
smile of resignation,

" Not much better."

I asked her to tell me about her school life. She
began at once to enumerate all her different studies —
piano, style, chronology of the Kings of France, sew-
ing, drawing, catechism, deportment. . . . I could never
remember them all ! She stiU held in her hands, all
unconsciously, the two ends of her skipping-rope, and
she raised and lowered them regularly while making
her enumeration. Then aU at once she became con-
scious of what she was doing, blushed, stammered,
and became so confused that I had to renounce my
desire to know the full programme of study adopted
in the Pr^f ere Institution.

After having questioned Jeanne on various matters,
and obtained only the vaguest answers, I perceived
that her young mind was totally absorbed by the
skipping-rope, and I entered bravely into that grave
subject.

" So you have been skipping?" I said. " It is a very
nice amusement, but one that you must not exert your-
self too much at ; for any excessive exercise of that


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 155

kind might seriously injure your health, and I should
be very much grieved about it, Jeanne — I should be
very much grieved, indeed !"

" You are very kind, Monsieur," the young girl said,
" to have come to see me and talk to me like this. I
did not think about thanking you when I came in,
because I was too much surprised. Have you seen
Madame de Gabry ? Please teU me something about
her. Monsieur."

"Madame de Gabry," I answered, "is very well.
I can only tell you about her, Jeanne, what an old
gardener once said of the lady of the castle, his mis-
tress, when somebody anxiously inquired about her :
' Madame is in her road.' Yes, Madame de Gabry is
in her own road ; and you know, Jeanne, what a good
road it is, and how steadily she can walk upon it. I
went out with her the other day, very, very far away
from the house ; and we talked about you. "We talked
about you, my child, at your mother's grave."

" I am very glad," said Jeanne.

And then, aU at once, she began to cry.

I felt too much reverence for those generous tears
to attempt in any way to check the emotion that had
evoked them. But in a little while, as the girl wiped
her eyes, I asked her,

" Will you not tell me, Jeanne, why you were think-
ing so much about that skipping-rope a little while
ago?"

"Why, indeed I will, Monsieur. It was only be-


166 THE CRIME OF 8TL7EBTBE BONNABD.

cause I had no right to come into the parlor with a
skipping-rope. You know, of course, that I am past
the age for playing at skipping. But when the ser-
vant said there was an old gentleman ... oh ! ... I
mean . . . that a gentleman was waiting for me in
the parlor, I was making the little girls jump. Then
I tied the rOpe round my waist in a hurry, so that it
might not get lost. It was wrong. But I have not
been in tlie habit of having many people come to see
me. And Mademoiselle Prefere never lets us off if we
commit any breach of deportment : so I know she is go-
ing to punish me, and I am very sorry about it." . . .

" That is too bad, Jeanne !"

She became very grave, and said,

" Yes, Monsieur, it is too bad ; because when I am
punished myself, I have no more authority over the
little girls."

I did not at once fully understand the nature of this
unpleasantness ; but Jeanne explained to me that, as
she was charged by Mademoiselle Prefere with the
duties of taking care of the youngest class, of washing
and dressing the children, of teaching them how to
behave, how to sew, how to say the alphabet, of show-
ing them how to play, and, finally, of putting them to
bed at the close of the day, she could not make herself
obeyed by those turbulent little folks on the days she
was condemned to wear a night-cap in the class-room,
or to eat her meals standing up, from a plate turned
upside down.


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 157

Having secretly admired the punishments devised
by the Lady of the Enchanted Pelerine, I responded,

" Then, if I understand you rightly, Jeanne, you
are at once a pupil here and a mistress ? It is a con-
dition of existence very common in the world. You
are punished, and you punish?"

"Oh, Monsieur!" she exclaimed. "No! I never
punish !"

"Then, I suspect," said I, "that your indulgence
gets you many scoldings from Mademoiselle Prefere ?"

She smiled, and winked.

Then I said to her that the troubles in whidh we
often involve ourselves, by trying to act according to
our conscience and to do the best we can, are never of
the sort that totally dishearten and weary us, but are,
on the contrary, wholesome trials. This sort of phi-
losophy touched her very little. She even appeared
totally unmoved by my moral exhortations. But was
not this quite natural on her part ? — and ought I not
to have remembered that it is only those no longer
innocent who can find pleasure in the systems of
moralists ? . . . I had at least good sense enough to
cut short my sermonizing.

" Jeanne," I said, " you were asking a moment ago
about Madame Gabry. Let us talk about that Fairy
of yours. She was very prettily made. Do you do
any modelling in wax now ?"

" I have not a bit of wax," she exclaimed, wringing
her hands — " no wax at all !"


158 THE CRIME OF SYLVESTBE BONNABD.

" No wax !" I cried—" in a republic of busy bees ?"

She laughed.

" And, then, you see. Monsieur, inj figwrmes, as you
call them, are not in Mademoiselle Prefere's pro-
gramme. But I had begun to make a very small
Saint-George for Madame de Gabry — ^a tiay little
Saint-George, with a golden cuirass. Is not that
right. Monsieur Bonnard — to give Saint-George a
gold cuirass ?"

" Quite right, Jeanne ; but what became of it ?"

" I am going to tell you. I kept it in my pocket
because I had no other place to put it, and — and I sat
down on it by mistake."

She drew out of her pocket a little wax figure,
which had been squeezed out of aU resemblance to
human form, and of which the dislocated limbs were
only attached to the body by their wire framework.
At the sight of her hero thus marred, she was seized
at once with compassion and gayety. The latter feel-
ing obtained the mastery, and she burst into a clear
laugh, which, however, stopped as suddenly as it had
begun.

Mademoiselle Pr6f ere stood at the parlor door, smil-
ing.

" That dear child !" sighed the schoolmistress, in her
tenderest tone. " I am afraid she wiU tire you. And,
then, your time is so precious !"

I begged Mademoiselle Pref^re to dismiss that illu-
sion, Biud, rising to take my leave, I took from my


THE CBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNARD. 159

pocket some chocolate-cakes and sweets which J had
brought with me.

"That is so nice!" said Jeanne; "there will be
enough to go round the whole school."

The Lady of the Pelerine intervened.

" Mademoiselle Alexandre," she said, " thank Mon-
sieur for his generosity."

Jeanne looked at her for an instant in a sullen way ;
then, turning to me, said with remarkable firmness,

" Monsieur, I thank you for your kindness in com-
ing to see me."

"Jeanne," I said, pressing both her hands, "re-
main always a good, truthful, brave girl. Good-
by."

As she left the room with her packages of chocolate
and confectionery, she happened to strike the handles
of her skipping-rope against the back of a chair. Mad-
emoiselle Prefere, full of indignation, pressed both
hands over her heart, under her pelerine ; and I almost
expected to see her give up her scholastic ghost.

"When we found ourselves alone, she recovered her
composure ; and I must say, without considering my-
self thereby flattered, that she smiled upon me with
one whole side of her face.

"Mademoiselle," I said, taking advantage of her
good humor, " I noticed that Jeanne Alexandre looks
a Httle pale. You know better than I how much con-
sideration and care a yoimg girl requires at her age.
It would only be doing you an injustice by implica-


160 THE CHIME OF 8TLVBSTBB BONNABD.

tioa to recommend her still more earnestly to your
vigilance."

These words seemed to ravish her with delight.
She lifted her eyes, as in ecstasy, to the paper spirals
of the celling, and, clasping her hands, exclaimed,

" How weU these eminent men know the art of con-
sidering the most trifling details !"

I called her attention to the fact that the health of
a young girl was not a trifling detail, and made my
farewell bow. But she stopped me on the threshold
to say to me, very confidentially,

" You must excuse me. Monsieur. I am a woman,
and I love glory. I cannot conceal from you the fact
that I feel myself greatly honored by the presence of
a Member of the Institute in my humble institution."

I duly excused the weakness of Mademoiselle Pre-
f ere ; and, thinking only of Jeanne, with the bHnd-
ness of egotism, kept asking myself all along the road,
" What are we going to do with this child ?"


Jwne 3.

I HAD escorted to the Cimetiere des Marnes that day
a very aged colleague of mine who, to use the words
of Goethe, had consented to die. The great Goethe,
whose own vital force was something extraordinary,
actually believed that one never dies until one really
wants to die — that is to say, when all those energies
which resist dissolution, and the sum of which make


TEE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD. 161

up life itself, have been totally destroyed. In other
woras he believed that people only die when it is no
longer possible for them to live. Good ! it is merely a
question of properly understanding one another ; and
■when fuUy comprehended, the magnificent idea of
Goethe only brings us quietly back to the song of La
Palisse.

"Well, my excellent colleague had consented to die
— thanks to several successive attacks of extremely
persuasive apoplexy — the last of vrhich proved unan-
swerable. I had been very little acquainted with him
during his lifetime; but it seems that I became his
friend the moment he was dead, for our colleagues
assured me in the most serious manner, with deeply
sympathetic countenances, that I should act as one of
the pall-bearers, and deliver an address over the tomb.

After having read very badly a short address I had
written as well as I could — which is not saying much
for it — I started out for a walk in the woods of Ville-
d'Avray, and followed, without leaning too much on
the Captain's cane, a shaded path on which the sun-
light f eU, through foliage, in little disks of gold. Nev-
er had the scent of grass and fresh leaves, — never had
the beauty of the sky over the trees, and the serene
might of noble vegetal forms, so deeply affected my
senses and aU my being; and the pleasure I felt in
that silence, broken only by faintest tinkling sounds,
was at once of the senses and of the soul.

I sat down in the shade of the roadside under a
11


162 TEE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNABD.

clump of young oaks. And there I made a promise
to myself not to die, or at least not to consent to die,
before I should be again able to sit down under an
oak, where — in the great peace of the open country —
I could meditate on the nature of the soul and the
ultimate destiny of man. A bee, whose brown cor-
sage gleamed in the sun like an armor of old-gold,
came to light upon a mallow-flower close by me —
darkly rich in color, and fully opened upon its tufted
stalk. It was certainly not the first time I had wit-
nessed so common an incident ; but it was the first
time that I watched it with such comprehensive and
friendly curiosity. I could discern that there were all
sorts of sympathies between the insect and the flower
— a thousand singular httle relationships which I had
never before even suspected.

Satiated with nectar, the insect rose and buzzed
away in a straight line, while I lifted myself up as
best I could, and readjusted myself upon my legs.

" Adieu !" I said to the flower and to the bee.
"Adieu! Heaven grant I may live long enough to
discover the secret of your harmonies. I am very
tired. But man is so made that he can only find
relaxation from one kind of labor by taking up an-
other. The flowers and insects will give me that
relaxation, with God's will, after my long researches
in philology and diplomatics. How full of meaning
is that old myth of Antaeus! I have touched the
Earth and I am a new man; and now, at seventy


THE CRIME OF SYLVESTBE BONNARD. 163

years of age, new feelings of curiosity take birth in
my mind, even as young shoots sometimes spring up
from the hollow trunk of an aged oak !"


June 4.

I LIKE to look out of my window at the Seine and
its quays on those soft gray mornings which give such
an infinite tenderness of tint to everything. I have
seen that azure sky which flings so luminous a calm
over the Bay of Naples. But our Parisian sky is more
animated, more kindly, more spiritual. It smiles,
threatens, caresses — stakes an aspect of melancholy or
a look of merriment like a human gaze. At this mo-
ment it is pouring down a very gentle light on the
men and beasts of the city as they accomplish their
daily tasks. Over there, on the opposite bank, the
stevedores of the Port Sarnt-Mcholas are unloading a
cargo of cows' horns ; while two men standing on a
gangway are tossing sugar-loaves from one to the other,
and thence to somebody in the hold of a steamer. On
the north quay, the cab-horses, standing in a hne un-
der the shade of the plane-trees, each with its head
in a nose-bag, are quietly munching their oats, while
the rubicund drivers are drinking at the counter of
the wine-seller opposite, but all the while keeping a
sharp lookout for early customers.

The dealers in second-hand books put their boxes on
the parapet. These good retailers of Mind, who are


164 THE CRIME OF BYLVE8TBE BONNABD.

always in the open air, with blouses loose to the
breeze, have become so weatherbeaten by the wind,
the rain, the frost, the snow, the fog, and the great
sun, that they end by looking very much Kke the old
statues of cathedrals. They are aU friends of mine,
and I scarcely ever pass by their boxes without pick-
ing out of one of them some old book which I had
aliyays been in need of up to that very moment, with-
out any suspicion on my part of the fact.

Then on my return home I have to endure the out-
cries of my housekeeper, who accuses me of bursting
all my pockets and filling the house with waste paper
to attract the rats. Therese is wise about that, and it
is because she is wise that I do not listen to her ; for
in spite of my tranquil mien, I have always preferred
the foUy of the passions to the wisdom of indifference.
Eut just because my own passions are not of that sort
which burst out with violence to devastate and kiU,
the common mind is not aware of their existence.
Nevertheless, I am greatly moved by them at times,
and it has more than once been my fate to lose my
sleep for the sake of a few pages written, by some for-
gotten monk or printed by some humble apprentice of
Peter Schoeffer. And if these fierce enthusiasms are
slowly being quenched in me, it is only because I am
being slowly quenched myself. Our passions are our-
selves. My old books are Me. I am just as old and
thumbwom as they are.

A light breeze sweeps away, along with the dust of


THE CBIME OF aTLVESTBE BONNABD. 165

the pavements, the winged seeds of the plane-trees,
and the fragments of hay dropped from the mouths
of the horses. The dust is nothing remarkable in
itself ; but as I watch it flying, I remember a mo-
ment in my childhood when watching just such a
whirl of dust; and my old Parisian soul is much
affected by that sudden recollection. All that I see
from my window — that horizon which extends to the
left as far as the hiUs of Chaillot, and enables me to
distinguish the Arc de Triomphe like a die of stone,
the Seine, river of glory, and its bridges, the ash-trees
of the terrace of the Tuileries, the Louvre of the Ee-
naissance, cut and graven like goldsmith-work ; and
on my right, towards the Pont-Neuf {pons lAitet^m
novus ddopus, as it is named on old engravings), aU
the old and venerable part of- Paris, with its towers
and spires : — aU that is my life, it is myself ; and I
would be nothing but for aU. those things which are
thus reflected in me, through my thousand varying
shades of thought, inspiring me and animating me.
That is why I love Paris with an immense love.

And nevertheless I am weary, and I know that there
can be no rest for me in the heart of this great city
which thinks so much, which hag taught me to think,
and which forever urges me to think inore. And how
avoid being excited among all these books which in-
cessantly tempt my curiosity without ever satisfying
it ? At one moment it is a date I have to look for ;
at another it is the name of a place I have to make


166 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

sure of, or some quaint term of which it is important
to determine the exact meaning. Words ? — why, yes !
words. As a philologist, I am their sovereign ; they
are my subjects, and, like a good king, I devote my
whole life to them. But will I not be able to abdicate
some day ? I have an idea that there is somewhere
or other, quite far from here, a certain little cottage
where I could enjoy the quiet I so much need, whUe
awaiting that day in which a greater quiet — that
which can be never broken — shall come to wrap me
aU about. I dream of a bench before the threshold,
and of fields spreading away out of sight. But I must
have a fresh smiling young face beside me, to reflect
and concentrate all that freshness of nature. I could
then imagine myself a grandfather, and all the long
void of my life would be fiUed. . . .

I am not a violent man, and yet I become easily
vexed, and aU my works have caused me quite as much
pain as pleasure. And I do not know how it is that
I still keep thinking about that very conceited and
very inconsiderate impertinence which my young
friend of the Luxembourg took the liberty to utter
about me some three months ago. I do not call him
" friend " in irony, for I love studious youth with aU
its temerities and imaginative eccentricities. StUl,
my young friend certainly went beyond all bounds.
Master Ambroise Pare, who was the first to attempt
the ligature of arteries, and who, having commenced
his profession at a time when surgery was only per-


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 167

formed by quack barbers, nevertheless succeeded in
lifting the science to the high place it now occupies,
was assailed in his old age by all the young sawbones'
apprentices. Being grossly abused during a discussion
by some young addlehead who might have been the
best son in the world, but who certainly lacked aU
sense of respect, the old master answered him in his
treatise De la Mumie, de la Licome, des Venms et de
la Peste. " I pray him," said the great man — " I pray
him, that if he desire to make any contradictions to
my reply, he abandon all animosities, and treat the
good old man with gentleness." This answer seems
admirable from the pen of Ambroise Pare ; but even
had it been written by a village bonesetter, grown
gray in his calling, and mocked by some young strip-
hng, it would still be worthy of all praise.

It might perhaps seem that my memory of the inci-
dent had been kept alive only by a base feeling of re-
sentment. I thought so myself at first, and reproached
myself for thus dwelling on the saying of a boy who
could not yet know the meaning of his own words.
But my reflections on this subject subsequently took
a better course : that is why I now note them down
in my diary. I remembered that one day when I was
twenty years old (that was more than half a century
ago) I was walking about in that very same garden
of the Luxembourg with some comrades. We were
talking about our old professors ; and one of us hap-
pened to name Monsieur Petit-Eadel, an estimable and


168 THE GRIME OF STLVES'l'ME BONNABD.

learned man, who was the first to throw some hght
upon the origin of early Etruscan civihzation, but who
had been unfortunate enough to prepare a chronolog-
ical table of the lovers of Helen. We aU laughed a
great deal about that chronological table ; and I cried
out, " Petit-Kadel is an ass, not in three letters, but in
twelve whole volumes !"

This foolish speech of my adolescence was uttered
too lightly to be a weight on my conscience as an old
man. May God kindly prove to me some day that I
never used any less innocent shaft of speech in the
battle of life! But I now ask myself whether I
really never wrote, at any time in my life, something
quite as unconsciously absurd as the chronological ta-
ble of the lovers of Helen. The progress of science
renders useless the very books which have been the
greatest aids to that progress. As those works are no
longer useful, modern youth is naturally incMned to
beheve they never had any value ; it despises them,
and ridicules them if they happen to contain any
superannuated opinion whatever. That was why, in
my twentieth year, I amused myself at the expense
of Monsieur Petit-Eadel and his chronological table ;
and that was why, the other day, at the Luxembourg,
my young and irreverent friend . . .

" Menl/re en toi-mSme, Octave, et cesse de te plaindre.
Quoi! tu iBevai qv!on Vepa/rgne et ri'as Hen epargni!"*

* " Look into thyself, Octavius, and cease complaining.

What ! thou wouldst be spared, and thou thyself hast spared
none !"


THE CRIME OF STLYESTRE BONNABD. 169

June 6.

It was the first Thursday in June. I shut up my
books, and took my leave of the holy Abbot Drocto-
veus, who being now in the enjoyment of celestial
bUss, cannot feel very impatient to behold his name
and works glorified on earth through the humble
compilation being prepared by my hands. Must I
confess it? That mallow -plant I saw visited by a
bee the other day has been occupying my thoughts
much more than aU the ancient abbots who ever bore
crosiers or wore mitres. There is in one of Sprengel's
books which I read in my youth, at that time when I
used to read anything and everything, some ideas
about "the loves of flowers" which now return to
memory after having been forgotten for half a century,
and which to-day interest me so much that I regret
not to have devoted the humble capacities of my mind
to the study of insects and of plants.

And only a while ago my housekeeper surprised me
at the kitchen window, in the act of examining some
wallflowers through a magnifyiug-glass

It was while looking for my cravat that I made
these reflections. But after searching to no purpose
in a great number of drawers, I found myself obhged,
after aU, to have recourse to my housekeeper. Therese
came limping in.

" Monsieur," she said, " you ought to have told me
you were going out, and I would have given you your
cravat !"


170 TEE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

" But Th^rese," I replied, " would it not be a great
deal better to put it some place where I could find it
without your help?"

Th^rese did not deign to answer me.

Therese no longer allows me to arrange anything.
I cannot even have a handkerchief without asking her
for it ; and as she is deaf, crippled, and, what is worse,
beginning to lose her memory, I languish in perpetual
destitution. But she exercises her domestic authority
with such quiet pride that I do not feel the courage
to attempt a coitp d'etat against her government.

"My cravat! Therese!— do you hear? — my cravat!
if you drive me wild like this with your slow ways, it
will not be a cravat I shall need, but a rope to hang
myself !"

" You must be in a Yerj great hurry. Monsieur," re-
plied Therese. " Your cravat is not lost. Nothing is
ever lost in this house, because I have charge of every-
thing. But please allow me the time at least to find
it."

" Yet here," I thought to myself — " here is the result
of half a century of devotedness and self-sacrifice ! . . .
Ah ! if by any happy chance, this inexorable Therese
had once in her whole life, only once, failed in her
duty as a servant — if she had ever been at fault for one
single instant, she could never have assumed this in-
flexible authority over me, and I would at least have
the courage to resist her. But how can one resist
virtue ? The people who have no weaknesses are ter-


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONN ABB. l>j\

rible ; there is no way of taking advantage of them.
Just look at Therese, for example ; she has not a sin-
gle fault for which you can blame her ! She has no
doubt of herself, nor of God, nor of the world. She
is the valiant woman, the wise virgin of Scripture ;
others may know nothing about her, but I know her
worth. In my fancy I always see her carrying a
lamp, an humble kitchen lamp, illuminating the beams
of some rustic roof — a lamp which wiU never go out
while suspended from that meagre arm of hers, scrag-
gy and strong as a viue-branch.

" Therese, my cravat ! Don't you know, wretched
woman, that to-day is the first Thursday in June, and
that Mademoiselle Jeanne wiU be waiting for me?
The schoolmistress has certainly had the parlor floor
vigorously waxed : I am sure one can look at one's self
in it now ; and it wiU be quite a consolation for me
when I slip and break my old bones upon it — which
is sure to happen sooner or later — to see my rueful
countenance reflected in it as in a looking-glass. Then
taking for my model that amiable and admirable hero
whose image is carved upon the handle of Uncle Vic-
tor's walking-stick, I wfll control myself so as not to
make too ugly a grimace. . . . See what a splendid
sun ! The quays are aU gilded by it, and the Seine
smiles in countless little flashing wrinkles. The city
is gold : a dust-haze, blonde and gold-toned as a wom-
an's hair, floats above its beautiful contours. . . .
Therese, my cravat ! . . . Ah ! I can now comprehend


172 THE OBIMB OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

the -wisdom of that old Chrysal who used to keep his
neckbands in a big Plutarch. Hereafter I shall f oUow
his example by laying all my neckties away between
the leaves of the ' Acta Sanctorum.' "

Therese lets me talk on, and keeps looking for the
necktie in silence. I hear a gentle ringing at our
door-bell.

"Therese," I exclaim; "there is somebody ring-
ing the bell ! Give me my cravat, and go to the door ;
or, rather, go to the door first, and then, with the
help of Heaven, you will give me my cravat. But
please do not stand there between the clothes-press
and the door like an old hack horse between two
saddles."

Th&e^e marched to the door as if advancing upon
an enemy. My excellent housekeeper becomes more
inhospitable the older she grows. Every stranger is
an object of suspicion to her. According to her own
assertion, this disposition is the result of a long ex-
perience with human nature. I had not the time to
consider whether the same experience on the part of
another experimenter would produce the same results.
Maitre Mouche was waiting to see me in the ante-
room.

Maitre Mouche is stiH more yeUow than I had be-
lieved him to be. He wears blue glasses, and his eyes
keep m.oviQg uneasily behind them, Mke mice running
about behind a screen.

Mattre Mouche excuses himself for having intruded


THE CBIME OF STLVM8TRE BONNARD. 173

upon me at a moment when ... He does not char-
acterize the moment ; but I think he means to say a
moment in which I happen to be without my cravat.
It is not my fault, as you very well know. Maitre
Mouche, who does not know, does not appear to be at
aU shocked, however. He is only afraid that he
might have dropped in at the wrong moment. I suc-
ceed in partially reassuring him at once upon that
point. He then teUs me it is as the guardian of
Mademoiselle Alexandre that he has come to talk
with me. First of aU, he desires that I shall not
hereafter pay any heed to those restrictions he had at
first deemed it necessary to put upon the permit
given to visit Mademoiselle Jeanne at the boarding-
school. Henceforth the estabhshment of Mademoi-
selle Prefere will be open to me any day that I may
choose to call — between the hours of midday and four
o'clock. Knowing the interest I have taken in the
young girl, he considers it his duty to give me some
information alpout the person to whom he has con-
fided his ward. Mademoiselle Prefere, whom he has
known for many years, is in possession of his ut-
most confidence. Mademoiselle Prefere is, in his esti-
mation, an enlightened person, of excellent morals,
and capable of giving excellent counsel.

"Mademoiselle Prefere," he said to me, "has prin-
ciples ; and principles are rare in these days. Mon-
sieur. Everything has been totally changed ; and this
epoch of ours cannot compare with the preceding ones."


174 TEE CHIME OF STLYESTSM BONNABD.

" My stairway is a good example, Monsieur," I re-
plied ; " twenty-five years ago it used to allow me to
climb it without any trouble, and now it takes my
breath away, and wears my legs out before I have
climbed half a dozen steps. It has had its character
spoiled. Then there are those journals and books I
used once to devour without resistance by moonlight:
to-day, even in the brightest sunhght, they mock my
curiosity, and exhibit nothing but a blur of white
and black when I have not got my spectacles on.
Then the gout has got into my limbs. That is an-
other malicious trick of the times !"

" ISTot only that, Monsieur," gravely repUed Maitre
Mouche, "but what is really unfortunate in our
epoch is that no one is satisfied with his position.
From the top of society to the bottom, in every class,
there prevails a discontent, a restlessness, a love of
comfort . . ."

" Mon Dieu, Monsieur !" I exclaimed. " You think
this love of comfort is a sign of the times? Men
have never had at any epoch a love of discomfort.
They have always tried to better their condition.
This constant effort produces constant changes, and
the effort is always going on — that is aU there is
about it !"

"Ah! Monsieur," replied Maitre Mouche, "it is
easy to see that you live in your books — out of the
business world altogether. You do not see, as I see
them, the conflicts of interest, the struggle for money.


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 175

It is the same effervescence in all minds, great or
small. The wildest speculations are being everywhere
indulged in. What I see arovmd me simply terrifies
me!"

I wondered within myself whether Maitre Mouche
had called upon me only for the purpose of expressing
his virtuous misanthropy; but all at once I heard
words of a more consoling character issue from his
lips. Maitre Mouche began to speak to me of Yir-
ginie Prefere as a person worthy of respect, of es-
teem, and of sympathy, — ^highly honorable, capable of
great devotedness, cultivated, discreet, — able to read
aloud remarkably well, extremely modest, and skU-
ful in the art of applying blisters. Then I began to
understand that he had only been painting that dis-
mal picture of universal corruption in order the better
to bring out, by contrast, the virtues of the school-
mistress. I was further informed that the institution
in the Eue Demours was weU patronized, prosperous,
and enjoyed a high reputation with the public. Maitre
Mouche lifted up his hand — ^with a black wooUen
glove on it — as if making oath to the truth of these
statements. Then he added :

" I am enabled, by the very character of my pro-
fession, to know a great deal about people. A notary
is, to a certain extent, a father-confessor. I deemed
it my duty. Monsieur, to give you this agreeable in-
formation at the moment when a lucky chance en-
abled you to meet Mademoiselle Prefere. There is


176 THE GRIME OF STLYE8TRE BONNABD.

only one thing more which I would like to say. This
lady — who is, of course, quite unaware of my action
in the matter — spoke to me of you the other day in
terms of the deepest sympathy. I could only weaken
their expression by repeating them to you; and,
furthermore, I could not repeat them without betray-
ing, to a certain extent, the confidence of Mademoiselle
Prefere."

" Do not betray it, Monsieur ; do not betray it !" I
responded. " To tell you the truth, I had no idea
that Mademoiselle Prefere knew anything whatever
about me. But since you have the influence of an
old friend with her, I will take advantage of your
good will, Monsieur, to ask you to exercise that influ-
ence in behalf of Mademoiselle Jeanne Alexandre.
The child — for she is still a child — is overloaded with
work. She is at once a pupil and a mistress — she is
overtasked. Besides, she is punished in petty dis-
gusting ways ; and hers is one of those generous nat-
ures which will be forced into revolt by such con-
tinual humiliation."

"Alas!" replied Maitre Mouche, "she must be
trained to take her part in the struggle of life. One
does not come into this world simply to amuse one's
self, and to do just what one pleases."

" One comes into this world," I responded, rather
warmly, " to enjoy what is beautiful and what is good,
and to do as one pleases, when the things one wants
to do are noble, intelligent, and generous. An edu-


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNABD. 11>J

cation which does not cultivate the will, is an educa-
tion that depraves the mind. It is a teacher's duty
to teach the pupD. hmo to will."

I perceived that Maitre Mouche began to think me
a rather silly man. With a great deal of quiet self-
assurance, he proceeded :

" You must remember. Monsieur, that the education
of the poor has to be conducted with a great deal of
circumspection, and with a view to that future state
of dependence they must occupy in society. Perhaps
you are not aware that the late Noel Alexandre died
a bankrupt, and that his daughter is beiag educated
almost by charity ?"

" Oh ! Monsieur !" I exclaimed, " do not say it ! To
say it is to pay one's self back, and then the statement
ceases to be true."

"The liabilities of the succession," contiaued the
notary, " exceeded the assets. But I was able to ef-
fect a settlement with the creditors in favor of the
minor."

He undertook to explain matters in detaU. I de-
clined to listen to these explanations, being incapable
of understanding business methods in general, and
those of Maitre Mouche in particular. The notary
then took it upon himself to justify Mademoiselle
Prefere's educational system, and observed by way
of conclusion,

" It is not by amusing one's self that one can learn."

" It is only by amusing one's self that one can learn,"
12


178 THE CRIME OF aTLVEBTRE BONNABD.

f\ I replied. " The whole art of teaching is only the art
\ of awakening the natural curiosity of young minds
for the purpose of satisfying it afterwards; and cu-
; riosity itself can be vivid and wholesome only in pro-
portion as the mind is contented and happy. Those
acquirements crammed by force into the minds of
children simply clog and stifle intelligence. In order
that knowledge be properly digested, it must have
been swallowed with a good appetite. I know Jeanne !
If that child were intrusted to my care, I should make
of her — not a learned woman, for I would look to her
future happiness only — but a child f uU of bright in-
telligence and f uU of life, in whom everything beau-
tiful in art or nature would awaken some gentle
responsive thrill. I would teach her to hve in sym-
pathy with all that is beautiful — comely landscapes,
the ideal scenes of poetry and history, the emotional
charm of noble music. I would make lovable to her
everything I would wish her to love. Even her needle-
work I would make pleasurable to her, by a proper
choice of the tissues, the style of embroideries, the
designs of lace. I would give her a beautiful dog, and
a pony to teach her how to manage animals ; I would
give her birds to take care of, so that she could learn
the value of even a drop of water and a crumb of
bread. And in order that she should have a stiU
higher pleasure, I would train her to find delight in
exercising charity. And inasmuch as none of us may
escape pain, I should teach her that Christian wisdom


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 1^9

which elevates us above all suffering, and gives a
beauty even to grief itself. That is my idea of the
right way to educate a young girl."

" I yield, Monsieur," replied Maitre Mouche, joining
his black-gloved hands together.

And he rose.

" Of course you understand," I remarked,' as I went
to the door with him, " that I do not pretend for a
moment to impose my educational system upon Made-
moiselle Pr6f ere ; it is necessarily a private one, and
quite incompatible with the organization of even the
best-managed boarding-schools. I only ask you to
persuade her to give Jeanne less work and more play,
and not to punish her except in case of absolute neces-
sity, and to let her have as much freedom of mind
and body as the regulations of the institution permit."

It was with a pale and mysterious smile that Maitre
Mouche informed me that my observations would be
taken in good part, and should receive all possible
consideration.

Therewith he made me a little bow, and took his
departure, leaving me with a peculiar feeling of dis-
comfort and uneasiness. I have met a great many
strange characters in my time, but never any at all
resembling either this notary or this schoolmistress.


180 THE CRIME OF 87LVESTBE BONNABD.

July 6.

Maitre Mouche had so much delayed me by his
visit that I gave up going to see Jeanne that day.
Professional duties kept me very busy for the rest of
the week. Although at the age when most men re-
tire altogether from active life, I am still attached by
a thousand ties to the society in which I have lived.
I have to preside at meetings of academies, scientific
congresses, assemblies of various learned bodies. I
am overburdened with honorary functions; I have
seven of these in one government department alone.
The hwreomx would be very glad to get rid of me, and
I should be very glad to get rid of them. But habit
is stronger than both of us together, and I continue to
hobble up the stairs of various government buildings.
Old clerks point me out to each other as I go by
like a ghost wandering through the corridors. When
one has become very old one finds it extremely diffi-
cult to disappear. Nevertheless, it is time, as the old
song says, " deprend/re ma ret^aite et de songer dfakre
vm, fin " — ^to retire on my pension and prepare myself
to die a good death.

An old marchioness, who used to be a friend of Helve-
tius in her youth, and whom I once met at my father's
house when a very old woman, was visited during her
last sickness by the priest of her parish, who wanted
to prepare her to die.

"Is that really necessary?" she asked. "I see


TEE CRIME OF ISTLVE8TRE BONNABD. 181

everybody else manage it perfectly well the first
time."

My father went to see her very soon afterwards,
and found her extremely iU.

" Good-evening, my friend !" she said, pressing his
hand. " I am going to see whether God improves upon
acquaintance."

So were wont to die the helles amies of the philoso-
phers. Such an end is certainly not vulgar nor imper-
tinent, and such levities are not of the sort that ema-
nate from dull minds. Nevertheless, they shook me.
I^iTeither my fears nor my hopes could accommodate
themselves to such a mode of departure. I would like
to make mine with a perfectly collected mind; and
that is why I must begin to think, in a year or two,
about some way of belonging to myself ; otherwise, I
should certainly risk . . . But, hush ! let Him not hear
His name and turn to look as He passes by ! I can
still lift my fagot without His aid.

... I found Jeanne very happy indeed. She told
me that, on the Thursday previous, after the visit of
her guardian, Mademoiselle Prefere had set her free
from the ordinary regulations and lightened her tasks
in several ways. Since that lucky Thursday she could
walk in the garden — which only lacked leaves and
flowers — as much as she Mked ; and she had even been
given facilities to work at her unfortunate little figure
of Saint-George.

She said to me, with a smile,


182 THE CRIME OF 8TL7ESTBE BONNABD.

" I know very well that I owe all this to you."

I tried to talk with her about other matters, but I
remarked that she could not attend to what I was say-
ing, in spite of her effort to do so.

" I see you are thinking about something else," I
said. " Well, tell me what it is ; for, if you do not, we
shall not be able to talk to each other at all, which
would be very imworthy of both of us."

She answered, ■

" Oh ! I was really listening to you, Monsieur ; but
it is true that I was thinking about something else.
You will excuse me, won't you? I could not help
thinking that Mademoiselle Prefere must hke you
very, very much indeed, to have become so good to
me all of a sudden."

Then she looked at me in an odd, smiling, fright-
ened way, which made me laugh.

" Does that surprise you ?" I asked.

" Very much," she replied.

"Please tell me why?"

" Because I can see no reason, no reason at aU . . .
but there ! ... no reason at all why you should please
Mademoiselle Prefere so much."

" So, then, you think I am very displeasing, Jeanne?"

She bit her hps, as if to punish them for having
made a mistake ; and then, in a coaxing way, looking
at me with her great soft eyes, gentle, and beautiful
as a spaniel's, she said,

" I know I said a foolish thing ; but, still, I do not


THE CBIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 183

see any reason why you should he so pleasing to Ma-
demoiselle Pr^fere. And, nevertheless, you seem to
please her a great deal — a very great deal. She called
me one day, and asked me all sorts of questions about
you."

"Keally?"

" Yes ; she wanted to find out all about your house.
Just think ! she even asked me how old your servant
was !"

And Jeanne burst out laughing.

" "WeU, what do you think about it ?" I asked.

She remained a long while with her eyes fixed on
the worn-out cloth of her shoes, and seemed to be
thinking very deeply. Finally, looking up again, she
answered,

" I am distrustful. Isn't it very natural to feel un-
easy about what one cannot understand ? I know I am
foohsh ; but you won't be offended with me, will you?"

" "Why, certainly not, Jeanne. I am not a bit offend-
ed with you."

I must acknowledge that I was beginning to share
her surprise ; and I began to turn over in my old head
the singular thought of this young girl — " One isjin-
easy about what one cannot understand."

But, with a fresh burst of merriment, she cried
out,

" She asked me . . . guess ! I will give you a hun-
dred guesses — a thousand guesses. You give it up ? . . .
She asked me if you liked good eating."


184 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNARD.

" And how did you receive this shower of interroga-
tions, Jeanne?"

"I replied, 'I don't know, Mademoiselle.' And
Mademoiselle then said to me, ' You are a little fool.
The least details of the life of an eminent man ought
to be observed. Please to know, Mademoiselle, that
Monsieur Sylvestre Bonnard is one of the glories of
France !' "

" Stuff !" I exclaimed. " And what did you think
about it, Mademoiselle ?"

" I thought that Mademoiselle Pr^fere was right."
But I don't care at aU ... (I know it is naughty what I
am going to say) ... I don't care a bit, not a bit, wheth-
er Mademoiselle Pref ere is or is not right about any-
thing."

" Well, then, content yourself, Jeanne, Mademoiselle
Pr^fere was not right."

" Tes, yes, she was quite right that time ; but I
wanted to love everybody who loved you — every-
body without exception — and I cannot do it, because
it would never be possible for me to love Mademoiselle
Pr^fere."

"Listen, Jeanne," I answered, very seriously, "Made-
moiselle Pr^f ere has become good to you ; try now to
be good to her."

She answered sharply,

" It is very easy for Mademoiselle Prefere to be good
to me, and it would be very difficult indeed for me to
be good to her."


THB CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD. 185

I then said, in a still more serious tone :

" My child, the authority of a teacher is sacred. You
must consider your schoolmistress as occupying the
place to you of the mother whom you lost."

I had scarcely uttered this solemn stupidity when I
bitterly regretted it. The child turned pale, and the
tears sprang to her eyes.

" Oh, Monsieur !" she cried, " how could you say
such a thing — you f You never knew mamma !"

Ay, just Heaven ! I did know her mamma. And
how indeed could I have been foolish enough to have
said what I did ?

She repeated, as if to herself :

" Mamma ! my dear mamma ! my poor mamma !"

A lucky chance prevented me from playing the fool
any further. I do not know how it happened that at
that moment I looked as if I was going to cry. At
my age one does not cry. It must have been a bad
cough which brought the tears into my eyes. But, any-
how, appearances were in my favor. Jeanne was
deceived by them. Oh ! what a pure and radiant
smile suddenly shone out under her beautiful wet eye-
lashes — like sunshine among branches after a summer
shower ! "We took each other by the hand and sat a
long while without saying a word — absolutely happy.
Those celestial harmonies which I once thought I
heard thrilling through my soul while I knelt before
that tomb to which a saintly woman had guided me,
suddenly awoke again in my heart, slow - swelling


186 THE CRIME OF SYLVESTBE BONNABD.

througli the blissful moments with infinite softness.
Doubtless the child whose hand pressed my own also
heard them ; and then, elevated by their enchantment
above the material world, the poor old man and the
artless young girl both knew that a tender ghostly
Presence was making sweetness all about them.

"My child," I said at last, " I am very old, and many
secrets of life which you will only learn Mttle by little,
have been revealed to me. Believe me, the future is
shaped out of the past. "Whatever you can do to hve
contentedly here, without impatience and without fret-
ting, wiU help you to live some future day in peace and
joy in your own home. Be gentle, and learn how to
suffer. When one suffers patiently one suffers less.
If you should ever happen to have a serious cause of
complaint I shall be there to take your part. If you
should be badly treated, Madame De Gabry and I
would both consider ourselves badly treated in your
person." . . .

" Is your health very good indeed, dear Monsieur ?"

It was Mademoiselle Pr^f ere, approaching stealthily
behind us, who had asked the question, with her pe-
culiar smile. My first idea was to tell her to go to the
devil ; my second, that her mouth was as httle suited
for smiling as a frying-pan for musical purposes ; my
third was to answer her pohtely and assure her that I
hoped she was very well.

She sent the young girl out to take a walk in the
garden ; then, pressing one hand upon her pelerine and


THE CRIME OF STL VE8TRE BONN AMD. 187

extending the other towards the Tableau d'Hormev^,
she showed me the name of Jeanne Alexandre written
at the head of the list in large text.

" I am very much pleased," I said to her, " to find
that you are satisfied with the behavior of that child.
Nothing could delight me more ; and I am inclined to
attribute this happy result to your affectionate vigi-
lance. I have taken the liberty to send you a few
books which I thiak may serve both to instruct and to
amuse young girls. You wUl be able to judge by glanc-
ing over them whether they are adapted to the perusal
of Mademoiselle Alexandre and her companions."

The gratitude of the schoolmistress not only over-
flowed in words, but seemed about to take the form of
tearful sensibility. In order to change the subject I
observed,

" What a beautiful day this is !"

" Yes," she replied ; " and if this weather continues,
those dear children will have a nice time for their en-
joyment."

" I suppose you are referring to the holidays. But
Mademoiselle Alexandre, who has no relatives, cannot
go away. What in the world is she going to do aU
alone in this great big house ?"

" Oh, we wiU do everything we can to amuse her. . . .
I wiU take her to the museums and — "

She hesitated, blushed, and continued,

" — and to your house, if you wiU permit me."

" Why, of course !" I exclaimed. " That is a first-rate
idea."


188 THE CRIME OF STLYESTBE BONNABD.

We separated very good friends with one another.
I with her, because I had been able to obtain what I
desired; she with me, for no appreciable motive —
which fact, according to Plato, elevated her into the
highest rank of the Hierarchy of Souls.

. . . And nevertheless it is not without a presentiment
of evil that I find myself on the point of introducing
this person into my house. And I would be very glad
indeed to see Jeanne in charge of anybody else rather
than of her. Maitre Mouche and Mademoiselle Pref ere
are characters whom I cannot at aU understand. I
never can imagine why they say what they do say,
nor why they do what they do ; they have a myste-
rious something m common which makes me feel un-
easy. As Jeanne said to me a little while ago : " One
is uneasy about what one cannot understand."

Alas ! at my age one has learned only too well how
little sincerity there is in life ; one has learned only
too well how much one loses by hving a long time in
this world ; and one feels that one can no longer trust
any except the young.


August 12.
I WAITED for them. In fact, I waited for them very
impatiently. I exerted all my powers of insinuation
and of coaxing to induce Therese to receive them
kindly; but my powers in this direction are very
hmited. They came. Jeanne was neater and prettier
than I had ever expected to see her. She has not, it


THE CHIME OF 8YLVESTBE BONNAED. 189

is true, anything approaching the charm of her mother.
But to-day, for the first time, I observed that she has
a pleasing face ; and a pleasing face is of great advan-
tage to a woman in this world. I think that her hat
was a little on one side ; but she smiled, and the City
of Books was all illuminated by that smile.

I watched Therese to see whether the rigid man-
ners of the old housekeeper would soften a little at
the sight of the young girl. I saw her turning her
lustreless eyes upon Jeanne ; I saw her long wrinkled
face, her toothless mouth, and that pointed chin of
hers — like the chin of some puissant old fairy. And
that was all I could see.

Mademoiselle Pref ere made her appearance all in
blue — advanced, retreated, skipped, tripped, cried out,
sighed, cast her eyes down, rolled her eyes up, bewil-
dered herself with excuses — said she dared not, and
nevertheless dared — said she would never dare again,
and nevertheless dared again — made courtesies innu-
merable — made, in short, all the fuss she could.

" "What a lot of books !" she screamed. " And have
you reaUy read them all. Monsieur Bonnard ?"

"Alas ! I have," I replied, " and that is just the rea-
son that I do not know anything ; for there is not a
single one of those books which does not contradict
some other book ; so that by the time one has read
them all one does not know what to think about any-
thing. That is just my condition, Madame."

Thereupon she called Jeanne for the purpose of com-


190 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNARD.

municating her impressions. But Jeanne was looking
out of the window.

" How beautiful it is !" she said to us. " How I love
to see the river flowing ! It makes you think about
aU. kinds of things."

Mademoiselle Prefere having removed her hat and'
exhibited a forehead tricked out with blonde curls, my
housekeeper sturdily snatched up the hat at once, with
the observation that she did not hke to see people's
clothes scattered over the furniture. Then she ap-
proached Jeanne and asked her for her " things," call-
ing her " my little lady !" "Whereupon the httle lady
giving up her cloak and hat, exposed to view a very
graceful neck and a lithe figure, whose outlines were
beautifully relieved against the great glow of the open
window ; and I could have wished that some one else
might have seen her at that moment — some one very
different froih an aged housekeeper, a schoolmistress
frizzled like a sheep, and this old humbug of an archi-
vist and paleographer.

" So you are looking at the Seine," I said to her.
" See how it sparkles in the sun !"

'" Yes," she rephed, leaning over the window-bar, "it
looks like a flowing of fire. But see how nice and cool
it looks on the other side over there, under the shadow
of the willows! That little spot there pleases me
better than aU the rest."

" Grood !" I answered. " I see that the river has a
charm for you. How would you like, with Mademdi-


TEE CRIME OF S7LVESTBE BONNABD. 191

selle Prefere's permission, to make a trip to Saint-
Cloud ? "We would certainly be able to take the steam-
boat just below the Pont-Eoyal."

Jeanne was delighted with my suggestion, and Mad-
emoiselle Pr^fere wilUng to make any sacrifice. But
my housekeeper was not at all willing to let us go off
so unconcernedly. She summoned me into the dining-
room, whither I followed her in fear and trembhng.

" Monsieur," she said to me as soon as we found our-
selves alone, " you never think about anything, and
it is always I who have to think about everything.
Luckily for you I have a good memory."

I did not think that it was a favorable moment for
any attempt to dispel this wild illusion. She continued :

" So you were going off without saying a word to me
about what this Uttle lady Ukes to eat ? At her age
one does not know anything, one does not care about
anything in particular, one eats like a bird. You your-
self. Monsieur, are very difficult to please ; but at least
you know what is good : it is very different with these
young people — they do not know anything about cook-
ing. It is often the very best thing which they think
the worst, and what is bad seems to them good, because
their stomachs are not quite formed yet— so that one
never knows just what to do for them. TeU me if the
little lady would like a pigeon cooked with green pease,
and whether she is fond of vanilla ice-cream."

" My good Therese," I answered, " just do whatever
you think best, and whatever that may be I am sure


192 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABB.

it will be very nice. Those ladies will be quite con-
tented with our humble ordinary fare."

Therese replied, very dryly,

" Monsieur, I am asking you about the little lady :
she must not leave this house without having enjoyed
herself a little. As for that old frizzle-headed thing,
if she doesn't like my dinner sh^ can suck her thumbs,
f don't care what she likes !"

My miud being thus set at rest, I returned into the
City of Books, where Mademoiselle Pref ere was cro-
cheting as calmly as if she were at home. I almost
felt inclined myself to think she was. She did not
take up much room, it is true, in the angle of the win-
dow. But she had chosen her chair and her footstool
so well that those articles of furniture seemed to have
been made expressly for her.

Jeanne, on the other hand, devoted her attention to
the books and pictures — gazing at them in a kindly,
expressive, half-sad way, as if she were bidding them
an affectionate farewell.

" Here," I said to her, " amuse yourself with this
book, which I am sure you cannot help hking, be-
cause it is full of beautiful engravings." And I threw
open before her Vecellio's collection of costume-
designs — not the commonplace edition, by your leave,
so meagrely reproduced by modern artists, but in truth
a magnificent and venerable copy of that editio prm-
ceps 'which is noble as those noble dames who figure
upon its yellowed leaves, made beautiful by time.


THE GBIME OF SYLVE8TBE BONN AMD. 193

"While turning over the engravings with artless
curiosity, Jeanne said to me,

" We were talking about taking a walk ; but this is
a great journey you are making me take. And I
would like to travel very, very far away !"

"In that case. Mademoiselle," I said to her, "you
must arrange yourself as comfortably as possible for
travelling. But you are now sitting on one corner of
your chair, so that the chair is standing upon only
one leg, and that Yecellio must tire your knees. Sit
down comfortably ; put your chair on its four feet,
and put your book on the table."

She obeyed me with a laugh.

I watched her. She cried out suddenly,

"Oh, come look at this beautiful costume!" (It
was that of the wife of a Doge of Venice). " How
noble it is ! What magnificent ideas it gives one of
that hfe ! Oh, I must tell you — I adore luxury !"

"You must not express such thoughts as those,
Mademoiselle," said the schoolmistress, lifting up her
httle shapeless nose from her work.

"Nevertheless, it was a very innocent utterance,"
I replied. /" There are splendid souls in whom the
love of splendid things is natural and inborn." f

The little shapeless nose went down again.

"Mademoiselle Pr^fere Mkes luxury too," said
Jeanne ; " she cuts out paper trimmings and shades
for the lamps. It is economical luxury ; but it is lux-
ury all the same."
13


194 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

Having returned to the subject of Venice, we were
just about to make the acquaintance of a certain pa-
trician lady attired in an embroidered dalmatic, when
I heard the beU ring. I thought it was some peddler
with his basket ; but the gate of the City of Books
opened, and . . . "Well, Master Sylvestre Bonnard, you
were wishing awhile ago that the grace of your pro-
tegee might be observed by some other eyes than old
withered eyes behind spectacles. Your wishes have
been fulfilled in a most unexpected manner, and a
voice cries out to you, as to the imprudent Theseus,

" Craignez, Seigneur, craignez que le Ciel rigoureux
Ne vous haYsse assez pour exaucer vos voeux !
Souvent dans sa colfere il re9oit nos victimes,
Ses pr&sents sont souvent la peine de nos crimes." *

The gate of the City of Books had opened, and a
handsome young -man made his appearance, ushered
in by Th^rese. That good old soul only knows how
to open the door for people and to shut it behind
them ; she has no idea whatever of the tact requisite
for the waiting-room and for the parlor. It is not in
her nature either to make any announcements or to
make anybody wait. She either throws people out
on the lobby, or simply pitches them at your head.

* " Beware, my lord 1 Beware lest stern Heaven hate you
enough to hear your prayers ! Often 'tis in wrath that Heaven
receives our sacrifices ; its gifts are often the punishment of our
crimes."


TRM CRIME OF STLVE8TRE BQjnrABB. 195

And here is this handsome young man already in-
side ; and I cannot really take the girl at once and
hide her like a secret treasure in the next room. I
wait for him to explain himself; he does it without
the least embarrassment; but it seems to me that he
has already observed the young girl who is still bend-
ing over the table looking at Vecellio. As I observe
the young man it occurs to me that I have seen him
somewhere before, or else I must be very much mis-
taken. His name is Gelis. That is a name which I
have heard somewhere, — I can't remember where. At
all events, Monsieur Gelis (since there is a Gelis) is a
fine-looking young fellow. He teUs me that this is
his third class-year at the Ecole des Chartes, and that
he has been working for the past fifteen or eighteen
months upon his graduation thesis, the subject of
which is the Condition of the Benedictine Abbeys in
1700. He has just read my works upon the " Monas-
ticon ; " and he is convinced that he cannot terminate
his thesis successfully without my advice, to begin
with, and in the second place without a certain manu-
script which I possess, and which is nothing less than
the " Register of the Accounts of the Abbey of Citaux
from 1683 to 1Y04."

Having thus explained himself, he hands me a let-
ter of introduction bearing the signature of one of
the most illustrious of my colleagues.

Good ! Now I know who he is ! Monsieur Gelis
is the very same young man who last year under the


196 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

chestnut-trees called me an idiot ! And> wMle unfold-
ing Ms letter of introduction I think to 'myself :

" Aha ! my unlucky youth, yjou are very far from
suspecting that I overheard what y©u said, and that
I know what you think of me — or, at least, what you
did think of me that day, for these young minds are
so fickle! I have got you now, my friend! You
have fallen into the lion's den, and so unexpectedly,
in good sooth, that the astonished bid lion does not
know what to do with his prey. But come now, old
lion ! do not act like an idiot ! Is it not possible that
you were an idiot? If you are not one now, you
certainly were one ! You were a fool to have been
listening to Monsieur GeMs at the foot of the statue
of Marguerite de Valois ; you were doubly a fool to
have heard what he said ; and you were trebly a fool
not to have forgotten what it would have been much
better never to have heard."

Having thus scolded the old lion, I exhorted him to
show clemency. He did not appear to require much
coaxing, and gradually became so good-natured that
he had some difficulty in restraining himself from burst-
ing out into joyous roarings. From the way in which
I had read my colleague's letter one might have sup-
posed me a man who did not know his alphabet. I
took a long while to read it; and Monsieur Gelis
might have become very tired under different circum-
stances; but he was watching Jeanne, and endured
the trial with exemplary patience. Jeanne occasion-


THE CRIME OF 8YLVESTBE BONNARD. 197

ally turned her face in our direction. "Well, you could
not expect a person to remain perfectly motionless,
could you ? Mademoiselle Pref ere was arranging her
curls, and her bosom occasionally swelled with little
sighs. It may be observed that I have myself often
been honored with these Kttle sighs.

" Monsieur," I said, as I folded up the letter, " I
shall be very happy to be of any service to you. You
are occupied with researches in which I myself have
always felt a very lively interest. I have done all
that lay in my power. I know, as you do — and still
better than you can know — ^how much there remains
to do. The manuscript you asked for is at your dis-
posal ; you may take it home with you, but it is not a
manuscript of the smallest kind, and I am afraid — "

" Oh, Monsieur," said Gelis, " big books have never
been able to make me afraid of them."

I begged the young man to wait for me, and I went
into the next room to get the Kegister, which I could
not find at fijst, and which I almost despaired of find-
ing, as I discerned, from certain familiar signs, that
Therese had been setting the room in order. But the
Eegister was so big and so heavy that, luckily for me,
Therese had not been able to put it in order as she
had doubtless wished to do. I could scarcely lift it
up myself ; and I had the pleasure of finding it quite
as heavy as I could have hoped.

" "Wait, my boy," I said, with a smile which must
have been very sarcastic — " wait ! I am going to give


198 THE CRIME OF 8TLVEBTBE BONNABD.

you something to do -which will break your arms first,
and afterwards your head. That will be the first ven-
geance of Sylvestre Bonnard. Later on we shall see
what else there is to be done."

"When I returned to the City of Books I heard Mon-
sieur GeUs and Mademoiselle Jeanne chatting — chat-
ting together, if you please ! as if they were the best
friends in the world. Mademoiselle Pr^fere, being
full of decorum, did not say anything ; but the other
two were chattering Uke birds. And what about?
About the blond tint used by Venetian painters ! Yes,
about the " Venetian blond." That little serpent of a
Gehs was telling Jeanne the secret of the dye with
which the women of Titian and of Veronese tinted
their hair according to the best authorities. And
Mademoiselle Jeanne was expressing her opinion very
prettily about the blond of honey and the blond of
gold. I understood that that scamp of a Vecellio was
responsible — that they had been bending over the book
together, and that they had been admiring either that
Doge's wife we had been looking at awhile before,
or some other patrician woman of Venice.

Never mind! I appeared with my enormous old
book, thinking that Gelis was going to make a grim-
ace. It was as much as one could have asked a porter
to carry, and my arms were all sore just lifting it.
But the young man caught it up like a feather, and
slipped it under his arm with a smile. Then he
thanked me with that sort of brevity which I hke.


TEE CRIME OF STLVE8TEE BONNABD. 199

reminded me that he had need of my advice, and,
having made an appointment to meet me another
day, took his departure after bowing to us with the
most perfect self-possession conceivable.

" He seems quite a genteel lad," I said.

Jeanne turned over a few more pages of Yecellio,
and made no answer.

" Aha !" I thought to myself. . . . And then we went
to Saint-Cloud.


September — December.

The regularity with which visit succeeded visit to
the old man's house thereafter made me feel very
grateful to Mademoiselle Prefere, who succeeded at
last in winning her right to occupy a special corner
in the City of Books. She now says " my chair,"
" my footstool," " my pigeon-hole." Her pigeon-hole
is really a small shelf properly belonging to the Poets
of La Champagne, whom she expelled therefrom in
order to obtain a lodging for her work-bag. She is
very amiable, and I must really be a monster not to
like her. I can only endure her — in the severest sig-
nification of the word. But what would one not en-
dure for Jeanne's sake? Her presence lends to the
City of Books a charm which seems to hover about
it still after she has gone. She is very ignorant ; but
she is so finely gifted that whenever I show her any-
thing beautiful I am astounded to find that I had


200 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD.

never really seen it before, and that it is she who
makes me see it. I have found it impossible so far to
make her follow some of my ideas, but I have often
found pleasure in following the whimsical and deli-
cate course of her own.

A more practical man than I would attempt to
teach her to make herself useful ; but is not the ca-
pacity of being amiable a useful thing in life ? "With-
out being pretty, she charms ; and the power to
charm is perhaps, after all, worth quite as much as
the ability to darn stockings. Furthermore, I am not
immortal ; and I doubt whether she wUl have become
very old when my notary (who is not Maitre Mouche)
shall read to her a certain paper which I signed a
little while ago.

I do not wish tha,t any one except myself should
provide for her, and give her her dowry. I am not,
however, very rich, and the paternal iaheritance did
not gain bulk in my hands. One does not accumulate
money by poring over old texts. But my books — at
the price which such noble merchandise fetches to-day
— are worth something. "Why, on that shelf there
are some poets of the sixteenth century for which
bankers would bid against princes ! And I think that
those " Heures " of Simon Yostre would not be readily
overlooked at the Hotel Silvestre any more than would
those Preces PicB compiled for the use of Queen
Claude. I have taken great pains to collect and to
preserve all those rare and curious editions which


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNARD. 201

people the City of Books ; and for a long time I used
to believe that they were as necessary to my life as
air and hght. I have loved them well, and even now
I cannot prevent myself from smiling at them and
caressing them. Those morocco bindings are so de-
hghtf ul to the eye ! Those old veUmns are so soft
to the touch ! There is not a single one among those
books which is not worthy, by reason of some special
merit, to command the respect of an honorable man.
What other owner would ever know how to dip into
them in the proper way ? Can I be even sure that
another owner would not leave them to decay in neg-
lect, or mutilate them in the moment of some igno-
rant whim ? Into whose hands wiU fall that incom-
parable copy of the " Histoire de I'Abbaye de Saint-
Germain -des-Pres," on the margins of which the
author himself, in the person of Jacques BouUlard,
made such substantial notes in his own handwriting ?
. . . Master Bonnard, you are an old fool! Your
housekeeper — ^poor soul! — is nailed down upon her
bed with a merciless attack of rheumatism. Jeanne
is to come with her chaperon, and, instead of think-
ing how you are going to receive them, you are think-
ing about a thousand stupidities. Sylvestre Bonnard,
you will never succeed at anything in this world, and
it is I myself who tell you so !

And at this very moment I catch sight of them from
my window, as they get out of the omnibus. Jeanne
leaps down like a kitten ; but Mademoiselle Pref ere


202 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

intrusts herself to the strong arm of the conductor,
with the shy grace of a Virginia recovering after the
shipwreck, and this time quite resigned to being saved.
Jeanne looks up, sees me, laughs, and Mademoiselle
Prefere has to prevent her from waving her umbreUa
at me as a friendly signal. There is a certain stage of
civihzation to which Mademoiselle Jeanne never can
be brought. You can teach her all the arts if you
like (it is not exactly to Mademoiselle Prefere that I
am now speaking); but you will never be able to
teach her perfect manners. As a charming girl she
makes the mistake of being charming only in her own
way. Only an old fool like myself could forgive her
pranks. As for young fools — and there are several
of them still to be found — I do not know what they
would think about it; and what they might think is
none of my business. Just look at her running along
the sidewalk, wrapped up in her cloak, with her hat
tilted back on her head, and her feather fluttering in
the wind, Mke a schooner in f uU rig ! And reaUy she
has a grace of poise and motion which suggests a fine
sailing vessel — so much so, indeed, that she makes me
remember seeing one day, when I was at Havre . . .
But, Bonnard, my friend, how many times is it neces-
sary to tell you that your housekeeper is in bed, and
that you must go and open the door yourself ?

Open, Old Man Winter ! 'tis Spring who rings the
bell.

It is Jeanne herself — Jeanne all flushed like a rose.


TEE CRIME OF STLYESTBE BONNABD. 203

Mademoiselle Prefere, indignant and out of breath,
has still another whole flight to chmb before reaching
our lobby.

I explained the condition of my housekeeper, and
proposed that we should dine at a restaurant. But
Therese— all-powerful still, even upon her sick-bed —
decided that we should dine at home, whether we
wanted to or no. Eespectable people, in her opinion,
never dined at restaurants. Moreover, she had made
aU necessary arrangements — the dinner had been
bought ; the concierge would cook it.

The audacious Jeanne insisted upon going to see
whether the old woman wanted anjrthing. As you
might suppose, she was sent back to the parlor in
short order, but not so harshly as I had feared.

" If I want anybody to do anything for me, which,
thank God, I do not," Therese had replied, " I would
get somebody less dehcate and dainty than you are.
What I want is rest. That is a merchandise which
is not sold at fairs under the sign of Motus^wnrdoigt-
mr-la-louche. Go and have your fun, and don't stay
here — for old age might be catching."

Jeanne, after teUing us what she had said, added
that she liked very much to hear old Therese talk.
Whereupon Mademoiselle Prefere reproached her for
expressing such unladylike tastes.

I tried to excuse her by citing the example of Mo-
liere. Just at that moment it came to pass that, while
chmbing the ladder to get a book, she upset a whole


204 THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNABD.

shelf -row. There was a heavy crash; and Made-
moiselle Prefere, being, of course, a very delicate
person, almost fainted. Jeanne quickly followed the
books to the foot of the ladder. She made one think
of a kitten suddenly transformed into a woman,
catching mice which had been transformed into old
books. While picking them up, she found one which
happened to interest her, and she began to read it,
squatting down upon her heels. It was the " Prince
Grenouille," she told us. Mademoiselle Prefere took
occasion to complain that Jeanne had so little taste
for poetry. It was impossible to get her to recite
Casimir de Lavigne's poem on the death of Joan of
Arc without mistakes. It was the very most she could
do to learn " Le Petit Savoyard." The schoolmistress
did not think that any one should read the " Prince
Grenouille" before learning by heart the stanzas to
Duperrier ; and, carried away by her enthusiasm, she
began to recite them in a voice sweeter than the bleat-
ing of a sheep :

" ' Ta douleur, Duperrier, sera done Stemelle,
£t les tristes discours
Que te met en I'esprit I'amiti& paternelle
L'augmenteront toujours ;


" ' Je sais de quels appas son enfance etait pleine,
Et n'ai pas entrepris,
Injurieux ami, de consoler ta peine
Avecque son mfepris,' "


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 205

Then in ecstasy she exclaimed,

"How beautiful that is! What harmony! How
is it possible for any one not to admire such exquisite,
such touching verses! But why did Malherbe call
that poor Monsieur Duperrier his ' mjwrieiviB arm ' at
a time when he had been so severely tried by the
death of his daughter? Injurieiix a/mi — :you must
acknowledge that the term was very harsh."

I explained to this poetical person that the phrase
" Iinjwri&ux omii" which shocked her so much was an
apposition, etc., etc. What I said, however, had so
little effect towards clearing her head that she was
seized with a severe and prolonged fit of sneezing.
Meanwhile it was evident that the history of " Prince
GrenouUle " had proved extremely funny ; for it was
all that Jeanne could do, as she crouched down there
on the carpet, to keep herself from bursting into a
wild fit of laughter. But when she had finished with
the prince and princess of the story, and the multi-
tude of their children, she assumed a very suppliant
expression, and begged me as a great favor to allow
her to put on a white apron and go to the kitchen to
help in getting the dinner ready.

" Jeanne," I replied, with the gravity of a master,
"I think that if it is a question of breaking plates,
knocking off the edges of dishes, denting aU the pans,
and smashing all the skimmers, the person whom The-
rese has set to work in the kitchen already wiU be
able to perform her task without assistance; for it


206 TEE CBIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD.

seems to me at this very moment I can hear disas-
trous noises in that kitchen. But anyhow, Jeanne, I
will charge you with the duty of preparing the des-
sert. So go and get your white apron ; I will tie it
on for you."

Accordingly, I solemnly knotted the linen apron
about her waist; and she rushed into the kitchen,
where she proceeded at once — as we discovered later
on — ^to prepare various dishes unknown to Yatel, un-
known even to that great Careme who began his treat-
ise upon pieces montees with these words : " The Fine
Arts a/re five i/n nvmb&r : Pamtmg, Music, Poetry,
ScuT/pinire, and Architectv/re — whereof the principal
brcmch is Confectionery.'" But I had no reason to be
pleased with this Mttle arrangement — for Mademoi-
selle Pref ere, on finding herself alone with me, began
to act after a fashion which filled me with frightful
anxiety. She gazed upon me with eyes full of tears
and flames, and uttered enormous sighs.

" Oh, how I pity you !" she said. " A man hke you
— a man so superior as you are — having to live alone
with a coarse servant (for she is certainly coarse, that
is incontestable)! How cruel such a life must be!
You have need of repose — you have need of comfort,
of care, of every kind of attention; you might fall
sick. And yet there is no woman who would not
deem it an honor to bear your name, and to share
your existence. No, there is none; my own heart
tells me so."


THE CRIME OF STLVE8TRE BONNABD. 207

And she squeezed both hands over that heart of
hers — always so ready to fly away.

I was driven almost to distraction. I tried to make
Mademoiselle Pr6f ere comprehend that I had no inten-
tion whatever of changing my habits at so advanced
an age, and that I found just as much happiness in
life as my character and my circumstances rendered
possible.

" No, you are not happy !" she cried. " Tou need
to have always beside you a mind capable of compre-
hending your own. Shake oflf your lethargy, and cast
your eyes about you. Tour professional connections
are of the most extended character, and you must
have charming acquaintances. One cannot be a Mem-
ber of the Institute without going into society. See,
judge, compare. No sensible woman would refuse
you her hand. I am a woman, Monsieur; my in-
stinct never deceives me — there is something within
me which assures me that you would find happiness
in marriage. Women are so devoted, so loving (not
aU, of course, but some) ! And, then, they are so sen-
sitive to glory. Remember, that at your age one has
need, like (Edipus, of an Egeria ! Your cook has no
more strength — she is deaf, she is infirm. If anything
should happen to you at night! Oh! it makes me
shudder even to think of it !"

And she really shuddered — she closed her eyes,
clenched her hands, stamped on the floor. Great
was my dismay. "With awful intensity she resumed,


208 '■I'HE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

"Your health— your dear health! The health of
a Member of the Institute ! How joyfully I would
shed the very last drop of my blood to preserve the
life of a scholar, of a litterabev/r, of a man of worth.
And any woman who would not do as much, I would
despise her! Let me tell you, Monsieur^ — I used to
know the wife of a great mathematician, a man who
used to fiU whole blank-books with calculations — so
mfiny. blank-books that they filled aU the closets in
the house. He had heart-disease, and he was visibly
pining away. And I saw that wife of his, sitting
there beside him, perfectly calm ! I could not endure
it. I said to her one day, ' My dear, you have no
heart! If I were in your place I would do ... I
would do ... I do not know what I would do !' "

She paused for want of breath. My situation was
terrible. As for telling Mademoiselle Prefere what I
really thought about her advice — that was something
which I could not even dream of daring to do. For
to fall out with her was to lose the chance of seeing
Jeanne. So I resolved to take the matter quietly.
In any case, she was in my house: that considera-
tion helped me to treat her with something of cour-
tesy.

" I am very old. Mademoiselle," I answered her,
" and I am very much afraid that your advice comes
to me rather too late in life. Still, I wiU think about
it. In the meanwhile let me beg of you to be calm.
I think a glass of earn suaree would do you good I"


TEE CRIME OF 8TL7ESTBE BONNARD. 209

To my great surprise, these words calmed her at
once ; and I saw her sit down very quietly in her cor-
ner, close to her pigeon-hole, upon h&r chair, with her
feet upon her footstool.

The dinner was a complete failure. Mademoiselle
Pref ere, who seemed lost in a brown study, never no-
ticed the fact. As a rule I am very sensitive about
such misfortunes; but this one caused Jeanne so
much delight that at last I could not help enjoy-
ing it myself. Even at my age I had not been
able to learn before that a chicken, raw on one side
and burned on the other, was a funny thing; but
Jeanne's bursts of laughter taught me that it was.
That chicken caused us to say a thousand very witty
things, which I have forgotten ; and I was enchanted
that it had not been properly cooked. Jeanne put it
back to roast again ; then she broiled it ; then she
stewed it with butter. And every time it came back
to the table it was much less comestible and much
more hilarious than before. When we did eat it, at
last, it had become a thing for which there is no name
in any cwisme.

The almond cake was much more extraordinary. It
was brought to the table in the pan, because it never
could have been got out of it. I invited Jeanne to
help us aU to a piece, thinking that I was going to
embarrass her ; but she broke the pan and gave each
of us a fragment. To think that anybody at my age
could eat such things was an idea possible only to a
U


210 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTEE BONNABD.

very artless mind. Mademoiselle Prefere, suddenly
awakened from her dream, indignantly pushed away
the sugary splinter of earthenware, and deemed it op-
portune to inform me that she herself was exceeding-
ly skilful in making confectionery.

" Ah !" exclaimed Jeanne, with an air of surprise
not altogether without malice.

Then she wrapped aU. the fragments of the pan in
a piece of paper, for the purpose of giving them to her
little playmates — especially to the three little Mouton
girls, who are naturally inclined to gluttony.

Secretly, however, I was beginning to feel very un-
easy. It did not now seem in any way possible to
keep much longer upon good terms with Mademoiselle
Prefere since her matrimonial fury had thus burst
forth. And that lady gone, good-by to Jeanne! I
took advantage of a moment while the sweet soul was
busy putting on her cloak, in order to ask Jeanne to
teU me exactly what her own age was. She was
eighteen years and one month old. I counted on my
fingers, and found she would not come of age for an-
other two years and eleven months. And how would
we be able to manage during all that time ?

At the door Mademoiselle Prefere squeezed my
hand with so much meaning that I fairly shook from
head to foot.

" Good-by," I said very gravely to the young girl.
" But hsten to me a moment : your friend is very old,
and might perhaps fail you when you need him mosty


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 211

Prbmise me never to fail in your duty to yourself, and
then I shall have no fear. God keep you, my child !"

After closing the door behind them, I opened the
window to get a last look at her as she was going
away. But the night was dark, and I could see only
two vague shadows flitting across the quay. I heard
the vast deep hum of the city rising up about me;
and I suddenly felt a great sinking at my heart.

Poor child !


Decemier 15.

The King of Thule kept a goblet of gold which
his dying mistress had bequeathed him as a souvenir.
"When about to die himself, after having drank from it
for the last time, he threw the goblet into the sea.
And I keep this diary of memories even as that old
prince of the mist-haunted seas kept his carven gob-
let ; and even as he flung away at last his love-trinket,
so will 1 burn this my book of souvenirs. Assuredly
it is not through any arrogant avarice, nor through
any egotistical pride, that 1 shall destroy this record
of an humble life — ^it is only because I fear lest those
things which are dear and sacred to me might appear
to others, because of my inartistic manner of expres-
sion, either commonplace or absurd.

I do not say this in view of what is going to follow.
Absurd I certainly must have been when, having been
invited to dinner by Mademoiselle Pref ere, I took my


212 THE OEtME OF STLVE8TBE BONNARD.

seat in a lergere (it was really a hergeri) at the right
hand of that alarming person. The table had been set
in a little parlor ; and I could observe from the poor
appearance of the display that the schoolmistress was
one of those ethereal souls who soar above terrestrial
things. Chipped plates, immatohed glasses, knives
with loose handles, forks with yellow prongs — there
was absolutely nothing wanting to spoil the appetite
of an honest man.

I was assured that the dinner had been cooked for
me — for me alone — although Maitre Mouche had also
been invited. Mademoiselle Prefere must have im-
agined that I had Sarmatian tastes on the subject of
butter ; for the butter which she offered me, served up
in little thin pats, was excessively rancid.

The roast very nearly poisoned me. But I had the
pleasure of hearing Maitre Mouche and Mademoiselle
Prefere discourse upon virtue. I said the pleasure —
I ought to have said the shame ; for the sentiments to
which they gave expression soared far beyond the
range of my vulgar nature.

"What they said proved to me as clear as day that
devotedness was their daily bread, and that self-sacri-
fice was not less necessary to their existence than air
and water. Observing that I was not eating, Mad-
em6iseUe Prefere made a thousand efforts to over-
come that which she was good enough to term my
" discretion." Jeanne was not of the party, because,
I was told, her presence at it would have been con-


THB CRIME OF 8YL7ESTRE BONNABD. 213

trary to the rules, and would have wounded the feel-
ings of the other school-children, among whom it was
necessary to maintain a certain equality. I secretly
congratulated her upon having escaped from the Mer-
ovingian butter; from the huge radishes, empty as
funeral-urns ; from the coriaceous roast, and from
various other curiosities of diet to which I had ex-
posed myself for the love of her.

The extremely disconsolate-looking servant served
up some liquid to which they gave the name of cream
■ — I do not know why — and vanished away like a
ghost.

Then Mademoiselle Prefere related to Maitre Mou-
che, with extraordinary transports of emotion, all that
she had said to me in the City of Books, during the
time that my housekeeper was sick in bed. Her ad-
miration for a Member of the Institute, her terror of
seeing me sick and alone, and the certainty she felt
that any intelligent woman would be proud and happy
to share my existence — she concealed nothing, but, on
the contrary, added many fresh follies to the recital.
Maitre Mouche kept nodding his head in approval
while cracking nuts. Then, after aU this verbiage, he
demanded, with an agreeable smile, what my answer
had been.

Mademoiselle Prefere, pressing one hand upon her
heart and extending the other towards me, cried out,

" He is so affectionate, so superior, so good, and so
great ! He answered. . . . But I could never, because


214 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABB.

I am only an humble woman — I could never repeat
the words of a Member of the Institute. I can only
utter the substance of them.- He answered, 'Yes, I
understand you — ^yes.' "

And with these words she reached out and seized
one of my hands. Then Maitre Mouche, also over-
whelmed with emotion, arose and seized my other
hand.

" Monsieur," he said, " permit me to offer my con-
gratulations."

Several times in my life I have known fear; but
never before had I experienced any fright of so nau-
seating a character. A sickening terror came upon
me.

I disengaged my two hands, and, rising to my feet,
so as to give all possible seriousness to my words, I
said,

"Madame, either I explained myself very badly
when you were at my house, or I have totally mis-
understood you here in your own. In either case, a
positive declaration is absolutely necessary. Permit
me, Madame, to make it now, very plainly. No — I
never did understand you ; I am totally ignorant of
the nature of this marriage project that you have been
planning for me — if you really have been planning one.
In any event, I would not think of marrying. It
would be an unpardonable folly at my age, and even
now, at this moment, I cannot conceive how a sensible
person like you could ever have advised me to marry.


THE CRIME OF 8YL7E8TBE BONNABD. 215

Indeed, I am strongly inclined to believe that I must
have been mistaken, and that you never said anything
of the kind before. In the latter case, please to ex-
cuse an old man totally unfamiliar with the usages of
society, unaccustomed to the conversation of ladies,
aijd very contrite for his mistake."

Maitre Mouche went back very softly to his place,
where, not finding any more nuts to crack, he began
to whittle a cork.

Mademoiselle Pref^re, after staring at me for a few
moments with an expression in her little round dry
eyes which I had never seen there before, suddenly
resumed her customary sweetness and graciousness.
Then she cried out, in honeyed tones,

"Oh! these learned men! — these studious men!
They are aU like children. Yes, Monsieur Bonnard,
you are a real child !"

Then, turning to the notary, who stiU sat very
quietly in his corner, with his nose over his cork, she
exclaimed, in beseeching tones,

" Oh, do not accuse him ! Do not accuse him ! Do
not think any evil of him, I beg of you ! Do not think
it at aU ! Must I ask you upon my knees ?"

Maitre Mouche continued to examine aU the various
aspects and surfaces of his cork without making any
further manifestation.

I was very indignant ; and I know that my cheeks
must have been extremely red, if I could judge by the
flush of heat which I felt rise to my face. This would


916 THE OBIMK OF i^YLVrnTRE BONNARD.

enable me to explain the words 1 hoaitl through all
the buzzing in uiy ears :

" I am frightened about him ! our poor friend ! . . .
Monsieur Mouche, be kind enough to open a Avindow I
It seems to me that a compress of arnioa would do him
some good."

1 rushed out into the street with an unspeakable
feeling of shame.

" My poor J eanne 1"


Dewmhci' ^0.

I PABSBD eight days without hearing anything fur-
ther in regard to the i'ruforo establishment. Tlien,
feeling myself unable to remain any longer -without
some news of Clementine's daugliter, and feeling fur-
thermore that I owed it as a duty to myself not to
cease my visits to the school without more serious
cause, I took my way to Aux Ternes.

The parlor seemed to me more cold, more damp,
more inhospitable, and more insidious than ever be-
fore; and the servant much more silent and much
more scared. 1 asked to see Mademoiselle Jeanne;
but, after a very considerable time, it was Mademoiselle
Pr6f6re who made her appearance instead — severe
and pale, with lips compressed and a hard look in her
eyes.

"Monsieur," she said, folding her arras over hor
pelerine, " I regret very much that I cannot aUow you


THE CEntE OF SYLVESTRE BONKARD. 217

to see Madema sella Alexandre to-day ; but I cannot
possibly do it."

" Why not r I asked, in astonishment.

" Monsieui'," she replied, " the reasons which compel
me to I'equest that your visits shall be less fi-equent
hereafter ai"e of an excessively delicate nature : and I
must beg you to spare me the unpleasantness of men-
tioning them."

" Madame," I replied, " I have been authorized by
Jeanne's guardian to see his ward every day. "WiU
you please to inform me of your reasons for opposing
the AviU of Monsieur Mouche r

"The guardian of Mademoiselle Alexandre," she
rephed (and she dwelt upon that word "guardian" as
upon a solid support), " desii-es, quite as strongly as I
mj-self do, that your assiduities may come to an end
as soon as possible."

" Then, if that be the case," I said, " be kind enou^
to let me know his reasons and your own."

She lookeil up at the little spiral of paper on the
ceiling, and then replied, with stern composure,

" You insist upon it * Well, although such explana-
tions are very painful for a woman to make, I wiU
yield to your exactions. This house, Monsieur, is an
honorable house. I hare my responsibility. I have
to watch like a mother over each one of my pupUs.
Your assiduities in regard to Mademoiselle Alexandre
could not possibly be continued without serious injury
to the yoimg girl herself ; and it is my duty to insist
that they shall cease."


218 TME CRIME OF SYLVE8TBE ^'iONNABB.

" I do not really understand you," L replied — and I
was telling the plain truth. Then she deliberately re-
sumed : •

" Your assiduities in this house are being interpret-
ed, by the most respectable and the least suspicious
persons, in such a manner that I find myself obliged,
both in the interest of my establishment and in the in-
terest of Mademoiselle Alexandre, to see that they end
at once."

"Madame," I cried, "I have heard a great many
silly things in my life, but never anything so silly as
what you have just said !"

She answered me very quietly,

"Tour words of abuse will not affect me in the
slightest. "When one has a duty to accompHsh, one is
strong enough to endure all."

And she pressed her pelerine over her heart once
more — not perhaps on this occasion to restrain, but
doubtless only to caress that generous heart.

" Madame," I said, shaking my finger at her, " you
have wantonly aroused the indignation of an aged
man. Be good enough to act in such a fashion that
the old man may be able at least to forget your exist-
ence, and do not add fresh insults to those which I
have already sustained from your lips. I give you
fair warning that I shall never cease to look after
Mademoiselle Alexandre; and that should you at-
tempt to do her any harm, in any manner whatsoever,
you will have serious reason to regret it !"


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNABD. 219

The more I became excited, the more she became
cool ; and she answered in. a tone of superb indiffer-
ence:

" Monsieur, I am much too well informed in regard
to the nature of the interest which you take in this
young girl, not to withdraw her immediately from
that very surveillance with which you threaten me.
After observing the more than equivocal intimacy in
which you are hving with your housekeeper, I ought
to have taken measures at once to render it impossible
for you ever to come into contact with an innocent
child. In the future I shaU. certainly do it. If up to
this time I have been too trustful, it is for Mademoi-
selle Alexandre, and not for you, to reproach me with
it. But she is too artless and too pure — thanks to me !
— ever to have suspected the nature of that danger
into which you were trying to lead her. I scarcely
suppose that you wiU place me under the necessity of
enlightening her upon the subject."

" Come, my poor old Bonnard," I said to myself, as
I shrugged my shoulders — " so you had to Mve as long
as this in order to learn for the first time exactly what
a wicked woman is. And now your knowledge of the
subject is complete."

I went out without replying ; and I had the pleasure
of observing, from the sudden flush which overspread
the face of the schoolmistress, that my silence had
wounded her far more than my words.

As I passed through the court I looked about me in


220 THE CBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

every direction for Jeanne. She was watoMng for me,
and she ran to mb

" If anybody touches one Httle hair of your head,
Jeanne, you write me ! Good-by !"

" No, not good-by."

I replied.

" Well, no — not good-by ! "Write to me !"

I went straight to Madame de Gabry's residence.

"Madame is at Rome with Monsieur. Did not
Monsieur know it ?"

" "Why, yes," I replied. Madame wrote me." . . .

She had indeed written me in regard to her leaving
home; but my head must have become very much
confused, so that I had forgotten aU about it. The
servant seemed to be of the same opinion, for he
looked at me in a way that seemed to signify, " Mon-
sieur Bonnard is doting" — and he leaned down over
the balustrade of the stairway to see if I was not go-
ing to do something extraordinary before I got to the
bottom. But I descended the stairs rationally enough ;
and then he drew back his head in disappointment.

On returning home I was informed that Monsieur
G61is was waiting for me in the parlor. (This young
man has become a constant visitor. His judgment is
at fault betimes ; but his mind is not at all common-
place.) On this occasion, however, his usually welcome
visit only embarrassed me. "Alas!" I thought to my-
self, " I will be sure to say something very stupid to


TME CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD. 221

my young friend to-day, and he also will think that
my faculties are beconjing impaired. But still I can-
not really explain to him that I had first been de-^
manded in wedlock, and subsequently traduced as al
man wholly devoid of morals — that even Therese had
become an object of suspicion— and that Jeanne re-
mains in the power of the most rascally woman on
the face of the earth. I am certainly in an admirable
state of mind for conversing about Cistercian abbeys
with a young and mischievously minded man. Never-
theless, we shall see — we shall try." . . .

But Therese stopped me :

" How red you are. Monsieur !" she exclaimed, in
a tone of reproach.

" It must be the spring," I answered.

She cried out,

" The spring ! — ^in the month of December ?"

That is a fact ! this is December. Ah ! what is the
matter yith my head ? what a fine help I am going
to be to poor Jeanne !

" Therese, take my cane ; and put it, if you possibly
can, some place where I shall be able to find it again."

" Good-day, Monsieur Gehs. How are you ?"


llTidated.

Next morning the old boy wanted to get up ; but
the old boy could not get up. A merciless invisible


2i22 TEE CBIME OF STLVB8TRE BONNABD.

hand kept him down upon his bed. Finding himself
immovably riveted there, the old boy resigned himself
to remain motionless ; but his thoughts kept running
in all directions.

He must have had a very violent fever ; for Made-
moiselle Pref ei-e, the Abbots of Saint-Germain-des-Pres,
and the servant of Madame de Gabry appeared to him
in divers fantastic shapes. The figure of the servant
in particular lengthened weirdly over his head, grim- '
acing like some gargoyle of a cathedral. Then it
seemed to me that there were a great many people,
much too many people, in my bedroom.

This bedroom of mine is furnished after the anti-
quated fashion. The portrait of my father in full uni-
form, and the portrait of my mother in her cashmere
dress, are suspended on the wall. The tyall- paper
is covered with green foHage- designs. I am aware
of all this, and I am even conscious that everything is
faded, very much faded. But an old man's room does
not require to be pretty ; it is enough that it should
be clean, and Therese sees to that. At all events my
room is suJBBciently decorated to please a mind like
mine, which has always remained somewhat childish
and dreamy. There are things hanging on the wall
or scattered over the tables and shelves which usually
please my fancy and amuse me. But to-day it would
seem as if all those objects had suddenly conceived
some kind of ill-will against me. They have all be-
come garish, grimacing, menacing. That statuette,


TBE CRIME OF SYLVESTRE BONNARD. 223

modelled after one of the Theological Virtues of Notre-
Dame de Brou, always so ingenuously graceful in its
natural condition, is now making contortions and
putting out its tongue at me. And that beautiful
miniature — in which one of the most suave pupils of
Jehan Fouquet depicted himself,' girdled with the
cord -girdle of the Sons of St. Francis, offering his
book, on bended knee, to the good Duke d'Angouleme
— who has taken it out of its frame and put in its
place a great ugly cat's head, which stares at me with
phosphorescent eyes? And the designs on the wall-
paper have also turned into heads — hideous green
heads. . . . But no — I am sure that wall-paper must
have foliage-designs upon it at this moment just as
it had twenty years ago, and nothing else. . . . But
no, again — I was right before — they are heads, with
eyes, noses, mouths — they are heads! . . . Ah! now
I understand! they are both heads and foliage -de-
signs at the same time. I wish I could not see them
at all.

And there, on my right, the pretty miniature of the
Franciscan has come back again ; but it seems to me
as if I can only keep it in its frame by a tremendous
effort of will, and that the moment I get tired the
ugly cat-head will appear in its place. Certainly I
am not delirious; I can see Therese very plainly,
standing at the foot of my bed ; I can hear her speak-
ing to me perfectly well,, and I would be able to an-
swer her quite satisfactorily if I were not kept so


224 TEE CRIME OF 8YLVESTRE BONNARD.

busy in trying to compel the various objects about me
to maintain their natural aspect.

Here is the doctor coming. I never sent for him,
but it gives me pleasure to see him. He is an old
neighbor of mine ; I have never been of much service
to him, but I like him very much. Even if I do not
say much to him, I have at least full possession of all
my faculties, and I even find myself extraordinarily
crafty and observing to-day, for I note all his gest-
ures, his every look, the least wrinkling of his face.
But the doctor is very cunning, too, and I cannot real-
ly tell what he thinks about me. The deep thought
of Goethe suddenly comes to my mind, and I exclaim,

" Doctor, the old man has consented to allow him-
self to become sick ; but he does not intend, this time
at least, to make any further concessions to nature."

Neither the doctor nor Th^rese laugh at my Uttle
joke. I suppose they cannot have understood it.

The doctor goes away ; evening comes ; and aU sorts
of strange shadows begin to shape themselves about my
bed-curtains, forming and dissolving by turns. And
other shadows — ghosts — throng by before me; and
through them I can see distinctly the impassive face
of my faithful servant. And suddenly a cry, a shriU
cry, a great cry of distress, rends my ears. Was it
you who called me, Jeanne ?

The day is over ; and the shadows take their places
at my bedside to remain with me aU through the long
night.


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNABB. 22S

Then morning comes — I feel a peace, a vast peace,
wrapping me all about.

Art Thou about to take me into Thy rest, my dear
Lord God ?


Februa/ry, 186 — .

The doctor is quite jovial. It seems that I am do-
ing him a great deal of credit by being able to get
out of bed. If I must believe him, innumerable disor-
ders must have pounced down upon my poor old body
all at the same time.

These disorders, which are the terror of ordinary
mankind, have names which are the terror of philolo-
gists. They are hybrid names, half Greek, half Latin,
with terminations in " ite," indicating the inflamma-
tory condition, and in " algia," indicating pain. The
doctor gives me all their names, together with a cor-
responding number of adjectives ending in " ic," which
serve to characterize their detestable quahties. In
short, they represent a good half of that most perfect
copy of the Dictionary of Medicine contained in the
too-authentic box of Pandora.

"Doctor, what an excellent common -sense story
the story of Pandora is ! — if I were a poet I would
put it into French verse. Shake hands, doctor ! You
have brought me back to life ; I forgive you for
it. You have given me back to my friends ; I thank
you for it. You say I am quite strong. That may
15


226 THE CBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

be, that may be ; but I have lasted a very long time.
I am a very old article of furniture ; I might be very
satisfactorily compared to my father's arm-chair. It
was an arm-chair which the good man had inherited,
and in which he used to lounge from morning until
evening. Twenty times a day, when I was quite a baby,
I used to climb up and seat myself on one of the arms
of that old-fashioned chair. So long as the chair re-
mained intact, nobody paid any particular attention
to it. But it began to limp on one foot; and then
folks began to say that it was a very good chair. Af-
terwards it became lame in three legs, squeaked with
the fourth leg, and lost nearly half of both arms. Then
everybody would exclaim, ' "What a strong chair !'
They wondered how it was that after its arms had
been worn off and all its legs knocked out of plumb,
, it could yet preserve the recognizable shape of a
chair, remain nearly erect, and still be of some service.
The horse-hair came out of its body at last, and it gave
up the ghost. And when Oyprien, our servant, sawed
up its mutilated members for fire-wood, everybody re-
doubled their cries of admiration. ' Oh ! what an ex-
cellent — what a marvellous chair ! It was the chair
of Pierre Sylvestre Bonnard, the dry-goods merchant
— of Epeminede Bonnard, his son — of Jean-Baptiste
Bonnard, the Pyrrhonian philosopher and Chief of the
Third Maritime Division. Oh! what a robust and
venerable chair !' In reality it was a dead chair. "Well,
doctor, I am that chair. You think I am solid because


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNARD. 227

I have been able to resist an attack which would have
killed many people, and which only killed me three
fourths. Much obliged ! I feel none the less that I
am something which has been irremediably damaged."

The doctor tries to prove to me, with the help of
enormous Greek and Latin words, that I am really in
a very good condition. It would, of course, be useless
to attempt any demonstration of this kind in so lucid
a language as French. However, I allow him to per-
suade me at last ; and I see him to the door.

" Good ! good !" exclaimed Therese ; " that is the
way to put the doctor out of the. house ! Just do the
same thing once or twice again, and he will not come
to see you any more — and so much the better !"

"Well, Th6rese, now that I have become such a
hearty man again, do not refuse to give me my let-
ters. I am sure there must be quite a big bundle of
letters, and it would be very wicked to keep me any
longer from reading them."

Therese, after some httle grumbling, gave me my
letters. But what did it matter ? — I looked at all the
envelopes, and saw that no one of them had been ad-
dressed by the little hand which I so much wish I
could see here now, turning over the pages of the Ve-
ceUio. I pushed the whole bundle of letters away:
they had no more interest for me.


228 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

I Appil-June.

It was a hotly contested engagement.

"Wait, Monsieur, until I have put on my clean
things," exclaimed Therese, "and I will go out with
you this time also ; I wiU carry your folding-stool as
I have been doing these last few days, and we will go
and sit down somewhere in the sun."

Therese actually thinks me infirm. I have been
sick, it is true, but there is an end to aU things ! Ma-/'
dame Malady has taken her departure quite a while\
ago, and it is now more than three months since her
pale and gracious-visaged handmaid, Dame Convales-
cence, politely bade me farewell. If I were to hsten/
to my housekeeper, I would become a veritable Mori-
siewr Argcmt, and I would wear a nightcap with rib-
bons for the rest of my life. . . . No more of this ! — I
propose to go out by myself ! Therese wiU not hear of
it. She takes my folding-stool, and wants to f oUow me.

" Therese, to-morrow, if you like, we wiU take our
seats on the sunny side of the wall of La Petite Prov-
ence, and stay there just as long as you please. But to-
day I have some very important affairs to attend to."

" So much the better ! But your affairs are not the
only affairs in this world."

I beg, I scold ; I make my escape.

It is quite a pleasant day. With the aid of a cab,
and the help of God, I trust to be able to fulfil ni,v
purpose.


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNARD. 229

There is the wall on which is painted in great blue
letters the words " Penswrmiat de Demoiselles tenujpa/r
Mademoisdle Virgmie I*refere" There is the iron
gate which would give free entrance into the court-
yard if it were ever opened. But the lock is rusty,
and sheets of zinc put up behind the bars protect from
indiscreet observation those dear little souls to whom
Mademoiselle Pref ere doubtless teaches modesty, sin-
cerity, justice, and disinterestedness. There is a win-
dow, with iron bars before it, and panes daubed over
with white paint — ^the window of the bath-rooms, like
a glazed eye — ^the only aperture of the building open-
ing upon the exterior world. As for the house-door,
through which I entered so often, but which is now
closed against me forever, it is just as I saw it the last
time, with its httle iron-grated wicket. The single
stone step in front of it is deeply worn, and, without
having very good ey^ behind my spectacles, I can
see the little white scratches on the stone which have
been made by the naOs in the shoes of the girls going
in and out. And why cannot I also go in ? I have a
feeling that Jeanne must be suffering a great deal in
this dismal house, and that she calls my name in se-
cret. I cannot go away from the gate ! A strange
anxiety takes hold of me. I pull the bell. The scared-
looking servant comes to the door, even much more
scared-looldng than when I saw her the last time.
Strict orders have been given : I am not to be allowed
to see Mademoiselle Jeanne. I beg the servant to be


230 THE CRIME OF S7LYESTBE BONNABJD.

SO kind as to tell me how the child is. The servant,
after looking to her right and then to her left, tells
me that Mademoiselle Jeanne is well, and then shuts
the door in my face. And I am all alone in the street
again."

How many times since then have I wandered in the
same way under that wall, and passed before the ht-
tle door, — ^full of shame and despair to find myself
even weaker than that poor child, who has no other
help or friend except myself in the world !

Finally I overcame my repugnance sufficiently to
call upon Maitre Mouche. The first thing I remarked
was that his office is much more dusty and much more
mouldy this year than it was last year. The notary
made his appearance after a moment, with his familiar
stiff gestures, and his restless eyes quivering behind
his eye-glasses. I made my complaints to him. He
answered me. . . . But why should I write down, even
in a blank-book which I am going to burn, my recol-
lections of a downright scoundrel? He takes sides
with Mademoiselle Prefere, whose intelligent mind
and irreproachable character he has long appreciated.
He does not feel himself in a position to decide the
nature of the question at issue ; but he must assure
me that appearances have been greatly against me.
That of course makes no difference to me. He adds —
(and this does make some difference to me) — that the
small sum which had been placed in his hands to de-
fray the expenses of the education of his ward has


THE CRIME OF STLYESTRE BONNARD. 231

been expended, and that, in view of the circumstances,
he cannot but greatly admire the disinterestedness of
Mademoiselle Pr6fere in consenting to allow Made-
moiselle Jeanne to remain with her.

A magnificent light, the light of a perfect day,
floods the sordid place with its incorruptible torrent,
and illuminates the person of that man !

And outside it pours down its splendor upon all the
wretchedness of a populous quarter.

How sweet it is, — this light with which my eyes
have so long been filled, and which ere long I must
forever cease to enjoy ! I wander out with my hands
behind me, dreaming as I go, following the fine of the
fortifications ; and I find myself after a while, I know
not how, in an out-of-the-way suburb fuU of misera-
ble little gardens. By the dusty roadside I observe
a plant whose fiower, at once dark and splendid, seems
worthy of association with the noblest and purest
mourning for the dead. It is a columbine. Our fa-
thers called it " Our Lady's Glove" — le gcmt de Ifol/re-
Dcrnie. Only such a " Notre-Dame " as might make
herself very, very small, for the sake of appearing to
little children, could ever slip her dainty fingers into
the narrow capsule of that flower.

And there is a big bumble-bee who tries to force
himself into the flower, brutally ; but his mouth can-
not reach the nectar, and the poor glutton strives and
strives in vain. He has to give up the attempt, and
comes out of the flower all smeared over with pollen.


232 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

He flies off in his own heavy lumbering way ; but there
are not many flowers in this portion of the suburbs,
which has been defiled by the soot and smoke of fac-
tories. So he comes back to the columbine again, and
this time he pierces the corolla and sucks the honey
through the Uttle hole which he has made : I should
never have, thought that a bumble-bee had so much
sense ! Why, that is admirable ! The more I observe
them, the more do insects and flowers fill me with as-
tonishment. I am hke that good RoUin who went
wild with delight over the flowers of his peach-trees.
I wish I could have a fine garden, and live at the verge
of a wood.


August, S&ptemiber.

It occurred to me one Sunday morning to watch
for the moment when Mademoiselle Pr^fere's pupils
were leaving the school in procession to attend mass
at the parish church. I watched them passing two
by two, — the little ones first with very serious faces.
There were three of them aU dressed exactly alike-
dumpy, plump, important - looking little creatures,
whom I recognized at once as the Mouton girls. Their
elder sister is the artist who drew that terrible head
of Tatius, King of the Sabines. Beside the column,
the assistant school-teacher, with her prayer-book in
her hand, was gesturing and frowning. Then came
the next oldest class, and finally the big girls, all whis-


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONNABD. 233

pering to each, other, as they went by. But I did not
see Jeanne.

I went to police-headquarters and inquired whether
they did not have, filed away somewhere or other,
any information regarding the establishment in the
Kue Demours. I succeeded in inducing them to send
some female inspectors there. These returned bring-
ing with them the most favorable reports about the
establishment. In their opinion the Pr^fere School
was a model school. It is evident that if I were to
force an investigation, Mademoiselle Pr^fere would
receive academic honors.


October 3.

This Thursday being a school-holiday I had the
chance of meeting the three little Mouton girls in the
vicinity of the Eue Demours. After bowing to their
mother, I asked the eldest, who appears to be about
ten years old, how was her playmate. Mademoiselle
Jeanne Alexandre.
The httle Mouton girl answered me, all in a breath,
"Jeanne Alexandre is not my playmate. She is
only kept in the school for charity — so they make her
sweep the class-rooms. It was Mademoiselle who said
so. And Jeanne Alexandre is a bad girl : so they lock
her up in the dark room — and it serves her right — and
I am a good girl — and I am never locked up in the
dark room."


234 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

The three little girls resumed their walk, and Ma.
dame Mouton followed close behind them, looking
back over her broad shoulder at me, in a very sus-
picious manner.

Alas ! I find myself reduced to expedients of a
questionable character, Madame de Gabry will not
come back to Paris for at least three months more, at
the very soonest. Without her, I have no tact, I have
no common-sense — I am nothing but a cumbersome,
clumsy, mischief -making machine.

Nevertheless, I cannot possibly permit them to make
Jeanne a boarding-school servant !


December 28.

The idea that Jeanne was obliged to sweep the
rooms had become absolutely unbearable.

The weather was dark and cold. Mght had already
begun. I rang the school-door bell with the tranquil-
lity of a resolute man. The moment that the timid
servant opened the door, I slipped a gold piece into
her hand, and promised her another if she would ar-
range it so that I could see Mademoiselle Alexandre.
Her answer was,

" In one hour from now, at the grated window."

And she slammed the door in my face so rudely
that she knocked my hat into the gutter. I waited
for one very long hour in a violent snow-storm ; then I
approached the window. Nothing ! The wind raged,


THE GRIME OF STLVEaTBE BONNARD. 235

and the snow fell heavily. Workmen passing by with
their implements on their shoulders, and their heads
bent down to keep the snow from coming in their
faces, rudely jostled me. Still nothing. I began to
fear I had been observed. I knew that I had done
wrong in bribing a servant, but I was not a bit sorry
for it. Woe to the man who does not know how to
break through social regulations in case of necessity !
Another quarter of an hour passed. Nothing. At
last the window was partly opened.

" Is that you, Monsieur Bonnard ?"

" Is that you, Jeanne ? — tell me at once what has
become of you."

" I am well — very well."

"But what else!"

" They have put me in the kitchen, and I have to
sweep the school-rooms."

" In the kitchen ! Sweeping — you ! Gracious good-
ness !"

" Yes, because my guardian does not pay for my
schooling any more."

" Gracious goodness ! Your guardian seems to me
to be a thorough scoundrel."

" Then you know — "

"What?"

" Oh ! don't ask me to teU you that ! — but I would
rather die than find myself alone with him again."

" And why did you not write to me ?"

" I was watched."


236 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNARD.

At that instant 1 formed a resolve which nothing
in this world could have induced me to change. I
did, indeed, have some idea that I might be acting
contrary to law ; but I did not give myself the least
concern about that idea. And, being firmly resolved,
I was able to be prudent. I acted with remarkable
coolness.

" Jeanne," I asked, " teU me ! does that room you
are in open into the court-yard ?"

" Yes."

" Can you open the street-door from the inside your-
self?"

" Yes, — if there is nobody in the porter's lodge."

" Go and see if there is any one there, and be care-
ful that nobody observes you."

Then I waited, keeping a watch on the door and
window.

In six or seven seconds Jeanne reappeared behind
the b^irs, and said,

" The servant is in the porter's lodge."

" Very well," I said, " have you a pen and ink ?"

""No."

"Apencn?"

"Yes."

" Pass it out here."

I took an old newspaper out of my pocket, and —
in a wind which blew almost hard enough to put the
street-lamps out, in a downpour of snow which almost
blinded me — I managed to wrap up and address that
paper to Mademoiselle Pr^f^re.


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 237

While I was writing I asked Jeanne,

" When the postman passes he puts the papers and
letters in the box, doesn't he ? He rings the beU and
goes away? Then the servant opens the letter-box
and takes whatever she finds there to Mademoiselle
Pref ere immediately : is not that about the way the
thing is managed whenever any mail comes f

Jeanne thought it was.

"Then we shall soon see. Jeanne, go and watch
again ; and, as soon as the servant leaves the lodge,
open the door and come out here to me."

Having said this, I put my newspaper in the box,
gave the beU a tremendous pull, and then hid myself
in the embrasure of a neighboring door.

I might have been there several minutes, when the
httle door quivered, then opened, and a young girl's
head made its appearance through the opening. I
took hold of it ; I pulled it towards me.

" Come, Jeanne ! come !"

She stared at me uneasily. Certainly she must have
been afraid that I had gone mad ; but, on the contrary,
I was very rational indeed.

" Come, my child ! come !"

"Where?"

"To Madame de Gabry's."

Then she took my arm. For some time we ran Mke
a couple of thieves. But running is an exercise ill-
suited to one as corpulent as I am, and, finding myself
out of breath at last, I stopped and leaned upon some-


238 THE CRIME OF SYLVESTBE BONNABD.

thing which, turned out to be the stove of a dealer in
s-oasted chestnuts, who was doing business at the cor-
ner of a wine-seller's shop, where a number of cabmen
were drinking. One of them asked us if we did not
want a cab. Most assuredly we wanted a cab ! The
driver, after setting down his glass on the zinc coun-
ter, climbed upon his seat and urged his horse forward.
We were saved.

"Phew!" I panted, wiping my forehead. For, in
spite of the cold, I was perspiring profusely.

What seemed very odd was that Jeanne appeared
to be much more conscious than I was of the enormity
which we had committed. She looked very serious
indeed, and was visibly uneasy.

" In the kitchen !" I cried out, with indignation.

She shook her head, as if to say, " Well, there or
anywhere else, what does it matter to me ?" And, by
the light of the street-lamps, I observed with pain that
her face was very thin and her features all pinched.
I did not find in her any of that vivacity, any of those
bright impulses, any of that quickness of expression,
which used to please me so much. Her gaze had be-
come timid, her gestures constrained, her whole atti-
tude melancholy. I took her hand — a little cold hand,
wtiich had become all hardened and bruised. The
poor child must have suffered very much. I ques-
tioned her. She told me very quietly that Mademoi-
selle Prefere had summoned her one day, and called
her a Uttle monster and a little viper, for some reason
which she had never been able to learn.


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTRE BONNABD. 239

She had added, " You shall not see Monsieur Bon-
nard any more ; for he has been giving you bad advice,
and he has conducted himself in a most shameful man-
ner towards me." " I then said to her, ' That, Made-
moiselle, you will never be able to make me beheve.'
Then Mademoiselle slapped my face and sent me back
to the school-room. The announcement that I would
never be allowed to see you again made me feel as if
night had come down upon me. Don't you know
those evenings when one feels so sad to see the dark-
ness come ? — ^well, just imagine such a moment stretched
out into weeks — ^into whole months ! Don't you re-
member my little Saint-George? Up to that time I
had worked at it as well as I could — ^just simply to
work at it — ^just to amuse myself. But when I lost
all hope of ever seeing you again I took my little wax
figure, and I b^an to work at it in quite another way.
I did not try to model it with wooden matches any
more, as I had been doing, but with hair-pins. I even
made use of epi/ngles a la rveige. But perhaps you
do not know what epim^les d la neige are? Well, I
became more particular about it than you can possibly
imagine. I put a dragon on Saint-Greorge's helmet ;
and I passed hours and hours in making a head and
eyes and a tail for the dragon. Oh, the eyes! the
eyes, above all ! I never stopped working at them tiU
I got them so that they had red pupils and white eye-
hds and eye-brows and everything ! I know I am very
siUy ; I had an idea that I was going to die as soon as


240 THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD.

my little Saint-George would be finished. I worked at
it during recreation-hours, and Mademoiselle Prefere
used to let me alone. One day I learned that you
were in the parlor with the schoolmistress ; I watched
for you ; we said Au r&ooi/r ! that day to each other.
I was a little consoled by seeing you. But, some time
after that, my guardian came and wanted to make me
go out with him one Thursday. I refused to go to his
house, — but please don't ask me why. Monsieur. He
answered me, quite gently, that I was a very whimsi-
cal little girl. And then he left me alone. But the
next day Mademoiselle Prefere came to me with such
a wicked look on her face that I was really afraid.
She had a letter in her hand. 'Mademoiselle,' she
said to me, 'I am informed by your guardian that
he has spent aU the money which belonged to you.
Don't be afraid ! I do not intend to abandon you ;
but, you must acknowledge yourself, it is only right
that you should earn your own livelihood.' Then she
put me to work house-cleaning ; and whenever I made
a mistake she would look me up in the garret for days
together. And that is what happened to me since I
saw you last. Even if I had been able to write to you,
I do not know whether I should have done it, because
I did not think you could possibly take me away from
the school ; and, as Maitre Mouohe did not come back
to see me, there was no hurry. I thought I could
wait for a while in the garret and the kitchen."
" Jeanne," I cried, " even if we should have to flee


TEE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNARD. 241

to Oceanioa, the abominable Pr^fere shall never get
hold of you again. I will take a great oath on that !
And why should we not go to Oceanioa ? The climate
is very healthy ; and I read in a newspaper the other
day that they have pianos there. But, in the mean-
time, let us go to the house of Madame de Gabry, who
returned to Paris, as luck would have it, some three
or four days ago ; for you and I are two innocent fools,
and we have great need of some one to help us."

Even as I was speaking Jeanne's features suddenly
became pale, and seemed to shrink into lifelessness ;
her eyes became all dim ; her lips, half open, contract-
ed with an expression of pain. Then her head sank
sideways on her shoulder ; — she had fainted.

I Hf ted her in my arms, and carried her up Madame
de Gabry's staircase like a little baby asleep. But I
was myself on the point of fainting, from emotional
excitement and fatigue together, when she came to
herself again.

" Ah ! it is you," she said : " so much the better !"

Such was our condition when we rang our friend's
door-bell.


Scmie da/y.
It was eight o'clock. Madame de Gabry, as might
be supposed, was very much surprised by our unex-
pected appearance. But she welcomed the old man
and the child with that glad kindness which always
16


242 THE GRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD.

expressed itself in her beautiful gestures. It seems
to me, — if I might use that language of devotion so
familiar to her, — it seems to me as though some heav-
enly grace streams from her hands whenever she opens
them ; and even the perfume which impregnates her ,
robes seems to inspire the sweet calm zeal of charity
and good works. Surprised she certainly was; but
she asked us no questions, — and that silence seemed
to me admirable.

" Madame," I said to her, " we have both come to
place ourselves under your protection. And, first of
aU, we are going to ask you to give us some supper —
or to give Jeanne some, at least ; for a moment ago,
in the carriage, she fainted from weakness. As for
myself, I could not eat a bite at this late hour with-
out passing a night of agony in consequence. I hope
that Monsieur de Gabry is well."

" Oh, he is here !" she said.

And she called him immediately.

" Come in here, Paul ! Come and see Monsieur Bon-
nard and Mademoiselle Alexandre."

He came. It was a pleasure for me to see his frank
broad face, and to press his strong square hand. Then
we went, aU four of us, into the dining-room ; and while
some cold meat was being cut for Jeanne — which she
never touched notwithstanding — I related our advent-
ure. Paul de Gabry asked me permission to smoke
his pipe, after which he listened to me in silence.
When I had finished my recital he scratched the short


THE CBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNARD. 243

stiff beard upon his chin, and uttered a tremendous
" Sacrehleu /" But, seeing Jeanne stare at each of us
in turn, with a frightened look in her face, he added :

"We will talk about this matter to-morrow morn-
ing. Come into my study for a moment ; I have an
old book to show you that I want you to teU me some-
thing about."

I followed him into his study, where the steel of
shot-guns and hunting-knives, suspended against the
dark hangings, ghmmered in the lamp-hght. There,
pulling me down beside him upon a leather-covered
sofa, he exclaimed,

" What have you done ? Great God ! Do you
know what you have done ? Corruption of a minor,
abduction, kidnapping ! You have got yourself into a
nice mess ! You have simply rendered yourself liable
to a sentence of imprisonment of not less than five
nor more than ten years."

" Mercy on us !" I cried ; " ten years imprisonment
for having saved an innocent child."

" That is the law !" answered Monsieur de Gabry.
" You see, my dear Monsieur Bonnard, I happen to
know the Code pretty well — not because I ever stud-
ied law as a profession, but because, as mayor of Lu-
sance, I was obhged to teach myself something about
it in order to be able to give information to my sub-
ordinates. Mouche is a rascal ; that woman Pr6f ere is
a vile hussy ; and you are a . . . Well ! I really cannot
find any word strong enough to signify what you are !"


244 TEE CRIME OF 8TLVE3TBE BONNABD.

After opening his book -case, where dog-collars,
riding -whips, stirrups, spurs, cigar -boxes, and a few
books of reference were indiscriminately stowed away,
he took out of it a copy of the Code, and began to
turn over the leaves.

" ' Okimes and Misdemeanoes ' . . . ' Sequesteatign
OF Peesons ' — that is not your case. . . . ' Abduction of
MiNOEs ' — here we are. . . . ' Article 354 : — WJiosoever
shall, either hy fromd or molence, home abducted or ha/oe
ca/used to ie abducted amy mvnor or mmors, or shall
hame enticed them, or turned them, ama/yfrom, or ford-
lly removed them, or shall have ca/used them to he enticed,
or tm/rned away from, or forcMy removed from the
places m which they ha/ve ieen placed by those to whose
aAithority or dvrection they ha/oe been submitted or con-
fided, shall be Uable to the penalty of imiprisomnemt.
See Penal Code, 21 am,d 28? Here is 21 : — ' The term
of imprisonment shall not be less tha/nfi/oe yea/rs.^ 28.—
' The sentence of i/mprisonment shall be considered as
invohing a loss of civil rights^ Now aU that is very
plain, is it not, Monsieur Bonnard ?"

" Perfectly plain."
' "N'ow let us go on: 'Aeticlb 366: — In case the
abductor be under the age of 21 yea/rs at the tmbe of
the qfence, he shall only be pvm,ished with ' . . . But we
certainly cannot invoke this article in your favor.
Aetiole 357 : — In case the abductor shall have mM/rried
the gi/rl by hi/m abd/ucted, he ca/n only be prosecuted at
tihe i/nsla/nce of such p&rsons as, according to the Oi/vU


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTRE BONNARD. 245

Code, may hawe the right to demcmd that the ma/rriage
shall he decla/red null / nor cam, he he condem/ned until
after the nullity of the ma/rriage shaU ha/ue heen pro-
nounced.'' I do not know whether it is a part of your
plans to marry Mademoiselle Alexandre! You can
see that the Code is good-natured about it ; it leaves
you one door of escape. But no — I ought not to joke
with you, because really you have put yourself in a
very unfortunate position! And how could a man
hke you imagine that here in Paris, in the middle of
the nineteenth century, a young girl can be abducted
with absolute impunity? We are not living in the
Middle Ages now ; and such things are no longer per-
mitted by law."

" You need not imagine," I replied, " that abduction
was lawful under the ancient Code. You will find in
Baluze a decree issued by King Childebert at Cologne,
either in 593 or 594, on the subject : moreover, every-
body knows that the famous Ordo'rmam.ce de Blois, of
May, 1579, formally enacted that any persons convict-
ed of having suborned any son or daughter under the
age of twenty-five years, whether under promise of
marriage or otherwise, without the fuU knowledge,
will, or consent of the father, mother, and guardians,
should be punished with death; and the ordinance
adds : ' Et pa/reillement seront punis extroM'dwiai/re-
ment tous ceux qui wwront pa/rtioipi anidit rapt, et gid
a/wrontprete conseil, confort, et ajide en au&wne ma/mh'e
que ce soif (And in like manner shall be extraordi-


246 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

narily punished all persons whomsoever, who shall
have participated in the said abduction, and who shaU
have given thereunto counsel, succor, or aid in any
manner whatsoever.) Those are the exact, or very
nearly the exact, terms of the ordinance. As for that
article of the Code-lSTapol^on which you have just told
me of, and which excepts from Mabihty to prosecution
the abductor who marries the young girl abducted by
him, it reminds me that according to the laws of Bre-
tagne, forcible abduction, followed by marriage, was
not punished. But this usage, which involved various
abuses, was suppressed in 1720 — at least I give you
the date within ten years. My memory is not very
good now, and the time is long passed when I could
repeat by heart without even stopping to take breath,
fifteen hundred verses of Girart de RoussUlon.

" As far as regards the Capitulary of Charlemagne,
which fixes the compensation for abduction, I have not
mentioned it because I am sure that you must remem-
ber it. So, my dear Monsieur de Gabry, you see ab-
duction was considered as a decidedly punishable of-
fence under the three dynasties of Old France. It is a
very great mistake to suppose that the Middle Ages
represent a period of social chaos. You must re-
member, on the contrary — "
Monsieur de Gabry here interrupted me :
" So," he exclaimed, "you know the Ordonncmce de
Blois, you know Baluze, you know Childebert, you
know the Capitularies — and you don't know anything
about the Code-NapoMon !"


THE CBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 247

I replied that, as a matter of fact, I never had read
the Code ; and he looked very much surprised.

"•And now do you understand," he asked, " the ex-
treme gravity of the action you have committed ?"

I had not indeed been yet able to understand it
fuUy. But httle by little, with the aid of Monsieur
Paul's very sensible explanations, I reached the con-
viction at last that I would not be judged in regard
to my motives, which were innocent, but only accord-
ing to my action, which was punishable. There-
upon I began to feel very despondent, and to utter
divers lamentations.

" What am I to do ?" I cried out, " what am I to
do? Am I then irretrievably ruined? — and have I
also ruined the poor child whom I wanted to save ?"

Monsieur de Gabry silently fiUed his pipe, and light-
ed it so slowly that his kind broad face remained for
at least three or four minutes glowing red behind the
hght, like a blacksmith's in the gleam of his forge-fire.
Then he said,

" You want to know what to do ? Why, don't do
anything, my dear Monsieur Bonnard! For God's
sake, and for your own sake, don't do anything at all !
Tour situation is bad enough as it is ; don't try to
meddle with it now, unless you want to create new
difficulties for yourself. -But you must promise me to
sustain me in any action that I may take. I shall go
to see Monsieur Mouche the very first thing to-morrow
morning ; and if he turns out to be what we think he


248 THM OBIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

is — that is to say, a consummate rascal— I shall very
soon find means of making him harmless, even if the
devil himself should take part with him. For every-
thing depends on him. As it is too late this evening
to take Mademoiselle Jeanne baok to her boarding-
school, my wife wiU keep the young lady here to-
night. This of course plainly constitutes the misde-
meanor of complicity; but it saves the girl from any-
thing like an equivocal position. As for you, my dear
Monsieur, you jupt go back to the Qua! Malaquais as
quickly as you can; and if they come to look for
Jeanne there, it will be very easy for you to prove
she is not in your house."

While we were thus talking, Madame de Gabry was
preparing to make her young lodger comfortable for
the night. When she bade me good-by at the door,
she was carrying a pair of clean sheets, scented with
lavender, thrown over her arm.

" That," I said, " is a sweet honest smeU."

"Well, of course," answered Madame de Gabry,
" you must remember we are peasants."

" Ah !" I answered her, " Heaven grant that I also
may be able one of these days to become a peasant !
Heaven grant that one of these days I may be able, as
you are at Lusance, to inhale the sweet fresh odor of
the country, and live in some little house all hidden
among trees ; and if this wish of mine be too ambi-
tious on the part of an old man whose life is nearly
closed, then I will only wish that my winding sheet


THE CRIME OF STLVESTRE BONN ABB. 249

may be as sweetly scented with lavender as that linen
you have on your arm."

It was agreed that I should come to breakfast the
following morning. But I was positively forbidden to
show myself at the house before midday. Jeanne, as
she kissed me good-by, begged me not to take her back
to the school any more. "We felt much affected at
parting, and very anxious.

I found Therese waiting for me on the landing, in
such a condition of worry about me that it had made
her furious. She talked of nothing less than keeping
me under lock and key in the future.

What a night I passed ! I never closed my eyes for
one single instant. From time to time I could not
help laughing like a boy at the success of my prank ;
and then again, an inexpressible feehng of horror
would come upon me at the thought of being dragged
before some magistrate, and having to take my place
upon the prisoner's bench, to answer for the crime
which I had so naturally committed. I was very
much afraid ; and nevertheless I felt no remorse or re-
gret whatever. The sun, coming into my room at
last, merrily hghted upon the foot of my bed, and
then I made this prayer :

"My God, ' Thou who didst make the sky and the
dew,' as it is said in Tristom, judge me in Thine equity,
not indeed according unto my acts, but according only
to my motives, which Thou knowest have been up-
right and pure; and I will say: Glory to Thee in


250 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

heaven, and peace on earth to men of good-will. I
give into Thy hands the child I stole away. Do that
for her which I have not known how to do : guard her
from aU her enemies ; — and blessed forever be Thy
name !"


Deaemh&r W.

When I arrived at Madame de Gabry's, I found
Jeanne completely transfigured.

Had she also, hke myself, at the first fight of dawn,
called upon Him " who made the sky and the dew " ?
She smiled with such a sweet calm smile !

Madame de Gabry caUed her away to arrange her
hair* ; for the amiable lady had insisted upon combing
and plaiting, with her own hands, the hair of the child
confided to her care. As I had come a fittle before
the hour agreed upon, I had interrupted this charm-
ing tofiet. By way of punishment I was told to go
and wait in the parlor aU by myself. Monsieur de
Gabry joined me there in a little while. He had
evidently just come in, for I could see on his forehead
the mark left by the fining of his hat. His frank face
wore an expression of joyful excitement. I thought I
had better not ask him any questions; and we aU
went to breakfast. When the servants had finished
waiting on the table, Monsieur Paul, who was keeping
his good story for the dessert, said to us,

"WeU! I went to Levallois."


THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNARD. 251'

" Did you see Maitre Mouche?" excitedly inquired
Madame de Gabry.

" No," he replied, curiously watoMng the expression
of disappointment upon our faces.

After having amused himself with our anxiety for
a reasonable time, the good fellow added :

" Maitre Mouche is no longer at LevaUois. Maitre
Mouche has gone away from France. The day after
to-morrow wiU make just eight days since he decamped,
taking with him all the money of his clients — a toler-
ably large sum. I found the office closed. A woman
who lived close by told me all about it with an abun-
dance of curses and imprecations. The notary did not
take the 7.55 train all by himself ; he took with him
the daughter of the hair-dresser of LevaUois, a young
person quite famous in that part of the country for
her beauty and her accomplishments ; — they say she
could shave better than her father. "Well, anyhow
Mouche has run away with her ; the Commissaire de
Pohce confirmed the fact for,* me. Now, really, could
it have been possible for Maitre Mouche to have left
the country at a more opportune moment ? If he had
only deferred his escapade one week longer, he would
have been still the representative of society, and would
have had you dragged off to jail. Monsieur Bonnard,
like a criminal. At present we have nothing what-
ever to fear from him. Here is to the health of
Maitre Mouche!" he cried, pouring out a glass of
white wine.


252 THE CRIME OP STLVESTRE BONNABD.

I would like to live a long time if it were only to
remember that delightful morning. We four were all
assembled in the big white dining-room around the
waxed oak-table. Monsieur Paul's mirth was of the
hearty kind, — even perhaps a httle riotous ; and the
good man quaffed deeply. Madame de Gabry smiled
at me, with a smile so sweet, so perfect, and so noble,
that I thought such a woman ought to keep smiles
hke that simply as a reward for good actions, and
thus make everybody who knew her do all the good
of which they were capable. Then, to reward us for
our pains, Jeanne, who had regained something of her
former vivacity, asked us in less than a quarter of an
hour one dozen questions to answer which would have
required an exhaustive exposition of the nature of
man, the nature of the universe, the science of physics
and of metaphysics, the Macrocosm and the Micro-
cosm — not to speak of the Ineffable and the Unknow-
able. Then she drew out of her pocket her little Saint-
George, who had suffered most cruelly during our
flight. His legs and arms were gone ; but he stUl had
his gold helmet with the green dragon on it. Jeanne
solemnly pledged herself to make a restoration of him
in honor of Madame de Gabry.

Delightful friends ! I left them at last overwhelmed
with fatigue and joy.

On re-entering my lodgings I had to endure the
very sharpest remonstrances from Th6rese, who said


TEE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 253

she had given up trying to understand my new way
of living. In her opinion Monsieur had really lost his
mind.

" Yes, Th^rese, I am a mad old man and you are a
mad old woman. That is certain! May the good
God bless us both, Therese, and give us new strength ;
for we now have new duties to perform. But let me
he down upon the sofa ; for I really cannot keep my-
self on my feet any longer."


Janua/ry 15, 186-.

" GooD-MOKNiNa, Monsieur," said Jeanne, letting her-
self in ; while Therese remained grumbling in the cor-
ridor because she had not been able to get to the door
in time.

" Mademoiselle, I beg you wni be Idnd enough to
address me very solemnly by my title, and to say to
me, ' Good-morning, my guardian.' "

" Then it has aU been settled ? Oh, how nice !"
cried the child, clapping her hands.

"It has aU been arranged, Mademoiselle, in the
Salle-comrrvime and before the Justice of the Peace;
and from to-day you are under my authority. . . .
What are you laughing about, my ward ? I see it in
your eyes. You have some crazy idea in your head
this very moment — some more nonsense, eh ?"

" Oh, no ! Monsieur. ... I mean, my guardian. I
was looking at your white hair. It curls out from


254 THE OBIME OF 8TLVBSTBE BONNABD.

under the edge of your hat hke honeysuckle on a bal-
cony. It is very handsome, and I like it very much !"

" Be good enough to sit down, my ward, and, if you
can possibly help it, stop saying ridiculous things, be-
cause I have some very serious things to say to you.
Listen. I suppose you are not going to insist upon
being sent back to the establishment of Mademoiselle
Pref ere ? . . . No. Well, then, what would you say
if I should take you here to live with me, and to finish
your education, and keep you here until . . . what
shall I say ? — ^forever, as the song has it ?"

" Oh, Monsieur !" she cried, flushing crimson with
pleasure.

I continued,

" Back there we have a nice little room, which my
housekeeper cleaned up and furnished for you. You
are going to take the place of the books which used to
be in it ; you will succeed them as day succeeds night.
Go with Th6rese and look at it, and see if you think you
will be able to live in it. Madame de Gabry and I have
made up our minds that you can sleep there to-night."

She had already started to run ; I called her back
for a moment.

" Jeanne, listen to me a moment longer ! You have
always until now made yourself a favorite with my
housekeeper, who, like all very old people, is apt to
be cross at tinies. Be gentle and forbearing. Make
every allowance for her. I have thought it my duty
to make every allowance for her myself, and to put up


TSE GRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNAtlD. 25S

with all her fits of impatience. Now, let me tell you,
Jeanne :— Eespect her ! And when I say that, I do
not forget that she is my servant and yours ; neither
wiU she ever allow herself to forget it for a moment.
But what I want you to respect in her is her great age
and her great heart. She is an humble woman who
has hved a very, very long time in the habit of doing
good ; and she has become hardened and stiffened inj
that habit. Bear patiently with the harsh ways of
that upright soul. If you know how to command, she
will know how to obey. Go now, my child ; arrange
your room in whatever way may seem to you best
suited for your studies and for your repose."

Having started Jeanne, with this viaticum, upon her
domestic career, I began to read a Keview, which, al-
though conducted by very young men, is excellent.
The tone of it is somewhat unpolished, but the spirit
zealous. The article I read was certainly far superior,
in point of precision and positivism, to anything of the
sort ever written when I was a young man. The au-
thor of the article, Monsieur Paul Meyer, points out
fevery error with a remarkably lucid power of incisive
criticism.

"We used not in my time to criticise with such strict
justice. Our indulgence was vast. It went even so
far as to confound the scholar and the ignoramus in
the same burst of praise. And nevertheless one must
learn how to find fault ; and it is even an imperative
duty to blame when the blame is deserved.


256 THJl CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

I remember little Kaymond (that was tlie name we
gave him) ; he did not know anything, and his mind
was not a mind capable of absorbing any sohd learn-
ing ; but he was very fond of his mother. "We took
very good care never to utter a hint of the ignorance
of so perfect a son ; and, thanks to our forbearance,
little Eaymond made his way to the highest positions.
He had lost his mother then ; but honors of all kinds
were showered upon him. He became omnipotent —
to the grievous injury of his colleagues and of science.
. . . But here comes my young friend of the Luxem-
bourg.

" Good-eveniag, Gehs. Tou look very happy to-day.
What good fortune has come to you, my dear lad ?"

His good fortune is that he has been able to sustain
his thesis very creditably, and that he has taken a
high rank in his class. He tells me this with the ad-
ditional information that my own works, which were
incidentally referred to in the course of the examina-
tion, had been spoken of by the college professors in
terms of the most unqualified praise.

" That is very nice," I replied ; " and it makes me
very happy, Gehs, to find my old reputation thus as-
sociated with your own youthful honors. I was very
much interested, you know, in that thesis of yours;
but some domestic arrangements have been keeping
me so busy lately that I quite forgot this was the day
on which you were to sustain it."

Mademoiselle Jeanne made her appearance very op-


TEE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNABD. 257

portunely, as if in order to suggest to him something
about the nature of those very domestic arrangements.
The gifldy girl burst into the City of Books like a
fresh breeze, crying out at the top of her voice that
her room was a perfect little wonder. Then she be-
came very red indeed on seeing Monsieur Gehs there.
J But none of us can escape our destiny. |

Monsieur GeMs asked her how she was with the tone
of a young feUow who presumes upon a previous ac-
quaintance, and who proposes to put himself forward
as an old friend. Oh, never fear ! — she had not for-
gotten him at aU : that was very evident from the fact
that then and there, right under my nose, they re-
sumed their last year's conversation on the subject of
the " Venetian-blond " ! They continued the discussion
after quite an animated fashion. I began to ask my-
self what right I had to be in the room at aU. The
only thing I could do in order to make myself heard
was to cough. As for getting in a word, they never
even gave me a chance. Gehs discoursed enthusiasti-
cally, not only about the Yenetian colorists, but also
upon aU other matters relating to nature or to man-
kind. And Jeanne kept answering him, " Tes, Mon-
sieur, you are right," ..." That is just what I sup-
posed. Monsieur." . . . "Monsieur, you express so
beautifully just what I feel." ... "I am going to
think a great deal about what you have just told me,
Monsieur."
When / speak. Mademoiselle never answers me in
17


258 TBE CRIME OF BTLVESTBE BONNABD.

that tone. It is only with the very tip of her tongue /
that she will even taste any intellectual food which I (
set before her. Usually she wiU not touch it at all.
But Monsieur Gelis seems to be in her opinion the su-
preme authority upon all subjects. It was always,
" Oh, yes !" — " Oh, of course !" — ^to all his empty chat-
ter. And, then, the eyes of Jeanne! I had never
seen them look so large before ; I had never before
observed in them such fixity of expression ; but her
gaze otherwise remained what it always is — artless,
frank, and brave. GeMs evidently pleased her; she
likes Gelis, and her eyes betrayed the fact. They
would have pubhshed it to the entire universe ! All
very fine. Master Bonnard ! — you have been so deeply
interested in observing your ward, that you have been
forgetting you are her guardian ! You began only
this morning to exercise that function ; and you can
already see that it involves some very delicate and dif-
ficult duties. Bonnard, you must really try to devise
som0 means of keeping that young man away from
her ; you really ought. ... Eh ! how am I to know
what I am to do ? , . .

I have picked up a book at random from the near-
est shelf ; I open it, and I enter respectfully into the
middle of a drama of Sophocles. The older I grow,
the more I learn to love the two civilizations of the
antique world ; and now I always keep the poets of
Italy and of Greece on a shelf within easy reach of
my arm in the City of Books.


THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD. 259

Monsieur and Mademoiselle finally condescend to
take some notice of me, now that I seem too busy to
take any notice of them. I really think that Mad-
emoiselle Jeanne has even asked me what I am read-
ing. No, indeed, I will not tell her what it is. What
I am reading, between ourselves, is the chant of that
suave and luminous Chorus which rolls out its mag-
nificent melopoeia through a scene of passionate vio-
lence— (the Chorus of the Old Men of Thebesj— 'Ejowe
avtKorE. . . . " Irmmcihle Love, Thou who descend-
est wpon rich houses, — Thou who dost rest wpon the del-
icate cheek of the raaidem, — Thou who dost tra/oerse all
seas, — su/rely none a/mong the Im/mortals can escape Thee,
nor indeed amy amiong men who liwe hut for a Utile
space; a/nd he who is possessed hy Thee, there is a mad-
ness vpon him" And when I had re-read that deli-
cious chant, the face of Antigone appeared before me
in all its passionless purity. What images ! Gods and
goddesses who hover in the highest height of heaven !
The blind old man, the long-wandering beggar-king,
led by Antigone, has now been buried with holy rites ;
and his daughter, fair as the fairest dream ever con-
ceived by human soul, resists the will of the tyrant
and gives pious sepulture to her brother. She loves
the son of the tyrant, and that son loves her also.
Aud as she goes on her way to execution, the victim
of her own sweet piety, the old men sing, " Iimvncihle
Love, Thou who dost descend upon rich houses, — Thou
who dost rest vpon the delicate cheeh of the maMm,." . . .


260 THE CRIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

" Mademoiselle Jeanne, are you really very anxious
to know what I am reading ? I am reading, Mademoi-
selle-^I am reading that Antigone, having buried the
blind old man, wove a fair tapestry embroidered with
images in the likeness of laughing faces."

" Ah !" said Gelis, as he burst out laughing, " that
is not in the text." x

" It is a soolium," I said.
J' Inedited," he added, getting up.

I am not an egotist. But I am prudent. I have to
bring up this child ; she is much too young to be mar-
ried now. No ! I am not an egotist, but I must cer-
tainly keep her with me for a few years more — ^keep
her alone with me. She can surely wait until I am
dead ! Fear not, Antigone, old CEdipus will find holy
burial soon enough.

In the meanwhile, Antigone is helping our house-
keeper to scrape the carrots. She says she likes to
do it — ^that it is in her line, being related to the art of
sculpture.


May.

Who would recognize the City of Books now ? There
are flowers everywhere — even upon all the articles of
furniture. Jeanne was right : those roses do look very
nice in that blue china vase. She goes to market 6very
day with Th6rese, under the pretext of helping the old
servant to make her purchases, but she never brings


THE CRIME OF STLVSSTBS BONNABB. 261

anything back with her except flowers. Flowers are
really very charming creatures. And one of these
days I must certainly carry out my plan, and devote
myself to the study of them, in their own natural do-
main, in the country — with all the science and earnest-
ness which I possess.

For what have I to do here ? Why should I burn
my eyes out over these old parchments which cannot
now teU me anything worth knowing ? I used to study
them, those old texts, with the most ardent enjoy-
ment. What was it which I was then so anxious to
find in them ? The date of a pious foundation — the
name of some monkish vmagier or copyist — ^the price
of a loaf, of an ox, or of a field — some judicial or ad-
ministrative enactment — aU that, and yet something
more, a Something vaguely mysterious and sublime
which excited my enthusiasm. But for sixty years
I have been searching in vain for that Something.
Better men than I — the masters, the truly great, the
Fauriels, the Thierrys, who found so many ^things —
died at their task without having been able, any more
than I have been, to find that Something which, being
incorporeal, has no name, and without which, neverthe-
less, no great mental work would ever be undertaken
in this world. And now that I am only looking for
what I should certainly be able to find, I cannot find
anything at aU ; and it is probable that I will never be
able to finish the history of the Abbots of Saint-Ger
main-des-Pr&.


262 THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONN ABB.

" Guardian, just guess what I have m my hand-
kerchief."

"Judging from appearances, Jeanne, I should say
flowers."

" Oh, no — ^not flowers. Look !"

I look, and I see a little gray head poking itself
out of the handkerchief. It is the head of a little
gray cat. The handkerchief opens ; the animal leaps
down upon the carpet, shakes itself, pricks up first one
ear and then the other, and begins to examine with due
caution the locahty and the inhabitants thereof.

Therese, out of breath, with her basket on her arm,
suddenly makes her appearance in time to take an ob-
jective part in this examination, which does not appear
to result altogether m her favor ; for the young cat
moves slowly away from her, without, however, ven-
turing near my legs, or approaching Jeanne, who dis-
plays extraordinary volubility in the use of caressing
appellations. Therese, whose chief fault is her inabiUty
to hide hor feelings, thereupon vehemently reproaches
Mademoiselle for bringing home a cat that she did
not know anything about. Jeanne, in order to justify
herself, tells the whole story. While she was passing
with Therese before a drug-store, she saw the clerk
kick a little cat into the street. The cat, astonished
and frightened, seemed to be asking itself whether to
remain in the street where it was being terrified and
knocked about by the people passing by, or whether
to go back into the drug-store even at the risk of being


THE CRIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD. 263

kicked out a second time. Jeanne thought it was in
a very critical position, and understood its hesitation.
It looked so stupid; and she knew it looked stupid
only because it could not decide what to do. So she
took it up in her arms. And as it had not been able
to obtain any rest either in-doors or out-of-doors, it
allowed her to hold it. Then she stroked and petted
it to keep it from being afraid, and boldly went to the
drug-clerk and said,

" If you don't Mke that animal, you mustn't beat it;
you must give it to me."

" Take it," said the drug-clerk.

..." Now there !" adds Jeanne, by way of conclu-
sion ; and then she changes her voice again to a flute-
tone in order to say aU kinds of sweet things to that cat.

"He is horribly thin," I observe, looking at the
wretched animal ; — ■'■'■ moreover, he is horribly ugly."
Jeanne thinks he is not ugly at aU, but she acknowl-
edges that he looks even more stupid than he looked
at first : this time she thinks it not indecision, but sur-
prise, which gives that unfortunate aspect to his coun-
tenance. She asks us to imagine ourselves in his place ;
— ^then we are obliged to acknowledge that he cannot
possibly understand what has happened to him. And
then we all burst out laughing in the face of the poor
Mttle beast, which maintains the most comical look of
gravity. Jeanne wants to take him up ; but he hides
himself under the table, and cannot even be tempted
to come out by the lure of a saucer of milk.


264 THE CRIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

We all turn our backs and promise not to look ; when
we inspect the saucer again, we find it empty.

" Jeanne," I observe, " your protege has a decidedly
tristful aspect of countenance ; he is of a sly and sus-
picious disposition ; I trust he is not going to commit
in the City of Books any such misdemeanors as might
render it necessary for us to send him back to his drug-
store. In the meantime we must give him a name.
Suppose we call him ' Don Gris de Gouttiere ' ; but per-
haps that is too long. 'PiU,' 'Drug,' or 'Castor-
oil ' would be short enough, and would further serve
to recall his early condition in life. What do you
think about it ?"

"'Pill' would not sound bad," answers Jeanne,
"but it would be very unkind to give him a name
which would be always reminding him of the misery
from which we saved him. It would be making him
pay too dearly for our hospitality. Let us be more
generous, and give him a pretty name, in hopes that
he is going to deserve it. See how he looks at us !
He knows that we are talking about him. And now
that he is no longer unhappy, he is beginning to look
a great deal less stupid. I am not joking ! Unhappi-
ness does make people look stupid, — I am perfectly
sure it does."

" Well, Jeanne, if you Kke, we wiU caU jaxxr protege
Hannibal. The appropriateness of that name does not
seem to strike you at once. But the Angora cat who
preceded him here as an inmate of the City of Books,


THE OBIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD. 265

and to whom I was in the habit of telUng all my
secrets — for he was a very wise and discreet person —
used to be called Hamilcar. It is natural that this
name should beget the other, and that Hannibal
should succeed Hamilcar.

"We all agreed upon this point.

" Hannibal !" cried Jeanne, " come here !"

Hannibal, greatly frightened by the strange sonority
of his own name, ran to hide himself under a book-case
in an orifice so small that a rat could not have squeezed
himself into it.

A nice way of doing credit to so great a name !

I was in a good humor for working that day, and I
had just dipped the nib of my pen into the ink-bottle
when I heard some one ring. Should any one ever
read these pages written by an unimaginative old
man, he wiU be sure to laugh at the way that beU
keeps ringing through my narrative, without ever an-
nouncing the arrival of a new -personage or introduc-
ing any unexpected incident. On the stage things are
managed on the reverse principle. Monsieur Scribe
never has the curtain raised without good reason, and
for the greater enjoyment of ladies and young misses.
That is art ! I would rather hang myself than write
a play, — not that I despise life, but because I should
never be able to invent anything amusing. Invent !
In order to do that one must have received the gift of
inspiration. It would be a very unfortunate thing for


266 THE CRIME OF STLVEBTBE BONNABD.

I

me to possess such a gift. Suppose I were to invent
some monkling in my history of the Abbey of Saint-
Germain-des-Pres ! What would our young erudites
say? What a scandal for the School! As for the
Institute, it would say nothing and probably not even
think about the matter either. Even if my colleagues
still write a little sometimes, they never read. They
are of the opinion of Parnj'^, who said,
" ITne pcdsMe indiffirence
Est la plus sage des verius." *

To be the least wise in order to become the most
wise — this is precisely what those Buddhists are aun-
ing at without knowing it. If there is any wiser wis-
dom than that I wiU go to Eome to report upon it. . . .
And all this because Monsieur Gehs happened to ring
the bell!

This young man has latterly changed his manner
completely with Jeanne. He is now quite as serious
as he used to be frivolous, and quite as silent as he
used to be chatty. And Jeanne follows his example.
We have reached the phase of passionate love under
constraint. For, old as I am, I cannot be deceived
about it : these two children are violently and sincerely
in love with each other. Jeanne now avoids him —
she hides herself in her room when he comes into the
library — but how weU she knows how to reach him
when she is alone ! alone at her piano ! Every even-

/ * " The most wise of tlie virtues is a calm indifference," \


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNARD. 267

ing she talks to him through the music she plays with
a rich thriU of passional feeling which is the new
utterance of her new soul. #

Well, why should I not confess it ? Why should I
not avow my weakness? Surely my egotism would
not become any less blameworthy by keeping it hidden
from myself ? So I wiU write it. Yes ! I was hoping
for something else ; — yes ! I thought I was going to
keep her aU to myself, as my own child, as my own
daughter — not always, of course, not even perhaps for
very long, but just for a few years more. I am so old !
Could she not wait ? And, who knows ? With the
help of the gout, I would not have imposed upon her
patience too much. That was my wish ; that was my
hope. I had made my plans — I had not reckoned upon
the coming of this wild young man. But the mistake
is none the less cruel because my reckoning happened
to be wrong. And yet it seems to me that you are
condemning yourself very rashly, friend Sylvestre Bon-
nard : if you did want to keep this young girl a few
years longer, it was quite as much in her own interest
as in yours. She has a great deal to learn yet, and you
are not a master to be despised. When that miserable
notary Mouche — who subsequently committed his ras-
calities at so opportune a moment — ^paid you the honor
of a visit, you explained to him your ideas of education
with all the fervor of high enthusiasm. Then you at-
tempted to put that system of yours into practice ;—
Jeanne is certainly an ungrateful girl, and Gehs a
much too seductive young man!


268 THE CRIME OF 8YLVE8TBE BONNABD.

But still, — unless I put him out of the house, which
would be a detestably ill-mannered and ill-natured
thing to doji — I must continue to receive him. He has
been waiting ever so long in my little parlor, in front
of those Sevres vases with which King Louis Phi-
lippe so graciously presented me. The Moissormeurs
and the Peoheurs of Leopold Kobert are painted upon
those porcelain vases, which Gelis nevertheless dares
to call frightfully ugly, with the warm approval of
Jeanne, whom he has absolutely bewitched.

" My dear lad, excuse me for having kept you wait-
ing so long. I had a Uttle bit of work to finish." ^

I am telling the truth. /Meditation is work J but of
course GeMs does not know what I mean ; he thinks
I am referring to something archaeological, and, his
question in regard to the health of Mademoiselle
Jeanne having been answered by a " Very well in-
deed," uttered in that extremely dry tone which re-
veals my moral authority as guardian, we begin to
converse about historical subjects. "We first enter
upon generalities. Generalities are sometimes ex-
tremely serviceable. I try to inculcate into Monsieur
G^Hs some respect for that generation of historians
to which I belong. I say to him,

" History, which was formerly an art, and which
afforded place for the fullest exercise of the imagina-
tion, has in our time become a science, the study of
which demands absolute exactness of knowledge."

Gehs asks leave to differ from me on this subject.


THE CRIME OF SYLVE8TBE BONNABD. 269

He tells me he does not believe that history is a sci-
ence, or that it could possibly ever become a science.
" In the first place," he says to me, " what is his-
tory? The written representation of past events.
But what is an event ? Is it merely a commonplace
fact ? Is it any fact ? No ! You say yourself it is a
noteworthy fact. Now, how is the historian to teU
whether a fact is noteworthy or not ? He judges it
arbitrarily, according to his tastes and his caprices
and his ideas — ^in short, like an artist ? For facts can-
not by reason of their own intrinsic character be
divided into historical facts and non-historical facts.
But any fact is something exceedingly complex.
"WiU the historian represent facts in all their com-
plexity ? No, that is Impossible. Then he will rep-
resent them stripped of the greater part of the pe-
culiarities which constituted them, and consequently
lopped, mutilated, different from what they reaUy
were. As for the inter-relation of facts, needless to
speak of it ! If a so-called historical fact be brought
into notice — as is very possible — ^by one or more facts
which are not historical at aU, and are for that very
reason unknown, how is the historian going to estab-
hsh the relation of these facts one to another ? And
in saying this, Monsieur Bonnard, I am supposmg that
the historian has positive evidence before him, where-
as in reality he feels confidence only in such or such
a witness for sympathetic reasons. History is not a
science ; it is an art, and one can succeed in that art


270 TSB CRIME OF BTLVE8TBE BONNAEB.

only through the exercise of his faculty of imagina-
tion."

Monsieur Gelis reminds me very much at this mo-
ment of a certain young fool whom I heard talking
wildly one day in the garden of the Luxembourg,
under the statue of Marguerite of Navarre. But at
another turn of the conversation we find ourselves
face to face with Walter Scott, whose work my dis-
dainful young friend pleases to term "rococo, trou-
badourish, and only fit to inspire somebody engaged
in making designs for cheap bronze clocks." Those
are his very words !

" Why !" I exclaim, zealous to defend the magnifi-
cent creator of " The Bride of Lammermoor," and " The
Fair Maid of Perth," " the whole past lives in those ad-
mirable novels of his ; — ^that is history, that is epopee !"

" It is frippery," Gelis answers me.

And, — will you believe it ?— this crazy boy actually
tells me that no matter how learned one may be, one
cannot possibly know just how men used to live five
or ten centuries ago, because it is only with the very
greatest difficulty that one can picture them to one's
self even as they were only ten or fifteen years ago.
in his opinion, the historical poem, the historical novel,
the historical painting, are all, according to their kind,
abominably false as branches of art.

" In aU the arts," he adds, " the artist can only re-
flect his own soul. His work, no matter how it may
be dressed up, is of necessity contemporary with him-


THE ORIMB OF 8YLVESTBE BONNABD. 211

self, being the reflection of his own mind. "What do
we admire in the ' Divine Comedy ' unless it be the
great soul of Dante? And the marbles of Michael
Angelo, what do they represent to us that is at all
extraordinary unless it be Michael Angelo himself?
The artist either communicates his own life to his cre-
ations, or else merely whittles out puppets and dresses
up doUs."

What a torrent of paradoxes and irreverences ! But
boldness in a young man is not displeasing to me.
Gelis gets up from his chair and sits down again. I
know perfectly well what is worrying him, and who
he is waiting for. And now he begins to talk to me
about his being able to make fifteen hundred francs a
year, to which he can add the revenue he derives from
a httle property that he has inherited — ^two thousand
francs a year or more. And I am not in the least de-
ceived as to the purpose of these confidences on his
part. I know perfectly well that he is only making
his Httle financial statements in order to persuade me
that he is comfortably circumstanced, steady, fond of
home, comparatively independent — or, to put the mat-
ter in the fewest words possible, able to marry. Quod
erat demonsbramdvMi, — as the geometricians say.

He has got up and sat down just twenty times.
He now rises for the twenty-first time ; and, as he has
not been able to see Jeanne, he goes away feehng as
unhappy as possible.

The moment he has gone, Jeanne comes into the


272 THE OBIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD.

City of Books, under the pretext of looking for Han-
nibal. She is also quite unhappy ; and her voice be-
comes singularly plaintive as she calls her pet to give
him some milk. Look at that sad little face, Bonnard !
Tyrant, gaze upon thy work ! Thou hast been able
to keep them from seeing each other ; but they have
now both of them the same expression of countenance,
and thou mayest discern from that similarity of ex-
pression that in spite of thee they are united in
thought. Cassandra, be happy! Bartholo, rejoice!
This is what it means to be a guardian ! Just see her
kneeling down there on the carpet with Hannibal's
head between her hands !

Yes, caress the stupid animal ! — pity him ! — moan
over him ! — we know very well, you little rogue, the
real cause of aU those sighs and plaints ! Neverthe-
less, it makes a very pretty picture. I look at it for a
long time ; then, throwing a glance around my library,
I exclaim,

" Jeanne, I am tired of aU those books ; we must
seU them."


September 20.

It is done ! — they are betrothed. Gelis, who is an
orphan, as Jeanne is, did not make his proposal to
me in person. He got one of his professors, an old
colleague of mine, highly esteemed for his learning
and character, to come to me on his behalf. But
what a love messenger ! Great heavens ! A bear, —


THE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TRE BONNABD. 273

not a bear of the Pyrenees, but a literary bear, — and
this latter variety of bear is much more ferocious than
the former.

" Eight or wrong (in my opinion wrong !) Gelis says
that he does not want any dowry; he takes your
ward with nothing but her chemise. Say yes, and
the thing is settled ! Make haste about it ! I want
to show you two or three very curious old tokens from
Lorraine which I am sure you never saw before."

That is literally what he said to me. I answered
him that I would consult Jeanne, and I found no
small pleasure in teUing him that my ward had a
dowry.

Her dowry — ^there it is in front of me ! It is my
hbrary. Henri and Jeanne have not even the faint-
est suspicion about it ; and the fact is I am conmionly
belifeved to be much richer than I am. I have the
face of an old miser. It is certainly a lying face ;
but its untruthfulness has often won for me a great
deal of consideration. There is nobody so much re-
spected in this world as a stingy rich man.

I have consulted Jeanne, — but what was the need of
listening for her answer ? It is done ! They are be-
trothed.

It would iU become my character as well as my face
to watch these young people any more for the mere
purpose of noting down their words and gestures.
NoU me tcmgere : — ^that is the maxim for aU charming
love affairs. I know my duty. It is to respect aU
18


2 '74 THE OBIME OF STLVESTBE BONNABD.

the little secrets of that innocent soul intrusted to me.
Let these children love each other all they can!
Never a word of their fervent outpouring of mutual
confidences, never a hint of their artless self-betrayals,
wUl be set down in this diary by the old guardian
whose authority was so gentle and so brief.

At all events, I am not going* to remain with my
arms folded ; and if they have their business to attend
to, I have mine also. I am preparing a catalogue of
my books, with a view to having them all sold at auc-
tion. It is a task which saddens and amuses me at
the same time. I linger over it, perhaps a good deal
longer than I ought to do ; turning the leaves of aU.
those works which have become so familiar to my
thought, to my touch, to my sight — even out of aU ne-
cessity and reason. But it is a farewell ; and it has
ever been in the nature of man to prolong a farewell.

This ponderous volume here, which has served me
so much for thirty long years, how can I leave it with-
out according to it every kindness that a faithful ser-
vant deserves? And this one again, which has so
often consoled me by its wholesome doctrines, must
I not bow down before it for the last time, as to a
Master ? But each time that I meet with a volume
which ever led me into error, which ever afflicted me
with false dates, omissions, hes, and other plagues of
the archaeologist, I say to it with bitter joy : " Go !
impostor, traitor, false-witness ! flee thou far away
from me forever; — vade rebro! all absurdly covered


THE OBIME OF STLVE8TBE BONNABD. 276

with gold as thou art ! and I pray it may befall thee —
thanks to thy usurped reputation and thy comely mo-
rocco attire — ^to take thy place in the cabinet of some
banker-bibliomaniac, whom thou wilt never be able
to seduce as thou hast seduced me, because he will
never read one single line of thee."

I laid aside some books I must always keep — those
books which were given to me as souvenirs. As I
placed among them the manuscript of the "Golden
Legend," I could not but kiss it in memory of Ma-
dame Tr^pof, who remained grateful to me in spite of
her high position and aU her wealth, and who became
my benefactress merely to prove to me that she felt
I had once done her a kindness. . . . Thus I had made
a reserve. It was then that, for the first time, 1 felt
myself inclined to commit a deliberate crime. AU
through that night I was strongly tempted ; by morn-
ing the temptation had become irresistible. Every-
body else in the house was still asleep. I got out of
bed and stole softly from my room.

Te powers of darkness ! ye phantoms of the night !
if while lingering within my home after the crowing
of the cock, you saw me stealing about on tiptoe in
the City of Books, you certainly never cried out, as
Madame Trepof did at Naples, " That old man has a
good-natured round back !" I entered the Ubrary ;
Hannibal, with his tail perpendicularly erected, came to
rub himself against my legs and purr. I seized a vol-
ume from its shelf, some venerable Gothic text or


276 ' THE CRIME OF STL7ESTRE BONNABI^.

some noble poet of the Kenaissance — the jewel, the
treasure which I had been dreaming about aU night,
I seized it and slipped it away into the very bottom
of the closet which I had reserved for those books I
intended to retain, and which soon became fuU almost
to bursting. It is horrible to relate : I was steaUng
the dowry of Jeanne ! And when the crime had been
consummated I set myself again sturdily to the task
of cataloguing, until Jeanne came to consult me ia
regard to something about a dress or a trousseau. I
could not possibly understand just what she was talk-
ing about, through my total ignorance of the current
vocabulary of dressmaking and linen-drapery. Ah!
if a bride of the fourteenth century had come to talk
to me about the apparel of her epoch, then, indeed, I
should have been able to understand her language!
But Jeanne does not belong to my time, and I have
to send her to Madame de Gabry, who on this impor-
tant occasion will take the place of her mother.

. . . Night has come ! Leaning from the window, we
gaze at the vast sombre stretch of the city below us,
pierced vn'th multitudinous points of light. Jeanne
presses her hand to her forehead as she leans upon
the window-bar, and seems a little sad. And I say
to myself as I watch her :fAll changes, even the most
longed for, have their melancholy ; for what we leave
behind us is a part of ourselves : we must die in one
life before we can enter into another j)

And as if answering my thought, the young girl
murmurs to me,


TEE CRIME OF 8TLVE8TBE BONNARD. 277

" My guardian, I am so happy ; and still I feel as if
I wanted to cry !"


THE LAST PAGE.

Augmt ^1, 1869.
Page eighty-seventh. . . . Only twenty lines more
and I will have finished my book about insects and
flowers. Page eighty-seventh and last. . . . " As we
home already seen, the visits of insects m-e of the utmost
importance to jpla/nts ^ svnce their dmi/y is to carry to
the pistils the pollen of the stamuns. It seems also that
the flower itself is a/rramged amd made attn-actmefor the
purpose of irwiting this miptial visit. I think I home
ieen cihle to show that the necta/ry of the plamt distils a
suga/ry liquid which attracts the insect and obliges it to
aid unconsdousl/y in the work of di/rect or cross fertili-
zation. The last msthod of fertiUzation is the more
coTmnon. I home shown that flmjoers a/re colored cmd
perfu/med so as to attract insects, and interiorly so con-
strueted as to offer those visitors such a mode of a,ceess
that they cam/not penetrate into the corolla without de-
positing upon the stigma the pollen with which they
home been covered. My most venerated master Sprengel
observes in regard to that flne down which Unes the co-
rolla of the wood-geranium : ' The wise Author of Nat-
wre has never created a single useless hm/rP I say in
my twm : If that Lily of the Valley whereof the Gos-
pel makes mention is more richly clad than King Sol-


278 TRE OBIME OF 8TLVESTBE BONNABD.

omon m, all his glory, its mcmtle ofpwrple is a wedd/mg-
ga/rmemt, a/nd that rich a^ppwrel is necessa/ry to the
perpetmation of the species.*

"Bbollbs, August SI, 1869."


Brolles ! My house is the last one you pass in the
single street of the village, as you go to the woods.
It is a gabled house with a slate roof, which takes
iridescent tints in the sun like a pigeon's breast. The
weather-vane above that roof has won more consider-
ation for me among the country people than aU my
works upon history and philology. There is not a
single child who does not know Monsieur Bonnard's
weather-vane. It is rusty, and squeaks very sharply
in the wind. Sometimes it refuses to do any work at
aU — ^just like Therese, who now allows herself to be

* Monsieur Sylvestre Bonnard was not aware that several very
illustrious naturalists were making researches at the same time as
he in regard to the relation between insects and plants. He was
not acquainted with the labors of Darwin, with those of Dr. Her-
mann Miiller, nor with the observations of Sir John Lubbock. It
is worthy of note that the conclusions of Monsieur Sylvestre Bon-
nard are very nearly similar to those reached by the three scien-
tists above mentioned. Less important, but perhaps equally in-
teresting, is the fact that Sir John Lubbock is, like Monsieur
Bonnard, an archsologist who began to devote himself only late
in life to the natural sciences. — Note by the French Editor.


THE CRIME OF 8YLVESTBE BONNARD. 279

assisted by a young peasant girl — though she grum-
bles a good deal about it. The house is not large, but
I am very comfortable in it. My room has two win-
dows, and gets the sun in the morning. The chil-
dren's room is up-stairs. Jeanne and Henri come
twice a year to occupy it.

Little Sylvestre's cradle used to be in it. He was
a very pretty child, but very pale. "When he used to
play on the grass, his mother used to watch him very
anxiously ; and every little while she would stop her
sewing in order to take him upon her lap. The poor
little feUow never wanted to go to sleep. He used to
say that when he was asleep he would go away, very
far away, to some place where it was aU dark, and
where he saw things that made him afraid — things
he did not want to see any more.

Then his mother would call me, and I would sit
down beside his cradle. He would take one of
my fingers into his httle dry warm hand, and say
to me,

" Godfather, you must teU me a story."

Then I would teU him aU kinds of stories, which
he would listen to very seriously. They aU interested
him, but there was one especially which filled his
little soul with delight. It was "The Blue Bird."
Whenever I finished that, he would say to me, " Tell
it again ! tell it again !" And I would teU it again
until his little pale blue-veined head sank back upon
the piUow in slunaber.


280 THE CRIME OP STLVESTBB BONNABD.

The doctor used to answer all our questions by
saying,

"There is nothing extraordinary the matter with
him!"

Wo ! There was nothing extraordinary the matter
with little Sylvestre. One evening last year his father
caUed me.

" Come," he said, " the little one is still worse."

I approached the cradle over which the mother hung
motionless, as if tied down above it by all the powers
of her soul.

Little Sylvestre turned his eyes towards me : their
pupils had already roUed up beneath his eyehds, and
could not descend again.

" Godfather," he said, " you are not to tell me any
more stories."

ISo, I was not to tell lum any more stories !

Poor Jeanne ! — poor mother !

I am too old now to feel very deeply; but how
strangely painful a mystery is the death of a child !

To-day, the father and mother have come to pass
six weeks under the old man's roof. I see them now
returning from the woods, walking arm in arm. Jeanne
is closely wrapped in her black shawl, and Henri wears
a crape about his straw hat; but they are both of
them radiant with youth, and they smile very sweetly
at each other. They snule at the earth which bears
them ; they smile at the air which bathes them ; they


THE CRIME OF 8YL7E8TBE BONNABD. 281

smile at the light which each one sees in the eyes
of the other. From my window I wave my hand-
kerchief at them, — and they smile at my old age.

Jeanne comes running lightly up the stairs; she
kisses me, and then whispers in my ear something
which I divine rather than hear. And I make answer
to her: "May God's blessing be with you, Jeanne,
and with your husband, and with your children,
and with your children's children forever !" . . . Et
Tvmvc dmdttis serowm i/wwm, Dortvine !"


X


THE BND.
