================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: The Life and Teaching of Tukaram
Creator: J. Nelson Fraser & J. F. Edwards
Edition: 1923 (Madras: Christian Literature Society; scan of 1932 reprint, same text)
Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/LifeAndTeachingsOfTukaram)
Public domain: First published 1923; public domain.
Artifact ID: fraser-edwards-life-and-teachings-of-tukaram-1923
================================================================================

THE LIFE AND TEACHING
OF TUKARAM

The Life and
Teaching of Tukiram

BY THE LATE

J. NELSON FRASER, m.a.

Indian Education Department, Joint-Author of The Poems
of TuhHrcfm

AND THE

'Rev. J. F. EDWARDS";?.

Author of The Holy Spirit, The CWisfian ]Eiynamk khd.khf
Article on ' Tukaratn ' in Hastings' Encyclopedia of
fieligion and Btliics

PROBSTHAIN & CO.,

ORIENTAL BOOKSELLERS
JO, AND PUBLISHERS, .es,

41 Gt. RUSSELL ST., LONDON, W.C.I.

CHRISTIAN LITERATURE SOCTETY FOR INDIA
MADRAS ALLAHABAD CALCUTTA RANGOON COLOMBO

1932

'O.'u S. PBKSS, MADBAS— 1923

TO THE

STUDENTS AND PUNDITS

OF THE LANGUAGE SCHOOL,

MAHABALESHWAR,

PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE

PREFACE

This book was promifaed many years ago by the late Professor
James Nelson Fraser, Principal of the Training College in Bombay
for Teachers in Secondary Schools, who passed away after but a
few days' illness on March 12, 1918,^ and some eighty pages may
be regarded as coming from his pen. They are distributed among
the first eight chapters as follows . six pages in chapter i, five in
chapter II, six in ill, twenty-three in iv, seven in v, five in IV,
SIX in vil, twenty in Vlll and two in appendix il. These pages
I have carefully worked over and rewritten in the light of the latest
findings, but whenever possible 1 have allowed his material to stand
unchanged . e.g., page 28, the first halt of page 32, and the third
paragraph on page 123 are almost exactly as I found them. His
one desire was ' to add a brick to the fabric of oriental learning',
as he wrote in a letter three years before his untimely death.

For the remainder of the book, over two hundred pages, includ-
ing the whole of the last two chapters and appendices I, lll-v, as
well as the footnotes throughout the work, I must accept full
responsibihty. Often has it seemed as if the many claims of work
m a city like Bombay would preclude the completion of the task,
but the preparation of a great part of the book for lectures to the
Language'School at Mahabaleshwar has helped to make it possible,
and I have been sustained by the two- fold conviction that study of
India's poet-saints is a sure road to unity between East and West,
and IS a master-key to unlock the treasures of religious aspiration
in the soul of India.

Numerous and generous have been my helpers, their generosity
being indicated by the fact that some prefer to remain anonymous.
Some obligations must, however, be discharged. My first Marathi
pandit, Mr. Krishnarao Vitfhal Kandhalkar, rendered much assis-
tance to Mr. Fraser, as he has done also to myself ; Dr. Macnicol
has not only secured tiib loan from the Association Press of the

1 Mr, Fras.er'i. collaboiator in the three volumes of English translations,
The Poems oj TitMy&m (puMiijhcd bj' thu C. L. S., M idras at Rs J-ii per
vol.), was the late Kao Bahadur Kashiiiath Balkrishna Maiathe, passed away
eight months later on November 13, 1918,

VlU

PREFACE

block of Vithoba but has given invaluable counsel at diflferent
stages ; the Bharata Itihasa Sanshodhak Mandala of Poona has
kindly 'lent three other blocks ; Mr. Vinayak Laxman Bhave of
Thana gave me a photograph of Santaji Tell Jaganade's manus-
cript and rendered much other priceless help besides: Mr. W. H.
Warren, formerly of the Cambridge University Press and now ofi
the C. L. S., has carried through a difficult piece of work with
unfailing courtesy ; and last but not least, the Honourable Dr. Sir
Narayan G. Chandavarkar, after reading through the book in page-
proof, has most generously found time to write a Foreword which
in itself is a worthy contribution to English-Marathi literature.

Should this work, despite its many imperfections, lead other
investigators, Indian and non-Indian, further to explore the— as yet
—largely-unworked gold-mine of the Maratha Poet-Saints, I shall
feel amply compensated.

BYCULLA, BOMBAY 1 J- F. EDWARDS.

December, 1921 J

CONTENTS

Pages
FOREWORD. By the Hon. Dr. Sir Narayan

G. Chandavarkar ... ... xi

Chap. I. THE LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM ... 1-22
11 THE VAISHljTAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S

DAY ... . ... ... 24-43

in. THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANpHARPOR; A

Study in India's Religious Aspiration . . 44- 64
IV. THE BIOGRAPHY OF TUKARAM ... 66-117

Preliminary Considerations : ... ... 67-68

(1) The Biographical Sources ... 68-75

(2) The Probable Biographical Facts ... 76-106

(3) The ' Legendary' Element ...107-117
„ V. TUKARAM'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY ... 118-144

(1) The Critical Problem ... ... 119-126

(2) The Literary Characteristics ... 127-133

(3) Tukaram's Picture of Himself ... 134--144
VI TUKARAM'S ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL

HINDUISM ... .. ... 146-166

„ , VII. TUKARAM'S PERMANENT PLACE AND IN-
FLUENCE ... ... ... 168 185

(1) His Influence among His Countrymen 169-179

(2) Tukaram's Permanent Place in Religion 179-185
„ VIII. TUKARAM'S LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS ... 186-213

(1) God and His Relation to the World... 187-190

(2) God's Relation to His Worshippers . . 190-193

(3) Sin ... ... ... 193-194

(4) The Means of Salvation... ...194-198

(5) The Obstacles to Salvation ... 198-199

(6) The Religious Life ... ... 199-202

(7) The Moral Ideal ... ... 202-206

(8) The Saints ... ... ... 206-208

(9) Duty towards Animals ... ... 209-210

(10) Reincarnation and the State after

Death .„ ... ... 210-213

B

CONTENTS

Chap. IX. TUKARAM'S EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI RELI-
GION
X. IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQTjwiE FOR
TODAY?
APPENDIX I. HINDU A VATISAS AND THE CHRISTIAN
INCARNATION
„ II. VERBAL PARALLELS BETWEEN TUKA-

RAM AND THE NEW TESTAMENT ...

,, III, TUKARAM'S ALLEGED INDEBTEDNESS

TO CHRISTIANITY
ADDITIONAL NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY

IV.

V.

INDEX OF • ABHANGS *
AUTHORS
„ SUBJECTS

214-231

232-268

269-273

274-278

279-i;2?
286-295
296-298
299-302
302-304
305-323

ILLUSTRATIONS

PAaB

1. The View From Dehu, TukarSm's Birthplace 5

2. Vithoba of Pa3i4harpur ... ... 53

3. Mahipati, The Biographer of Tukaram ... 70

4. Samples of Mahlpati's Handwriting ... 74

5. Image of Jijabai (or AvaJibSi), TukarSm's

Wife, now Worshipped at Dehu ... 87

6. The River Indraya^i where Tukaram threw

his Poems and where he * disappeared ' ... 105

7. A Page of Santaji Teji Jaganaqle's MS. of

Tukaram's Abhafigs ... ... 122

8. A Sample of what is claimed to be Tukaram's

Handwriting ... ... ... 127

9. The TakpithyS (Imitation) Vithoba at Pa]^-

dharpur... ... ... ... 156

10. Baburao Hari Deva^ikar of Pandharpur, a

Blind ' Haridas ' (Preacher) and ' Warkarl '
who knows Tukaram's thousands of A bhangs
by heart .., ... ... 170

11. Temples on the River Bank at Pan^harpiir ... 229

12. A /ifjffffw Band such as Tukaram led ,., 276

FOREWORD

Saint Tukaram has so deeply entered the soul of the people of
Maharashtra that the attempt made by Mr. Edwards and the late
Mr. Fraser in this book on the life, teachings and influence of this
saint deserves to be cordially welcomed by those who work for
India's good and greatness. In these days when more than ever
before it has become necessary for the East and the West to grasp
each other's hands in the spirit of brotherhood and promote the
world's peace, we can only serve that end by finding the throbbmgs
of that spirit in each country's poets and saints that have been.
Of no country is that true more than of India ; and of the poets
who were also saints and who have more than anyone else striven
to give her, and through her to the world, the best of thoughts and
life, the poet-saints of Maharashtra appeal to us peculiarly by their
directness and sturdiness of teaching and life, Dnyaneshwar,
Namdev, Eknath and last but not least of all, Tukaram, the subject
of the following pages — to name but a few and those few who are
familiar as household words in Maharashtra — are the glory of the
Maratha race ; and of these Tuktram is the most popular.

Nearly sixty years ago the late Sir Alexander Grant,' then
Principal of Elphinstone College, Bombay, read a paper on Tuka-
ram as a poet of Maharashtra at a meeting of the Bombay Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society with a view to acquaint Europeans
with the character of the saint's teachings. A few years later the
late Rev. Dr. Murray Mitchell,' of the Free Church of Scotland,
published a pamphlet, giving his (Dr. Mitchell's) view, from the
Christian standpoint, of the religious principles taught by Tukaram
and the influence his teachings had on his people. Both these
attempts to interest Europeans and Americans in the saint's worth
and work were but of a fragmentary character. Rev. Dr. Macnicol
of Poona," who has made it for years his life's mission to live
and move among the people of the Maharashtra country and whose
genuine sympathies for those people have endeared him to a large
number of them, has brought more close to the European mind the
beauty of Tukaram's saintliness by a sweet rendering into English
verse of some of the hymns of the saint. These, read by the light
of the Wilson Philological Lectures of the late Mr. W. B. Pat-
wardhan, Principal, Fergusson College, Poona, delivered at the
University of Bombay a few years ago, ought to go a great way

1 See pp. 165, 185, 190 of the present work.

2 Sec 'Authors' Index' for references in this book, especially Appen-
dix III.

3 For references in thia work sec ' Authors' Index',

xii FOREWORD

to instruct and interest Europeans and Americans in the character
of the vast influence which Tukaram has exercized for nearly four
hundred years over the masses of people in the Maratha country.
The present book by Mr. Edwards and Mr. Fraser is even a more
valuable addition to the English literature on Tukaram, inasmuch
as It goes more exhaustively into life and teachings of the saint,
and analyses with care the diflferent stages of Tukaram's religious
faith and the spell he has held over the mind and heart of
Maharashtra.

The Growth of the Soul ol India

To understand Tukaram aright it is necessary, I venture to
think, to trace the origin of the Devotional School of religion in
India to which he belonged. That School was but a natural and
necessary stage m the growth of the Soul of India, and its influence
cannot be discerned in its true perspective unless we examine the
conditions which gave it birth and led to its rise. Broadly viewed
from the historic point the religious and social life of India, so far
as its lines can be traced with distinctness, divides itself into four
successive stages, viz., (l) the Age of the Vedas, (2) the Age of
the Upanishads, (3) the Age of Buddha and Buddhism, and (+) the
Age of the bhakti or Devotional School of which Tukaram stands
as one of the most prominent members. But for the Vedas there
would be no Upanishads ; but for the Upanishads there would be
no Buddha. These four stages are interdependent. Each led to the
next and all the first three culminated in the bhakti or Devotional
School.

The Vedic Ideal

The Vedic ideal of life, as we gather from the Vedas, so-called,
and in particular the Rtg Veda, may be said to have consisted,
generally speaking, in the joyousness of life. The world to the
Vedic age with all its mysteries and miseries was made for man to
acquire wealth, enjoy life and make the best of this world's goods.
Their prayer was, in the words of a Vedic hymn, ' Give me health,
wealth, children and cattle.' To the question, who is the righteous
man? the Vedas answered : ' He who is active, acquires wealth and
then offers libations and performs sacrifices.' This view of life
arose from what our Vedic ancestors in the infancy of their life
saw of external Nature. Witnessing its operations they held that
the universe was made by one Primordial Spirit whom they called
Brahma the Creator, and who having created the universe made
over its government to various gods, as his agents. Of Brahma,
this primordial Spirit, they thought and said nothing beyond this,
that he was the Creator, the Eternal, the truth, the only truth
and reality that always exists. Man's direct concern — so

FOREWORD xiii

they reasoned— IS with the gods to whom Brahma has delegated
the government of the world. In the operations of external
Nature they witnessed regularity and fixed order of ceaseless
activity. ' Why do not waters, seeking after truth, ever repose ?
Why does not the wind rest ? ' asks a hymn in the Vedas. So
questioning they concluded that this ceaseless activity of the gods
reigning in external Nature produced food and other means of life,
happiness and enjoyment in this world for men. This moral law
of order and activity the Vedas called Rita, the equivalent of which
in English is ' the law of right ', the principle of righteousness. The
author of that law, according to the Vedas, is the god dwelhng in
and governing from the sky, ' the head ' or brain of the primordial
spirit Brahma. This Varuna, who laid down the kw of Rtta or
right, is described m the Vedas as 'the righteous lord, who wields
the supreme sceptre of universal sway. Both men and gods obey
his law and the haughtiest yield to his decree'. Him therefore
they regarded as the king of all kings among the gods whose
ordinances are fixed and steadfast and who having laid down the law
of Rifa, has taken a vow, from which he has pledged himself
never to depart but to abide by it unflinchingly. On that account
and in that belief they called him Dndha-Vrtta, ' firm vowed'.
Further, the Vedas reasoned that Varuna's law being the law of
right, and as it serves to give men food and other means of a life
of happiness and enjoyment, men are bound to obey that law by
following the example of external Nature as their teacher and like
It leading a life of work and activity on the one hand and on the
other acquiring as its result wealth which is the god Varuna's boon
to all who observe his law of Rita or right with blind and unques-
tioning obedience. As we do not know more of this Varuna than
that his law of Rila is a law of orderliness, prescribing work acti-
vity and enjoyment of the good things of this world, resulting from
them, that is the only portion of Truth given for man to know and
follow. Satya or truth, which is Brahma, is the root ; Rtta, right
or righteousness, is its fruit. Of the root what can we know — it is
behind the gods and therefore beyond our ken except that it bids
us obey the law of Rtta, or moral order governing the universe ?
Ours is merely to praise truth, and live in obedience to that law
and work, enjoy and earn paradise after death by a life of cheer and
work m this world. This law of Rita, which the Vedas discern in
external Nature, calling man to a life of work, wealth, and enjoy-
ment, is described m a hymn of the Rig Veda. Of that hymn and
its discovery of the law of moral order in the universe operating as
the law of righteousness the late Prof. Max MuUer in his Sttidies
in Sanskrit Literature has said that there is nothing like it in
either Greek or Roman literature. Imperfectly conceived though
it was by the Vedas, this law of Rita or moral order became for
subsequent ages m India the starting point for the further quest
of truth.

xiv FOREWORD

The Age of the Upanishads

The second stage of the Indian evolution of truth was the age
of the Upanishads. If the Vedas defined Truth as Brahma the
Creator, the only reahty because the only imperishable life, that
was, is, and shall be, incomprehensible to men, behind the law of
Rita or righteousness reignmg as moral order in the universe, the
Upanishads turned from Nature outwards to the mmd of man
inwards. Adopting from the Vedas their doctrine that the law of
iJiifa was the fruit, and Brahma, i.e.. Truth, its root, they main-
tained that man was able to see that law in external Nature just
and only because the Truth lay in his own soul dwelling in the
secret cavity of his heart, and discernible there by his mind, as the
eye of that soul. Therefore, while by no means contemning the
gospel of an active life of work, wealth and enjoyment taught by
the Vedas in obedience to the law of Rita as a portion of Truth,
but on the other hand accepting that gospel as laying down a
necessary law for man's life in this world, the Upanishads main-
tained that not Nature external but the soul of man is the Truth.
To it, they declared, he must retire by contemplation to realize it in
actual life. It is by meditation upon this indwelling soul, (said
they) and not by mere works or acquisition of wealth or sacri-
fice of animals to gods, that man can know and do the
the Truth. To the theory of the Vedas that behind the god
Varuna, who laid down the law of Rita or moral order, there was
one primordial spirit, the Creator of the whole Universe whom they
called Brahma the Truth, but who they declared was beyond the
comprehension of man, the Upanishads said that that primordial
spirit was comprehensible, if not fully, at least sufficiently for life's
purpose, by steady contemplation, because He dwells m every human
heart as man's Soul. This teaching of the Upanishads that Truth
means the Soul is best comprehended, if, from amidst all that they
have said m a variety of ways on the subject, we turn to the
homely conversation between the Indian sage Yajnyavalkya and
bis wife Maitreyi recorded in one of those ancient scriptures of
India. Yajnyavalkya figures there as a householder, who, while
leading a family life, served his country as its spiritual guide and
also philosopher. Having grown old in that service and having
felt that the evening of life was closing on him, he one day called
his wife Maitreyi to his side and opened to her the cherished wish
of his heart to give up home and country and society, now that he
had done all he could to serve them, and to retire into the forests to
lead there alone and by himself a life devoted to the contemplation
of God until death parted him from this mortal existence. Yajnya-
valkya, who had (so we gather from this story) trained his wife in
the philosophy of the Soul as Truth, used that philosophy to win
her consent to his wish. His reply to his wife contains the faith of
the Upanishads : * Know the Soul alone. Leave ofi' all other talk.'

FOREWORD XV

And he expanded that idea in his own words which may be
paraphrased as follows : ' Mai trey i, my dearest, you are right
when you tell me that we have loved each other as husband and
wife. But have you thought over this question ? What is that
love, whence is it, and for what is it ? When the husband loves
the wife and the wife the husband, do you mean to say that the
husband qua husband loves the wife qua wife and vice versa ? If
that were so, it could be no love at all. The relation of wife and
husband is the relation of the Soul of the one to that of the other.
So is it with all other human relations. They are schools for
training us m Soul- Love and thereby going to the Soul of all
Souls, viz. God. The Soul of each human being mixes with the
Souls of others -and forms the tie of those human relations which
we call home, society, country, etc., because it is the bond which
unites us all, makes us members of one another, and leads us by
its passage of human love to Love Divme, which is God, the
Over-Soul. It is our duty therefore, to win that Over-Soul by
contemplation in solitude. And therefore, having trained my Soul
by its human relations of home, etc., I have now arrived at a
period of life when I should seek repose by lonely contemplation
of the Soul of all Souls.' This soul-doctrine of the Upamshads,
which they express through Yajnyavalkya, is the same that we find
over and over again expounded by the poet Browning, and nowhere
more lucidly expressed than m his CnsHna ;

Ages past the soul existed.
Here an age 'tis resting merely,
And hence fleets again for ages,
While the true end, sole and single,
It stops here for is, this love-way,
With some other soul to mingle.

The reader will detect m this doctrine of the Soul as Truth
and comprehensible by contemplation and realizable by the human
relations of husband and wife, parents and children, citizen and
state, country and patriot, the humanistic motive, a tone of
pragmatism, leading to the inference, that, m spite of the fact
that the Upanishads emphasize in so many words that Truth is
absolute because the Soul is absolute as being the same with
Brahma, the Creator, the Over-Soul, the Upanishads deal with
Truth as if it is not absolute, because there are passages in
them to indicate that it is as relative as it is instrumental,
as human as it is useful. That is» the inference which the
late Mr. Josiah Royce, the American philosopher of the Absolute,
has drawn in writing about the enquiry of the Upanishads
into the problem of Truth. The explanation of that seeming
contradiction is that the authors of the Upanishads as successors
of the age of the Vedas did not wish to break away from
the past to which they had succeeded but, like all wise sageg

xvi FOREWORD

and reformers of their country, aimed at building upon that past
and thereby improving it- The theory of Truth in the Vedas was
humanistic and pragmatic, inasmuch as that was Truth for them
which proved useful m human hfe as preserving that life and
rendering it stable by winning success, as the world ordinarily
understands it. The Upanishads did not oppose that theory;
they proclaimed that the humanistic and pragmatic motive of
Truth gave only a partial view of it, and that, if man would but
turn to his Soul within by contemplation, he should find that Truth
transcended the limits imposed by that motive and had its birth
and source in the Absolute, of which the Soul was the best
expression. Therefore, they laid stress on contemplation as the
highest means of realizing by degrees Truth as Soul Force and
and defined Truth as the Soul. They taught that to know the
Soul as Truth by meditation is not only a form of worship but it
is real worship. - _

Buddha's Gospel of Nirvana

But, notwithstanding the 'eachmg of the Upanishads, the
people of India continued, genetaily speaking, to be dominated by
the humanistic motive of Truth. The acquisition of riches and
material comforts, the pursuit of hfe for enjoyment, the killing of
animals as sacrifices to the gods for the purpose of winning their
favour and securing health, wealth, and happiness m this world
and the next, went on as during the Vedic age. That rush for
life figured side by side with suffering and misery. This led
Buddha to preach his gospel of NirvSita or renunciation. He
did not condemn either the Vedas or the Upanishads for their res-
pective interpretations of Truth. But he denounced the kilhng
of animals for sacrifices as sinful. Hence his doctrine of AhtmsS
(abstention from injury) to all creatures as the highest religion.
He did not differ from the Upanishads as to the great value of
contemplation. Rather, he accepted it and emphasized its
necessity, but he discerned that the contemplation doctrine of the
Upanishads, which taught men to realize Truth by meditation of
the Soul, because the Soul was Truth, only led to the creation of
an intellectual aristocracy m India, divorcing it in point of fellow-
feeling from the masses, and did not serve to lift from off their
lives the oppressive burden of misery and sin which lay heavily
on them and made this world a scene of woe. Of what use is
it to ask people to realize ^Truth in the Soul by contemplation so
long as the passions and appetites of the body make a brute of
him, lead him to the infliction of suffering on himself and others
and to sacrifice animals to gratify his tastes and pacify the gods
in the name of religion ? So reasoning, Buddha put his greatest
emphasis on the body of man as man's enemy. He preached :
' Overcome the body ; extinguish its burning lusts that consume

FOREWORD , xvii

man.' And both by precept and his own example he proclaimed
his gospel of Nirvana, basing it upon his view of the world that
'all is void'. By Nirvllna, literally meaning extinction of self, he
understood as explained by Buddhistic scholars, not the extinc-
tion of the Soul but the expulsion of the craving of carnal
appetites and of the three passions of lust, hatred, and delusion.
And how according to Buddha is the self to be so extinguished ?
His answer was by contemplation leading to kind deeds and
compassion for all creatures in all the details of practical life.
That he called Ahimsa, which, meaning literally abstention from
injury, he explained as cultivation of ' good-will to all beings with-
out measure, unhindered love and friendliness towards the whole
world, above, below, around' (Rhys David's Lectures on The
Origtn and Growth of Religion, p. 111). All this, he maintained,
must be attained by the extinction of the carnal appetites. That
is Nirviina. That, then, wf '^ruth for Buddha— there is no other
truth that man can know and realize.

India's Devotional School

This definition of Truth as Hdirodij-a or extinction of the self
was bound to fail to make Buddhism the people's cult in India.
If the Upanishad conception of Truth as the Soul, realizable by
contemplation was too intellectual for the masses, Buddha's con-
ception of It was too rigid, ascetic, and cold for them. Buddhism
after having for some hundreds of years prevailed mainly because
of its democratic character — its sympathy for all and its protest
against caste — was driven out by Sri Sankaracarya, the greatest
apostle of Hinduism known to India. It had done its best work ;
it had brought the killing of animals as sacrifice and for food into
disrepute ; it had made people love peace and hate war ; it had
popularized the principles of meekness and charity. But the
masses felt that Buddhism was a negative creed — it taught extinc-
tion of the self without putting in man anything positive instead,
{^ri 6ankaracarya professed himself a follower of the devotional
school of religion which had begun to rise in India before his
birth. The country had produced saints previously who had
appealed to the masses more feelingly than other schools because
they taught the doctrine of God as Truth, and Truth as Love for
all without distinction of caste for creed. These saints came
after Sankara from all castes and creeds, even from the lowest castes,
which to this day are despised by the higher castes as untouchable
and unapproachable and subjected to utter social degradation.
These saints took up the problem of Truth where Buddha had left
it and improved upon it and also the Vedic and Upanishad concep-
tion of it. They accepted the view of the four Vedas that life should
be one of activity and enjoyment but they counselled moderation
of enioyment. They praised family life and looked askance at
C

xviii FOREWORD

asceticism which abandoned the world. They differed from the
Vedas which said that God is as incomprehensible as Truth.
Agreeing with the Upanishads they held that truth was m man's
Soul ; but that mere contemplation was not enough to realize
that truth for man, God being Love and that Love shinmg m the
Soul it should lead to deeds of peace, forgiveness, and mercy ;
Where these are, there only is God the Truth.' That sums up
their creed m essence. Then as to Buddha, the saints accepted
his gospel of Ahimsa (abstention from injury) ; also his condemna-
tion of caste ; but they ruled out his theory of the body as the
enemy of man as impracticable for the very purpose of the
human-hearted and universal love and good-will to all without
measure, which he had preached and practised.

Their teachings on this head may be put in some such lan-
guage as this ; ' You, Buddha, start by holding the body as man's
enemy because of its passions and you ask man to extinguish them
first by contemplation and then by good deeds of love to all with-
out measure. But how can man contemplate and do deeds of love,
mercy and goodwill without his body ? Those who seek to find
salvation by merely burning their passions m the fire of contempla-
tion are like a man who walks on the shelterless, slippery and
sundered edge of a mountain precipice. Those who again seek to
burn them m that iire by contemplation of something vague and
indefinable such as your Nirvana are like an unmarried woman,
seeking salvation by doing SatJ, i.e., burning herself m the pyre
of an imaginary husband to fiind salvation. You say the body is
man's enemy because of its passions and that therefore the
passions must be expelled. That you call Nirvana. But if the
passions are our enemies, are they not also our friends ? Is it not
because of our passions turned to good thoughts and thereby to
good deeds that we are able to do what you, Buddha, enjoin,
viz., a life of benevolence and love to all ? The germ of these
thoughts and deeds which is in man's self — whence is it? It must
be from some higher self. Look at the river. It comes from
the springs in mountains formed by the rain water from the sea,
flows outside, fertilizes fields and serves men, and at last joins
the great Ocean from whence it had taken its birth in the springs.
Similar is the case of man's Self called the Soul encased in his
body. Turn that Soul to its source — have God as Truth as your
goal —run your life's course with that goal always in view and
that is real Nirvana. That alone is Peace. What is peace but
doing good to all, even those that have done evil to you ? But
such peace can become accessible to all, high or low, only if
they yoke the Soul to the Over-Soul by love to Him and through
Him to all His creatures.'

Reasoning in this manner and borrowing the best and dis-
carding the rest from the Vedas, the Upanishads, and Buddha,
the saints of India, gave her and the world the following

FOREWORD XIX

definition of Truth : ' Truth is sama darshana \ i.e., ' Truth is
loving others at thy own self.' Because Rita, the law of right-
eousness discovered by the Vedas first, flowed from Brahma as
Truth, the Saints identified Rita with Truth and called falsehood
Anrita, that which is not Riia. Because the Upanishads defined
Truth as the Soul, residing m man's heart, they held that it is
the Soul which binds us all through the Over-Soul, God, and
therefore is the seat of Love. Hence Truth is Love.

Saints and Scriptures of Maharashtra

This definition of Truth as Love of others as thy own self
is given lu the BhSgavat Purctija which is universally regarded as
the standard authority of the devotional school second only to the
BhagavadgTtci or the Celestial Song, worshipped as India's New
Testament. In fact the former is in substance a rendition of the
latter. The B/iagavaifgZ/c? nowhere defines it. But in so many words
truth as the Bhclgavat Pitraija defines it. But in several places it
expressedly declares that he is the highest Yogi (man of contemp-
lation and action) who looks upon and treats others as his own self.
Taking up that teaching, Dnyaneshwar, the premier saint of Maha-
rashtra, to whom all succeeding saints thereof, including Tuka-
ram, owed a good deal of their religion, and who is regarded as
the progenitor of Maratha nationality, which culminated in the
great Sivaji's Maratha Empire, declared that there is no acquisition
equal to that of Samya, i.e., the power of regarding others and
treating them as your own self. II we interpret that by the light
of the texts in the Lfpanishads and the books of our Saints, which
say that there is nothing higher than or even equal to Truth, we
come to the .same idea of Truth as that defined in the Bhagavat
PurHna. That is made clear beyond doubt by Sivciji'ii spiritual
adviser. Saint Raradas, who defined Truth in the MantthT langu-
age of Western India as Ananyapaiiii, i.e., ' the condition' of
loving others as thy own self. These Saints reverenced the
Vedas and the Upani.shads but they declared that those scriptures
were partial to the three twice7born castes and neglected women and
the lowest fourth caste called &udra or servile, consisting of persons
whose lot it was to serve the former, remain in ignorance, and live
a life of servility. The Maralha Saint, Dnyaneshwar, himself a
Brahman, who lived in the thirteenth century after Christ, says in
his poetic gloss on the Bhagavadgittl which preaches the doctrine
of devotion to God as the highest and the easiest way to .salva-
tion because it is open to all, not merely to the twice-born but to
women and Siidras as well: 'The BhagavadgltH is but the Vedas
transformed into liberality. Therefore, it ifi superior to the Vedas.
True, the Veda is wealthy ; but there is no miser like him and that
because he whispered his doctrines into the ears of the three
twice-born castes only. And then he sat quiet, pretending he had

XX FOREWORD

no time to communicate his secret to people, like women and
Sudms, who are distressed by the pam and the miseries of this life
and its cares. But, methinks, that, as time wore on, the Veda's
conscience pricked him and exposed to him his own littleness.
Therefore, feeling that he should cast it off and acquire true glory,
he proclaimed himself to all classes and castes even to women and
$udras without distinction. So he, the Veda, took the form of the
Bhagavadgita and brought salvation to all.' These Saints further
taught that the golden age for India is not in the past but in the
present and the future. The Bhagavat Purana distmctly praises
the present and future as superior to the past, because of the
doctrine of equality of all castes and of women and men, held up as
their hope by the gospel of truth defined as love of others as one's
own self. For instance the Maratha Samt Xukaram sang m that
strain and proclaimed : ' The fulness of salvation has come for all.
Its market is free. Come one, come all, partake of it with rejoic-
nng. Here there is no distinction of caste, high or low, man or
. woman, Brahman or ^udra." What does it mean but that the age
' of Truth was not that of the Vedas, or of the Upanishads, or of
Buddha, but that of the Saints who held that Truth means not
i mere truth-telling but the practical regulation of life by deeds of love
to all as one's own self turned to God as Truth and therefore Love.
These Saints who so defined Truth were not dream mg optimists.
Their teachings abound with counsel that in this world we should
enjoy life by work, rest and sobriety of enjoyment and attain to
Truth by stages of steady, persevering, continuous practice in the
art of contemplation and deeds of love. Man, they said, cannot
like a bird fly up and at once pluck a fruit hanging on a branch of
a tree. He must chmb up to the fruit by steady steps. By such
practice (they said) man can conquer Nature — he can cross
mountains, navigate rivers, bridge distances of space and time and
even learn to fliy m the air. Here in this declaration the Saints
anticipated and by necessary implication paid a tribute of respect
to and admiration for man's discoveries, such hs the telegraph, the
aeroplane and all those arts of life of modern civilization which
some condemn as materialistic. They took ' the forward view of
life ' (to use an expression which Meredith has made familiar to us);
to them ' the golden age ' is not the Past but the Future. Far from
sharing the popular behef which has prevailed for centuries in India
that the present Age is the Age of Kali, of decay and degeneration,
they hold that this is the best Age, because it has made God
accessible to all and opened the gate of life to even the most degra-
ded and sinful. This optimistic faith finds its most terse e!..pres&ion
m Tukaram ; and — to use the words of one of his most inspiring
hymns : ' Who dare disregard the devotee of God who holds by
that faith unflinchingly?'

N. G. Chandavaekar,

ABBREVIATIONS USEP

B. G. Bombay Gazetteer, Bombay, 1885.

E. R. E. Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, vols, i-xii,
Edinburgh, edited by Dr. Hastings, 1908-21.

F. and M. Fraser and Marathe's Poems oj Tukardm, 3 vols.
Madras, 1909-15.

F. C. M. Fergusson College Magazine, Poona, 1910-21.

H. M. P. History of the Maratha People, vol. i, by Kincaid
and Farasnis, Bombay, 1918.

/. /. Indian Interpreter, a Quarterly Magazme, Madras,
1906-21. C. L. S.

I. P. Indu Prakash edition of Tukaram'a Poems in Marathi,
Bombay, 1869.

I.R.M. International Review of Missions, a, Monthly Maga-
zme, London, 1911-21.

J, R. A. S. Bo. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Bombay
Branch.

M, Mahipati, Tukaram's Biographer. See pp. 69 ff.

M. Sar. Maharashtra SSratiwat (History of Marathi Litera-
ture, From its beginnings to 1818), a Marathi work by V. L.
Bhave, Poona, 1919,

M. W. ■ Marathi Writings and Lectures of Dr. Sir R. G.
Bhandarkar, a Marathi work edited by D. G. Vaidya, with Life
of Dr. Bhandarkar by Sir. N. G. Chandavarkar, Bombay, 1919.

0. R- L. 1. Outline of the Religious Literature of India
Dr. J. N. Farquhar, London, 1919.

P. M, S. Psalms of MarathS Saints, Dr. N. Macnicol,
Calcutta, 1919.

S. r. C. ^rl Ttikaramace Caritra (Life of Tukaram in
Marathi), Mr. L. K. Pangarkar, Poona, 1920.

V. S. ill, R. S. Vaii/iuavism, ^aivism and Minor Religious
Systems, Dr. Sir K. G. Bhandarkar, vol. in, part in the Grun-
dnss, or Encyclopedia of Indo-Aryan Research, Stra&hburg, 1913.

Page 6

»

6

)>

9

n

18

39

20

19

21

99

21

>»

27

99

29

99

99

91

»

9)

30

91

40

99

40

CORRIGENDA

line 3 /or eldest read youngest and posthumous
„ 43/01- I650read 1550 (butsee p. 77)
„ 33 for Aple m read Apte and Mr. V. W. Bhide in
„ 13 (and 31) for 1650 read 1650 (butsee p. 77)
„ 36 for Mahipati read Mahipati
„ 4 (and 10) /or Mahipati read Mahipati
„ 12 for Nabaji read Nabhaji
, 9 for Bhagavadglta read Mahabharata
, 10 for September, 1919 read Feb. 1, 1920
, 18 /or Purcina read Purtfa (full)
, 18 /or Amca read Antsha (partial)
, 30 /or Veda read Vedas
„ 44 /or Vithoba, read Vithoba.''-*
footnote 1 for 'G.R.Navalkar, etc. read ' Rtse of th

Maratha Power, pp. 9-11.

^ G R. Navalkar,etc.
42 line 31 for Mhanoni read Mhanoni

49 footnote 4 for para. 1 read para. 2

50 footnote 1 for Chap. 8 read Chap. 5.
„ „ 1 for under 2 read under 4

51 hue 35 for para. 11 read para. 10
55 „ 27 for section 6 read section 7
„ „ 28 for 7 read 8,

76 „ 35 for mantra read mantra

87 „ 32 /or beads read garland

98 „ 44 for chapter 6, section 9, read chap, x, p. 265

99 „ 29 for him. read him'.'

99 footnote 6 /or part II, sect. 3 read pp. 123-5.

105 line 33 for Keluskar read Keluskar

137 „ 11 /or brings read brings*

143 „ 21 for viii. 3 read viii. 2

150 footnote 4 for 152-3 read 155-6

159 line 42 for 1227 read 1727

174 „ 11 /or Part II read pp. 188-9

177 headline for II read VII

188 line 37 /or 218-9 read 216-7

194 „ 16 for 225-7 read 223-5

195 „ 20 for 218-9 read 215-7

216 „ 35 for 227, 230 read 225, 228

244 „ 8 for Prabhakarrao ; read Prabhakarrao's

278 „ 10 for place read places

282 ., 32 for resemblances read resemblance

296 „ 8 for letters read titles

298 „ 25 for 75 read 76

System of Transliteration

Sf a, 3TT a, ?, i, | i, 7 u, 35 u, 5l| r, it e, ^ ai, aft o, ^ au,
?K k, 51 kh, 5tT g, W gh, 5 n ; =^ c, g ch, ^ j, §[ jh, sT n ; S t,
5 th, 3- d, S dh, 01 n ; ^ t, g th, ^ d, '<^ dh, ?r n ; 7 p, tp; ph,
^ b, ¥r bh, H m ; 5T y, ^ r, 55 1, cf V, ^ s, "T s, ?a[ s, 1 h, S 1.

'Abhang' : Definition and method of quotation.

Abhang is the Marathi word for hymn or lyrical poem.
Abhangs have peculiar metres of their own, and rhyme and divide
their verses irregularly, the last couplet opening'usually with the
author's name, e.g., ' Tuka says.' Abhangs maybe limited to two
or four lines, or they may have as many as thirty, and even
more.

Whenever, in this book, abhangs are quoted with merely a
number following in brackets, e.g., on p. 135 where half a dozen
are thus referred to, the reference is always to Fraser and
Marathe's English translations, The Poems of TuMrSm, 3 vols.

THE GREAT HEARTED

■V/ho day and night are from all passion free-
Within their holy hearts I love- to be,
Dwelling m sanctity

They bathe in Wisdom , then their hunger stay
With Perfectness , lo, all in green array.
The leaves of Peace are they.

With pearls of Peace their limbs they beautify;
Withm their mmds as in a scabbard I,
The All-Indweller, he

Therefore their love waxes unceasingly —
These greatsouled ones ; not the least nft can be
Between their hearts and me

Translated from Dnyiineshwar (13th Century)

P M. S. p. 35

'O HASTE AND COME"

Dost thou behold me perishing '

haste and come, my God and king.

1 die unless thou succour bring

O haste and come, my God and king.

To help me is a trifling thing ,

Yet thou must haste, my God and king.

O come (how Nama's clamours ring)
O haste and come, my God and king

Translated from Nfimdev (14th Century)

P M.S. p. 43.

RELIGIOUS UNREALITY

Ah, he speaks the woids of heaven
With a heart to murder given —
Loudly praise to God be sings.
But his soul to lucre clings —
Tuka says — A wretch so base —
Smite him, slap him on the face >

Translated from Tukaram (1608-49) by Dr. J. Murray Mitchell,
The Indian AnUq-iary, Marck, 1888, p. 61.

Chapter 1
The Land and People of Takaram

1. Maharashtra

The land of Tukaratn is that region of Western India which
bears the ancient name of Maharashtra. By old tradition it com-
prises the Western Deccan, from Na^ik and Poona to Satara and
Kolhapur. ' In shape a triangle, its base is the sea from Daman to
Karwar, the perpendicular side a line running from Daman beyond
Nagpur, the hypotenuse an irregular line from beyond Nagpur to
Karwar. The area of this tract is over 100,000 square miles and
Its population exceeds thirty millions,''' Speaking quite strictly,
it does not include the country below the Ghats, the Konkan. The
people of the latter speak the language of Maharashtra and its history
has at times been closely connected with that of the table-land above
the Ghats, but it probably witnessed no part of Tukaram's life and
we need give little thought to it here. It is a country of flat nce-
fields with groves of trees here and there and straggling villages
beneath their shade. The whole year is hot and moist and for
several months everything is drenched m rain. Above the Gbats
we are in a difTerant world. The sea disappears from our thoughts ;
all round us on every hand stretches the Deccan plam. Some-
times it is perfectly flat and treeless, but more often it rises and
falls in gentle undulations and it is seldom that hills or mountains
are not seen rising in the distance. Tukaram's home was not
very far from the edge of the table-land and the Ghats themselves.
A few miles from Dehii, his birthplace, the cultivated fields run up to
the mountains and quite close to the village there are solitary hills.
Trees are not wanting, the thorny biibJuil on the waste land and
mangoes near the village being cultivated for their shade and their
rauch-appreciated fruit. When the fields are green with crops the
whole scene is pleasant to a visitor's eye, and the contrast of
mountain and plain is stimulating. The air too is fresh and pure
and the visitor for a moment may easily dream that he has lighted
on one of the happiest retreats on earth.

The dream, however, would be dispelled by reflection. The
Deccan soil for the most part is poor, the rain is uncertain, and
scarcity of food has always been a recurring incident in men's
lives. The extreme heat and the extreme cold are both trying, and
the plagues of tropical life, fever, guinea-worm and so forth, molest
the people of Maharashtra as much as others.

xH,M.P.,p.l

2 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

The people inhabiting Maharashtra had no early history of
importance. On the sea-coast arose prosperous ports, like Kalyan,
but inland there was no seat of empire till the bounds of
Maharashtra were passed. We must think of the early Marathas
as a village people leading hard industrious lives and waiting for
a later hour to summon them to take part in history.

2. The Maharashtriyans or Marathas

Who were the Marathas ? In A soka's inscriptions the people
of the Western Deccan are called Rathikas (Sanskrit RlXshtrtka).
Soon after his time they passed under the Andhras, a ' Dravidian '
people of Southern India v/ho ruled the peninsula from sea to sea till
the third century after Christ. These were followed in time by
various ' Rajput ' kings, of whose origin we know nothing. One
of their dynasties, the Rashtrakutas, ruled at Nasik, and lasted till
the Muhammadan invasions. It is tempting, of course, to connect
this name with that of Maharashtra, but all that is certain about
the latter is that it came into general use after the invasions ; how
much older it was we do not know.

Kmcaid and Parasnis, in their History of the MarcithS People,
have shown that far back in the early history of Western India,
Maharashtra bore the name of Dandakaranya or the Dan(Jaka
Forest. Indeed, even still, whenever Marathi-speakmg Brahmans
m their religious sacrifices refer to the country, they do not call
it Maharashtra but Dandakaranya. How then did Dandakaranya
come to be called Maharashtra ? Its inhabitants maintain that
Maharashtra means the great country, while Mr. Molesworth,
the well-known Marathi scholar, hints that the name may mean
the country of the Mahars, but there are sufficient grounds
for rejecting this view. The Mahars are not a people but are
merely a debased section, and their name is a corruption of
the word Eirttyuhar or ' remover of the dead '. Surely from so
abject a community no country would take its name. Moreover,
the words Mntyuhar Raslitra could not, according to the ordinary
laws of linguistic corruption, become the name Maharashtra,
Instead of armies, Asoka sent forth in every direction ministers
of religion to teach the principles of Buddha. These missions
are recorded in inscriptions carved on rocks all over Northern
India, and on no less than four of those still surviving Asoka
states 'that he had sent missionaries to the Kastikas. These
Rastikas or Rashtnkas were the dwellers in the Dandaka Forest,
Proud of their independence, or for some kindred reason, they
came in later years to call themselves Maharashtrikas, and so
the country which they occupied came to be known as Maha-
rashtra and its people as Marathas'.* In Mr. Raj wade's

> iy.il/. P., pp. 4-7

I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 3

MahSrashtracha Vasahat Ksl (the colonization of Maharashtra)
the position is laid down that Maharashtra comes from Eashtnkas,
i e., the leading men of the Rashtra, or country, and that the
word Maharashtnkas refers to chiefs among the leading men.

3. The Shaka Era ol A. D. 78

Following on the Buddhist Empire which terminated in 185
B c. after the death of Asoka, 'the Andhra kings' who were
formerly vassals of the Buddhist Emperors overran the whole
of Maharashtra and remained in power for about three centuries,
their dominance receiving a check at the hands of a tribe named the
Shakas, or Scythians, who gave their name to the Shaka era by
which legal and religious documents of Hindus in N. and S. India
are dated. The Shaka era began sev.enty-eight years later than the
Christian, and Kincaid and Parasnis point out, relying on the ' sur-
mises' of Dr.R.G. Bhandarkar m his Ancient History of the Deccan,
that ' the resemblance between the word Shaka and the Shaka
era . . . could hardly be fortuitous. Now if the Shaka era was
founded by the Shakas, they did it m all probability to celebrate
some great achievement. Thus the Shakas probably conquered
the Deccan when the Shaka era began, that is to say m a.D. 78. .
. . . These foreign kings did not long vex Maharashtra . . .
Before A.D. 150 Shaka rule m Maharashtra had vanished. . . .
In A.D. 78 the Shaka chief forced his way either through the
Vindhyas or along the Konka^i sea-board. For some fifty years
he and his descendants occupied Maharashtra'.* It seems unlikely
that an era of 'foreign kings' should have been used for religious
purposes m so ancient a religion as the Hinduism of Maharashtra
especially when that ' foreign ' rule was only fifty years m dura-
tion. This same view, however, is held by Sir J. F. Fleet who
pronounces as ' fiction ' the popular belief that the Shaka era wis
founded by a King Shalivahan who reigned A. D. 78 at Piatish-
thana the modern Paithan on the Godaveri.^

4. The Marathi Languagfe

The language of the Marathfis has been classified by science
as ' Aryan '. But no one has really enquired how much it has in
common with the tongue of the Kig Veda, and the view may be
hazarded that its non-Aryan elements are large and significant.
Mr. V. L. Bhawe believes it to be extremely probable that there
must have been a kind of mutual influence and admixture of the
language of the highly intellectual Aryans and of the language

I H. M. P., p. 10

' E. R E , Vol. M, p. 96 , also Encyclopecdia Biitanmca (lltb edition),
Vol. xm. pp. 497-8.

4 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

spoken by the aboriginal dwellers in Maharashtra, that the language
thus formed was called ' Maharashtrl ' and that from this has
arisen the language known to-day as ' Maharashtri ' or ' Marathi '
or ' DeshI '.'

On this subject Professor Patwardhan observes in his Wtlson
Philological Lectures : ' There is hardly anything of a reliable
character established beyond the possibility of question or con-
troversy as regards the time and date of the makers of Marathi
and Marathi Literature. . . . Nothing 13 definitely known, it must
be admitted at the outset, as regards the origin of the Marathas
and Marathi. Maharashtra and Maharashtrl are very old words
indeed. . . . Maharashtri was a current language m the days of
VararuchI .... Vararucbl wrote .... about 380 years before
Christ. In that case .... the word Maharashtri is as old as
388 B.C. if not older still .... From the third century B.C. to
the tenth century a.d, the literary history of Maharashtra is yet to
be written. With the exception of few literary remains we have
practically no material to hand to bridge the gulf. And yet it
appears, on the face of it, improbable that there was no literature.
For the literature of a people rises or falls according as the
people themselves rise or fall. . . . That Marathi m its Marathi
form has come from Maharashtrl, is only a developed form of
Maharashtrl, is generally admitted, and may be clear to any one
who compares the vocabulary of Marathi with that of Maharashtrl
and especially certain pronominal forms, indeclmables, verbal
roots, in the two. But when exactly the Marathi forms, Marathi
idiom, and Marathi words sprang into being from the original
Maharashtii it is difficult to say. There are, I understand, only
four or five inscriptions wherein Marathi forms of words and
Marathi structure of sentences can be identified. But nothing of
a literary character that belongs to the period before the tenth
century after Christ has so far been discovered.' "

Closely connected with this question of philology, and illustrat-
ing the early beginnings of the Marathi language^^ is a legend given
by Kincaid and Parasnis which shows the Andhra period to
have been one not only of military and mercantile, but also of
literary, activity. A certain ghost named Kanabhiiti brought to
one Gunadhya, a minister of King Shalivahan, seven volumes of
stories all written in blood. Gunadhya accepted these and offered
them as a gift to his royal master. Disgusted with the strange
language and the stranger script, King Sbahvahan returned the
books to his minister who, furious at the failure ot his present, burnt
SIX of the seven volumes. The remaining volume fell into the
hands of Gunadhya's pupils or cleiks who being acquainted
with the ghost language pronounced the book charming. When

1 See V. L. Bhawe, M. Stir; p. 8

* W. B, Patwardhan, J!". CM, Vol viii. No. 3, Dec. 1917, pp. 104-110

■

;

■

^Kl

^^m

^^^H

^^^^^H^Ba^'

m

■■

B^^^^^^HHaHR^^

^^^^^^^H^I^H^'i

1

''H^l

^^^^^H^^^^B^

1

9

JHHl

HHHB:'>>

'

o

<

H
S

cs

t-<

IP

U
Q

o

111

W

[I]

B
H

I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 5

their verdict came to Shahvahan's ear he made a further effort to
read Kanabhuti's stones, and once he had mastered the difficulties
of Kanabhuti's literary medium he was as charmed with the tales
as Gunadhya's pupils. It seems probable that the ghost language
of Kanabhuti was the Maharashtri dialect, born of the efforts
of the Eashtnkas to speak Sanskrit, and _fhat the reign of
Shalivahan, that is, the peuod when the Andhra kings held
sway, first saw the use for literary purposes of that 'vigorous,
supple, graceful and copious tongue ' which we call Marathi.

5. Dehu, Tukaram's Village : Past and Present

The village life of the Deccan has changed in some details
during British rule but the present is still so much like the past
that thoughtful observers can easily recall the latter as it was in
Tukaram's day. To do something of the kind let us go to Dehu,
the poet's birthplace on the right and south bank of the Indrayapi,
a large stream flowing into the Bhima. In the lains this stream is
broad and rapid ; in the dry weather it is little more than a chain
of pools with a nil of turbid water sometimes connecting them,
sometimes vanishing in its pebbly bed. Round the village are
still visible fragments of the old wall, emerging from thickets
of prickly pear. Within it the houses, of bricks or mud, stand
thickly crowded together. There is only one passage that can
be called a street. Here are a few shops that deal m gram or
cloth but they are not the only centres of trade in the village, for
on market days a baziir is opened under the peepal tree and
various products are exchanged. One of the changes since Tuka-
ram's day is probably the greater importance of the shopkeeper and
the diminished importance of the bazar. The ruinous, uncared-for
appearance of the village probably recalls his own time. Nothing m
India is ever repaired ; and the houses in an Indian village, like the
trees in the jungle, rim their natural course from youth to age and
death without interference from man. If this fills the village with
eyesores nobody much minds them, any more than people mind the
boulders in the unpaved, unlevelled pathways or the smells of an
age preceding sanitation.

Accessible to the modern sightseer, Tukaram's birthplace is
situated three miles from the Hombay-Poona trunk road at the
very end of a country lane branching off from the former near the
%th milestone fioni Bombay and the 15th from Poona, less than
ten minutes' walk from Shelarvadi railway station. When we
visited the village on October '.'5, 1920 the motor-car took us
right up to the walls of Vithoba's temple overlooking the Indrayani.
An expert on anthropological research in Hinduism has laid down
the following golden rules on visiting Hindu temples: ' You must
have a pair of holelcss stockings, some knowledge of the vernacular

6 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch

and charming manners; armed with these, you can enter any-
where. . . . Even if it is not absolutely necessary, take your shoes
ofif; that IS an outward and visible sign which any Indian can read
that you are visiting the temple in a spirit of sympathy. Explain
to the priest exactly what you want to see, and if you are writing a
book, tell him so.' ^ By a stroke of good fortune the first priest
we met was the leading Gosavl^ among Tukaram's direct des-
cendants who number some 250 out of Dehu's present population
of 1722. The great pride with which everything relating to the
17th century poet-saint is preserved and explained was at once
manifest. In at least three directions, indeed, this natural pride
goes to an extreme against which we have little doubt Tukaram
would have made his remonstrance, viz., worship of himself,
polytheism, and caste-prejudice, though we shall see later how often
ont bhakt I poet 'limped between two opinions'. To-day, despite
his vehement protests m some of his poems against certain forms of
idolatry, Tukaram is not only made an object of worship himself, in
Dehu, but within the same sacred enclosure there is a veritable
pantheon dedicated to Rama, Maruti, Ganpati, Garud, etc. in
addition to the poet's own Vithoba, from whose threshold people
accounted of low-caste origin are kept away, darshan in such cases
having to be taken at a distance. The inconsistency of this last
with Tukaram's own somewhat democratic inclinations we ventured
to point out to our GosavJ guide who took our gentle expostulation
good-naturedly. A short distance from Vithoba's shrine we came
to the inevitable temple with its inevitable worship of Tukaram, on
the spot where four centuries ago stood the poet's humble hut, and
a few paces away was the small cottage dedicated to the worship of
Jijabai his longsuffermg wife. We then saw the tomb of Tukaram's
eldest son, Narayanrao, who like Dnyaneshwar before him took
sthala-samSdhl (getting oneself buried alive). Immediately
behind this rest the ashes of several famous GosSvls in Tukaram's
line. Lastly, less than half a mile away we came upon the shrine
visited yearly on certain days in Phalgun, the twelfth Hindu
month'', by a festival crowd that numbers anything from twenty
to forty thousand people ; the reason for their coming being given
m a Marathi inscription which translated reads . ' From this place
Tukaram took the form of Brahma and ascended to Vaikuritha
(Paradise) '. We noted however that opposite this spot deemed
most holy by millions of intelligent Hindus, is the deepest part
of the Indraya^i — a part which always has deep water, said our
guide, and we wondered therefore whether a more natnial explana-
tion for the ' ascension ' of 1650 might not fit the facts.*

■ ' Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson, / R M. October, li520.

«A GosdvJ IS 'a Sudra (and sometimes a Brahman) who has renounced
worldly business, pleasmes and affections', J. V Moleswortb, Marilihl and
Enghih Dictionary, p 249, col. 1

^ This year (1920) these days came on March 6-S

^ See the end of Section ji, Chapter iv

I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 7

6. Deccan Villages— Then and Now

As for life's experiences in the Deccan, past and present are much
the same. The same crops are planted and by the same methods ;
the thoughts of men are centred on weather and prices. The
present differ.s from the past in its greater security. When the rain
fails in any district life is not immediately threatened. Local war
IS no more a feature of the times. The outlook of men has also
broadened. The cheap post, newspaper and day-school have made
themselves felt in the village : there is some knowledge of the
world. The isolation of the people has been disturbed. The public
services in police, education and other matters, bring it into touch
with other villages and remind it that there is a central power
directing things for a common good. In Tukaram's day certainly
such a central power existed, that of the Mogul Emperors directed
from Ahmednagar, but its proceedings were far less methodical
than those of modern government and if it sometimes interfered in
small affairs which to-day would be left alone, m many directions
where the official hand is now felt daily the village went its way
without interference.

It seems idle to ask the question whether people were happier
in those days than in our own, and we may leave the comparison to
those bold enough to make it. No doubt local interests were
stronger in the days of primitive isolation, and local gossip was
more absorbing. This means also that local feuds were more bitter,
and these feuds have always been the curse of Indian village life.
We may suppose, if we like, that simple piety was commoner ;
but dark superstitions were common too, the dread of evil spirits
more burdensome, dark and cruel rites more prevalent. Of all this,
as we shall see, Tukaram's poems furnish their own evidence.

What is true of India as a whole is true of that part of India
called the Deccan : if you would influence the people of India you
must get to know something of the 750,000 villages in which nine-
tenths of India's mighty population live. This was well put m a
paper on Spiritual Forces in India by Dr. Macnicol in the Con-
temporary Review^ some years ago. ' Every one who would touch
the heart and mould the life of India must go down among the silent
masses of the people. They must turn their backs upon the cities
and the life of 'the cities. It is a commonplace of commonplaces
in regard to India to say that it is a land of villages. It is this
tact, no less than the tenacity of their minds and the elusiveness of
their thoughts, that has made it appear so often as if messages
conveyed to the people of this land were writ on water. For the
most part it is probable that they never reached their ears. If
anyone would know what India will be, if he would guess what
forces are still dormant in her and of what she dreams, and especi-
ally if he desires to move and mould her future, he must sit with

1 September 1900, pp. 384-294.

8 , LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

the villager at his hut-door, buy with him and sell at his weekly
market, and journey with him when he takes his pilgrim's staff
and sets forth to some distant shnne. If he is a foreigner it is
difficult indeed for him to come close enough to those simple
children of the earth to form any true conception of the dim
thoughts and impulses that move them. The nearest he can come
to them, perhaps, is when he pitches his tent close by their village
and gathers them around him to speak with them of whatever
troubles them, and, by what means he may, to win their hearts.
It is no easy thing to do m India '.

7. Maratha Religious Life

It will be best therefore at this point to give some proportionate
account of the religious life and organization of a Maratha village.
That life is best viewed m its general aspect as a life of domestic
religious rites. Every respectable Hindu family has m its house
a small shnne for domestic worship, where the head of the family
every day performs the ceremonies needed for its wellbeing. There
will be found the images of the chief gods, and especially of any
god to whom by tradition the worship of that family is offered.
Over these images scented oil is poured, then they are bathed m a
saucer kept close by for sacred purposes, dried, replaced, besmeared
with a sandal-wood preparation, after which flowers are offered
them, lights are waved round them, a small bell is rung and food
is presented to them before the family sit down to their own meal.
During this piija (worship) prayers are uttered ; the whole cere-
mony, which must be performed either by the male head of the
household or by the family priest, occupying about half an hour
before the morning meal, the chief meal of the day. These sacred
images, however, do not take their places or receive these obser-
vances till they are duly consecrated by the Brahmans. So here
the services of the priest are needed, as they are needed at
every special ceremony m "the life of a Hindu (on which see
Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson's Rites Of The Twice-Born). They are
not needed, on the other hand, when he visits a shrine where
some image of a god stands in public waiting for its worshippers.
As in his own house, he approaches it directly, salutes it and
departs. Almost all images, however, have their Brahman attend-
ants and no pious worshipper will neglect these, if they are present.
Small popular shrines where no attendant waits, the red-coloured
images of Maruti or Hanuman who watches over all Deccan
villages, are visited by their votaries who paint them and place
garljands on them when they feel disposed. The little temple
of Siva, found in every Deccan village, is visited morning and
evening by all whose inclinations lead them there.

These ceremonies and visits to temples make up the round of
ordinary worship. Once a year there is a special occasion of

I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 9

quite another kind, the shrUddh, or oflfering to the spirits of departed
ancestors. This arises partly from the view that departed souls
require nourishment and partly from the belief that they must
expiate in hell the offences of their last incarnation till, the
penalty having been duly paid, they depart to enjoy the reward of
their merits for a period in heaven. The faith of their descendants
manifested in the shrifiidh accelerates their liberation, and the rite
IS esteemed by all Hindus as one of the most serious duties of
religion. In addition, the daily round of temple vibits is often
supplemented by pilgrimages to famous shrines.

Correcting a misconception by no means rare m the West,
Dr. Macnicol, whose authority in this matter will at once
be recognised by Western readers, remarks : ' No greater mistake
could be made than to suppose that there is no strength of purpose
or resolution in the people of India. How else have those
hiU-sides been furrowed so deep by the feet of pilgrims that have
come and gone throughout a thousand years ? What strength
of soul was theirs who, in the still more distant past, carved deep
out of the solid rock cells for themselves and great cathedrals for
their gods .... Wherever one goes, the prints of pilgrims' feet
are " numberless and holy all about hini ". No doubt much of the
reality and power that lay m former days behind those facts has
passed away from them to-day .... Nor can one wonder, with
the constant pressure of poverty upon them, that in the case of the
great majority of all classes their worship, in the expressive
language of a proverb, is given first to " Potoba, and only then to
Vithoba," and perhaps there is more excuse for such worship in
India than m most othei lands'. ' These worshippers of * Potoba ',
so accurately described in the Pauline phrase ' whose god is their
belly,' may serve as a reminder to foreigners — both missionaries
and officials — that a useful point of contact with the people is
provided by the study of Marathi proverbs, on which Mr. Manwaring
in English and Mr. Apte in Marathi have written excellent books.

8. Deccan Temples

It is difficult to obtain any correct idea either of the number of
Hindu temples in those early times or of the proportion of temples
given up to the various Hindu deities. In an examination of
' the Selections from the PeshwS's Diaries ' by Justice Ranade, we
read the following : ' The last portion of the Selections gives a list
of some 250 temples, which were of sufficient importance to
receive State-help in 1810-11. The relative popularity of the
several deities will appear from the analysis which shows that there
were fifty-two temples of Maruti, the attendant of Kama, while
Rama himself had eighteen places of worship. The temples

* The Contemporary Review, Se^U 1900, pp. 284-0 K

%

10 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch;

dedicated to Vishnu were nine, to Vithoba thirty-four, to Krishna
as BalajJ twelve. Rama and Krishna incarnations had thus
seventy-three places of worship. The most popular gods with
the Brahmans were Mahadeo who had forty temples, and
Ganpati who had thirty-six temples. Judged by the number of
temples, the worshippers of Siva and Vishnu were thus nearly
equal. The old aboriginal gods had in all thirty-two places of
worship ; the Devi had ten , Dattatreya had only one temple for
his worship, and there were eight places of Muhammadan Dargas
held m veneration'.^

9. Bhajans and Kirtans

The formalism of Hindu ritual, now as m Tukaram's day, is
counterbalanced by meetings for common worship in which no
priest takes any leading part or is necessarily present at all. Such
meetings need not even be held in a temple. It is solely a matter
of convenience where they are held and often the courtyard of some
large house is the scene of a hhajan, hatha or kirtan. Bhajan is
the name of a choral service in which all present take an equal
part ; a kirtan is a service m which one leader expounds the theme
and invites the company to join him in song : a haths seeks to
inspire patriotic and religious fervour by narrating the exploits of
gods and heroes. The leader on all such occasions may be a
Brabn.an but this is by no means necessary, perhaps not even
usual. A kTrtaiikay is simply a man of respectable station who
has felt drawn to the religious life, possesses the gift of exposition,
and, what in India is closely allied to it, the gift of song. He is as
it were a Moody and a Sankey in one. He may or may not make
religious teaching the sole business of his life, but no doubt the
most successful among the kJrtanMrs occupy themselves with
nothing else. There is nothing in the way of a school or centre for
training but to some extent they learn from each other. Among
them are men of great reputation, who attract very large gatherings
and undoubtedly exercise a real influence for good. And it appears
that they very seldom make any charge for their services or accept
anything more from their friends than subsistence.

Services of this kind may be connected with the worship of any
god but m practice they are chiefly held to magnify Rama, Krisbija
and Vishnu. They have been developed by the followers of the
Bhaktt-Marga, the path of loving devotion. To a Protestant eye
they are the most edifying of Hindu religious observances. They
combine something of the oratorio with something of the service of
song, and no one whose inclinations lead him m these directions
will fail to enjoy or even to take some involuntary part if he is
present m a kfrtan. (See the section on this subject in chapter 7)

1 Justice M. G Ranade, Niscellaneous Wnttngs, 1013, pp 375-0.

LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 11

10. Religious Superstition

On the other hand it is not to be forgotten that religious senti-
ment led and leads many of these same villagers in very different
directions. It leads them for instance to propitiate evil spirits. There
is much less of this practice in Maharashtra than m many parts of
India ; it exists, however, and outside the town or village often
stands the shrine of Veta}, the prince of these demons ^ To this
repair those who believe themselves in trouble from his myrmidons,
and by the offering of a cocoanut (representing perhaps the human
head of a remote antiquity) seek to purchase life. A foreigner of
course can o£fer no opinion how oflen this happens, but probably it
does not as often happen in Maharashtra as elsewhere. In times of
special trouble, such as cholera or plague, an image of the cholera
or plague spirit may be set up outside the village and honoured
there in the hope that it may not come inside, and there are some
quaint ways of inducing it to turn its attentions to other villages.

As for witches and wizards and dealers m spells and curses,
potions and incantations, they are not unknown in the Deccan but
probably much less is heard of them than in Southern India. Such
persons are seldom found to reside in one place hke the village
witch of old England who has scarcely any counterpart in old
India. The sorcerers of the country belong to the vast oider of
wandering ascetics, for ever coming and going, frightening women
very much and occasionally doing great harmf. But the Deccan
on the whole is much more free fiom these troublers of men's
spiritual peace than other parts of India

In a deeply interesting section entitled 'Superstitions ' relating
to the Maratha Government of the Peshwas, Justice Kanade
supplies the following facts: ' Belief in omens and prognctics
was common to all classes. It is recorded that a student cutoff his
tongue and another Gujarathi devotee cut oiff his head by way of
offering it to the deity he worshipped, and in both cases, the events
were reported to the Government by the local officials, and large
sums were spent to purify the temples and ward off the dangers
threatened by these unholy sacrifice'^. People were filled with
alarm, when it was reported that an earthquake had distuibed the
Kalyan Taluka. A fortress on the Ghats was believed to have
suff'ered injury from the influence of evil sight, and another
fortress a few years later was rendered unf't for occupation by the
prevalence of an unaccountable disease. In all these thiee cases,
steps were taken to pacify the elements by general purification. The
donee of a Jahagir village praypd to Government to resume the
grant and e>:change it for some other, as the gift became undesu-
able on account of the prevalence ofj evil spirits. Partial and

1 ■ Rings of whiU' stones representing Vetal.tlie ghost-kmg.and his troojicis
are often to be seen outside Deccan viUages' {U. M.i'., p. 11). Inside thete
lings village athletes both wrestle and worship. ._ , ,

12 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

local famines gave frequent trouble in those days, and large sums
were spent in employing Brahmins to drown the gods, or pour
water over them for days and weeks together. Sacrifice of buffa-
loes to a goddess at Tnmbak, which had been stopped for some
years, was resumed by the order of the Government at the instance
of Brahmin devotees. When a man-eating tiger appeared on the
Saptashrmgi Hill in the Na§ik District, the Kamavlsdar was
ordered to consult the pleasure of the goddess, and if she
consented, to employ men to shoot it. A lizard having fallen on the
body of the idol at Pandharpui, a great penance was ordered in
which Brahmins took part. The sale of cows to butchers was
strictly prohibited throughout the country. Some Muhammadans,
who were guilty of breaking the law, were severely punished, and
a Brahmin, ^ho cut off the tail of a cow, was sent to prison.' ^

II. Social Life and General Culture

Maharashtra is, probably, on the whole, the most orderly corner
of Hindu society. The village system is more clearly defined than
it IS elsewhere, the status and mutual services of the castes are
placed on a clearer footing, there are fewer of the miserable hangers-
on, the forlorn classes, than there are ui the Hinduism of other
parts. And the dress of Maharashtra is the most practical and for
women the most becoming dress worn by the peasantry of India.
On the other hand it is the least couttly pait of the country,
perhaps the least artistic. The Marathas during all their history
built nothing whatever, and art does not seem to owe anything to
their patronage. They have one heto and one heroic period but in
the leading position which they then assumed ihey did little of
lasting value for India as a whole. Beginning with plundering the
Moguls they freed the country, it is true, from Muhammadan rule
but created no system worthy of their vigour or of their shiewdness
of character. When, through their own ceaseless quarrels, the
sceptre departed from them, the mass of the people retained nothing
mspiring from two centuries of martial authonly.

On the other hand, recent investigation shows that m everj
stage of society, high and lo*, poets were highly honoured anc
received the popular homage. (See section 20 of this chapter oi
the ' Democratizmg Influence of Maratha Poets.') Moreover, lh<
Peihwas all encouraged learning and education. Mr. V. L. Bhawi
points out that in the case of every Maratha author of importanci
either he or his descendants I eceived a gift ftom the Peshwas ti
encourage him in his literary work." Mr. K. V. Subiamanya Aiyai
the author of Histoitcal Sketches of Ancient Dcccan, has pomte

I Jusitire M. G. Ranade, iltscellaneous Wntitigs, pp. 374-5
^Sec'Mr. V L. Uhawc, iH. Sar , e g. p 379, Mahipall's esse, p. 3U
Nirai^ijaa's case.

LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 13

out the interesting fact that in the ancient Deccan ' the poet was
better favoured than even the king's nearest relations andlhete was
nothing to compare with his status, honour and esteem.'^ This
fact helps us to understand Tukaram's popularity both in his own
day and now.

As for the tastes of the Maiatha people of the piesent day,
' I may be forgiven it I pause to combat the disastrous idea', says
Mr. Sedgwick, one of the all too few Englishmen who know the
richness of MarathI literature, ' that Marathi poetry is neither read
by Marathi speaking gentlemen, nor worth reading. Literature for
its own sake is perhaps not so much followed in the Ea&t as in the
West. But such students of literature as there are in the Deccan
read the Marathi poets. Abhangs and potlits are sung or read at
every festival. Children in the smallest as well as the largest
schools are taught the poetical language as soon as they can read
and write reasonably correctly. A not inconsiderable amount of
research work and literary criticism is being done in Marathi
through the medium of periodicals. . . Last but not least we
have at the present moment m Poona a group of Indian scholars
calling themselves the Tukilrclni-inaiidali, which is preparing a
critical edition of the works of Tukaram with an exhaustive and
scholarly commentary. All this is indicative of the fact that
Maiathi poetry is read and studied more than ever before'."

Even the rank and file have their literary interests of a kind.
It has been truly said that ' in every town and village in the Deccan
and Konkan, especially during the rains, the pious Maratha will be
found listening with his family and friends to a recitation of the
PothT of Shridhar (1678-1728), and enjoying it indeed. Es.cept an
occasional gentle laugh, or a sigh, or a tear, not a sound disturbs
the rapt silence ot the audience, unless when one of those passages
of supreme pathos is reached, which afTects the whole of the
listeners simultaneously with an outburst- of emotion which drowns
the voice of the reader'."

12. The Power of the Brahmans

The Brahmans undoubtedly retain the tradition that they are
the class entitled to control and' direct affairs. In this part
of India they have assumed a position quite unique, furnishing the
priests, politicians and, foimerly, the waniors of the country.
Their position as priests may be parallelled clt.ewliere, but
nowhere have they monopolized all administrative power as they
have done here. Even in the Maiatha anuy many of the officers
were Brahmans, and they filled almost all posts in the civil service.
It is difficult to account for this, and difficult to say how exactly it

'^Indian Social Reforniei', Aufiust 4, 1919, p. C14.

•! Mr. L J. Sodgwick, I. C. S., /. S. A.S. So., 1910, Vol. 2J, Ho. £5, p. 110

' Acvvorth's Ballads, wvn.

14 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM OK.

affected the country or the Brahmans themselves. On the whole
there was probably not much friction between them and the other
classes; their predominance was accepted both in secular and
spiritual affairs. Though exclusive they were not offensively
arrogant or at least were not felt to be such by the non-Brahman
classes who felt the Brahman influence to be humanizing after the
harsh cruelties of Mubammadan rule. Non-Brahmans became
content to leave politics alone and when the Government of
Bombay, regarding the Peshwa as incorrigible, annexed his terri-
tories the peasantry did not feel that any rights of theirs were
being taken away. In religious matters, as we have seen, the
common people had always a large sphere of their own and one
in which they found a leading interest of their lives. Doubtless
the view they took of Brahmans at that time approximated to the
view taken of them by low-caste people to-day, as expressed in the
saying : ' Brahmans are like palm-trees, very high, but giving little
shade to us poor people '.

Careful observers have pointed out that Maratha Brahmans
are among 'the most capable Hindus in the Empire'.* This,
moreover, is the view they take of their own position ' Maratha
Brahmans . . . regard themselves as the elite of mankind, not
-only because they are Brahmans, but also because they believe
themselves superior to all other Brahmans m India. To them
Gujrath Brahmans (the Brahmans of Gujarat) are only a caste
of water-carriers, and Telang Brahmans (Tilanga or Carnatic
Brahmans) are a caste of cooks. They look upon Sarasvat
Brahmans and the Brahmans of Northern India as degenerate
because the latter are "fish-eaters". They again believe that all
other Brahmans, like those of Northern India, are unable to
pronounce Sanskrit speech conectly. On account of their preten-
sions to political and scholarly wisdom the Maratha Brahmans are
far from popular . . . They have a power of conferring Vedic and
Puranic sacraments, as they are the priests of the nation, but the
possibilities of this power, and the good uses to which this power
can be applied, are not yet fully realized by them . . . The
Peshwas are gone, and so is the power of the Sbastiis and Pundits
in Foona. They still like to play their excommunication forma-
lities. They often excommunicate persons, either those who have
returned from England, or married a widoiv, or drank tea with
Englishmen.' '^ Those acquainted with recent Indian history will
recall the instance of the late Mr. Bal Gangadhar Tilak who only
a few weeks before his death on August 1, 1920 underwent the
ceremony of piayaschit (purification) m consequence of visiting
England. On We-steru India Brahmans Mr. R. E. Enthoven's
Tribes and Castes of Bombay, Yo\. i , pp. 213-54 should be carefully
studied.

^ E R E. aihcle Bombay , Vol. 2, d 788 (a)
' E. R. B. article Hinduism, Vol. 6, pp. 093-3

I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 15

13. The Maratha Character

Maratbas should be thought of chiefly as a hard-working,
home-keeping, rehgious people. This judgement departs widely
from that usual in our histories. TeBnyson has fixed for us the
Maratha character in one of his trenchant phrases, 'the wild
Maratha battle', and the name of Assaye (however little the common
man knows about it) stands for a day-long struggle against a host
of indomitable swordsmen. Now the Marathas undoubtedly did a
good deal of fighting. But in the last days of their exploits, when
we examine the roll of their troops, it is astonishing how many of
them were Arab mercenaries or predatory scoundrels from all parts
of India. And without doubting that the famous cavalry always
included the more adventurous of the young Marathas it is very
uncertain how long after Shivaji's time the Maratha army
continued to be a really national force. Perhaps it is enough
to say here that in this as in all reflections on character, whether
national or individual, we soon light on those contradictions which
further knowledge seems only to emphasize. A certain shrewd
and pushing worldliness being quite characteristic of the country,
especially among those Brahmans who have taken to worldly life,
a roving, sword-clashmg sort of Maifitha there must once have
been, but the conception with which this paragraph started comes
ultimately as near the central type as any other. Of course we
constantly fail to allow for varieties of type within a people, but
Tukaram's pages m themselves are sufficient proof that very
different characters might have been found within the walls of
any village in his day.

How the Maratha army came to be so largely mercenary
Justice Ranade has shown m hia exhaustive examination of the
PeshwS's Diaries. 'The army', says he, 'm fact represented the
Maratha nation more faithfully than any other single section of the
population. Shivajl commenced his work of conquest of the forts
round about Poona and in the Konkaii with the help of the Mavajes
and the Hetkaris. The army then consisted only of the Hasham
Infantry, who were armed generally with swords and matchlocks.
When, later on, he descended into the plains, the cavalry became
the chief agency of offensive warfare m the hands of the MarJithas.
The old Mavales and Hetkaris were retained, but chiefly in
command of the hill-forts. The cavalry, thus brought into
existence, fought with the Moguls under Aurangzib, and spread
the tetror of the Maratha name throughout India. They were not
mercenaries in the usual sense of the word. They enlisted in the
army either singly, or with their horses and men, for the fair
season of the year, and when the rains approached, they returned
to their homes, and cultivated their ancestral lands . . . The
strength of the Maratha cavalry continued to be the most
distinguishing feature till about the year 1750, when contact with

15 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

the French and British armies . . . induced the Maratha leaders
to have recourse to this new agency, . . . the Gardls or the trained
battaUons. The weakness of this new addition to the mihtary
force consisted in the fact that unhke the Mavales or the
Shiiledars, who each owned his plot of land and served the State,
not as mercenaries, but as miliua, the Gardis were mercenaries,
pure and simple, made up of foreign recruits of different nationali-
ties, who had to be paid fi^ced salaries all the year round, and only
owed loyalty to the commanders who paid them their wages.
There was no national element m this new force . . . The army,
instead of being national, became mercenary m the worst sense of
the word. Attached to the regular armies, there was a licensed
host of free-booters, called Pendharis who . . . made a living by
pillage of the enemy, and ultimately of their own people . . . The
old infantry and cavalry had lost their stamina, and the new
mercenaries, without leaders and without any knowledge of military
science except the drill, were as ineffective as the Pendharis who
accompanied them. It was this change which paralyzed the
nation '. ^

Later history has shown what wonderful fighters modern
Marathas are and the world itself has resounded with the deeds
of Maratha gallantry on many fields of action. Speaking in the
Viceroy's Council shortly before the conclusion of the world-war
in 1918, the Hon, Mr. C. A. Kincaid observed : ' Resourcefulness,
courage, fertility of invention, endurance, all these qualities have
been abundantly shown by Maratha regiments at the front . . .
I felt a glow of pride and pleasure when I learnt of the gallant
deeds of the Maratha regiments who sailed ... to Irak, who
occupied Basra, who took Kurna and won at ^aiba . . . They
fought in a way which would have roused the e_nvy of the veterans
of the Bhosles and the comrades of Chim^aji ^ppa '. ^

14. Maratha Family Life and its Women

The Maratha bond is in all cases a strong one. In the case of the
Brahmansit brings together various families under one roof m a
common life to which Western institutions have no parallel. The
imagination of a Western critic cannot in the least conceive in
detail the positions and sentiments to which this gives rise ; they
belong to a world into which he has no means of entering. The
only thing that need be said about it is one which is obvious, that
it fetters the movements of its members, especially m youth, to a
degree unknown among ourselves. That the movements of a
Hindu are closely prescribed for him is indeed a matter of general
knowledge but perhaps this knowledge usually takes account only

1 Justice M, G. Ranade, Miscellaneotii Wnimgi, pp. 352 — 55
' Dnyanodaya, 'Marath.T, Gallantry', November 28, 1918.

t LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 17

of the incidence of rules regarding food and bO forth. To this we
have to add &uch things as the influence of a horoscope and above
all the social pressure of the jomt-faniily system, which even in
practical affairs never leaves a boy a moment's freedom from the
hour of his birth. It seems a marvel how any one born m this
system can retain any sort of enterprise or self-determination,
but we have always to remember that human nature reasserts
Itself in the most unexpected ways. As to what has actually hap-
pened in the Hiudu families we are much in the dark. No people
have ever been so little given to self-revelation.

Maratha women are of course not personally known to the
foreigner. The women of the upper classes stay within their houses
as much as possible ; the peasant women may be seen at work
everywheie and if you can speak their language are not always
averse to a brief chat with you. Their language is racy and
unrestrained and fully imbued with that humour which — though
some people may not think so — is nngrained in most Hindus. It
would appear that they have, if not vQles, yet substantial rights
secured by custom, and are well able if llie.se are invaded to defend
themselves. Whatever tyranny is suffered by the cbild-wife or
child-widow. It is at least inflicted chielly by their own sex.

15. Heroic Age of the Marathas

We staled above that the Mauithfi people had one beru, bbiva)i,
and one heroic age which was approaching when 'J'ukurfim wabborn
in 1608. According to the commonly accoptod date Shivaji was
born m 1627, though as Jadunath Sarkar says: 'The Zedhe
Chronology, which gives original and surprisingly coirect dales
about later events in Shivaji'slifo-story, places his birth in February
1630'.' Investigation, has established Shivnji's character both as a
man and a ruler. By one of those revolutions which the spirit of
history loves he appears on the scene a few years after the great
Akbar, from whom India seems about to receive an impulse towards
unity, political and religious, that will mould all her future history.
The hope thus held forth is at once by destiny dispelled. With
Akbar the Mogul system culminates and with him it disappears.
His principles and visions vanish. His narrow-minded successor
sweeps all away, and creating nothing to replace what he destroys,
leaves chaos behind him after two generations of power. The re-
constructing force comes from a quarter where no one looks for it —
the Deccan, regarded by Aurangzib as ' inhdels' land '.

16. Shivaji, Tukaram and Ramdas

Maharashtra cannot have seemed a region specially fitted to
produce a revived and energetic Hinduism. But it was there that
* SInvajT and His Tuna, pubUshod by M. C. Saikar & Sons, Calcutta.
3

18 LIFfi AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cH.

the hour found the man. Among the few good famihes of the
country was that of a small jaglrdUr near Poona in which Shivajl
was born He was from his earliest ysars a strict and earnest
Hindu and among the sentiments of his early manhood was a
keen resentment against the slights and injuries which his faith
suffered from the Government of Aurangzib (1658-1707). He knew
the natural sources of military strength in the Deccan, and what
is even more important there breathed through his actions a
rude democratic spirit which woke his countrymen into vigorous life
and made them devoted and fearless soldiers, it would be outside
the scope of these pages to follow his career. We need at present
only notice that Tukaram lived in the darkness preceding this dawn.
He died m 1650 when ShivajI was dreaming dreams of a perilous
future. There is nothing m Tukaram's poems to show that he
gave much thought to the Mahommedans or considered that what
the times needed was a political revolution. His brief connection
with Shivd-jl will be discussed elsewhere.

Born in the same year as Tukaram, the poet Ramdas (1508-
1681) outlived him by nioie than thirty years. Just as Shivaji's
connexion with TuK'aram is surrounded with a measure of un-
certainty, so also experts have differed as to the extent of the
relation between ShivajI and Ramdas. Some have held that
Ramdas was the ' guide and inspirer' of Shivaji's whole policy
through the critical years which led up to Shivaji's kingship,
thus wielding potent influence m the building up of the Maratha
kingdom. Others hold it to be ' proved conclusively that Ramdas
had nothing to do with the great work of winning independence
from the Mahoramedan which Shivaji had undertaken and brought
to a successful issue even before they met in 167.2 '. If this latter
conclusion be accepted then the reference to Ramdas in the letter
to Shivaji from Tukaram — who died m 1650 — must be regarded as
an interpolation. The whole subject, however, is still under
discussion *

17. The Greeting of Hindus

Though it probably takes us beyond Tukaram's day there is one
story told of Shivaji and Ramdas which is worth repeating since it
refers to the supposed origin of those well-known woids Rain Ram
by which Marathas in Western India greet one another. It is said
that Shivaji begged Ramdas to live with him and let him serve

^ See Prof. Bbate's. Marralil book, Strjjangcnl and Samarth RamdSi,, I. I,
Jan 1919, vol \iii, pp. 157-Cb' whore the authorities on both sideb aicgi\en;
Jan. 1910 vol. 1%, pp 197-cS, Mr. G. K Cliandorkar in 7iC6(Tn, June 2G, 1900,
Mr. K. A. Kelnikar's Ltfc of HhivajT in Maratlii, pp 507-H, 551-62 wlierc
other conclusive evidence is adduced , Kincaid and Parasnis, in H, ill. P. pp.
191-2, and Mr. V. L Hliawe in M, &'»;, (pp 219, 415), with the Maialhl daily
LUkSangraha for Apnl 25. 1020 gning alccluicby Mr. V. Potdar.

1 LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 19

him as he had done for a single day at Jaranda. Ramdas requested
in return that, instead of serving him, Shivajl would grant him
three boons. Shivaji said that he would do so gladly. The third
one was that ShivajI should honour the heio god Ramchandra by
ordering his subjects when they met to say to each other by way
of greeting, Ram Rc!m. Shivaji granted these boons and Ram Ram
are still the words of greeting used by Marathas when they meet,
Mahars, Chambbais and other depressed castes using the word
Johar,^ the ancient form of salutation, just as Urahmans use
Namaskcir.^ The above legend may have to be rejected as
unhistorical, seeing that Tukaram himself has an abhang with the
words of this same greeting, though of course the abliaiig itself
may be an interpolation.

1 8. The Maratha National Movement

It only remains to note the fact, all-important for gaining any
true conception of the heroic age of the Marathas, that m the days
of Tukaram, Shiviji and Ramdas there was a linking together of
the forces of the Maratha nation, both material and moral, which
contributed to a movement of enduring significance in Indian
history. This has been very happily expressed by Prof. Limaye :
' We are inclined to hold that there were two factors in the national
movement of Maharashtra. That representing material power was
contributed by the Maratha nobles who opposed Shivaji in the first
instance. The moral force of the movement was derived from the
preaching of the great saints, while Shivaji stands for the synthesis
of the two. Himself the son of a great Marfdha nobleman and
as such possessed of power and influence, he was thoroughly imbued
with the spirit of the teaching of the saints. Inspired by their
high ideals, he strove to realize them m his life, and, in doing so,
was prepared to risk both his power and position. That is the
significance of Shivaji's life-work, and it is this which entitles him
to rank by the side of the greatest of the world's heroes '." Hence
it can be said with truth that 'the Marathas are a nation, and from
the Brahman to the ryot they glory in the fact.'*

If, then, Shivfij'i's glory consists in the fact that he welded the
scattered Marathas into a kingdom, why was this kingdom so short-
lived, suffering disruption less than nine years after Shivaji's death ?
Dr. Rabindranath Tagoro thus explains : ' Shivaji aimed at
preserving the rents and holes in our body social ; he wished to save
from the Mogul attack a Hindu society of which ceremonial
distinctions and isolation of castes are the very breath of life. He
wanted to make this heterogeneous society triumphant over all
India ! He wove ropes of sand ; he attempted the impossible. It is

1 Originally a war-cry of the Rajputs.
« H. U. P., pp. 91-2.

^ Professor H G. Limaye, m.a,, P. C. ill., February 1919, p. 1C7.
■• Acworth's Pcytvadas, or MarathI Ballads, celebrating the exploits of
Maratha heroes, in.

20 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch.

beyond the power of any man, it is opposed to the divine law of
the universe, to establish the svoarcTj of such a caste-ridden, isolated
mlernally-torn sect over a vast continent like India.' ^

With this diagnosis agrees that of the Maratba historian
Justice Ratiade, who has shown chat while the kingdom of th{
Peshwas anticipated some of the modern Maratha movements foi
social lefoim, it contained within itself the seeds of Us owr
decay. The later decline must not, however, be allowed to obscure
the view first advocated by the late Hon. Mr. Justice Telang m hi;
Gleanings from the Bakhars that the Maratha rulers showe<
'greater moral courage and liberality of sentiment' than peopl.
have been disposed to give them credit for.* Nevertlielesf
' It IS a matter of history that the Maratha Confederacy or Empire-
the most considerable Hindu national achievement in histori
times — broke on the rock of caste ', the eilect of this being lei
' even to-day m the embittered feelings between the Brfilimins an
the Maralhas round about Poona'. "

19. The Literature of the Maratha Bhaktas (Saints)

If we are to understand the true origin and force of th
Maratha movement and ils significance for the India of to-day v,
must add to the ' two factors ' of Prof. Limaye a third fore
which was at work — that of literature and specially the literatui
of the Bhahti movement in Maharashtra. There can be i
question that this literature has been greatly underrated t
Western scholars, but of late years it has been coming to 1
own. Prof. Patwardhan in his Wilson Pliihlogical Lecttin
has shown that ' Marathi literature, even before it came in
contact with the literature of the West, had reached a state >
development and growth both quantitatively and qualitative
that the people of Maharashtra may well be proud of,' and muc
the .same has been said by Mr. L. ]. Sedgwick, I.C.S. :" ' We.ste
scholars may hardly be aware that there exists in Maialhi
bliaktt literature, which in age, in volume, and in quality cj
equal, if not surpass, the Hindi. Indeed 1 would go furth(
and say that viewed from any standpoint of cnticisni the o
poems of Mahlpatl, and the abhai'igs of Namdev, Eknatb, Titkfiril
and Ramdas must be placed among the finest of the poel
productions of the world . . . We aie in the presence
a strange world of saints and poets, ... a religion which h
dominated the thoughts of the lower and middle das.ses in t
Deccan. Bhakit m this part of India centres entirely round tl

1 Quoted by Jadnnfith Saikrir m ShtviTj? and I lis Tniici, pp. -l.m I

^ Justice M G Ra.u!i6e, Ulnccllaiicoiis Wntnifi.i, pp. 3Ti 80.

" The Indian Social Reformer, October 17, WiO.

*FC U , July 1912, pp. 31-2.

^J.R A.S. Bo., Vol. 23, No. 05, pp. 109-10

I LAND AND PEOPLE OF TUKARAM 21

one god — the god Vithoba .... Upon the worship of this deity
there' has been built up m Marathi a hterature of great extent and
beauty. It covers a period frorti about A.D. 1290, to the present
day, but the best period ends with the death of MahipatI in 1791
A D. It may be divided into two main portions: hymns, naostly in
the metrical form known as ahhaugs but al&o partly in other forms,
and especially narrative-lives of the saints in the metre known as
the ovt. Of the former the four great exponents are Namdev,
Eknath, Tukaram and Ramdas (the last-named being a Rama
worshipper), while the latter is represented mainly by Mablpati,
whose Bhakhvtjclya, BhaktihlciiHnta, elc. were suggested by the
Bhakfamala of Nabaji, the Hindu poet. ... Of the three
Vitthala-hhakta abhai'ig writers Tukaram is by the far the most
popular.'

20. Democratizinff Influence of the Maratha Poets

The unique seivice rendered by the saints and prophets of
Maharashtra, was long ago pointed 'out by the late Justice M. G.
Ranade who showed that as a result of their work ' there came
into existence the beginnings of a national feeling' which represen-
ted nothing less than ' spiritual emancipation of the national mind '.
This has been dealt with more recently by Prof. Patwardhan who
states : ' For five successive centuries Maharashtra was the abode
of that noblest and truest of all democracies, the democracy of
the Bhahli school. The whole of the Marathi Literature of
those centuries is a literature of Spiritual Democracy — it breathes
the breath of equality, of fraternity and of spiritual liberty. . . .
The Bhaktt school democratized hterature, so that all those that
would, could and did bear their share in the building up of the grand
edifice. There were Brahmans, Sudras, Shimpls or tailors, Kum-
bhars or potters, Nhavis or barbers, even Mahars or low castes,
that felt the call of the Divine Muse, and contributed their own
little streamlet to the general flood . . . The democrati7,ation
of Literature had one inevitable result. It was to nationalize it.
. . . The literature was no longer of the Brahmans or Sudras or
Mahars. It was Marathi Literature and every one, whatever his
caste or creed, trade or profession, learned to love it and labour
for It. . . . The Bhaktt school poets thus not only made the liter-
ature but also made the people a nation They nationalized the
literature'.* How far these facts bear on the modern history of
India has been shown by Jaduniith Sarkar : ' The Marathas
have a historic advantage of unique importance in the India of
to-day. Their near ancestors had faced death on a hundred battle-
fields, had led armies and debated in the chamber of diplomacy,
had managed the finances of kingdoms and grappled with the
problems of empire ; they had helped to make Indian history.' '■*

1 F. C. M July 1919, pp. 3^-5.

" Shtvdfl and His Tniics, pp. 20-21.

22 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

Sir C, Sankaran Nair has similarly explained tiie uniqueness of
Maratha influence in the making of India. In a remarkable
address at Leeds University, September 7, 1920, after speaking of
the 'great national revival in the Maratha country', he quoted
with approval the following opinion of Major Evans Bell : ' The
last chapters of self-development and self-independence in India
belong to the Western region. The Maratha Confederation
emancipated the Hindus and ... set up religious and social
tolerance. . . . The Hindu revival of the seventeenth and eight-
eenth centuries which paved the way for British intervention,
was a movement of social and political progress, in which the
Marathas took the lead, it may be said, unconsciously, instinctively,
without premeditation or prevision.' ^

If the political ' courage ' of the city of Bombay is evidenced
by its ' anxiety to enfranchise five million (Indian) women at the
same time as five million men ' as was affirmed by Sir J. D.
Rees, '' a courage, he added, which is in deep contrast with 'the
conservatism of rural India'; and if Lord Sinha, first Indian
Governor, could say that ' it was to the political leaders of Bom-
bay that he always looked for instruction and guidance ' ; " then
such high political distinction is to be traced back to the nation-
alizing and democratizing influence of the Maratha poet-saints.
The greatest of these nationalizing and democratizing forces in
the life of Western India— Tukaram— we are to study in this
book,

1 The Indian Social Reformer, Nov. 14, 1920.

^ Fortnightly Review, 1920.

"A speech in Bombay, Dec. 5, 1920.

Vaibhnavi&m is admUtedlv what is called the Bhaktt or Devotional wor-
bhip which lb inconsislent with the spirit cf caste.

Sir C. Sankaran Nair at Leeds University, September 7, 1920

THE BESETTING GOD

Of God my meat and drink I make,

God is the bed on which I lie
God IS whate'er I gi\e or take ,

God's constant fellowship have I
For God IS here and God is there —

No place that empty is of him.
Yea, lady Vithfi, I declare,

I fill the world up to the brim.

Translated from Janribai, Naradev's domestic servant (lUh
century), by Dr. Maonicol, Pi,alms of Manttha Saints,
p 50.

THE SCORNER

Who praises and who scorns mo too,
Both are my mother. Ay, 1 ' lew
My scorners as my mother true.

For such are kind to me. They say
Hard words that wash my boil away,
As does a mother's bathing They

Are fi lends indeed and strength supply
To me. Were I to blame them, why.
The guilty one would then be I,

O sweet IS scorning, setting free
From bondage of duality.
A gracious benefactor he.

Before the scorner bow we low.
Blest be his mother , for I know
Who suffer scorn to Freedom go.

Translated hom BhtivcTifha Raiiutyaiia{ch3.p 1) of Ekanath
(1548-99) by Dr. Macnicol, Psalms of Maratha Saints,
p. 53.

Chapter 2
The Vaisbnava Hindaism of Takaram's Day

Before introducing Tukfiram it is necessary to say something
about the religious system with which he was connected.

I. Characteristics of Hinduism in General

It was not until the Mohammedan invasions that the name
' Hindu' passed into use for the people of India. Occasionally
lawgivers have tound themselves compelled to try to define a HindQ.
The attempt has always failed, since, in practice, those Indians
are Hmdiis who are neither Mohammedans nor Jews nor Parsis nor
Christians nor members of any other Indian community that can
be defined or disposed of. Nevertheless, something may be done
to understand a word so often used, if we are careful not to beg any
questions. If we use the word of the prevalent type of life and
belief which the Mohammedans found in India we may describe
Hindus as marked by the following characteristics. Their social
system is based on caste and they recognize the spiritual ascen-
dancy of the Brahnians. They venerate the Vedas and the cow.
They worship and believe in one or more of the usual Hindu gods,
in Vishnu or his avataras, in Siva or in others. They believe
in the cycle of rebirth. They use images in religious worship. To
these characteristics others might be added, frequently but not
invariably associated with them.*^

Research is made difficult by the great paucity of Indian
historical works. ' Hindus wrote no formal history at any period ;
for the early centuries there are no archa-'ological remains that
throw any light on the course of events ; nor is any definite
information provided by nations outside India',.* Nor is research
made any easier by the pantheistic bent of the Indian mind. It
might be said with truth that the popular mind is always careless of
distinctions, but this indifference is more prevalent in India than in
any other country. In points of daily routine vital to the caste
system the sense of distinction is acute and active but in other
matters it hardly exists. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar has more than
once pointed out this weakness of Indian research. In his
Vaishnavism he writes • * Unfortunately the historical spirit has

1 See Dr. Farquhar's concise Primer 0/ Hinduism, espRCially chapters xiii
and XIV on ' Wbat it is to be a Hindu to-day ' and ' The religion of the lower

^ i N. Farquhar, OJi.L I., p. 3.
4

26 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

by no means been the distinguishing feature of the intellectual
life of us Indians, and we often confuse different persons together
and attribute to one what belongs to another '.^ In a remarkable
paper prepared for the Oriental Conference held in Poona,
November, 1919, he diagnosed this weakness as follows: *A
young man, the editor of a good many Sanskrit works, asks me
with a derisive smile what the necessity was of naming a MS.,
of showing the country it came from and the age in which it was
written. He did not know that vyhen a judge noted down the age ■
of a witness appearing before him, the name of the caste, or the
community, or country to which he belonged, he got information
from him which had a value m the estimate of the evidence.
Similarly another young man, not fully acquainted with the critical
method, said that Namdev and Dnyandev were contemporaries,
but that difference between their languages was due to the
mistakes of successive scribes. Maratbi literature which has come
down to us is full of such strange theories. It is a very disagreeable
matter to dwell at this length on the faults of oiir Indian scholars,
but it is an allegiance which I owe to truth.'

This spirit m religious enquiries means that you soon reach
the point where you are told that one god is the same as another, or
that God is the same as the world — Pantheism, which is not so
much a system as a bent of mind.

One more characteristic mark of a Hindu worth noting here,
and one which illuminates one aspect of the enduring religiousness
of India, IS his willingness to believe that every man should follow
the dictates, and observe the practices, of that religion in which
he was born. This helps to explain on the one hand his tolerance
of the Christian religion and on the other hand his slowness to
accept any form of faith other than that handed down from his
forefathers.

2. Vishnu's Place in the Hindu System

Among the puzzling problems of the Hindu religion one of the
most puzzhng and interesting is the question who Vishnu is and
what part he has played m the Hindu system. The question is all
the more important because the type of Hinduism prevalent in
Tukaram's land, and the popular literature of Tukaram's people,
both belonged largely to the Vaisbpava school.' It is a question
taking us to the very heart of the religion of Tukaram, for the
name Vithoba itself, the name of the god so closely identified
with Krisija and so dear to Tukaram, is viewed by the best
authorities as a corruption of the name Vishnu.

Vishnu IS a Vedic god, being regarded as one of the upper gods
in the Vedas. He is by no means supreme even in the two great

i VSM R.S., etc., p. 92.

' Vaishnavais the adjective from Vishnu.

II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 27

epics of India, the MahSbhUrata and the Ramaycina, though both
books were written with a view to exalting his position. ' He is the
centre of the first real sect, the Vaish^avas, who derive their name
from him, and who gave forth a book which has come to be
regarded as India's most sacred book — the Bhagavadgita. By
means of this book the followers of Vishnu created the first Hindu
theism, their method being to unite Vishriu on the one hand with
Brahman and on the other with Krisna. The chapter m the
Bhagavadgtta containing the thousand names of Vishiiu is one of
the greatest treasures of devout Vaish^avas. '

Since ' the Vaish^iavas of the Maratha country are Bhagavatas '"
It is well to note specially the place occupied by Vishiju m the
religion of the Bhagavatas. 'The word Bhagavata has two
meanings in modern Hinduism. It is first an epithet used of
VaishijHvas generally, as those who use the Bhagavat-^astra, or
body of works which revere Vishnu as Bhagavan. It is used, in
the second place, of a special community of Vaishnavas . . . who
really adore Vishnu, but recognise the equality of the two gods ',
Vishnu and Siva, and retain Vedic rites. ' When we realise that it
was probably, between A. i). 200 and a. d. 550 that the worship of
Vishnu and Siva as equal, or as one, was instituted, we might
agree to the theory that ' the worship of Siva and Vishiju as one
was a compromise meant to reconcile warring sectaries ', Investi-
gators, however, suggest another explanation, viz., that 'the
metaphysical equahty of Vishnu and Siva ' had Us origin in the
Bhagavata community referred to above. How very closely
connected all this is with the subject of this book is shown by
another excerpt. ' The Bhagavatas of the Maratha country to-day
form a popular bhakti movement, . . . The god is Vitthal or
Vithoba ; both these names are ]ocal variations of Vishnu. The
chief centres are Pandharpur, Alandi and Dehu, but there are
numerous shrines throughout the country. In the chief temple of
Paridharpur, Vitthal wears a curious sort of crown which the
priests say is Siva's linga ; so that the image, standing for both
gods, is truly Bhagavata', * (See a paragraph on 6iva in chap. 6).

How Vithoba of Pandharpur, so dear to Tukaram, comes to
have any connection with Vishnu will become clearer m light of
later paragraphs. .

3. The Vaishnava Idea of Avatar a

One of the most interesting features of Vishiju is his recurring
avatams. The conception will bear more enquiry than it has
received, for ' we do not know how the Vaishnavas were led to

* See J. N. Farquhar, O.R.L.l,, Index under the word 'Vishnu ', p, 449,
» Ibid., p. 234.
» Ibtd., p. 142
*/6j<f.,p. 301.

28 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

develop the doctrine. The idea appears suddenly.'^ We have
here three aspects calling for elucidation, viz., the exact meaning
of the word avatSra — one of the most important words in
Vaishnavite Hinduism; the important place occupied m the
Vaishnavite religion of Tukaram by the idea of avatara; the
fundamental difference between this idea and the Christian
doctrine of incarnation. The first two we deal with now, the
last m a brief appendix (see Appendix I).

1. The word avatara means by derivation a descent or
appearance on a scene. It has been used and might still be used
of the appearance of mortal men ; e.g , Tukaram is commonly
regarded as an avatara of his predecessor Namdev.

ii. It IS specifically used of the sudden appearance of a deva
(god). The devas (gods) in general were conceived as possessing
the power of rendering themselves visible or invisible at will, and
of transporting themselves at will to any part of the world. We
read of various deities doing this, even minor deities.

iii. In the case of Vish^iu we have the added idea that his
manifestations were always for the purpose of helping men (or
animals like the elephant Gajendra) in distress.

iv. The word avatara thus became specially connected with
Vishnu It is now seldom used in connection with any other deity.

V. The English term ' incarnation ' is a dangerous equivalent
for it : the questions which this word suggests never presented
themselves to the Hmdii mind. An avatSra is a very simple
expedient.

vi. As to the origin of the conception it is not necessary to
trouble ourselves much. It is not Vedic. It is, however, very
natural and one rather wonders that more is not heard of avataras
among other races. The Greeks, for instance, found it easy to
believe that the gods appeared on the battle-field to help men :
Hercules m the story appears to the distressed carter. These
are avatUras, but such occurrences play no great part in Greek
legend as a whole. We may say perhaps that the work performed
by the Hindu avataras is performed for the Greeks by heroes —
the slaying of demons and so forth. The Greeks were a self-
reliant race.

vii. It may be asked if the deva (god) is related to the body
which he assumes m the same way as the human spirit is related
to its bodily tenement. Probably, however, the question has not
struck Hindfl theologians.

4. Elasticity of the Vaishnava Term Avatara

In modern times the chief avataras of Vishnu have been
listed and fixed at ten: fish, tortoise, boar, the man-lion, the dwarf,
Parashuram, Rama, Knsna, Buddha, Kalki. This, however,
> See J. N. Farquhar, O.RXJ., pp. 84-5.

n VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 29

IS quite a modern idea. In older writers the number vanes a good
deal. It is a curious fact that Buddha has somehow found a
place m the list. Who would suppose that Buddha was the for-
midable enemy of Vishnu and indeed of all gods ? Now, however,
that all danger from Buddha has passed away, due respect is paid
to his eminence by transforming him into a god himself A
positivist might sigh for the accommodating disposition of the popular
mmd which solves a cardinal problem with such ease. How the
number ten actually obtained currency does not seem to be known.

In The Indian Soctal Reformer of September 1919, Mr.
Manilal Parekh, in a letter which the editor published under the
heading ' The Hindu Appreciation of Christ,' observed : ' The
word avatSra is very loosely used 'by the majority of Hindus.
Most people entirely overlook the serious differences that have been
made between one avatara and another by such Theistic schools
of thought as the Vaishnava. Most of these schools, which alone
can consistently use that termj^ look upon only Krisna as the
Puriina Avatcira, and others as AmcU avatara. This practically
means that Kris^a is the avatara for them m the same sense in
which Christ is the avatitra for the Christians.' The same journal,'
as an illustration of what ' represents the attitude of India to
Christ ', stated : ' One of the most powerful Hindu religious
reformers of recent years was the late Swami Vivekananda. He
had a profound reverence for Christ, and so had his Master,
Ramkrishna Paramahamsa. Pandit Sivanath Sastry m his book
Men I Have Seen relates that a Christian preacher who was the
Pandit's friend once accompanied him on a visit to Ramkrishna.
When he introduced his friend to the Paramahamsa, Ramkrishna
bowed his head to the ground and said, " 1 bow again and again at
the feet of Jesus." The Christian gentlemen asked : " How is it,
Sir, that you bow at the feet of Christ ? What do you think of
Him ?" " Why, I look upon him as an incarnation of God — an
incarnation like our Rama or Krisna. Don't you know there is a
passage in the Bhilgwat where it is said that the incarnations of
Vishnu or the Supreme Being are innumerable ?" '

How fundamental to Vaishnava Hinduism is the theory of
repeated avatSras and how great a part it has played m India's
religious history Dr. Soderblom shows:'' 'The conception of the
solitary incarnation of deity is peculiar to Christianity. In India
the development of the idea resulted m an exactly opposite view,
. . . constant increase m the number of embodiments — we find
successively the figure ten, twelve, twenty-two, twenty-four, twenty-
eight — until at length they are spoken of as innumerable so that the
great teachers of any religion whatever . . . could be numbered
'among the avatSras.' Prof. Jacobi remarks," that 'when a local

' The Indian Social Reformer, September 14, 1919
^ E.R E Vol. vii, p. 184.
^ E. R. E. Vol. VII, p. 197.

30 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

saint has a proper shrine where he is worshipped, and his fame
continues to increase, a legend is sure to be fabricated which
declares him an avatara of some god or rtsln.' Every part of
India can provide its own illustrations of the above.

5. Vishnu's Most Popular AvatSra

We may next consider what is commonly stated to be the
most popular avatSra of Vishnu. Vasudeva appears as a com-
mon name of Vishnu and as an epithet of Knana. There is
scanty but genuine evidence of a worship of Vasudeva which Sir
R. G. Bhandarkar is inclined to date very early and to rate very
highly as an impulse towards monotheism, which played an
important part in later Hinduism. In the Veda Kjrisna is only
the name of a rishi or sage and it is uncertain whether at the later
stage Vasudeva is to be considered as personally identified with the
rishi Krisna. If Kris^ia the warrior pripce whom we meet in the
BhagavadgitS was a historic personage, then he has been trans-
formed into a religious teacher and an avatara of the supreme
spirit Vishnu. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar surmises that there may have
been a historic Krlsija born among the pastoral tribe called the
Ahirs, and his fame may have led to his identification with Kfispa,
the warrior prince, who was already identified with the much older
Vishnu and Vasudeva.' Kris^a and Vasudeva on this theory are
distinct, the latter teaching his people monotheism as early as the
sixth century B.C. Some scholars hold this view to be unhistorical
on the ground that 'there is certainly no clear evidence of the
existence of a monotheistic faith during those early centuries '.'

6. The 'Historicity' of Krishna

The whole question of Kns^a and his ' historicity ' has in
recent years been engaging the attention of Indian scholars. In
the month of July, 1920 Pandit Sitanath Tattvabhushan contri-
buted to The Indian Messenger, the organ of the Sadharan Brahmo
Samaj, a series of articles on ' The Bhagavat Dharma ', described
as * a grand and far-reaching movement ' which ' has afifected all
Indian forms of religion '. The purpose of the articles was
stated thus : * Vasudeva was originally only a particular conception
of God and not a historical person and Krisna's historicity
as a religious teacher is more than doubtful.' After speaking of the
' fictitious nature of the MahabMrata story, specially of its
central figure, Krisna,' the Pandit went on to say : 'As to
Krisna, his relation with the main story of the Mahabharata is
slight, and in the original narration of the war he may have been
quite absent. Even when introduced into the poem, he was

^ V.S.M JR.S., p. 37

" J. N. Farquhar, O.R.LJ,, p. 50.

n VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 31

perhaps only a hero and politician, and not God incarnate.
The Bhagavadgita and the other Gtms anji religious dissertations
in the MahSbharata in which Krisna appears prominently as a
religions teacher and God incarnate, are evidently very late
additions to the original epic. This is clear from the abrupt way
in which some of them, specially the Bhagavadgita, are introduced
into the body of the poem, hke patches of new cloth sewn with
an old piece, and from the knowledge of later times, manners
and religious doctrines which they betray. But there are indica-
tions, however slight, to show that the worship of Kpsna as a hero
or demi-god existed in the country as early as 300 B c. . . .
The temptation to invent a god or to develop and popularize
a god already receiving worship from some people, was very
great. The secret of the spread of Buddhism must soon have been
found out by the Brahmans. It was the position of Buddha as
the central figure in his religion. The Sastras appeal only to
the learned few; a person — one realizing to some extent at
least the popular ideals of excellence — appeals to all. Before the
rise or popularization of Krisna-worship the rapid progress of
Buddhism must have deeply alarmed the leaders of Vedic society
and set them thinking of the best way to stem the tide. Besides the
other methods adopted, of which we need not speak, the setting up
of a rival to Buddha must have commended itself as the most
important . . . And as Buddha was by birth a Kshatriya and by
character a rehgious teacher, so -was his rival, Knsija, conceived
to be, though perhaps the warlike predilections of the epic poets
made him more of a warrior than became his mission as a
religious teacher. This seems to us to be the origin of the
so-called Bha'gavat Dharma, which was indebted not only for
many of its teachings, but also for the conception of its central
figure, to Buddhism. Krisna Vasudeva was not its author, but its
product . . . How then was Vedic theism to be conserved ? On
what line should it develop ? How were the broken forces of
Brahmanism to be rallied ? The Bhagavat Dharma, or, to call it by
its more correct name, Vaisbnavism, was an answer to these
questions ... It was given mostly in the name of one fancied
teacher, that of Krisna Vasudeva. The earlier Vaishijavas knew
he was not historical.' We have seen no answer to this statement.

7. Modern Indian Views of the Krishna Lej^end

If the Vaisbnavite or devotee of hhakti has not been burdened
with relics of nature- worship which cling to some forms of
Hinduism, he has had his own burden in the legends connected with
Krisiia as the ' cowherd '. ' Perhaps indeed we ought not to call

■^ For an English translation of Tularam's poems on this unsavoury topic
see F. and M,, Vol. n, pp 1 -29.

32 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH

them a burden, for they have been immensely popular, but the mori
elevated spirits in Hinduism have wondered what to make of tbem
Of course they have tried allegory, that easy refuge of the inter
preter, but they have probably wished the problem did not Ii<
before them. Perhaps, indeed, the most interesting difference tha
has arisen between the various Vaishnava schools has been th«
problem as to what attitude they should adopt towards these
legends depicting Knsna as taking supreme pleasure m sexual inter-
course and enjoying it on a vast scale, especially with a favourite
mistress named Radha. It is possible to allegorize all this, and
to say that ultimately nothing is meant except that to the pure all
things are pure. In practice, however, the prominence given by
some Vaisbnavas to this aspect of Kris^ia's activities has had
most unpleasant results and the nobler spirits in Hinduism have
turned their thoughts to other aspects of his story. Some suppose
these legends are deliberate allegory. Now allegory has certainly
played a part in the expository methods of Hinduism as of some
other faiths, but as to how large that part was or how far it may
have determined the developments of Hinduism there is room for
vast difference of opinion. We will only say that the critic who
tries to explain things allegorically is a lost man. It is so easy,
so tempting a procedure that he soon sets no hmits to its use : he
considers it a way out of every difficulty. Certainly if the Krisija
legends were allegories, those who devised them conferred a great
disadvantage on their system.

Sir R. G. Bhandarkar has described the ' frolic ' legends as ' an
after-growth ' in the remarkable sentence : ' The dalliance of
Krisna with cowherdesses, which introduced an element incon-
sistent with the advance of morality into the Vasudeva religion,
was also "an after-growth."' * Mr. M. K. Gandhi has applied the
allegorizing method to the Glta so far as to say that ' the GUit is an
allegory m favour of the doctrine of non-resistance.' On this The
Indian Social Reformer for August 24, 1919 made the pertinent
comment: 'This is sheer casuistry.' Concerning the moral diffi-
culty surrounding Knsija's name the Reformer remarked : ' If
people would use their common sense — even apart from all question
of charity — it must be obvious that the " eroticism " of Krisna's
youth is merely the exuberance of the poetic chroniclers.' But
even the most bountiful supply, whether of ' common sense ' or of
' chanty ', will not solve what is one of the most baffling problems
connected with the historical developments of India's chief religion
and to fall back upon ' the obvious ' is to give up the case in sheer
despair. This book is not the place for entering at length on ' such
questions as whether there was such a person as Krisna, whether
the Krisna of the Glta was the Krisna of the PurSiia, whether
the Glth was composed by Krisna at all, whether Krisna is a
Hinduised edition of Christ.' ° Still further is it from the purpose of

\VSM.R.S., p. 3S.
Indian Social Reformer. September 7, 1919.

II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 33

this book to go about ' trying to discredit names and ideas held m
deep veneration by the people '. ' When, however, we are told
positively that ' Krisna was the great leader and teacher who at a
time of dire peril and confusion gave India the watchword which
has preserved her to this day ', something is stated as a historic
fact which by such a firtt-rate authority as Sir R, G. Bhandarkar
is only hazarded as a possibility and even then only by virtue of
' the Hindu habit of thought of identifying one god with another
by regarding the latter either as forms or incarnations of the former
and thus evolving monotheism out of polytheism. ' ^

8. The Text-Book of Vaishnavite Bhakti

The teachings by which the figure of Vishnu- Krisna has kept
its place in India are found in their authoritative form in the
BhagavadgTts. Though not very short, this is condensed and
intricate and presupposes ages of philosophic discussion. Some
have held it to be at the bottom a compromise between different
views, but see below for other possibilities. Its method has been
compared with that of the Anglican Prayer-book, in the form for
the rite of the Eucharist, where the consecrated bread is handed
to the worshipper with a formula which places side by side two
opposite views of its nature. The result has been — whether inten-
tionally or not — that just as members of the Church have been
divided as to which view the Church holds, so Hindus are divided
as to whether the GTicl takes the dvaita or the ffrfva'if a (pantheistic)
view of the divine nature.

Without pretending to expound the GltU or to sum up its views
we may safely call it the text-book of bhakti, a word which means
loving devotion, the bhakti school being those who hold that man's
salvation (however this may be defined) is accomphshed by loving
devotion to God as personal. Whether the author of the GttCi was
trying to reconcile the various schools of thought in his day. or
whether his is the fountain from which those schools subsequently
flowed, the ideas of the book, once launched into the Hindu world,
have had a long history and a powerful influence over men.

Dr. Farquhar considers the enquiry concerning' the far-famed
BhagavadgTtcl ' has advanced a distinct stage. He states that
' most modern scholars recognize that, in its present form, it can
scarcely be earlier than the first or .second century A.D.,' whereas
the late Justice Telang and Sir R. G. Bhandarkar have held
it belonged to the fourth century B.C. The Vaishnavas or
worshippers of Vishnu, at first only a heterodox sect, were
finally established as a real force in Hinduism under the powerful
influence of the two great reformatiou movements represented by

'^ Indian Social Reformer, September 7th, 1919.
2 V, S. M. R. S., p. 19.

34 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Buddhism and Jainisra, and the Giici is their product. If it is ' the
expression of the earhest attempt made m India to rise to a theistic
faith and theology,' then the eaihest Indian Theism is much later
than has been hitherto supposed. The poem seeks to give all
Vaishnavas a truly spiritual religion by bunging 'release' within
reach of all men and women of the four chief castes, in itself a
religious revolution, the Gltcl thus becoming ' the layman's Upan-
ishad'. This it does by instituting a new method in Hinduism,
the bhakti-matga or path of loving devotion. Viewed at first as a
heterodox book, since it sprang from ' the young Vaishnava sect '
itself then viewed as heterodox, the Glfcl is now read by half the
population of India as ' the very cream of orthodoxy ', and it is
' probable that the poem is purely of Indian origin ' without any
Christian influence.'

9. Vaishnava and Orthodox Hinduism

It is worth noting the relation of this influential Vaishnava
sect m Hinduism to those viewing themselves as orthodox. The
Vaishnava devotees have sometimes been described as revoltmg
from orthodox Hinduism in some such way as Protestant re-
formers from the Church of Rome. This view of them is, however,
only partly correct and is mostly misleading. Side by side with
Vaishnava Hinduism ran another line, the line of Saivite worship
holding the advaita creed (pantheism) m its extreme form.
Naturally the Vaishnava system with the dvatta (duality) creed
that accompanies it has occasionally looked like a reformation or
a reaction against the other, but there does not seem to have been
any acute conflict between the two.

We may admit an occasional clash. The Vaishnava system
tends to reject caste and of course the Brahman ascendancy. But
it never carries the tendency far. A foreign observer is astonished
that it does not follow out its apparent principles, but though it
stumbles across the objection to caste it does not act on it. There
were revolts against caste in the history of Hinduism but the
remarkable thing is they have seldom proceeded from the
Vaishijavites.

Vaishnava saints have written more in the vernacular than
the advaita philosophers and this reminds the European of the
Piotestant movement. There is some real resemblance, vet it may
easily be exaggerated and it should be observed that the Vaishnava
writers did not pretend to publish the truth of the Vedas in the
vernacular so much as attempt to provide the unlearned man
with a simple devotional literature. So far the Brahmans had no
objection to their programme and we must not think of the
Brahmans fighting the hliakti-marga or the Vaishnava saint with the
1 See O. R. L. I., pp. SC-92

II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 35

feelings of a Roman towards a Protestant There was plenty of
wrangling between the dvaita and advatta schools of philosophy
but each school had its Brahman champions. And the Brahmans
always took possession of the Vaishijava shrines and administered
them; an amicable arrangement was observed, 'either by the
appointment of real Vaishnavas as mmistrants, or by the
recognition of the actual incumbents as Vaishnavas.' '

This leads to the question as to how the Brahman priests
acquired their great ascendancy even in the reformed type of
Hinduism which Vaishijavism presents to our view. Probably the
simplest and truest explanation of this priestly ascendancy in
Vaishnava Hinduism is the fact that adaptation to the changing
circumstances has ever been the law of the Brahmans. ^

Whatever the status of priests in Aryan or pre-Aryan days the
priest of later Hinduism was the recognised head of all the castes,
and one much wonders how he got and kept the place. Even so,
the Brahman position has not been equally strong in all parts of
India. In Bengal, for instance, the Brahmans appear to be almost
a depressed class compared with what they have been in the
Deccan. Some dissenting bodies of Hinduism, the Lingayats, for
instance, have their priests, but they keep them m their place.
The Parsis have priests but do not yield them any ascendancy, and
it appears to be perhaps an accident of destiny that so high a rank
has been conceded to the Brahman. "

10. Differing' Elements in Vaislinavite Bhakii

It will already have become clear that the influence of Vaishnava
bhakti has neither been simple nor has it given rise to a united
school of believers. The erotic manifestations of bhakti m some
parts have presented a bhakti of an essentially different type from
that in Maharashtra, where its literature has exercised an influence
of a democratizing national value. Side by side with these types
other developments have arisen sometimes resembling the
Vaishijavite system, but certainly often differing from it, and bhakti
belief and practice have often absorbed alien elements. This is so
in the religion of every country, for men are not and cannot be
wholly consistent in their religious and moral systems, but in India
the capacity for inconsistency is greater than elsewhere.

.Dr. Farquhar has shown that for nearly five hundred years
(a. d. 900 to 1350) the development of Hinduism was largely
influenced by the various .',ects that atose and that these seels were
themselves greatly influenced by ' wandering singers ' and their

> R. L I, p 51

■* On t'lie • unfaiUiiH arliiptilnlilj * of the Biahmau hecs Sir VaU'iitine Chiiol
in Indian Uiiu't,f,p 31 .lud Sir Alfied Lyall.p mi in the same book.
•* See alhO section IJ, chap. 1

36 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM Cfl.

* enthusiastic bhakti '. This development went on until the middle
of the sixteenth century by which time these religious sects were
very considerable in both numbers and influence. From 1700
this important factor of the religious sects became a diminishing
quantity. 'Multitudes have drifted back to undifFerenced poly-
theism, carrying with them the merest shreds of the old thought.
Uneducated piljarls (temple-ministrants) with their numerous
images and rnongrel ritual strengthen the reactionary movement.
The mass of Sudras belonged to no sect but worshipped now one
god, now another.'' In these long centuries the important
Bhagavat religion, with its bhaktt and its equalizing of Vishnu and
^iva, was laying hold of the country, and since Maratha saints
were Bhagavatas it behoves us to understand what the nature of this
religion was. Of Us chief scripture, the Bhagavata Purana,
Dr. Farquhar says. 'What distinguishes it from all earlier
literature is its new theory of bhaktt; and therein lies its true
greatness. Some of its utterances on this subject are worthy of a
place in the best literature of mysticism and devotion. A careful
study of those passages will convince the student that they are
expressions of a living religious experience. ... In this rich
religious element lies the chief source of the power of th& Bhagavata.
Hence the hold it has had on some of the best Vaish^ava com-
munities and on many of the noble minds of India.' ^

Such facts as the foregoing will help us to understand some-
thing of the religious condition of India, as we watch the rising
influence of the various bhakti sects in South, North and Western
India.

II. Early Bhakti of South India Vaishnavism

While the earliest references to the worship of Vasudeva
appear to belong geographically to North-West India, to Rajputana
and to the Maratha country, the Vaishijavite bhakti system seems
to have reached its vigour earlier in the South than elsewhere.
This was due to the influence exerted by a set of Vaishnava
poet-musicians named the Alvars whose religion was one of
passionate emotion and who wandered from shrine to shrine in the
Tamil country, composing hymns and singing them in ecstasy.
Though they were the leaders and teachers of the Sri-Vaishijava
sect, a sect very strict in all caste matters, they yet taught Sudras
and out-casles as well as caste people. Not only are their hymns
collected and arranged to-day, but their images are even worshipped
in the temples. The teaching of the Alvars culminated in
Ramanuja, whose birth is fixed in A. D. 1015 and his death in 1137
at 120 years of age. He was a Brahman of Conjeeveram, and is

' O. R. L. I., pp 2'J2, 220, 82,
» Ibid, pp, 229-230.

11 VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 37

regarded as ' the philosophical theologian of the bhahti school '
supporting the Vaishnava worship with an interpretation of the
ancient writings which preserves the personality of God as an
ultimate truth. This leaves the devotee free to believe that hhakti
or personal adoration is actually oifered to the Supreme and
human worship can go no further. Ramfinuja was followed by
Madhva who established much the same conclusion by different
trains of reasoning. These two are the two great theologians of
the Vaisbijava school, though they are not, as an example of life,
so cherished as are other less learned saints, and having written in
Sanskrit they are not understood of the people. ^

12. The Bhaktj of North India Vaishnavism

Of the sect of Ramanuja, and some three and a half centuries
later, was Ramananda (circ. 1400-1470) afamousasceticof Benares
whose name is still surrounded with obscurity.^ He taught that all
God's servants are brothers, that faith in God, and neither caste
nor position, is the thing that matters. 'Let no one ask a man's
caste or with whom he eats. If a man shows love to God he is
God's own '. Of his twelve apostles two were women, Padmavati
and Surasuri.

In Northern India the Vaishnava creed received a great impulse
towards the end of the sixteenth century, its chief exponent being
Tulsl Diis (1532-1623), who devoted himself to Rama, an avatara
of Vishnu, and identified the cult with a .spirited and noble morality.
If Knsna is the most popular Hindu hero, ' Kama is, perhaps,
the most venerated ', as embodying the highest Hindu ideals.
' The pole-stars of his life are devotion to duty and self-sacniice.
He gives up a kingdom to maintain his father's word. He gives up
a peerless wife to please his people.' But he embodies the Hindu
social polity also in ' some of its weaknesses such as the surrender
of judgement to popular clamour and the unquestioned acceptance
of the current system as divinely ordained.'"

Vallabha and Chaitanya worshipped Krisna, the latter (1486-
1534) spreading the Krisija cult through Bengal) where the bloody
sacrifices to Kali and the dark superstitions of the tantra worship
struck him with horror. He must be reckoned a reformer, but bis
presentation of the Vaishnava system is m many ways unedifying.
On the one hand he spins endless subtleties about the different kinds
of love enjoyed by Kfisna and Rildha, thus reproducing the very
atmosphere of dialectic which the hhakti school wishes to leave
behind. On the other hand, his corrective seems to have been an

I On Ramanuja and Madhva see Dr.Macnicol's Indian Thetitn, chaps, vu
and vui.

» Farquhar, O li.L I , p. 323.

•• Indian Social Reformer, August 24, 1919.

38 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

endless round of dancing and swooning before the god. Chaitanya's
emotion leads to something like hysteria, while sensuality results
from that of the Vallabhas. The unbridled emotionalism of the
latter sect was exposed in the Bombay Courts m 1863, as it had
long before been expressed by Mlri Bal, queen of Udaipur in the
fifteenth century ' There is but one male m existence, namely my
beloved Kanai Lai (Krisna), and all besides are females.' ^

Chaitanya seems to have been related to the shrine at Jagannath
much as Tukaram was to Fandharpur. This famous shrine is
better known to Europeans than Pandharpur, probably because it is
nearer to a city like Calcutta, and because somebody at some time
or other invented the fantastic myth about Jagannath's car. The
poems about Jagannath at Pun are all cries tor mercy, resembling
those of Tukaram, when in that frame of mind. They are, however
wanting in the moral sturdmess of Tukaram.

13. Maratiia Bhaktas and Their Bhakti

It IS into a very different atmosphere we pass when we begin 10
study the bhaktt school of Maharashtra, where the chief names are
Dnyaneshwar of the thirteenth century, Namdev of the fourteenth,
Eknath of the sixteenth and Tukaram of the first half of the seven-
teenth.

The first of these, Dnyiineshwar, cominonly referred to as * the
father of Marathi poetry ', is famous as the author of the Maralhi
poetical commentary on the BhagavadgltcZcBl\edL the Dtiyiinaslmoarl
and as the one whose name is to-day coupled with that of Tukaram
by pilgrims on their way to Pandharpur as they march on chanting
the names of their two greatest teachers : Dnyanoba, Tukoba ;
Dnyanoba, Tukoba ° The lofty spirit of Dnyaneshwar's teaching
may be inferred from his prayer at the close of the DnyHneshwarl,
a portion of which runs as follows : ■* ' May God the Universal Soul
be well-pleased with the offering of my words, and being pleased,
may He grant me this favour — that sin may depart from the
wicked ; that in them the love of good works may increase, and
that mutual friendship may grow in the whole of the race. May
the darkness of sin disappear, may the Universe behold the sun of
righteousness, and may the longings of mankind attain satisfaction.
May all three worlds be perfected in joy and for ever worship the
Supreme Being*.

Nciindex', who was famous among bis own people as the ktttiimh-
I:avi because every member oi hib family, even the maid-
servant, could compose poetry, is tlie first l\Iar,ithd poet to
denounce idolatry with real force. Witii hun it was always plain

1 li R K. Vol.9 p 111-. I..

-' Sometimes vniicd as Diiy indci, TiiK.-ii.im , or, tivi'itlcv, Tukaram
■' OuMtions of tc't nusc in some of ilic foUowiiif; pluases, the translation of
which would need to be uiodiried accordiiiKlv.

II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 39

speech : ' They are fools lost to anything good who worship gods of
stone : those who say and those who believe that a god made of
stone speaks to his devotee are both stupid '. But Namdev con-
tinued the use of idols' The legend is told of Namdev that, being
a robber, he was dnven to ' make a friend of repentance ' by the
sorrows of a lonely widow whose husband had been killed by
Namdev's band. Finding' no mercy in a Saivite ternple, he
plunged a knife into his own head as he stood before Siva, the
blood spurting forth and defiling the god. Cast out in anger by
the people, he heard in his bitterness a voice bidding him go to
Pandharpur : ' Its patron god, Vitthal, will purge thee of thy
sins, and thou shalt not only obtain salvation, but renown as one of
God's saints*.

Eknath h3.Ah\s poems publicly thrown into the God avari river
because he practised the principle laid down in the Bhagavadgtlii
that ' a man of knowledge looks with the same eye upon a Brahman
well- versed in learning, upon a cow, or an elephant or a dog or an
out-caste'. So completely was this principle observed by Eknath
the Vedantist, the Brahman, the idolater, that on one occasion he
lifted on to his own shoulder an out-caste Mahar boy whose feet
were burning on the hot sand ; on another occasion he took and
befriended a Mahar thief after the latter's release from punishment
in the stocks; on a third occasion some poor Mahars having
expressed a longing for a feast similar to one Eknath had prepared
for a company of Brahmans, they were invited to join in and at his
wife's suggestion the whole of the Mahar community were later fed
in Eknath's compound ; while on a fourth occasion Eknath went
so far as to accept an invitation to dine at the house of a Mahar,
though m the account of this last incident his biographer makes
out that Eknath's god took Eknath's form. The following story
is also told of him. Returning from his morning bath m the holy
Godavari, a Mohammedan spat on him. Without a word he went
back and bathed again. Once more the man met him and repeated
the insult. As Eknslth calmly turned round and walked back
towards the river a bystander asked him why did he not curse the
wretch. ' Why should J curse my benefactor ?' was the reply ;
' but for him I should have bathed only once in the sacred stream.
Now I have bathed twice, and I must needs go again.'

Though all these Deccan bhahtas have something of true
nobility, none has the deep personal interest of Tukilram. He must
have known their writings well and no doubt owes to them many
of his phrases. It is cuuous, however, that he does not often
directly mention this debt : it was perhaps sufficiently known to his
audience. Tukaram describes himself as initiated into the Vaish-
nava order by a wandering devotee whose name was Baba]i ; this
man m turn gave the names of his own teachers as Raghava-
Chaitanya and Keshava-Chaitanya, but there is nothing to show
who these men were.

40 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

14. Vaishnavite Revival in Vithoba's Land

How great and far-reaching was the influence exerted by these
bhaktas of the Deccan has been set forth by the late Justice
M. G. Ranade who shows that the political revolution which
stirred Maharashtra towards the close of the sixteenth century was
preceded and m fact to some extent caused, by a religious and
social upheaval which moved the entire population. As m Europe
in the sixteenth century, so the contemporary Reformation in the
Deccan was religious, social and literary, not Brahmanical in its
orthodoxy, but ethical and heterodox in the spirit of protest against
all distinctions based on birth, a reformation which was the work
of the people, of the masses not of the classes. The movement
was led by saints and prophets, poets and philosophers, who sprang
chiefly from the lower orders of society — tailors, carpenters, plotters,
gardeners, shop-keepers, barbers and even Mahars. 'What
Protestantism did for Western Europe in the matter of civil
liberfy was accomplished on a smaller scale in Western India. The
impulse was felt in art, in religion, in the growth of the vernacular
literature, in communal freedom of life, in increase of self-reliance
and toleration. ' 1 From the twelfth to the seventeenth centuries
there are no less than fifty names of popular leaders m this great
movement.

For the explanation of this reviving, purifying and democrati-
zing of the Hinduism of the Deccan we have to go to Pandharpur
and there learn what little the muse of history will reveal concern-
ing that god who was enshrined m the thought and affection of
the poet-saint of Dehu. If we could forget Tukaram's veneration
for the image of Vithoba we could hail him as a fellow-Protestant,
but that would be to forget half of Tukaram's spiritual life,
wrapped up as it is so closely with the condescending love which
he supposed God to have shown in accepting the incarnation at
Pandharl. We cannot afford to forget that if he weie alive to-day
Tukaram might show himself disagreeably obstinate about the
historic authentic character of Vithoba's avatara, for he regarded
Pandharpur as a holy place because it was at Pandharpur that
Vishnu seemed to stand incarnate and visible, Tukaram in some way
identifying that incarnation with the figure on the brick, exactly
how, he does not say. He ' wanted some material effigies on which
he could set his eyes and which he could clasp with his hands ; and
he found that satisfaction in the stone god VilhobS. He daily
visited him ; he decked him with flowers, offered incense to him,
and pressed him tenderly to his bosom, addressing him m language
of fond affection. Hence the mad devotion of Tukaram for
Vithoba."

I G R. Navalkar, TitkJrain, The RlcrlurrushinaiiPoct and Samt, pp. 29,
30, 32 and 33. ^^ '

11 VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 41

IS. The Name Vithoba — Its Origin and Significance

Efforts have been made by scholars to elucidate the problem of
the origm of the god Vithoba and the etymology of the name.

(1) Sir R. G. Bhandarkar believes ' the full name of the god is
Vitthal' and that the corruption of the Sanskrit name Vishnu in the
Kanarese language is probably Vitthu, the terminations kS and ta
being appended to the name Vishnu or Vitthu to indicate the sense
of tenderness or reverence. '

(2) This is supported by Pandit Bhagwanlal Indrajl^ who
holds the name Vithoba to be a short form of Vithalbava, that is,
Father or Dear Vitthal, the Yadav inscriptions making it probable
that the oldest of these names is Vitthal and probably Kanarese.

(3) Similar to this is the conclusion reached by Dr. William
Crooke ' who suggests the name may be ' a corruption of Vishnu-
pati, lord Vishnu ', through a local form Bistu or Bittu, the name
Paijdurang, usually understood to mean ' white coloured ', being
probably a Sanskritized form of Pandaraga, ' belonging to
Pa^udarge ', the old name of the place. According to this view
Vithoba would appear to be a local deity admitted into Hinduism
as a form of Vishgu. The term Vithoba thus being traced back to
Vitthal, what of the latter ?

(4) Mr. L. J. Sedgwick sets forth three possible etymologies
for the word Vitthal, one being that it stands for Ishti-sthal, isliH
being used for a brick and also a special form of sacrifice ; another
being that it comes from the MarathI words vU — loathing, and
tSlne = to avoid ; a third being that it is connected simply with the
MarathI word «V=a brick (often pronounced vit), and meaning 'the
Vishiju of the brick '. On the story of Pundalika, whose filial
devotion Krisna is said to have so appreciated as to consent to
become incarnate in an image which should always ' stand on a
brick' ( = Vithoba), ^ Mr. Sedgwick theorizes that about the middle
of the 12th century Pundalika brought to Pandiharpur a statue found
in some other part of India and under the name of Vitthala set it up
in a disused temple of Mahadev. If it be asked why did Pundalika
call the statue Vitthala, Mr. Sedgwick concludes this may have been
the name of Pundalika's father and that ' the statue was intended by
him to be merely a commemoration of his deceased parent ' whom
he worshipped to the end of his life. ^

(5) Rao Sahib P. B. Joshi hints that the name Vitthala may
come from Vishtrashravas, ' the far-renowned ', this being a rare
classical epitl^et of Vishiiu and Kris:oa, Vistara and Vitthala being
philological parallels. But it is not proved either that the

1 V.S.M.R S., p. 87.

2 B.G. Vol. XX, p. 423.

3 Art. Pan4hilrpur in E.R.E., Vol. ix, pp. 601-2.

4 See P. and M. Poems of Tukaram, Vol 2, p. 433.
5J.R.A.S. Bo., Vol. 23, No. 65, pp. 123-5.

6

42 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Pan(Jharpur statue was ever called Vishtrashravas, or that the
first half of the word, which is meaningless, usurped the place of
the whole. ^

(6) Most picturesque of all is the derivation given by Moles-
worth in his monumental MaiathT and English Dictionary ^
and accepted by the Rev. Ganpatrao R. Navalkar" who points
out that to Brahmans '.the initial letter Vi of the name Vitthala
indicates knowledge or understanding, it being a form of the
Sanskrit root vid, to know or understand ; tha means a cypher, i.e.,
privation, destitution ; and /a stands for /5fe, he takes'. In this
way Vii, tha, la form Vitthala and the word may be interpreted
to mean : ' Receiver of the ignorant and those destitute of under-
standing', or m Scriptural terminology, ' the Friend of publicans
and sinners ', as it has been rendered in poetry :

Sinners are we — I and you ;
Vithoba alone is true,
He receives the fallen too.

(7) In support of the second etymology under para (4) above
it may be pointed out that Pundalika is said to have been reclaimed
from an irreligious life by the earnest piety of a Chambhar or
cobbler and this heterogeneous character of Vithoba's worshippers
is witnessed on festive occasions in the fusion of all castes. With
the Brahmans politically dominant in the country they must have
felt a deep resentment against the god whose worship caused such
pollution, a vttal on so great a scale. What wonder they called
this god Vital (pollution), the impersonation of defilement and
abomination ! So runs the popular argument.

(8) It is worthy of note that some authorities attach the
highest importance to Tukaram's own couplet on Vithoba's name,

Vica helS thoba

Mhanont nava to VithobS
numbered 4118 in the Indti Prakash edition and translated by
Fraser and Maratbe (2828, vol, in) : ' a pillar of wisdom he made
himself, hence his name is Vithoba.' Translating the Marathi note
by Mr. V. N. Joga, the late Brahman leader of the Warkaris, in
hi« valuable commentary on Tukaiam's abhaiigs (vol. 2, p. 314) we
get the following English rendering of Tukaram's lines : Vi has
become thoba and thus His (God's) name is Vithoba. Of the two
important Marathi words in the first line, vt stands for vid, know-
ledge, as in para (6) on this page, while thobcl (a meaningless term
whose nearest Marathi word is thombS, a shapeless block of wood)
takes the sense of Skdr, shape or form. Tukaram's couplet would
thus appear to mean that the Formless (Brahma) has assumed a
form, that Divine Knowledge (vid) has taken concrete visible shape,

• JJi.A.S. Bo., Vol 23, No. 65, p. 234.

° See under the word Vitthal, p 737, col. 2.

^ TukSram, MahSrHshtrian Poet and Saint, pp. 3-6.

II VAISHNAVA HINDUISM OF TUKARAM'S DAY 43

that the Impersonal has become Personal, that God Impersonal
and Unseen has become Personal and Manifest. This interesting
interpretation, if it can be sustained, is in complete harmony with
the conception of the Divme Being and its manifestation held by
the Vaishnava bhakH school dealt with in this chapter. Some
students of Tukaram, however, takmg fhobS in Tukaram's couplet
to refer to thombs m the other sense of the latter word which makes
It refer to 'an ignorant fellow', hold that Tukaram makes the name
Vithoba signify that Vi, Knowledge or the All-Knowing, has
condescended to manifest or mcarnate Itself in what to outward
seeming is an ignorant and unthinking material object. See further
on TukSrSm's Idolatry, chapter 6, section 1.

We are bound to conclude, however that the difficult problem
of the origin of the god Vithoba and the etymology of the name
must be regarded as yet unsolved.

Our study thus far has brought us to Pandharpur, the home of
Vithoba and the pilgrim city of Tukaram. In our next chapter we
shall with him 'go to Paijdharpur' and in imagination 'be a
pilgrim there '.

A REMONSTRANCE!

Graoioasly thy heart inclme : —
Open to me, brother mine '

He's a saint who knoweth how
To the world's abuse to bow.
• • I •

Surely he whose soul is great
Is to all compassionate.

Thou pervading Brahman art
How should anger fill thy heart '

Such a pois6d soul be thine.
Open to me, brother mine !

Muktabai (13th century) P. M. S., p. 41,

A BITTER CRY

When will the end of these things be ?
Ah, tell me, Lord of Pandhari,
When wilt thou save unhappy me '

O tell me, tell me true, for I
Cry to thee with a bitter cry.

Why speakest thou not ? Ah, Vitthal, why
Thus silent > Whither shall I fly '

Who else will bear my sore distress ?
Smite me not m my helplessness.

As to the child is wholly sweet
His mother, — so to me thy feet.

. . ( • .

Naradev (14th century) P. M S., p. 44.

GOD WHO IS OUR HOME

. To the child how dull the Fair
If his mother be not there '

So my heart apart from thee,
O 4^u Lord of Pandhari '

As the stream to fishes thou,
As IS to the calf the cow.

To a faithful wife how dear
Tidmgs of her Lord to hear 1

How a miser's heart is set

On the wealth he hopes to get '

Such, sa^s Tuka, such am I '
But for thee, I'd surely die.

Tukaram 1608-SO P. M. S., t>. 57.

1 This Abhang is said to have been addressed by Muktabai to her brother
Dynanesvar on an occasion when the door of his hut was closed against her
and she supposed him to be angry.

Chapter III

The Pilgrimage To Pandharpar
A Stndy in India's Religions Aspiration

I. Tukaram and the Pilgrim City

Pandharpur having exercised a unique influence both on
Tukaram's personal experiences and on his writings, it is important
to consider what is known of this great pilgrim centre. How
Tukaram viewed the pilgrims with whom he must so often have
journeyed is shown in Fraser and Marathe's translation of the
following abhaiigs: 1499, 1500, 1512-14, 1523, 1530-9 in vol. II.
On Pandharpur as a pilgrim centre, whole sections are taken up
with it, e.g., section xv. m vol. Ill beginning with the words, ' Go,
go to Pa^dharpijr; be, be a pilgrim there'' Before, however, we
consider the subject of pilgrimage in Tukaram's day and in the city
so dear to him it may be well, by way of preface, to consider the
subject of Indian Pilgrimage in general and note how passionate is
that religious aspiration to which it is an index.

3. Moksha and Self-Torture

For three thousand tragic years Moksha has been the religious
quest of India. This supreme aspiration after union with God,
which is rightly considered ' the pith and kernel of the religious
faiths of India', runs through the BhagavadgltS, that sacred book
held dear by no less than one hundred and fifty millions of India's
people. This great desire— often despite unworthy accompani-
ments — IS the inspiring motive of India's astonishing asceticism,
with its five and a half million mendicants, Sadhus and ascetics,
whose self-mortification goes to extremes which are disastrous both
socially and religiously. These austerities are practised both by
Saivite and Vaish:pava Hindus but mostly by the former. What
soul can remain unmoved as it contemplates the indescribable self-
torture inflicted to win emancipation? As part of their tapas-
charya or austerities some lower grades of sadhus, and occasionally
sSdhvts (female ascetics) too, practise self-mortifications repellent
and disgusting in the extreme, though with a motive investing them
with noble pathos Such are the Panchaiapas or PanchadhTmt
whose penance consists in enduring the beat of five fires around
them, the fifth sometimes being that of the sun with its fierce heat

46 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

pouring down on their unclothed bodies; the Urdhvahdhu who
extend one or both arms over their head until rigid and atrophied ;
the Urdhvamukhin or Bhumimukhtn who for half an hour or
more hang downwards from the bough of a tree, head nearly touch-
ing the ground ; the Akasmukhtn who keep the neck bent back as
they gaze on a skv of brass ; the Nakhtn who let finger-nails grow
to inordinate lengths ; the JaUiiayl who spend the whole night
immersed in water ; the PhaWhan who subsist on fruits ; and the
DudhahSri who live solely on milk. Other forms of self-torture
consist in sitting or sleeping on a couch studded with nails or on a
bed of spikes (a Brahman ascetic at Benares lay naked thus for
thirty-five years) ; while others observe a vow of silence for years,
or chew live coals, or thrust knives or skewers into their flesh, or
tread on glowing ashes, or allow themselves to be buried alive.
Some of the higher strades of SannySsXs, especially the Datjdi
SannySsJs — so named from the wand (datid) which they carry —
have to undergo a probation of twelve years which is spent m
wandering about m all weathers ; some of them go naked, others
refuse food unless supplied by the hands of a virgin. There are
others who practise ashtadafidvata, measuring the ground by
prostrations of the eight parts of the body — forehead, breast, hands,
knees and insteps, in this way taking long pilgrimages to sacred
places by slow marches which necessitate hundreds of thousands of
painful prostrations. In such cases the pilgrims' hands are some-
times covered with padded wooden clogs, the soles being studded
with hob-nails, some devotees in the performance of vows crawling
the last stage on their sides or on their ankles, completing the jour-
ney by standing on their heads before the idol. '

An impressive example in the Marathi country, illustrating the
deep pathos of India's religious quest, is supplied by the case of
Joga Paramanand, a poet and bhakta of Vithoba, long before
Tukaram's day. One day, when measuring his body from his
house in Barsi to the temple of Bhagwan in the town, at each
prostration repeating a sloka from the BhagavadgitS, as was his
daily custom, a rich merchant vowed he would give him a costly
silk garment if he got a son. On the arrival of a son the vow was
fulfilled and Joga had to wear che costly covering m place of his
rags. Prostrating himself as usual, but more carefully, lest the
garment be spoiled, the samt reached the temple a few moments
after morning piij3 (worship) was over. Whereupon he bitterly
blamed the newly acquired garment, tore it to pieces, and ever
after wore his rags. *

^B.JR.JS.VoI 3,pp 87-96, Art. AsceticnmfHinduJ, A.S-Geien;Vo1.C>,
p. 701 b, Art. Hinduism, W, Crooke, Vol 10, p. 26a, Art. Pilgrimage
(Iitdtan). W.Crooiie; Vol 11, p. 330a, Art Sects (Hindu), W. Crooke; and
J, C. Oman, Cults, Customs, aitd Superstitions of India, p. 9.

« V. L. Bhave, M. Sar., p. 70.

in THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 47

3. Pilgrim Centres in Western India

A brief consideration of what goes on in at least two other
pilgrim centres in Tukaram's India — Maharashtra — will enable us
better to appreciate Pa^dharpur. *

Naiik IS an object of pilgrimage because situated on one of
India's sacred rivers, the Godaverl. According to one estimate no
less than thirty million pilgrims are expected to visit Nasik during
the Sinhasth, a festival which occurs every twelve years when
Jupiter is in the constellation of Leo, a season considered by Hindu
authorities a favourable period for the washing away of sins. In
the present year (1920), this ' duodecennial ' festival which usually
lasts eighteen months and which started on July 14 was practically
over before Christmas, that is in less than five months. The
disappointed PttjarU (ministrants) gave two reasons for the failure,
viz., famine conditionfa and the spread of education, some SSdhtis
bemoaning the fact that many of their clients who used to come
from a distance by tram and motor-car had not appeared this year.

Jejurl, on the Southern Mahratta Railway thirty-two miles
south-east of Poona, is sacred to Khandoba, a god worshipped by
the middle and low castes of Maharashtra and the cause of much
obscenity. Khandoba is of the family of 6iva who represents all
that is most repulsive in India's worship, who attracted to himself
much of the sordid worship of the aborigines of the land, and who
about the 12th century appears to have instigated a terrible perse-
cution of Vaishnavas, Buddhists and Jains. The ' dogs of
Khandoba ', as his devotees are called, are slaves of passion ; boys
born after a vow to Khandoba merely adding to the number of
India's ' holy beggars ', while girls are doomed to lifelong degrad-
ation. ' See also chapter 5, II, 10 on ' doubtful religious characters '.

If Khan4oba, the Saivite god of Jejuri, shows Hinduism on its
darker side, the Vaish^iava idol Vithoba represents Hinduism
almost at its best. Far and away the most sacred city of Maha-
rashtra is Paijdharpar in the Sholapiir District of the MaralhS
country, on which we are to concentrate our attention in order to
learn with what passionate purpose Hindus in Western India seek
after moksha. ' You can buy liberation there for nothing ' is the
verdict of Tukaram, the most famous of the singers of Pan4harpiir.
The chief sacred days are those in Ashadh (June or July) and Kartik
(October or November) when most of the visitors come from the
Deccan, and with railway facilities the number is very large. At the

' This IS not a section on ' sacared places ', otherwise we should have to deal
■with many places, e. g„ \V3l, on the Kfi^^a river, with a large BrShman
population, many temples and bathing ghats, and notable m ^ivaji's
wanderings, one incident in GolewadI village near by illustrating the purity
of his personal character. See H M. P., p 153

^ On Jejuri see B G , Vol xviii, part m, pp 132-9, and part 1, pp, 476-7
also Contemporary Review, September 1909, pp. 289-90,

*8 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Ashadhi Fair of 1919 no less than 140,000 pilgrims^ entered the
town, nearly 12,000 taking darshan daily, many of these taking
the recognised pilgrim route which includes Dehu, Tukaram's
birthplace' and Alandi, the samOdhi of Dnyane^war, and thence
to Pa^dharpur. The god Vithoba, whose darshan so many
eager souls aspire after, and said to be standing on the
brick thrown to Krispa by Pundalika when the former told the
latter to worship him as Vithoba (in other words as ' him who
stood upon the brick'), has for us companion m the innermost
shnne the image of Rukhmmi, Krisna's consort, since her flight
and subsequent discovery were the cause of Knsna's visit to
Pan^harpur. It is from this event that the town dates its import-
ance in the history of Vaish^ava religion.'

4. On the Way to Pandharpur

How do Vithoba's 140,000 pilgrims reach Pandharpur ? The
answer to this question not only vindicates the claim that
Vaishnavism is the most genuine religion in Hinduism, but shows
how closely linked with song is India's spiritual development. A
section in our last chapter gave the names of the chief poets
enshrined in the heart of the Maratha nation. The depth of the
people's devotion to their poet-samts is seen m the part the songs of
these saints play in the annual pilgrimages. Pilgrims reach
Pandharpur from all quarters and each company carries its own
pSlkhi (palanquin) containing the pSdukU (or footprints) and
as is believed the spirit of their bygone samt, whose praise they
sing in his own or some other poet's verse, the leading refrain of
these pilgrim songs being DnyanobS, Tukoha. A prominent
member of the Bombay Prarthana Samaj, in an article describing
his visit to the Ashadhi festival on June 26, 1920, writes; ' For the
last three or four centuries, it has become customary to send
on this Ei-adasM day Palkhis or Palanquins from several
places in Maharashtra and Berar connected with saints like
Tukaram, Dnyandev, Muktabai and others. Stone images or
pSduk^s of these saints are carried in these palkhis and a
large number of pilgrims numbering from 100 to 2,000 accom-
pany them. They come from long distances of fifty to a
hundred miles travelling at the rate of eight to ten miles daily.
They all come to a place five miles from Pandharpur on the
morning of the Ekadashi day. In the evening these palkhis

* The 1920 AshSdhi Fair was attended by 124,775 pilgrims, the decline
being attributed to the ' Smhasth ' Fair (Government of Bombay, General
Department, Order No. 941, January 26, 1921).

" See section 5, Cbap. 1

•■* See H.M.P Chap, xi, 'The Pandharpur Movement, a. d. 1271 to 1640',
where the information given needs supplementing by study of the MarathI
sonrces.

Ill THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 49

start in a procession under police supervision so as to reach Pan^har-
pur by 8 p.m. It is a really inspiring sight to see this procession.
It lasts for nearly four hours. In front of each Palkhi there are
trumpets playing and wind-pipes blowing followed by klrtan-pa.rties
enthusiastically singing and dancing, clapping their hands.' '

Official figures show that out of Vithoba's 140,000 worshippers

attending the Ashadhi Fair, 55,923 travelled there by train.

Pilgrimage by railway tram is one example of changing India.

This means that over 84,000 came by road and what pilgrimage to

Pa)ndharpur meant for some of them is indicated by the Bombay

Gazetteer in its seventy pages on PandharpQr. Its section on

Pilgrims contains the following : ' As soon as the pinnacle of

Vithoba's temple comes in sight, the pilgrim stops and throws

himself on the ground in honour of the god. Some pilgrims, who

have taken a vow to that effect, continue to prostrate till they

reafch the town, or throw themselves at full length on the ground

malfing a mark ahead as far as their hands can reach, then rise,

waHc up to the mark again, prostrate themselves, and so in this way

reach the holy city. Some pilgrims roll on the ground all the way

from Barsi Road (31 miles) or Jeur (45 miles). Cases are said to

have occurred of pilgrims rolling from Benares, Nagpur, and

Haidarabad in fulfilment of vows'.° Dr. J. Murray Mitchell gives

a similar account of what he saw in 1881, telling of one man who

' had come, rolling hke a log at the rate of two miles a day, from

the neighbourhood of Nagpur, occupying about two years in the

achievement.'' As recently as 1919 a Mamlatdar m government

service, a devoted Vaishnava of B.a. attainments, distressed by his

brother's mysterious disappearance, vowed he would go to Pan-

dharpur by the method of dandavat (personal prostrations) if only

his missing brother were found. To his astonishment he discovered

the latter that very day, so bracing himself up for the hardship and

possible ridicule, after a few days' practice of dandavat he obtained

leave and made prostrations all the way from Hubli to PandharpSr,

the journey taking several weeks.

These tragic methods of religious quest adopted in Hinduism
against which the Arya and Prarthana Samajes utter so honour-
able a protest must have been well-known to our bhakti saint and
poet Tukaram who if he ever practised them, which is more than
doubtful, did so only to reject them, for he knew that by none of
these things could his accusing conscience find rest. *

5. The Self-Accusations of Deccan Pilgrims

How stinging these accusations, despite Tukaram's personal
popularity, his abhang numbered 1334 in the Induprakcish

> Subodh Patrika, July 18, 1920.

^ B. G. Vol. XX, p 470,

" The Indian Antiquary, Vol. xi, 1S82, p. 155.

* See chap. 6, sect. 2 , chap 8, sect, iv, para, I , also chap. 9, sects, 8 and 11,

7

50 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

edition and 126 in Fraser and Marathe shows: 'Oh sages, hear
this what I say ; I am a great fallen sinner, Why do ye love me
with such tenderness ? My heart is witness to me that I am not
redeemed ?' Or take his abJiang numbered 476 in the above edition
and translated by Fraser and Marathe (number 343) m words
which, though expressive, cannot convey the pathos and plaintive-
ness of the ongmal MarathI : ' Fallen of fallen, thrice fallen am
I ; but do Thou raise me by Thy power. I have neither purity of
heart, nor a faith firmly set at Thy feet : I am created out of sin.
How often shall I repeat it ? says Tuka. ' And listen yet again
to the piercing cry : ' How can I be saved ? Tell me O ye saints,
and pacify my mind. How shall the sum of my past perish ?
I know not the secret, and hence I despair. How can I make
myself pure? I weigh this thought continually day and night;
I am disquieted. Tuka says, I have no strength of my own, to
bring me to this final repose.' '

Nor was Tukaram alone, among Hindu pilgrims, m the
possession of a sense of sin. ' Not to lay too much stress on a mere
matter of words, the whole Karmic philosophy of Hinduism, the
pilgrimages to rivers and shrines, the conception of heavens and
hills, the innumerable prayaschittams that abound in the moral
code, all these testify to the presence of a sense of moral unworthi-
ness.'^ The Na^ik festival of the Sinhasth referred to'above affords
incidental proof that the sense of sin is by no means absent from the
consciousness of the earnest Hindu pilgrim. This same festival
affords also interesting evidence as to what the Hindu pilgrim
feels he must do for the washing away of his sins. During this
favourable period, says Sir Ramkrishna Gopal Bhandarkar,
' Hindus go to holy places, such as Nagik, shave their heads and
moustaches and bathe in the river. ' ' How clearly Tukaram saw
the futility of such methods and how fearlessly he criticized them
is shown by his striking abhaug numbered 2,8fi9 in the Indw
Prakash edition and translated by Sir R. G. Bhandarkar as
follows: * When the auspicious juncture of Sinhasth comes, it
brings fortune only to barbers and priests. There are crores of
sins in the heart, but externally a man shaves the hair on the head
and the beard. What has been shaved off, has disappeared.
Tell me what else has changed. The vicious habits are not
changed, which might be regarded as a mark of the destruction of
sins ; says Tuka, without devotion and faith everything else is
useless trouble." *

I P. and M. 363; IndupraMsh 619. See further Chap. 8 section in, paras
under 2 on Tukaram's Sense of Sin.

' Christian Patriot, Madras, June 19, 1920."
^V.S.M iJ.S, p. 94.

* For other renderings of this see P. M. S„ Ko. cm. p. 88, and F, and M ,
No. 2599, Vol, ii. p. 415.

in THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 51

6. Pandharpur and its Temples

The town of Paijdharpur stands on the West bank of the Bhima
in the hollow of a great bend of the river. The bank itself is high
and steep and below it there is a vast expanse of sand and gravel.
On this ,are several temples in the usual Deccan style approached
from the town by flights of steps or ghats. From the opposite bank
the little town half-buried in trees presents a picturesque sight with
spires of temples emerging from among the tree-tops. The
pilgrim coming from distant villages by road crosses the nver by a
ford, unless the water is too high, in which case there are large
barges with curious equine figure-heads painted a bright red wait-
ing to transport him.

The town itself wears a thriving appearance. Some small manu-
factures are carried on, a kind of decorated cloth being one of them.
A mixture of resin is squeezed on to the cloth through a stencil and
mica IS dusted over the resin. The result is a bright gliUenng
pattern. Pandharpur's resident population in the census of March
18, 1921 was about 25,530.

Pa^idharpflr, however, from the religious point of view is not a
town but a holy place where many temples have been built, and we
must begin our serious acquaintance with it by visiting these
temples. They are numerous. Every god of importance has his
place or places of worship. The following is a conspectus of the
chief among them, there being many others not mentioned here. *

Shiva : There are many temples, large and small, insignificant
and famous, of Siva. Perhaps his most popular manifestation is
simply the liiiga set up by Pundalika, known as Pundalika's temple.
These are gracious manifestations, but there is also the temple of
Kclla-bhairClva, with an image m black stone where the menacing
aspect IS displayed. His consort has shrines under the names of
ShclkambarT, AmbclbcH axid MahisSsura-mardinT. These two latter
represent her as a friend of man, the destroyer of the buffalo demon.

Khandoba : There is also a temple of the warrior god of the
Deccan, about which no more need be said than appears in section 3
above, and in para 11, section II of chapter 5.

Ramchandra's Temple : This temple contains the images of
Ganpati, Rama, Lakshman, and Sita. There is also a portrait image
of Ahalyabal, the builder. Such images are very rare in connection
with Hmduism.

Qanpati's Temple : The original temple of Ganpati was
destroyed by the Mahommedans, the present one being built in the
reign of the last Peshwa. A stone marks the grave of Cokhameja,
a Mahar devotee of Vithoba.

Tlie Chophala Temple : This contains the Pnnchayatan,
or five images of Visnu, Amba, Ganpati, Mahadev and Surya.

1 Full details are to be found in B.G , Vol. ^x. in its fine section on Pandhar-
pflr to winch we are indebted for much m this chapter

55 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

This IS a popular combination bringing together the gods whose
temples are usually separated.

Vyasa : The author of the Mahabharata is honoured with a
temple to himself.

Chandrabha^a : The spirit of the river is represented by a
black stone image of a woman. On the top of the porch is (among
other figures) a representation of the four-headed Bramha, who
never has a temple to himself, though he is quite familiar as a figure
on other gods' temples. Chandrabhaga is the name given to the river
Bhima m and around Pandharpiir because the bend of the river at
this point assumes the form of the crescent moon (chandra). This
and other details concerning Paijdharpur are given by Mahipati
in his book Pandurang Mahatmya written in 1766. '

Maruti : This popular guardian of Deccan towns and villages,
the famous monkey god, has two shrines or rather images, one black
and one red. The red one owes its colour to the red paint lavished
upon it and it is a conspicuous sight under a peepal tree in the
town of Fandharpur.

Vishnu : Besides the temple of Vithoba there are various other
shrines of Visiju, A little to the south of the town in the bend
of the river there is a holy spot known as Vish^jupada. Here on
the rocks there are a few rough cup-shaped indentations, which
are said to be the foot-prints left by Kris^a's cows when he
brought them here on his wanderings in search of Rukminl. It
was here he found her and here a feast was held to celebrate
their reconciliation. Accordingly a temple has been built here and
here shraddh ceremonies are performed. Not far from this spot
IS the village of Gopalpur, where there is another temple of
Krisija, a fairly large structure in a courtyard enclosed by
cloisters. Here we are shown a big jar where Yashoda used to
make butter and the place is connected with Kyisija's name by
various tales. In Paiidharpur itself there is a temple of Kfis^a
represented as Murlidhar, the flute-player : there is also one of the
Dattatreya incarnation of Visnu.

All the temples mentioned above are places of note : smaller
temples and shrines abound. In some cases their origin is known,
in others it is not, in no case does it appear to be of any interest
or connected with any legend except that of the Takpithya Vithoba.
This is the name of a small image erected by a Brahman widow
who was crowded out of the temple and sat disappointed and
fasting for fifteen days after which she fell asleep and on waking
found this image miraculously presented to her by the god.

7, The Temple of Vithoba

We may now proceed to visit the sacred temple of Vithoba
ilself. It stands in the very centre of Paiidhrl-ksJietra, the
holy city of Pancjihari. Round it is a courtyard, measuring} 350

' See V. L Bhave, U. Say., pp. 382-3.

VITHOBA OF PANOHAUPUli

Ill THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 53

.feet by 170. The chief entrance to this is by the East gate called
the Namdev gate. As the floor of the courtyard is above the level
of the surrounding ground the gate is reached by twelve steps. On
the lowest of these steps is placed a brass bust of Namdev who
with his family took samSdht there, the step being plated with brass
on which are stamped the figures of Namdev holding a Kirtan and
of the women of his family clapping their hands in accompaniment
to his music. Inside the courtyard^ are many little shrines, to
Ganpati, Maruti and Rama and even Siva and Bhairava, and there
are small living rooms, storehouses and other chambers for pur-
poses connected with the temple. The central shrine has been
constructed at various times. Its core appears to have been m the
Hemadpanti style of the twelfth century, a style which though
simple is one of the truly artistic styles of Hindu architecture.
The shrine itself is approached by a long vestibule, with a flat roof
and Westerners are allowed access to this roof from which part of
the courtyard can be seen. It is all that they see of the interior,
which is rigidly closed to all but Hindus. This is m contrast with
our experience at Dehu whereon October 25, 1920, we were allowed
to stand on the temple threshold examining by the aid of a hand-
mirror the faces of -Vithoba and Rukmmi; at Pandharpur, how-
ever, access to the central shrine can only be gained by crossing
the above-mentioned courtyard where un-Hindu feet never tread.

8. The god Vithoba

Western eyes, accordingly, do not gaze on the sacred image of
Vithoba at Paijdharpur and his shrine is small and dark, little being
distinguished except by lamplight. Copies of the image are made
and sold, one of which may be examined m the picture opposite.
It is probably not unlike the original. This is three feet nine
inches high, cut, probably, out of black trap rock. The upper part
of the body is usually nude ; round the waist is a waist-cloth ; on his
neck the god wears a collar with a jewel set in it ; in his ears are
the fish ear-rings. The image stands with arms akimbo and hands
on hips, one hand carrying a conch-shell, the other a discus, Visiju's
emblems. On his forehead is the sextarial mark of Vispu. ' His
feet are evenly set on the square brick so often mentioned in the
poems. Perhaps the most remarkable fact of all, and one we
learned from a Ptijdn (ministrant) on the spot during our visit on
October 27, 1920, is the fact that Vithoba wears a curious tope- like
crown, which the priests say is Siva's linga; as is affirmed also in
an abhatig of Nivtittinath, the older brother of Dnyaneswar, and
in a well-known line of Raindas's Manobodh}

The copy of the image here presented is probably if anything
superior to the original as a work of art and Western critics
might conclude that whatever imprebsion Vithoba has produced

' See chap. 6, sect. 4 on Siva

54 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM en.

upon mankind is not due to any aid from plastic art. With
reference to the same picture in Dr. Macnicors Psalms of MarStha
Saints, Miss Evelyn Underbill writes as follows : 'To the Western
mmd it seems almost incredible that the'image of Vithoba, which
forms the frontispiece of this volume, ceuld arouse ardent feeling
of any kind save that of repulsion ; but we must remember that an
ancient Greek would probably have found a Byzantine crucifix
equally grotesque, and been wholly unable to understand _ the
emotional glamour with which devotion has surrounded it.'
It 4nay be that Hindus are desirous of emphasizing their theory
that their idols or sculptures are swayambhn, self-formed or self-
created. This was what Dr. J. Murray Mitchell was told about
Vithoba on his visit to Pandharpur m December 1881 : * We were
told it had not been fashioned by human hands but was swayambhn
i.e., self-produced.* We were further informed that in the morning
It looked like a child, at noon like a full-grown man, in the evening
like an old man.'" On some occasions during the pressure
of Ashadh and Kartik observances the god 'is popularly
represented as being tired out and his bed-chamber is closed.'

9. Vithoba and Caste^ Distinction

On the question of the equal privileges of all castes at
Pandharpur there may easily be confusion. While it is quite correct
to say that history shows Vitthala is quite free to all castes ' and
that ' in the 13th to 16th centuries distinction of caste was not
observed m and about the temple precincts at Pandharpur,' " it
is yet true that the Mahar poet and saint Cokhamela who is
said to have died m 1338 (traditional date) was forbidden to enter
Vithoba's temple ? The only reason assigned is that he was an
' untouchable ', a Mahar ' out-caste ', and that ' out-castes ' as such
have never been allowed within the sacred precincts. This agrees
with what Dr. J. Murray Mitchell saw on the spot: ' It is often
asserted that caste is disregarded at Pandharpur ; but we found
that Mahars were not allowed to approach beyond a certain point.
This led us to ask for an explanation : and we quoted one of
Tukaram's most remarkable abhangs, beginning

'Twixt the low and lofty, God no difference knoweth,

Still to faith He sheweth

All his glory,

' Westminster Gazette, Feb. J4, 1920. The review fiom which the above
IS taken is. not signed with Miss Underbill's name but ' E U ' i& sufficient indi-
cation of the writer,

' The present writei was told the same in October, 1920

" The Indian Antiquary , Vol \i., 1882, p 151.

* L. J Sedgwick, I C S., /. R. A. S. Ho , Vol.23, No 05, p. 126.

" Ibid , p 134.

Ill THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 55

in which the poet declares that the god Vithoba assisted the Mahar
devotee Cokhameja even to bear off dead cattle — which is one of the
most humiliating of employments. " Why then," we asked, "exclude
Mahar worshippers now ?" " That was all very well for the god, "
was the reply ; " he may do as he pleases ; but men must obey the
rules of caste." ' '

The principle applied always at Pa^idharpur, the understanding
of which will prevent any possible confusion as to the practice
obtaining there, is that low castes are admitted to Vithoba's shrine,
while ot<<-castes or ' untouchables ' are excluded, and always have
been. Nevertheless, all that was said at the close of chapter I on
' the democratizing influence ' of the Maratha bhaktas holds true,
with the result that m Vithoba's presence there is a cosmopolitanism
found very rarely in Indian temples. This fact doubtless largely
explains Vithoba's popularity with the masses of the people.
Even those Warkaris^ who are of low-caste origin, as well as
other low-caste devotees of Vithoba, are allowed to embrace him in
his innermost shrine, just like those of higher birth. It seems all
the more unfortunate therefore that 0M^ castes are not allowed at
all within the precincts of Vithoba's temple, but must worship at
the image of the Mahar saint Cokhameja on the other side of the
street opposite Namdev's staircase.

It must be regarded as one of the many irreconcilable incon-
sistencies of Hinduism that in spite of bhakti's 'democratizing
influence 'no out-caste is admitted to Bhagavata temples in
Maharashtra '.° And Vithoba's temple is a Bhagavata temple.'' On
this subject see also section 6, ' Tukaram as Reformer,' and section
7, Tukaram and Caste,' in chapter 6.

10. Vithoba's Temple-service

It will be of interest to note what are the services performed in
Vithoba's temple and who perform them. It would appear that no
other Vaish^ava temple in India possesses a similar image, served
as It IS by a colony of DeSasiha Brahmans, including priests
{badvas), ministrants, choristers, bath-men, singers, barbers, mace-
bearers, and lamp lighters. Five times every twenty-four hours
the round of service is performed. About three a.m. a priest begs
the god to wake. The door being opened, food placed in the bed-
chamber the previous day is removed, butter and sugar-candy are
laid before the god, and a torch made of muslin soaked in butter is
waved before him from head to foot. Many votaries come to
behold Vithoba at this time, after which he is again fed, butter and
sugar being placed in his mouth. Lights perfumed with camphor
are waved, faded garlands are removed, the feet of the image are

» The Indian Antiquary, Vol.xi., 1882, pp. 151-2.

' See section on these in Chapter 7.

3 O.R.L.I , p. 301. * See para 2, chapter 2, p. 27.

56 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CEI.

washed first in milk and then in water, and the service proper {piija)
then begins. The image is unrobed and bathed, a sheet being held
before the door, while he is naked. Before the 1873 attack on
Vithoba by the Saivite enthusiast (see section 14 below) the god was
washed in warm water, but since the left leg had to be cemented it
is said that cold water mixed with saffron has been used. After
his bath he is dried and dressed m new robes, his face being wiped
and rubbed with scented oil until it shines. A turban is bound
round his head and garlands of flowers are hung on his neck, while
the barber holds a mirror before him. His feet are washed and
rubbed with sandal, and sandal paste is applied to his brow. About
three in the afternoon the god is again dressed, the ministrant
bathing and adorning him. Wednesday and Saturday are days
specially sacred to the god unless these fall at the conjunction of
sun and moon or at ominous conjunctions- of planets, and as with
all Vaishnavas, the eleventh day in each fortnight of the lunar month
(ekadaslix) is a fast day. *

n. The Pilgrim's Priest and Ceremonies

Having learned what there is to see with the bodily eye at
Pandharpur we may now follow the pilgrims on their arrival there
and observe what use they make of their time. Each pilgrim on
arrival is bound by custom to enroll himself as the client of
some priest. Strictly speaking, indeed, he should engage three
priests, a Badva to conduct him to Vithoba, an Vtpat to conduct
him to Rukmini, and an ordinary local Brahman to perform the
river-side ceremonies. To mix with the crowd and salute the god m
passing requires no priestly help, but most pilgrims come desirous
to accomplish something more. They have no difficulty in finding
priests, for records are kept of all visitors and the priest who has
once served a family has a right, and his family inherit a right, to
serve its descendants. Every pilgrim is met on his arrival and
handed over to his proper priest, who generally makes all necessary
arrangements for his stay.

Early on the morning after his arrival the pilgrim goes down
to the river to perform the Ganga-hhet, the ceremony of meeting
the Ganges, as the Bhima is called for the' time being. He
places on the ground a cocoanut, some sandal paste, tulsi leaves
and a few grains of rice. He addresses the river thus : ' I offer a
cocoanut, sandal paste, tulsi leaves and rice,' and at the same time
he places these articles on the sand before him. The priest then
says : ' I bow, Ganga, to thy lotus feet : I bow to thee, Chandra-
bhaga '. The ritual which follows is a little more complicated if
the pilgrim is a Brahman than if he belongs to the lower castes.
In the former case he enters the water till his head is submerged,
faces the East, sips water thrice from the palm of his hand and

1 See B. G., Vol. xx, pp. 415 ff ; E.R.E., Vol. ix, p. 602 a,

Ill THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 57

repeats the twenty-four names of Visnu which he invokes in his
daily devotions. He then sprinkles water on the river and prays
m Sanskrit . ' Come, Sun, with thy thousand rays, thou mass of
glory, and ruler of the world, accept this my worship and this
offering of water : I bow to thee.' He takes a little earth from the
bed of the river and rubs it on his chest, saying in Sanskrit ; ' Earth !
free me from my sms and misdeeds, that my sins being destroyed
by thee I may win heaven.' He makes another dip in the water
and turning to the West takes a little cow-dung from the priest
and rubs it on his body saying in Sanskrit : ' Cow-dung, that
belongest to the wives of bulls who roam from wood to wood eating
herbs, thou that dost cleanse the body, remove for ever all my
ailments and sorrows.' He dips again in the water, rubs ashes on
his chest, and recites a Vedic hymn. Then still standing in the
water he takes water m both hands and pours it out as an offering
to the river, saying : 'In this South-flowing Bhima on the West
bank, in the holy Lohadand, in the holy town of Pandhri, near
Pundalik, near the holy ptpal Narayan, and near the cow and the
Brahman, O Bhlma ! by thy favour guard me, who am the image of
sin, a sinner above other sinners, whose soul is a sinner and born
in sin.'^ To put away the miseries and sins whose source is the
body, the speech, the mind, the touch of others or the neglecting
to touch others, eating or refusing to eat, drinking or refusing to
drink, and all small and secondary sins, to put away these I
bathe m the Chandrabhaga on this auspicious day.' After this
ceremonial bathing, if he wishes, he may proceed to personal
ablutions.

If a Brahman pilgrim has his wife with him the ends of their
clothes are tied m a knot before they enter the river. The wife
does not rub her body with earth, cowdung or ashes, nor does she
repeat her husband's prayers : she merely follows her husband's
actions m dipping in the water.

In the case of a non-Brahman pilgrim these ceremonies are
much abridged, the rubbings being omitted. The pilgrim salutes
the river m the first words we have given and then enters the water
while the priest says : ' In this holy place on this holy day I shall
bathe m the Chandrabhaga to remove all sins of body and mind due
to touch or caused by speech.'

12. The Pilgrim's Gifts

The pilgrim then, if a well-to-do man, proceeds to make certain
offerings to the river : sandal-paste, rice, flowers, sugar and fruit.
Offerings are also made to the priest : (i) Possibly the clothes in
which the pilgrim bathed are presented to him. (li) Some money :
it IS a rule that whatever else is given to a Brahman some money
must accompany it. (lu) If the pilgrim is a married man his wife

' B. G. (xx., p. 475) here inserts ; ' 6iva ' destroy my sins ',

58 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

may make a present to the priest's wife. This takes the form of a
wmnowing fan, m -which are laid various articles partly symbolic,
such as rice and plantains, partly valuable such as ornaments or
dress, (iv) A cow may be given to the Brahman. The pilgrim
seldom is rich enough to make this present, but a pretence of
making it is gone through. The priest brings forward a cow which
he keeps for the purpose, the pilgrim lays a little money beside her,
worships her and walks round her, while the priest says : ' All the
sins and misdeeds of this and other births are destroyed at every step
of the round." Then the pilgrim grasps the cow's tail and places
it in the priest's hand and the priest says on his behalf . ' The cow
in whom live fourteen worlds and who therefore is able to do good
in this world and the next, this cow whose god is Rudra, who has
golden horns, silver hoofs, a copper back, with a milking pot and
a bell i^ound her neck, this cow I give to thee who art learned
m the Vedas, who hast committed them to memory, who hast a
wife, (this do) that Visnu may be pleased and I may be saved
from hell.' After this comes the gift of a shaligram stone made
with similar ceremonies. This gift, it appears, is more usual flora
pilgrims from the Southern Deccan or Telugu country.

Then comes the ceremony called shrclddh or funeral rite, m
memory of the pilgrim's ancestors. As the IJhima flows into the
Krisna and not into the sea, these ' mmd-utes ' at Pandharpur are
less availing than at Gaya or Na^ik. Brahmans therefore seldom
perform them at Pandharpur ' and when they do the moustache is
not shaved,'* an additional reason being that the worshipper is
viewed as still having a father and mother m the god Vilhobu and
the goddess Rakhumai. The shrclddh ceremony should properly
be performed on the banks of a river flowing into the sea, the
Bhima being the only river allowed as an exception to this rule.

The Bombay Gazetteer adds that some Madras pilgrims
treat Pan4harpur as they treat Benares or Gaya. ' The women,
though their husbands are alive, make the hair ofTenng or vei.ilditn
{veuT, braid; dtin, giit), that is, they have their heads shaved as
Brahman women's heads are shaved at Gaya. The ceremonies may
either be spread over three days or crowded into one, according
to the time and money the pilgrim means to spend'.'

13. Darshan (vision of the god)

After these duties are accomplished the pilgrim proceeds
to the worship of the god. In its simplest form this is nothing
more than a darshan or a setting of one's eyes upon him. But
the usual method of darshan in Vithoba's temple in Pandhar-
pur is marked by a feature said to be found nowhere else in the
whole of India. No pilgrim to Vithoba at Pandharpur considers the

' B. G. Vol. XX, p. 478.
2 Ibid, p. 481,

m THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 59

darshan ceremony complete unless he touches the feet of Vithoba
with his head. In order to ensure decorous performance of this
ceremony, bars are placed beyond which only one worshipper can go
at a time. Darshan at Pandharpur thus includes embracing the
image, laying one's head on its feet, waving money, laying money
before it, placing round its neck a flower garland and tulsl leaves,
and offering a cocoanut or sugar and incense. Till this is done the
pilgrim has no rest, for to most pilgrims the sight of Vithoba is their
dearest hope on earth. They beam with joy as they leave his
presence, their longing to throw their arms round his knees at last
realized. ^

It often happens that a pilgrim reaching Pandharpur late in the
evening goes straight to the temple and accomplishes a dhnl-
darshan or visit for this purpose with the dust {dhnl) of his journey
still on his feet. There is nothing formal about such a visit. But
more ceremonious visits may be paid. Two of these have been
recognized, the mahspujs and the padyapuja. In the former the
pilgrim pours over the image the five nectars and usually presents
offerings of considerable value, such as jewels. Owing to some
dissensions between the priests official permission for this mahetpaja
has now to be obtained. The padyapujs is more common. In
the course of this the pilgrim washes the feet of the image, sprin-
kles them with sandal-paste and rice, throws a garland of flowers
round its neck, waves lighted sticks of camphor incense round it,
and finally lays a cash present ^ before it. The image is then decked
in its ornaments, and sweetmeats are offered to it. This being
accomplished the pilgrim proceeds to worship Rukmini. Here
he still has choice of forms of ceremonial corresponding to the two
recognized m the case of Vithoba. The details are in each case
much the same. It is to be noted that in 1873 various innovations
were introduced into Vithoba's worship owing to the injuries in-
flicted on him (on which see following page).

The visit to the chief gods being finished the pilgrim makes a
circuit of the holy district" and salutes the deities at their temples.
There are two recognized routes, one longer * than the other.' Once
in his life every devout worshipper makes the longer circuit, over
seven miles. When he stays a day or two in Panclharpur he makes
it a point to see the daily ministrations offered to the image as often
as possible. Nor does he neglect to feed a company of Brahmans,
large or small according to his means, especially if his visit has
been a ceremonious one. If his visit falls during the sacred seasons
its closing scene will be enacted at the Gopalpur temple, where the
pilgrims partake of a mixture of dried curds together in memory of
the joint- meal by Krisna and the cowherds.

!■ B. G. XX., p. 473.

" DakshinS.

" Pradakshind,

* Nagar^radakshitfa, town circuit.

" Dovpradakshi^a, god-circuit.

60 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH-

14. Vithoba's Calamity in 1873

On Sunday, July 20, 1873, while four or five GoscivX^ mendicants
were embracing the idol Vithoba, one of them pushed it over and
as it fell it broke its legs between knees and ankles. The priests
refused to divulge exactly what happened, the local behef being
that the mendicant threw a stone at the idol because it did not eat
fruit which he had offered. ' But this is less likely ', says the
Bombay Gazetteer, 'than the story that the image was thrown
over by a shove either wilful or accidental. To avoid inquiry and
noise the Badvas silently drove out the mendicants and kept the
temple closed for two or three days. According to one story during
those days a new image was installed, but examination shows that
the present image is the old image patched at the break, it is said,
by iron or copper rods from within. Besides being mended the
image has also been strengthened by a support from behind up to
the knee.' *

Newspapers of the time enable us to supplement the above
record in various details. The Arunodaya published at Thana
atfirmed positively that a stone was thrown, while a Bombay
correspondent after careful investigation wrote to the hidu-
PrakSsh that the stone thrown was the size of a cocoanut, adding
that a new idol of Vithoba was erected as nearly like the old one
as could be made, but dissimilar in important respects which he
mentions.

How terrible the presence of a broken idol at Pandharpur must
have seemed will appear from a few sentences by Mrs. Smclair
Stevenson : ' If in the process of time the ear or nose of an idol,
or any of its limbs, gets broken or crumbles away, the belief i§ that
the spirit of the god escapes through the opening thus made. . . .
One of the most illuminating ways to study idolatry sympathetically
and scientifically is to watch what is done with a broken idol '." In
Vithoba's case, it was no mere ' crumbling away ' but a violent
attack upon him resulting in grave injury.

A sure index to the gravity of the affair is supplied by a secret
meeting of the temple priests and the resolution they passed of
which the following is a rough translation: 'This afTair must not
reach the outside world, for we have already many foes and this is
a most critical occasion. Therefore without complete unanimity
we cannot possibly preserve secrecy. Remembering then our
ancient ancestors, let us make no more ado but all pull together and
reseat Vithoba on his throne. Putting aside our difTerences regard-
ing temple-rights let us labour with one accord, for we are all
dependent solely on him. All wrangling at the time of worship
should cease forthwith and we should all toil with one end in view.
When people come to offer sacrifice we should ask of them gifts

1 See second footnote, p. 6.

« B.G. Vol. x\, p. 423.

3 The Rites of the Twiee-Bom, pp. 41S-C.

Ill THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 61

only in accordance with established rules, gladly accepting what is
gladly given. Whenever Vithoba is worshipped arrayed in his
ornaments, all must be present, each doing service strictly according
to his hereditary right. This resolution is passed unanimously and
our earnest request to all Warkaris and their followers is that
thsy read and carefully ponder over it, and that without fail they
impart wisdom to the common people by pointing out the advantages
of coming to Pandharpur.' The crisis thus led to self-reformation
by the priests and a consolidation of their ranks.

Needless to say, confusion reigned supreme not only in Pandhar-
pur but throughout Maharashtra, for it was found impossible to con-
ceal the fact that so grave a disaster had happened m the holy city.
The iconoclast himself spread the knowledge, for he went about
bragging of his deed until the angry citi;^ens, two days later at 7-30
in the evening, set on him so furiously with cudgels that he fell
senseless and the police had to remove him to hospital. Others were
arrested on suspicion but released on a security the next day
owing to lack of evidence. How deeply Maharashtra was moved is
clear from the newspapers of the time — Indu-PrakCish, Aruno-
daya, BerSr SamSchiir, and the Dnycinodaya. One Hindu
gentleman writing to the proprietor of the first-mentioned paper
gave expression to what must have been a widespread doubt :
' With broken leg how could Vithoba any longer be viewed as " self-
existent " as indicated in the favourite term applied to him,
swayambhn '? And among the Warkans, the innermost sect of
Vithoba's devotees, there was a wailing as if a member m each
family lay dead.'

15. Pilgrims, Missionaries and Indian Reformers

Writing m Tfie Indian Antiquary for June 1882 (pp. 1-19-156)
the Rev. Dr J. Murray Mitchell gives an interesting account of
a visit to Pandharpur in which he reports that in conversing with the
people and in preaching he met no bitter opposition, many express-
ing a desire to hear him again. The mental state of the pilgrims
is illustrated by the following typical conversation. ' You good
friends are very much in earnest. Some of you have come 600
miles to this festival. The expense, the labour, is very great ; the
risk to life not small ; for you all know how frequently cholera
breaks out at these gatherings. You expect much from this pilgri-
mage. How sad if you do not gel what you want; but what do
you want ? ' ' We bathe in the Bhima, and gaze on the god ; and
so all sm is removed, and much righteousness acquired ', was the
usual answer. ' Are you sure that bathing in the Bhiraa washes
away sin ?' ' Why, who doubts it ? have not I come hundreds of
miles to be purified so ?' Dr. Mitchell reports perpetual confusion

"i^ Dnycinodaya, Vol. 32, July 31, 1873, pp. 245-7, 251-2; August 7,
1873, pp. 237-9 ; Vol. 71, August ) , 1912, pp. 243-4.

62 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

between the material image and an unseen Vithoba, ' Vithoba ',
said one of the hearers, ' is almighty and omnipresent. ' ' Is
he in your own village?' 'To be sure.' 'Then why travel
hundreds of miles to see him here ? ' ' Ah ! but this is a special
Vithoba; this is a swayambhil image.' ' Well; but is it the image,
or the deity, you trust in ? ' ' The deity.' The doctor made efTorls
to discover what precise meaning was affixed to the phrase heard
continually, that the waters of the Bhima ' washed away sin.' The
pilgrims believing that the guilt of sm was removed, to discover
whether they held that their hearts were purified questions were
put. ' Unless our hearts are purified,' said one man, ' there is little
good in our coming here'. But did experience show that they
were purified? On one or two mamtainmg this, they were easily
silenced by proverbs current all over India about those who go on
pilgrimage generally coming back worse than before. 'Visit
Benares thrice ', runs one Marath! proverb, ' and you become a
thorough scoundrel.' So the doctor asked: 'When a pilgrim
visits Pandharpur, does he not usually carry home a load of pride
and self-conceit ? ' ' Too often,' was the reply. ' Has he then got
any good by bathing in the Chandrabhaga ? ' ' Very little.' ' Has
he not got harm ? ' ' Perhaps.'

A similar impression was left on the rnind of an Indian Reformer
belonging to the Bombay Prarlhana Samaj whose visit to Panclhar-
pur on June 26, 1920 we have already referred to. He writes as
follows: 'One cannot avoid thinking when he sees this vast
humanity on Ashcldhi Day in Pandharpur, . . . that people do
not get true spiritual benefit. After all it is a religious feast which
affects only the outside. The hearts of the devotees are not touched
and their life is not renovated. The pilgrim does not leave the
place morally or spiritually transformed He thinks his sins are
washed away, but he has no determination not to err again. How
to preserve this valuable asset of bhakti and make it spiritual is
the problem to which the thoughts of a Brahmo naturally turn
when he sees this religious feast.' '

i6. Government and Pilgrim Festivals

In the essay on Pandharpur referred to above, Dr. Murray
Mitchell writing in 1882 showed the grave need of public control in
connection with the two great annual festivals. The crowding of
the worshippers into Vithoba's small apartment often resulted in
women being injured m the crash, sometimes they were subjected to
indignities, sometimes had their ornaments torn off. A thoughtful
English magistrate had ruled, a few years before, that as far as
possible, men and women should be kept separate on the great day
of any feast. Even so, the scene was one of terrible confusion, the
unutterably filthy condition of the town making one of the doctor's
party seriously ill. On another occasion cholera broke out, and they
1 Subodh Patnka, July 18, 1920.

Ill THE PILGRIMAGE TO PANDHARPUR 63

had to minister to the bodies as well as the souls of the pilgrims.
Happily, however, ' Pandharpur has developed into a decent-looking,
clean town, with a plentiful water-supply.' ^

How this improved condition of affairs in this great pilgrim
centre has been brought about and how it is still mamtained
appears from the annual Government reports on the Ashadhi
Festival. In the report from the Collector of Sholapur to the Com-
missioner, C. D. .dated the 11th November 1919, we are told
supervision was exercised as usual by the Collector, the District
Deputy Collector, the District Superintendent of Pohce, and the
Deputy Sanitary Commissioner, the Sanitary Commissioner also
encamping at Pandharpur during the Fair. In addition to the
ordinary police stationed at Paiidharpur, a force consisting of one
Inspector, eight Sub- Inspectors, six jamadars, twenty-three Head
Constables and one hundred and thirty-five constables from other
parts of the District were drafted into Pandharpur. From other
districts also detectives were called in to watch their own local bad
characters. Sanitary arrangements were completed m good time
before the Fair m a way reported to be ' very creditable to the
Municipality.' One hundred and thirty-eight extra bhangJs and
one Sanitary Inspector were employed by the Municipality, who
had arranged to stock sufficient quantities of disinfectants freely
used during the Fair. Water-supply was adequate. Ten men
were appointed to prevent waste, and only on one day was
want of water felt in places of high levels. The usual precautions
of closing step-wells, and of treating all wells on the piilkin routes
with permanganate of potash, were adopted. 'The pilgrims as
usual took river-water m spite of advice from the police,' The
medical arrangements showed twenty-eight Sub-Assistant Surgeons
employed on special duty. There was no indigenous cholera at
Pandharpur, but it broke out with' the Aland! paikhl and thus
infection was brought to Pandharpur, a few cases from Na^ik,
Jalgaon and Umraoti also being imported. After the big day the
cholera cases were almost confined to the followers of the Alandl
pillhhl, and three Sub-Assistant Surgeons were sent with the palkhls
of Dnyanoba, Nivrittinath and Tukaram for two marches of their
return journey. The Hindu division of St. John's Ambulance
Brigade attended the Fair as usual and rendered great assistance.

17. The Disastrous Pilgrimage of the Last Peshwa

It would have been strange if so famous a religious centre as
Pandharpur was for probably a thousand years ° had not figured in

I The Indian Antiquary, Vol. xi, 1882, pp. 1S3-6.

'^ ' In the thirteenth century Vitthal was already a god of long standing. . .
The general workmanship of the image is earlier than the mediaeval Rajput
style of the Anhilvad Chaiilukyas (943-1240), ... or the Ajmer Chohans
(6*55 — 1193). The dress and ornament of the image belong to . . . probably
not later than the 5th or Cth century after Christ,' This image of Vithoba
resembles sculptures ' of the 4th century'. B.C., Vol. xx, pp. 420, 424, 430.

64 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

the historical vicissitudes of the country. Withm the walls of
Pandharpur, a stone's throw from Vithoba's temple, Vithoba's
devotees who were for the time being residing in the sacred enclo-
sure, m 1815 committed a foul murder. This murder of Gangadhar
Shastri, the Gaikwar's agent at the Poona court, effected with the
complicity of Trimbakji Denglia, the favourite of Bajirao the last
Peshwa (1796-1817), was one of the chief causes of the downfall
of Maratha rule. The official chronicle runs : ' Gangadhar Shastri
had gone to Poona under British guarantee to settle some money
disputes between the Gaikwar and the Peshwa, but finding his
efforts fruitless he had determined to return to Baroda and leave the
settlement to British arbitration. This disconcerted Bajirao's
plans, whose real object was to arrange a union with the Gaikwar
against the English, and he and Trimbakji after much persuasion
induced Gangadhar to stay. In July (1815) Bajirao went to
Pandharpur on a pilgrimage and took with him Trimbakji and
Gangadhar Shastri. On the 14th of July the Shastri dined with
the Peshwa, and in the evening Trimbakji asked him to Vithoba's
temple where the Peshwa was. Gangadhar who was unwell
excused himself, but was pressed by Trimbakji and went to the
temple with a few unarmed attendants. After a prayer to Vilhoba
he talked with Trimbakji and then went to pay his respects to the
Peshwa who was seated in the upper verandah of the temple and
treated him with marked attention. When the visit was over,
Gangadhar started for his lodging m high spirits. He had scarcely
gone 300 yards when he was attacked m the street by assassins
hired by Trimbakji and was almost cut to pieces' \ The treacher-
ous murder of a Brahman m the holy city, the proved guilt of the
Peshwa's representative, the intrigue and duplicity of the Peshwa
himself, the assassination of o^e for whose security the British had
pledged themselves, these things led on to war and the issue was
only determined by the complete defeat of the Peshwa's army on
the battlefield of Kirkee, November 5, 1817.

Having thus acquainted ourselves, in our introductory chapters,
with Tukaram's land and people, with the religion of his day, and
with the city he has made famous m his verse, let us now enter
upon our study of the bhakfi poet himself as far as the biographical
material at our disposal will permit.

1 B.G., Vol, XX, pp. 484-5.

THE PRIDE OP KNOWLEDGE I

Though I'm a man of lowiy birth
The saints have magnified my worth.

And so ■withm my heart to hide
Has come the great destroyer, pride.

In my fond heart the fancy dwells
That I am wise and no one else.

O, save me, save me, Tuka prays ;
Spent like the wind are all my day?

WITHIN MY HEART

I know no wa> by which
My faith thy feet can reach

Nor e'er depart.
How, how can I attain
That thou, O Lord, shalt reign

Within my heart '

Lord, I beseech thee, hear
And grant to faith sincere.

My heart withm.
Thy gracious face to see.
Driving afar from me

Deceit and sin

O come, I, Tnka, pray,
And ever with me stay.

Mine, mine to be.
Thy mighty hand outstretch
And save a fallen wretch.

Yea, even me.

GOD IS OURS 1

God is ours, yea, ours is he,
Soul of all the souls that be.

God is nigh without a doubt,
Nigh to all, within, without.

God IS gracious, gracious still ;
E\ery longing he'll fulfil

God protects, protects hi^ own ,
Strife and death he casteth down.

Kind IS God, ah, kind indeed :
Tnka he will guard and lead.

* Translated from Tukaram, P.M.S., pp. 77, 63, 73.

Chapter IV
The Biography of Tukaram

Preliminary Considerations

With regard to the date of Tukaram's birth there is a difference
of opinion, some Marathi authorities holding it to have taken place
in 1598, others in 1588, while other schools hold to 1577 or 1568.
We however may adopt the traditional dale of 1608 based on
Mahlpati's record, until better available evidence points to the
contrary.^ This means that Tukaram Bolhoba Ambile ' was born
the same year as John Milton. If Milton's mission was to herald
the golden age both of English Protestantism and English literature,
that of Milton's contemporary, Tukaram, was to give expression to
the protest of India's heart against the Hindu scheme of things
which had reduced religion to a philosophy and to express that
protest in verse that was to become dear to Indian prince and
peasant alike. Tukaram's value, therefore, in the words of Prof.
W- B. Patwardhan of Poona, is that of ' a poet-saint who lived and
moved just when Maharashtra was in labour over the birth of a
new spirit. A new life was stirring the hearts and a new warmth
was felt in the blood that surged in the veins of Marathas of the
time and it may be that non-Indian students of Maratha history
will discover material here to estimate the under-current of thought
and feeling of the Maharashtra of the sixteenth and the seventeenth
century '.' In the happy simile of Dr. Mackichan, Tukaram is * the
Robert Burns of India'.*

In writing any biographical account of Tukaram we are confronted
with two serious problems. The first one arises from the fact that
the existing Marathi 'Lives' of Tukaram are indebted to one
authority. Up to the present hour indeed (1921) almost all the
available information concerning Tukaram's life comes to us from

1 See the Marathi discussions in L. R. Pangarkar's S.T.C., (1920) pp. 7-4^;
in the Vtvidh Dnyan Vtstara, September J920, pp. lOS-114, and January 1921,
pp. 25-36, and in Nawa Yuga, March 1921, pp. 137-9, summarized p. 76 below.

2 ' More ' IS the family surname given by some authorities including Sir
R. G. Bhandarkar {V.S,M.R S., p. 92). This is traceable to the baJihar
of BSmdSs whose authority m a matter of this kind cannot be regarded as
equal to that of the official record!) of a NSbik priest who used to serve Tukarilm
and his descendants on their visits there and whose records give the signature
of Tukaram's son NsirSyan with 'Ambile' as the family surname, 'More'
being given as that of the family lineage (iJI Sdc, p. 172, footnote 2),

'•' I. I., October. 1910, p. 114.
i I /., January, 1913, p. 173,

68 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

that same source, Mahipati, the famous biographer of the Maratha
' saints' who wrote a century and a quarter after Tukaram's death.
It IS true that some of these details are confirmed by other sources,
but in the main we are depended on this one authority. The
other difficulty referred to concerns the fact, admitted by Hindu
biographers and commeniators (see below), that Mahipati, on whom
we are so dependent, has interwoven with his story much that is
obviously miraculous and legendary. In view of these facts it seems
best to divide this ' biographical ' chapter regarding the poet and
saint who marks 'the era of the efflorescence of Maharashtra's
people'* mto three distinct parts : I. The Value of our Sources ; II.
the Probable Biographical Facts; III. The Legendary Additions.

I. The Biographical Sources

I. Pact and Tradition in 'Lives' of Tukaram

Prefixed to the standard Marathi edition of Tukaram's poems
published by the Indu-Prakash Press, is a biographical essay by
Janardan Sakharam Gadgil where it is stated : ' The biographer's
task, in writing a faithful life of any of the guiding spirits who in
their time influenced the Hindu nation, is extremely difficult. The
idea of recording events faithfully for the information of after-ages
never existed in the nation. Whenever the influence on the
succeeding generations of any of the important personages has been
great enough to induce somebody to write his biography, the ten-
dency towards deification has been so great, that the little of real
events that has descended by tradition has been mixed up with
fable to such a degree as almost to defy all attempts at separa-
tion What has been aimed at, therefore, in this

notice, IS to bring together the several passages in the following
collection bearing on the poet's life, linking them together by
the light furnished by the mythological account of Mahipati.' ^

In the above observations there are three phrases used — ' the
tendency towards deification,' ' tradition mixed up with fable,'
' the mythological account of Mahipati ' — which, when joined by a
fourth at the conclusion of the same essay, ' the legends of Mahipati '
(Ibid. p. 32), give abundant reason for caution in reading the
Marathi 'Lives' of Tukaram who is ' par excellence the post of
Maharashtra.'* Should the verdict in the Indu-PraJtSsh edition
of 1869 be challenged as out of date, a similar verdict by Prof.
Patwardhan in April 1912, may be more readily accepted. He
says : ' We have, m the first place, no authentic and properly sifted

1 Dr. Mackichan, /. I., January 1913, p 165.

2 Poems of TukSrdm, I.P edition. Vol. I., p. 2.
3, Dr. Mackichan, I.I, January 1913, p. 173

IV BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES 69

account of his life. There is a mass of legends and traditions
that have gathered round Tukaram. These are imphcitly believed
m by those who are avowedly Tukoba's followers, and equally by
those who, though not followers of Tukoba's school, are innocent
admirers of everything connected with the saint of Maharashtra.''
Again he says : ' As m the case of Tukaram, so in that of Namdev,
I have to sound a note of complaint at the outset. There is hardly
any authentic information available as regards his life and work.
Most of the accounts that have come down to us are vitiated by
adventitious matter mixed up with and added to the little that is
genuine history. It is everywhere the same old story ; miracle and
wonder-working have obscured the field. Take any of the saint-
poets of Maharashtra from Dnyaneshwar . . . . , his hfe-story is
shrouded with mystery — hidden behind a dense overgrowth of
superstitious tradition and fantastic invention. In the case of
Tukaram we had at least some facts of historical accuracy to start
with.'" On the other hand, 'it is a great relief,' says Dr. P. R.
Bhandarkar, ' to find Tukaram working no miracles. Tradition has
credited him with having performed many, but he per&onally does
not lay claim to any.' "

2. Tukaram's Biog-rapher: Mahipati

Who was this Mahipati, concerning whose poetical acccDunls
of the Maratha saints the late Maraiha Christian poet Narayan
Waman Tilak once said that they ' remind one ol Foxe's Booh of
Martyrs ' ? And what led Mahipati to write the ' lives ' of his
country's samts? Born m 1715, from hjs earliest days Mahipati
gave proof of a religious temperament. At five years old he
joined a company of pilgrims to Pa^dharpur, and from that time
made an annual pilgrimage to the great .shrine. On his father's
death he succeeded hira as kulkaruT of Taharabad but soon resigned
Government service because the Mussulman jSghirdar who was
his superior forced him to work when he (Mahipati) desired to
pray. Leaving hiS' ^ujii and carrying out the order, he told the
jagJilrdar when he had completed the task, ' I have obeyed your
command, but no more of this'. He had learned that he could not
serve two masters, the State and his god, so he laid his pen at
Vithoba's feet, devoted himself lo Vithoba's service for ever, and
vowed that neither he nor any descendant should ever again serve
the State, a vow which was kept for geneiations. One night
Tukaram appeared lo Mahipati m a dream and bade him write the
lives of Maratha bhakiaa. He began the Bhakta VtjSya, his

1 /./ , April 1Q12, p. 19

2 /./., April 1913, p. 11.

3 Tvo UiTsfcts, Jciius ami Tnkifiani, p. 28.

10 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

chief work, finishing it m a. D. 1762 or 1763. Its completion
was anticipated by his Santa Lllamrtta in 1757. Katha SSrSmyita
was finished in 1765 and Bhakta Lllamnta in 1774. His Santa
Ytjaya was incomplete when he died in A. D. 1790. ^ His life of
Tukaram occupies twenty-one chapters in all, five m the Bhakta
Vijaya (48-52) and sixteen in Bhakta Lllamnta (25-40).

We have already quoted one English critic's estimate of Mahl-
pati's literary merit (see pp. 20-1). Another, Mr. C. A. Kincaid,
affirms : ' Had Mahipati used a linguistic medium more widely
known than MarathI, he would have ranked high among the
world's poets. Even a foreigner can appreciate the easy flow of
his stanzas, his musical rhymes and above all his unrivalled
imagery.' * One of the greatest needs in MarathI literature to-day
is a critical investigation of what have been called Mahipati's
' legends of mediaeval bhaktas. '

3. Mahipati an Honest Author

America joins in this chorus of praise from foreign critics
concerning the author of the Acta Sanctorum of the Marathas.
We are indebted to Dr. Justin E. Abbott of New Jersey,
United States, and formerly of Bombay, for the following critical
notes. They reached us on different dates and we give them as
we received them, {a) and (6) respectively, to which we add a
paragraph (c).

(fl) ' Mahipati's account of Tukaram is almost the sole source
from which the different MarathI " lives of Tukaram " draw. The
question then is : Is Marhlpati's account true to facts? Tukaram
died in 1649 (traditional date) * and Mahipati wrote his account in
1774, or 125 years after Tukaram's death. Not very long, but long
enough for legends to grow. I regard Mahipati as an honest writer,
that he used honestly the material at his disposal. He was not
a "higher critic ", but used as truth whatever.'came to him in the
form of MSS or oral tradition. I think 1, can produce convincing
evidence of this honesty. He had evidently a good library oi
manuscripts. I have the names of some he possessed, or was mort
or less familiar with. I find this list in his own writings, Bu
as poet he avows the principle of expanding the facts at his disposal
"as a seed expands into a tree." This is indeed a habit of Indiai
poets.

^ See M. 65r., pp. 378-388 for biographical details.
° Tales of the Sainfs of Pandharput; pp. 3-4.

3 L. J. Sedgwick, J.iR.^.S. Bo., Vol 23, No. OS, pp 127-8.

4 The brackets are our own, as various dates are held by scholars — 164
1649, 1650 and 1653 ■ see our note at the end of the list of dates. Part II.
p. 77.

F?%^^."»

x...-»;iia» y'

MAHIPATI, THE BIOGRAPHER OF TUKARAM

IV BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES 71

' What MSS or what oral tradition did Mahipati use ? This
is as yet an unsolved problem, with this exception, that a few
sources are known. Among the MSS he uses are the Abhafigs
by Tukaram's brother Kanhoba (see Bliakta Lllantrita, ch. 40.
198 and following) and abhafigs of Rameshwar {Bhakta LllSmrita,
ch. 40. 209). There is also now published Niloba's Gatha. Niloba
was a disciple of Tukaram's.' H e gives some account of Tukaram,
and Mahipati knew of Niloba, so probably knew of his abhafigs
{Bhakta LllSmrita, ch. 4 0. 238.) The last part of Mabipati's chapter
40, which describes Tukaram's " ascension," mentions many indivi-
duals who must have passed on to the next generation their knowledge
of Tukaram.

' It still remains true that all modern accounts of Tukaram's
life are to be traced to Mahipati as the practically sole source of
information. Perhaps some time Mahipati's sources will be better
known.

' This being so we cannot now know what are facts and what
are fiction in Mahipati's account. It will not do merely to deduct
the manifestly legendary, and call the balance facts, as seems to be
the general practice. The only honest way for any modern writer,
is to give Mahipati credit for the account the writer gives, and give
it as Mahipati gives it, legend and all, leaving it to the future, for
possible discoveries, to settle what are the real facts of Tukaram's
life. Much of Mahipati's account may be facts, but I think events
in Tukaram's life should not be recorded as facts until they can be
substantiated from other and earlier sources.'

(6) 'As I have before remarked I regard Mahipati as an honest
historian. He wrote from books before him, and from oral tradition.
He anticipated the charge that he drew from his own imagination
and says in Santa LilSmrita (1. 67-69) : " You will raise this doubt
in your mind and say : You have drawn on your own imagination.
This is not so. Listen. Great poet-saints have written books in
many languages. It is on their authority that I write this Santa
LllSmrita. If I wrote on my own authority my statements would not
be respected. The Husband of Rukminl is witness to this, who
knows all hearts."

* In Bhakta VijOya (1.37) he says : " You will say I have compiled
this book on my own authority. This indeed is not so. Hold no
doubts in your minds." He then quotes Nabhaji and Udhavchid-
ghan as authorities : " Joining these two together, Bhakta VijSya
was begun " (l. 39). For a list of saints with whose names and
books Mahipati was familiar see Bhakta Vijitya (l. 19), Bhakta
VijSya (57. 169-201) and Bhakta Ltletmrita, chap. 51, where there
are 127 saints mentioned by name.

* His story of Dnyjineshwar in Bhakta Vijaya (chap. 8) he took
from Dy&ndevOchJ Adi (Dnyandev's Origin) by Namdev. His

' A posthumous disople: see]]sect. 4 (6), p. 73 below.

n LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

story of Mirabal in Bhakta Vij'aya (chap. 38) he took from
Mirabalche Chantra (Life of Mirabai) by Namdev. His story of
Gora Kutnbhar m Bhakta Vijaya (chap. 17) he took from
Goraba KumbhcirSche Chantra (Life of Goroba Kumbhar) by
Namdev.'

' So far as evidence goes he conscientiously used his sources,
as an honest recorder of what he believed to be true. If he expanded
meagre statements into fuller detail it was not to add facts but to
give a fuller understanding of them To use his own words he
" expanded facts ]ust as a tree is the expansion of a seed. " By
this I understand that he embellished but did not add imaginary
accounts, that what he wrote he felt he had good authority for.

' The faithfulness of Mahipati in recording the traditions received
by him, either through books or oral sources, does not ensure the
truth of those traditions, which must be established on other
grounds, but it is satisfaction that one can depend with good assu-
rance on his honesty as a writer, and that he did not draw on his
imagination more than he felt necessary for poetic reasons.'

(c) In addition to the above from Dr. Abbott on the honesty and
trustworthiness of our chief authority, Mahipati, we shall do
well to note a striking illustration of Mahipati 's candour as provid-
ed by his faithful account of the attitude adopted towards caste by
one of his Brahman 'saints'. Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar has
pointed out that Mahipati makes 'one of his Brahman saints
declare that there is no caste among devotees of God and repre-
sents him to have drunk the holy water given to him by a chanibhar
or leather-worker '.' That Mahipati, a ' Rigvedl VasiStha Gotri
De^asth Brahman,'^ should have faithfully recorded that another
Brahman wmked at caste in relation to religious matters and
should have portrayed him as receiving water at the hands of one
of the lowest of India's out-castes is a remarkable illustration of
Mahipati's honesty as an author. He sometimes even revises an
earlier account of his own (see footnote 2 on sect. 15, Part II).

4. Sources Earlier than Mahipati

What are the possibilities of substantiating or correcting Mahi-
pati's account ' from other and earlier sources ' '

(1) First and most important of all we must never forget the
rich mine of information in Tukaram's own autobiographical poems,
the investigation concerning which we leave until the chapter on
Tukaram's Autobiography (see chap. 5, Part I).

(2) Next in real value come the abhafigs of Rameshwar
Bhatt, a leading disciple of Tukaram's referred to m the notes from
Dr. Abbott on the previous page as one of Mahipati's own sources.

^ /. /., April 1914, p. 2C. 2 M. Sar., p. 378,

IV

BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES 73

The importance of Rameshwar Bhatt m this connexion is three-
fold : (,a) as having been used by Mahlpati we are able to test the
accuracy of the latter, (6) as being one of Tukaram''? own circle
we have invaluable contemporary data, and (c) as formerly keenly
hostile to Tukaram, and then his follower, he is m himself an
abiding testimony to the influence of Tukaram's character and
work in the poet-saint's own lifetime (see sections 29-30, Part II
of this chapter).

(3) A third source is provided in a short life of Tukaram by
his grandson (son of Tukaram's own son) na-ned Gopal Boa.'

(4) Another of Tukaram's immediate disciples, a woman
named Bahinabai (1628-1700), whose Marathi shows her to have
had some literary ability, dictated her autobiography to her son. '
Among other things she confirms the incident concerning Mumbaji
(see sect. 31, Part II, present chap.) whose house she occupied
but from which she says she was expelled because she attended
Tukaram's kirtans. Not only does she confirm the account of
Mumbaji's hostility to Tukaram but she gives the namss of some
of the leading personalities in Tukaram's circle, including that of
the Pafil (chief village officer) and others. '

(5) In 1674, only a little more than twenty years after
Tukaram's death, there was written a book on Keshav Chaitanya
Sampradaya by one named Krishnaji Bairagya. This authority is
quoted by name and his facts are given in detail by one Niranjan
who supplies from this source priceless information from which we
come to know the succession of gurus — Keshav, Raghav and
Babaji — leading up to the 'call* of Tukaram. It was from the
last of these that Tukaram says he obtained in a dream his guru-
mantra * which not only initiated him finally into Hinduism,
investing hira with complete authority, but was felt by him to be a
divine afflatus marking out his future career. The fundamentally
important dates of this crucial spiritual experience and of Tukaram's
birth itself are regarded as being settled by this ancient authority,
which takes us back to a source nearly a century earlier than
Mahipati. '

(6) Almost equally ancient is Niloba of Pimpalner, one of the
most famous of Warkarl leaders, the priest (joshf) and revenue
officer {kulkarni) of his ancestral Sirur in the Poona district, who
has left abhaiigs descriptive of Tukaram dated no later than thirty
years after Tukaram's death. From his ' Life ' which Mr. Pangar-
kar has borrowed from descendants and examined, it appears
Nijoba was born after Tukaram died, that he saw Tukaram in a

' M. Sar^ p. 186 footnote.

* See ' The Autobiography of BahinSbai ' in Marathi published by Mr.
D. v. Umarkhane (Chitra Shala Press, Poona) and an English Note on this in
the Dynanodaya, March 10, 1921.

» M. Sar., pp. 242-5. 193, and L. R Pangarkar, S.T.C., pp. 468-74.

* See sect. 22, Part II of this chapter, and Muznmdar's view given there,
» M. Sar., p. 190, note 1,

10

74 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

dream about 1675-80, healed the Pattl (chief village officer) of
Pimpalner, on going to live there received the honours of a sSdhu,
gave up secular service because it interfered with his devotions,*
and wrote a Gatliff of which 1551 abhafiga are published, many of
them, especially Nos. 869-890, being written in praise of Tukaram
and his kxrians, thus confirming Mahlpati's narrative of nearly a
century later m this important matter.'

Some authorities would add a seventh source other than Mahl-
pati — Narahari Malu, author of Bhakti Kathamnta, who wrote
fifty years later. ■ He must, however, be pronounced an utterly
untrustworthy guide though he has unfortunately been followed by
various Maratha writers."

5. The Biography on the whole Trustworthy

How far then may the existing biography of TukSram be
regarded as reliable ? In view of Tukaram's picture of himself in
his own moving poems, the contemporary evidence of his own
disciples, the record of a by no means distant relative, and the
imporlant testimony surrounding his guru-mantra, we are justified
m believing that while there is much unsifted tradition, 'miracle
and wonder-working,' Mahipati's interesting account has a solid
substratum of historical accuracy. As far as we can test his
sources he gives us a large body of fact on which we can safely
rely. We are confirmed in reaching such a conclusion when we
learn that Mahipati went, for example, to Tukaram's own des-
cendants and obtained from them what evidence he could,* in one
case information concerning the facts of Tukaram's youth and
early manhood between the ages of 13 and 21, at which age and
during a severe famine Tukaram's father died. Of these and other
facts we have independent confirmatory evidence. Our confidence
in Mahipati is strengthened when we further discover that m
writing his 'lives of the saints' he used the works of earlier
authorities with such discrimination that when he found any of
them not as informing or as useful as be bad expected he laid them
aside, e.g., Nabbajl, the Nagar Brahman of the late 17th century
whose Bhakta Mala was of service when Mahipati ' began ' his
Bhakta VijSya, but whom he set aside later because of his
preference in favour of better authorities.*

I See the parallel of Mabipati in sect. 2 above.

^ See Bhakta Vtjaya, chap 56, 147-187, L. R. Pangarkar, S.T.C., pp.
474-80 and The GaihS of Niloba's Abhangs, by Trimbak Hari Awte, esp.
pp. 195-200.

» M. Sar., p 391.

* M. SSr., p. 381.

■■' See M. Sar., pp 372-4 ; on the whole question of Mahipati's sources,
W. SSr., pp 378-88 are worthy of careful study.

'K K

!

'^^m^^^

■Mm0m^ )

IV BIOGRAPHICAL SOURCES 75

With such a conclusion before us we are surely justified in
separating the probable historical element in the material that has
come down lo us from what appears to be legendary, as we do m
the two remaining parts (II and III) of this chapter, always
remembeting, as the reader must, the possibility of error m the
results presented. This course we follow, though Dr. Abbott would
himself prefer to have the account * as Mahipati gave it, legend
and all ', leaving the future to settle what are the true facts of
Tukatam's life. We have however, adopted a compromise — see
Part II, the italic (ype at the close of section 1. The Western
reader needs the additional reminder that even the probable. biogra-
phical facts, in pait II, are of necessity presented m that Hindfl
dress with which Tukaram's Hindu biographer has clothed them,
Parts II and III being m the form of translated excerpts from
Mabipati's 'biographical' record in BJiakta LtlSmrita (chaps.
i5-40) and Bhakia VijUya (chaps. 48-52).

II. The Probable Biographical Facts in the Life of

Takaram

I. Chief Events with Approximate Dates'

A. D.

1608. Tukaram's Birth (see sect. 3 below).

This IS the traditional dale, being the one adopted by Mahlpati
in Bhakta LilSmnta (oh. 28. 132-8) ; the late Janardan Ramchandra
held to 1588 ; the genealogical records at Dehu and Paij^lhaipur
give 1598 ; other authorities affirm 1577 ; while Prof. Rajwaije, on
the basis of an ancient genealogy found with a WSrkarl near Wai,
maintains 1568. At present certainty is impossible. See Bhawe,
M. SSr., p. 194, note; PangSrkar, S.r.C, pp. 20-32 ; Gadre m
Vividh DiiySii VistSra, September 1920, pp. 105-114, and Bhide
in January 1921, pp. 25-35; also P. R. Bhandarkar, Nawa Yuga,
March 1921, pp. 137-9.

1621. Tukaram's father turns over to him the burden of the
busine&h (see sect. 5).

1621-3 (.ctrc.) Tukaram is married to Rakhmabai and thun
to Avalibal, otherwise called J ijabai (see sect. 8).

1625. Death of Tukaram's parents and of his eldest brother's
wife (see sect. lO).

1626. His eldest brother Savajl becomes a sanyabi (bcc
sect. 10).

1628. Tukaram le&olves to put aside his indiftereuce to
worldly affairs and to give himself to the management
of his business in company with his two wives and his
eldest son (see sects. 5, 7-8).

1629. Uusmess failure and bankruptcy. Beginning of a famine
(see sects. 10-11).

1630. Famine at its worst, during which Rakhmabai dies
of hunger; death of eldest son, after which, in utter
indifference to worldly things, he retires to Bhambaiiath
Hill and receives a ' revelation ' (bee sects. 10-11).

1631. Rebuilding of the temple in Detiu; continuous attend-
ance at Ktrtatis (sect, 13).

1632-5. Tukaram's call to become a poet (sect. 19) ; he
receives the guru-mantra' (sect. 22). See however foot-
note, sect. 30, for Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar's view.

1 These dates are taken from the Maritbi ' Life 'by Mr. L R. FSngSrkar
(1920), pp. 45-6, embodying the results of a careful discussion of Tukaram
chronology. We have added in brackets after each event a reference to our
own sections in the following Part II and a note where we differ.

^ We have here taken a slightly different order from Paogarkar in accord-
ance with what we believe to be Mabipati's order.

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 77

1638 (circ.) Tukaram persecuted by Rameshwar Bhatt
and sustained by a special ' revelation ' (sects. 29-30).

1649 Tukaram's end.

This is the date given by Tukaram's grandson Gopal Boa and
Mahipati in his Bhakta LUamnta (chap. 40, 183) ; Mr. Pangarkar
adopts March 9, 1650 ; Prof. Raj wade holds to 1648 ; while Mr.
Bhawe prefers 1652. On this difficult question, which with present
available material, is probably insoluble, see Bhawe, M. SHr , pp.
189, 186n, Assal Gatha, p. 13; Pangarkar, S.T.C., pp. 14-20;
Ga.dre in Vivtdh Dnyan Vtstara, September 1920, pp. 105-114,
and Bhide in January 1921, p. 27 ; albo P. R. Bhandarkar in Nawa
Ytiga, March 1921. pp. 138-9.

In the following narrative, footnotes are given to indicate
where lines or paragraphs have been deleted, as belonging to
what the best authorities would probably agtec are ' legendary
additions '. These hues and paragraphs omitted from Parf
II are inserted in Part III ( ' Legendary Additions ') of this
Chapter and anyone desirous of reading Mahipati's story
consecutively may do so by following the guidance of the foot-
notes. Occasionally this ' legendary ' dress will be found clinging
even to the narrative m Part II. In most such cases we have either
introduced Mahtpatt's name or ike device of quotation marks
or that of a special footnote. In the last- mentioned the letter
' M ' refers to Mahtpati, and it is to be carefully distinguished
from ' F and M ' which refers to Fruscr and Marffthe's Transla-
tion of Tuk<ir(i)ii's 'Poems,' 3 vols, and from ' RL Sdr.' which
refers to V. L. Uhawc's ' Muhdrashtra Saraswat \

2. Tukaram's Ancestry

Our kuowledgc of Tukaram begins with a lorelatUet named
Vi^vambhara who was a tradesman at Dehii and at the same
time a devout worshipper of Vithoba. He was a truthful and fair-
dealing man ; his busmebs throve, so he spent his profitb entertain-
ing holy men and Brahmans who were bound on pilgrimage. By
night he would assemble his neighbours and sing the lives of Ram
and Kris^ia till all worldly impulscb died away in binj.

At length ho was advised by bis mother to follow an old
custom of his family and make tlie pilgrimage to Pa^dbarpur.
He listened to her advice, visited Pa^^bari, subdued his mind to a
frame of repentance, bathed in the Chandrabhaga, gazed on the
god and returhed home filled with joy. After his return be had no
peace for thinking of Pa^dharl. His eyes were for ever full of
tears, sobs choked his throat ; he was like a miser brooding on his
gold or a cow on her calf. So he returned to Pa94bari and there told
his distress. ' Know you not that there is no place void of me even
for a moment ?' was the voice he seemed to hear. ' Wherever you
call upon my name, there assuredly I am present.'

n LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CS.

Then Visvambhara went home, but every fortnight he made a
pilgrimage to Pa^dhari, and after nine months, one night in a
dream he saw Hari' who said : ' Visvambhara, my friend, you have
made me your debtor, and I have come here to stay with you.' So
saying, he vanished, and" Visvambhara took and set up an image
near the river Indraya^i ; then calhng in Brahmans skilled in
vedic lore they performed the installation ceremony," poured over
the image the panchainriia?' and arranged it in silk, with a crown
an4 earrings, offered it food and sang a song of praise.

Visvambhara then begged of Vithoba that his family might
always serve him ; and some time later he passed away leaving
behind him a wife Amabai and two sons, Han and Mukunda.
His wife was a devouc woman, who asked heaven for no worldly
blessings, and though she showed no interest or special fckill in
business, everything for a time went smoothly in her house.
Amabai's two sons were worldly men ; they persuaded her to
leave Dehu, and soon after they perished in war. She too lost
everything and one of her daughters-in-law burned herself with her
husband's (Mukunda's) corpse Her other daughter-in-law (wife
of Han) had meanwhile given birth to a son, Vithoba, by whom
the family was continued.

3. Birth and Naming

The 'family tree' gives U5 the names Vithoba, Padajl, Sankar,
Kaiihayu and Uolhoba sometimes called Bolhail, this last, whose
wife was named Kanaka!, becoming the father of Tukariim.
Bolhoba spenl twenty years in pilgrimages and other religious acts,
at the end'ot which period he had three sons.'

For the birth of her second child, Tukaram, Kanaka! went to
a lonely temple, and when she looked on his face an incredible
lustre dazzled her eyes, and she read in his countenance a rapture
of devotion and peace.

Twelve days later she took the child to the temple, laid it at the
feet bf Fandurang and asked that he might be named. Receiv-
ing the assurance that every blessing should attend him, she laid
him in a ctadie and this cradle song was sung for hiiii ; —

' Where the Eternal, the Undeveloped, the Void of name and
form rejoices, sleep there, O child of mine ! Where ' I am I ' and

' One of Knsna's names popularly understood to mean ' sin-remover '.

* When ViSvambhara awoke, M. says, he called together all the wor-
shippers of Vishijii, and paying no heed to scoffers and scorners, went with them
in piocession, singing Han's praises, to a niango-grove near Dehu. They
found it pervaded by a wondrous fragrance coming from an linage of Pa^idu-
raiig with Rukmmi beside him.

'.See Chapter 6, sect 1 on Tukaram's 'Idolatry' for the significance of this
ceremony which is called pran ^ratisthd.

*TI\e Panchamnta is an anointing by curd, milk, honeyj ghee and sugar
being poured overall images, both in temples and m BiShman houses.

* See sect. '1. Tukaram's Birth ' m Part JIl of this chapter.

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 79

' I am he ' are heard no more, where monism and duahsm are
each half true, sleep there, O child of mme ' Where Knower,
Knowledge and Known cease to exist, sleep there, O child of
mine ! On the place where the saints declare knowledge to be per-
fect knowledge, the place where desire is not, in the home where
delight IS the soul's own delight, setting there your heart, sleep
there, O child of mine i On the feet of Pandarahg, where the
Undeveloped, the Unknowable, through his worshippers' love has
assumed a form, setting there your affertion, sleep there, O child
of mine !'

Then she called the child Tukaram.

4. Home Influences

Her husband never failed to worship the Lord of Vsin^haxl,
and God gave wealth and children, ' the fruit of ancient merit.'
Tliree sons were born to them — Savajl, Tukaram and Kanhoba.
Their natures were like others but they were destined to lead
mankind to devotion and repose. Friends increased around them,
the Brahmans wedded them with lavish outlay, and their mother
rejoiced. A son, a son's wife, possessions, and a living husband,
these are what Hindu women delight in and she had them all.
The Merciful One suffered nothing to go amiss with them.
While attending duly to their affairs they forgot not the highest
purpose of life ; he truly is severed from the world who never
says to himself, 'It is I who do this.' The saints, like other
men, carry on business but their feelings towards it are different.
The ignorant imagine th^t their own efforts bear frnit and that their
own skill saves Ihem from confusion. They are imprisoned in
their self-conceit ; but the wise are they who know that God^ alone
acts. Such a one was Bolhoba. As the lotus grows in the pool,
yet no water clings> to it; as the sun is reflected in the water-vessel,
yet it IS not wetted ; so the servants of God' live under the illusion
of the world and traffic therein, yet they forget not Him.

On Dehu, the scene of Tukaram's early home-life, see pages 5
and 6.

5. Tukaram enters Business

When Bolhoba grew old, he called his eldest son and bade him
take charge of the business. But Savaji, when he heard his father's
words, and looked at the stock and ledger, fell at his father's feet,
and declared that he abhorred the world and its ways.

The father then turned to Tukaram, who accepted the task, and
won praise from everybody by his management of the business.

' M's word IS Hari, a name of Vishnu (see footnote 1 on previous page),
' M's word IS Vishnu,

80 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH,

His father's mind was at peace and for a few years Tukaram appears
to have prospered. But grief follows joy — this is a truth im-
memorial ; darkness follows day ; scarcity follows a good harvest ;
sickness good health ; and so it was with Tukaram. His father and
mother passed away. Savaji's wife died and Savajl became
a religious mendicant: he subdued the flesh and attained
to happiness and peace. Tukaram found himself losing money
in the business, his capital disappearing like clouds m summer.
But he felt his duty as head of the family and he made
every effort to succeed. He toiled day and night, loading the
bullocks with his own hands, enduring heat and cold and loss of
sleep. He raised fresh capital and started new transactions ; but
he made no profit.^ All the time, however, he dealt with his
customers honestly ; he never gave anyone short measure ; he never
uttered a falsehood ; Han's name was ever on his lips ; and his
actions towards all creatures were compassionate.

At last all his own means were exhausted. His friends met and
set him up once more with a little money. They also offered him
their advice : ' Day and night you are crying on Han's name, this
is what has ruined you. A devotee of Vishnu cannot thrive m the
world. Our fathers always said so and now you know it is true ;
you have brought yourself to beggary.' His wife added her com-
plaints. Still Tukaram called on Han's name and still misfortune
followed him. Mahipati adds : ' HSri was trying to see if Tukaram
would give him up.'

6. The Fallen Sack and the Sympathetic Stranger

One night as he was travelling m the way of business, his com-
panions having gone on ahead, a dreadful storm fell upon him, a
storm of wind and rain and lightning, and he saw beasts of prey
around. Then his sorrows broke forth and he cried : ' The filthy
world ' I have embraced it ! Hence my troubles! My father is
dead ; my brother has abandoned everything ; I am bankrupt ;
hence my shame. Here I am ; my companions have left me ; no
one will lend me a hand with this sack ' O Hari, god of gods, I
have no friend but thee ! Run to help me ! ' As he spoke he saw
a wayfaring man beside him — * it was Han who had come to help
him,' says Mahipati. ' Who are you ? ' asked the stranger, ' block-
ing up the road m this way ? * 'I am a dealer in grain,' said
Tukaram ; ' Here's a sack fallen and I have no one to help me with
it ; and my companions are gone ahead.' Then, according to our
authority, the sympathetic stranger put forth his hand and in a
moment laid the sack on the ox. After that he stepped forward and
showed Tukaram the way, till they came to the Indraya^I river

* M, gives as the reason . ' Han never helped hini.'

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 81

■which was high m flood, but the stranger led the way and they
crosmed safely. Tukaram stood amazed and ' suddenly ', says
Mahlpati triumphantly, 'a flash of lightning showed Tukaram
that his companion wore the pttamher (the usual yellow silk robe of
Vishnu), that at his throat a kaustubh jewel sparkled, and a rosary
of Tul^T beads hung round his neck.' Nothing was said, however,
and they went on to Dehu together, where Tukaram's companion
left him.

7. In the Chilly Trade

There is always enmity between the world and spiritual aspira-
tion, and Tukaram continued solitary among his fellow-villagers.
They went on scoffing at him. Then the rains failed and a sore
drought prevailed. In the hope therefore of making a little money
Tukaram set out with bags of chillies ^ for the Konkan and as
he went along, the name of Vitthal ^ was ever on his lips. When
he reached the sea he unloaded his oxen beneath a peepal tree,
near the temple of Siva, and spread his wares on the ground.
Then he sat down beside them, forgetting all about himself and
thinking on nothing but the form of Pandurang. The villagers
came and asked his prices. He answered : ' You know the usual
price, don't you ? Take what you want,' and he let them fill the
measure themselves. At first they feared he would check them,
but his thoughts were far away, and he nevei interfered with
them. The news spread through the village, and people came
tumbling over each other. ' We will pay you later on,' said they.
' Very good,' said Tukaram. Some took handfuls, others maunds,
according to their strength, and at last one rascal made the remark:
' I have plenty of money at home, I want a sack of chillies.' ' I
will trust you,' said Tukaram. Even so pious men understand
God's purposes, but not the hard hearts of the wicked.

Now Tukaram felt pleased to think he had finished his busi-
ness, so he set a little rice cooking and sat watching it with a
thankful heart. Meanwhile" the kindly stranger who on the
stormy night some time before had helped him now entered the
village, represented himself as belonging to Tukaram and said
politely to the people: *It is time we were going, please let
us have our money.' ' What money ?' said they ; ' he never
measured anything out to us, we don't know what we owe him.'
Then he told each one exactly what he had taken and they were

1 Dr. Murray Mitchell's translation of Mahlpati's Bhakia LUamrita in
J.R^,S. Bo^ January 1849, pp. 15-29. at this point says: ' TukSram filled
three sacks ■with pei>per and proceeded to the Konkan'. There ate two mistakes
here, one a confusing of the ■word mtrchj (chillies) with mirl (pepper), the
other that Tukaram would not take pepper to the Konkan where pepper was
grown and sold . this would be like ' taking coals to Newcastle '

^ Another name for Vithoba, see sect. 15, chap. 2, pp. 41-3.

" Hari took the form of a man, says M.

11

82 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

stupified; they paid up at once. So he went through all the
village and collected all Tukaram's debts.^ There remained only the
rascal who carried off the whole sack. ' He is the worst of the lot'
said Tukaram's representative, ' what am I to do with him ? ' So
he took a rope and tied it round his neck and cried, ' Pay me or I
will hang myself and ruin your whole village !' Then the villagers
all cried, ' Shame on the rogue,' and they fell on the rascal with
kicks and fisticuffs till he paid up in full. So off went the stranger
to Tukaram, and gave him the price of his chillies. Tukaram
mistook him for the village watchman, and begged him to go and
buy him a little ghee. He brought so much that Tukaram was
astonished and he said, 'Ghee is very cheap here ! Stay and share
my meal.' * Very good,' said he, and with them also sat down an
unbidden guest.' Tukaram bade him welcome, and when the meal
was finished both ' departed and were seen no more. But when the
villagers came to see Tukaram and learned that he sent no one to
collect his debts, there was great astonishment and Tukaram could
say nothing but 'Unfathomable are the ways of Hari.'

8. The Ro^ue with Gilded Bracelets

So Tukaram went off singing Hari's name and on his way he
met a rogue who had some gilded bracelets,^ and these he offered
him for sale. Tukaram protested he was too poor to buy them,
but the rogue offered to take part payment in cash and trust him
for the rest. Tukaram accordingly bought them ; he went home
and tied up his oxen, and went to pay off his debt to money-lenders.
But when they tried his bracelets on the touchstone there was a
loud laugh, and scorn was poured on Tukaram and Vithoba and he
must needs go woefully home.

Now Tukaram had two wives. The elder one named Rakhma-
bai had become ' constitutionally asthmatic ' ° and so he had married
another, the daughter of Appaji Gulve, a well-to-do shopkeeper of
Poona.* The younger wife Avail, who was also called J i jabai, lamen-
ted loudly the misfortune of the brass bracelets. Bringing forth her
own jewels she pledged them and raised two hundred pieces of
silver. With these she bade Tukaram go forth and trade, and he
purchased a commodity of salt and took it to Baleghat. Much she
admonished him as he went, to take care of his money and not
lavish it on beggars. And Tukaram reached Baleghat and sold his
salt, and bought sugar and sold it again for cash.

I Hari never thinks of his own dignity , he forgets everything but his
worshipper's love, says M.

Who according to M. was '^iva-'

3 M. means Han and ^tva.

4 M says these bracelets were of brass gilded over.

5 W. B. Patwardhan, F.C.SS,, vol. 1, No. 3, p. 1, Bhawe, M. Sdr. p. 172.

6 In accordance with Hindu practice, these marriages would be arranged
by Tukaram's father, Tukaram being 13 or 14. See S.T.C., p. 77 where Panggr-
kar's figures do not harmonise with those on his p. 46.

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 83

9. Helping a Brahman Debtor

In one city which he entered he met a Brahman with a long
untrimmed beard, a wooden plough strung round his neck, ^ and
who cried to everyone, ' Help ' Help !' The avaricious people
of the town gave him a few coppers, but Tukaram asked the reason
of his plight. Whereupon the Brahman answered : * My kinsmen
have wrested my inheritance from me ; they bribed the court and
threw me into prison. The raja was a man of no judgement and I
was fined three hundred rupees. Fifty I have paid, and the rest I
am begging; there is a constable in charge of me and he gives me
no rest.' Tukaram was moved with compassion and he gave two
hundred and fifty rupees to the Brahman who sent the constable
with It to the court. Then Tukaram had the Brahman shaved and
fed his family and ten other Brahmans * and they all gave him
their blessing. ' The villagers of Dehu were now satisfied that
Tukaram was a lunatic When he returned home, they put a
necklace of onions round his neck, mounted him on a donkey and
paraded him through the streets to be mocked at by the crowd. ' '

10. Adversity and Self-Dedication

After tins a sore famine broke out, the great famine of Tuka-
ram's hfe-time being in 1629, and it is to this that TukarSm'
probably refers in abhatig No. 113 of Eraser and Marathe's transla-
tion. The rains failed utterly and the cattle died of hunger. Tuka-
ram's family began to starve and in vain he entreated neighbours
to help him. One day he sold his last possessions, a few old sacks
and a pack-saddle, and purchasing a little gram he made some thin
porridge for his family. When that was finished the neighbours
asked scornfully what Vitthal was doing for him ? He felt
as a man feels when an ulcer is opened up with a lancet, but
he answered them quietly. The husbandman'fa toil ifa long and
weary but he rejoices when the harvest ripens ; ' even so the
spiritual struggle is long drawn out but it ends in the joy of experi-
ence. This is what Tukaram found.* At 13 he entered business;
when 17 his parents died and soon afterwards occurred the death
of his sister-in-law, Savaji's wife. When Tukaram was 18 this
elder brother Savaji became a sanyasi and said good-bye to Dehu

1 This IS in accordance -with an ancient custom still prevalent in some
parts of India, debtors being compelled to wear a small hand-sue plough
around the neck as the sign to all they meet or from whom they beg that they
are m debt. Such a debtor is usually pursued by some representative of his
creditor with whom he must share all his takings, whether food or money.

2 Highly meritorious acts,

3 H. M. P. p. 181.

4 See V, L. Bhave's U. Sar. p. 192,

84 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

and his family. Now at 21 Tukaram had become ' bankrupt '^ and
— ' sorrow's crown of sorrow ' in India — he had to face famine,
bankruptcy and bereavements. He lost his eldest son ; his favourite
wife Rakhmabai died crying for bread ; and he began to reflect on the
world* : ' How many years I have wasted ! The time that is left let
me give to Hari.' Reflecting thus, he closed his eyes and cried :
' Han, O Lord, can I behold thee ? How can I bring thee before
my eyes ? How shall I deal with the world ? ' So crying, he
called to memory the image of Pa]j(Jurang, and for seven days he
sat with his eyelids closed. The silence was at length broken,
says Mahlpati, by a divme voice. How the bankrupt and grief-
stricken merchant of Dehu came to view all this painful discipline,
and bow sorrow and self-dedication became strangely mingled, we
shall see in our next chapter.

II. Tukaram withdraws from Business

Tukaram then went to a waste place and his younger brother
Kanhoba went to look for him, night and day searching among
the hills. At last he came to Bhambanath and there he saw an
amazing sight : Tukaram was rapt m worship." In the words of
Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar: 'It was on the hill named Bhambanath,
Tukaram tells us, that he had the revelation in which " formless
Vifhoba appeared unto him ".'*

The two brothers went back to Dehu together. As soon at.
they got home Tukaram threw into the river the papers which
showed that people owed his father money. ' It is idle to read
books,' said he, ' unless we learn by experience to appreciate them.
I am resolved myself to be a beggar ; as for the business, you must
carry it on.' And Kanhoba did so, while Tukaram withdrew from
the world. Very little food he ate, uo that his limbs wasted away.
He allowed himsell neither sleep nor rest and poured himself
out m repentance. In the morning he would bathe and visit
Pa^dura^g's temple, then he would go to the forest. West of Dehu
IS Bhand^ra Hill where he would sit alone rapt in contemplation.
' Since God has vifaited you,' men would say, ' why need you subdue
your senses ?' ' When the bun rises,' replied Tukaram, ' every eye
beholds him, but no one can keep him from his course a moment.
God indeed has visited me once, but 1 mean to keep Him with me
always. The Ganges flows into the sea not once but continually,
so must God's worshippers part from Him only to meet Him
again.' In short, he gave up the world entirely, and worshipped

I ' 1 became bankrupt and was crashed by the famine ' are his words in
abhaAg 113 (F and M).

3 See sect. ' 2. Adversity and Self-Dedication ' in Part III of this Chapter.

3 For the detail by M. see sect. 3 in Part III of this Chapter.

4 Txito Masters ; Jestis and Tukaram, p. 12.

re PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS ^5

God day and night ' I trust in Thy name alone : it is to me family
and wealth, and the merit of fierce austerities ; its glory is known
to all the saints.' Each evening Tukaram would return to DehQ.
Many voices spoke, some approving and some disapproving,
but none of them troubled his mind. He was like an elephant
walking on a royal road, with dogs barking at his heels.

12. How he watched the Cornfield

Near the place of his meditations a peasant had a crop of corn
and one day he made Tukaram a proposal. ' Sit and watch my
. field,' said he, ' I will give you half a maund of grain. You can
go on worshippmg Han.' 'Very good,' said Tukiram, for he
was always ready to help any one. So the peasant led him off
and gave him a sling, and he promised to stay till the crop
ripened.

There was a watchman's scaffold m the field and Tukaram sal
himself down on it. Soon came the birds and settled for a meal,
and Tukaram said to himself : ' These too are God's creatures and
all of them hungty ; last year there was famine, this year God hat.
sent us a crop ; I call myself a worshipper of Vishipu ; I must not
chase these away or I shall be guilty of wrongdoing.' When
two watches of the day had passed, the birds began to sing sweetly ;
they had filled their stomachs and they flew away to drink. Mean-
while Tukaram's wife wondered where he was, and she sent her
daughter to look for him. _Ka^i ran and tound him, but Tukaram
refused to go home, so Avail sent him some food to the field.
And there he stayed day and night, save for his morning visit to
the temple. Every evening he said to the birdb, ' Be off ! Be off '
It will be dark soon and you will not be able to see your way !
Come back to-morrow morning.' And he looked on theiii with ad-
miration and said, ' They eat only a few grains here and take
nothing home with them. When, O God, wilt Thou let me live like
them ? Away with the illusions that bind mc ; lei me trample ou
names and torms, let me see my own self m every one and forget
my body. As dead leaves are whirled about by the wind, such
be my comings) and goings; let me look on gold and pebbles
as the same ; keep evil hopes far from me ; let me listen neither
to praise nor censure ; let me see the Life of the World in all
living things.'

While he was thus meditating all the birds m the village
flocked to the field. Tukaram rejoiced to see them feed, as a
generous man rejoices to feed rows of Brahmans, but later on came
the peasant and he found every ear in his field empty' He
visited every corner of it, and everywhere birds flew away, like
Brahmans at the approach of an out-caste. ' You have ruined me ! *
he cried to Tukaram, and he dragged him off' to the panchSyat
( village jury ). Tukaram told his story very simply and everyop^

86 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

burst into laughter. * How much have you lost ? ' said the jury
to the peasant. ' Two khai'tdls^ ', he rephed. Then the jury agreed
that Tukaram must make it good, or the Government ojfficial
would be displeased, since he was insisting on payment of the
taxes due from the grain. So the jury went off to estimate the
damage, but — so runs the story of Mahipati — when they reached
the field, lo ! every ear was full of gram, not a trace of damage
could be seen ! And when the field was reaped, seventeen khat'idls
of gram were recovered from it ; such a harvest had never been
seen before.. There were many opinions what should be done with
it, but finally it was agreed by the jury that Vithoba had sent it for
Tukaram and that two khandis should be given the peasant, the
rest to Tukaram. He however refused to take it, ' for to expect no
fruit of our actions is the chief sign that a man is a true devotee
and that his spirit is at peace.' Many are ready to serve such a
man — and such a man was Tukaram. The balance of fifteen
khaMu of grain were left in custodj? of Mahadajipant Deshpande,
the revenue official already referred to.

13. Tukaram and the Tegmple Repairs

Tukaram's wife was very bitter over his refusal to accept
the gram, but Tukaram heeded her not. He turned his thoughts to
the old temple of Pan^urang in the village which was falling down
through age. He took a pickaxe in his hand and also set to work
mixing clay and water Mahadajipant at this time had a dream in
which he seemed to hear Hari bidding him help Tukaram. He
obeyed the call and sent workmen to repair the temple, paying their
wages out of the balance of grain left in his hands. Tukaram
reflected sadly that he ought now to feed Brahmans, and he had no
means of doing so. Once more Mahadajipant remembered " that
Tukaram had never been paid his half maund for watching the
field. The village jury was again summoned and they called on the
peasant to pay up his debt. Many of them added something them-
selves, and Tukaram finished his labours on the temple by feasting
the Brahmans, while a consecration ceremony ' was performed for
the image.

Tukaram then formed the idea of conducting Kirtans, and he
began by committing to memory the lines of old saints like Namdev
and Kabir, Dnyaneshwar and Eknath. He sat on Bhanrjara Hill
and learned them. He read the Bhagvadgita and searched out its
meaning, his wife bringing him food daily. To be sure, she was a
shrew, but she respected her husband and laid all the blame for his
foolishness on Vit{hal.

1 A khandl is 20 Bombay maunds by measure, roughly lbs, 1600 or over
cwts 14.

2 M says • ' Hari reminded Mahadaj'ipant '.

3 The PrU^ Pratiitha ceremony, on which see chapter 0, sect. 1 on
'Tttkaram's Idolatry".

IMAGE OF JlJABAl (OR AVALiBAl) TUKARAM's WIFE, NOW
WORSHIPPED AT DEHU

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 87

14. The Troubles of His Wife

Well, one day Avail was carrying him bread and a gourd full of
water. The sun was very hot, the path very rough and thorny, and
she was almost fainting with fatigue. She spilt the water and her
bitterness broke forth in loud complaints. A thorn got into her
foot and she could walk no further, when suddenly it was as if there
stood_by her side one glittering in silk and jewels. ' The wretch! '
said Avaji, 'what does he want ? He has driven my husband mad,
and he has come to laugh at my troubles.' So she turned away,
but, whichever way she looked, it seemed as though Hari was
reflected in a house full of mirrors. She closed her eyes, but a
voice seemed to say, ' My daughter, why do you take me for an
enemy ? You say I have turned your husband against the world ;
not so, it IS only that the plant has borne its own fruit, and the
wind has blown_it from the tree. How am I to blame m this ? '
And with this Avali felt the thorn had left her foot. Then she
stood and cried : ' I am losing time ; that lunatic is sitting there on the
hill,' and off she started, finding some fresh water and supplying her
husband's needs.''

15. Avali Loses Her Robe

One day she was bathing and had hung on a wall her one and
only robe, while her husband despite their deep poverty was sitting
near singing of Hari. Just then there came past a poor old Brah-
man woman * who begged Tukaram for a dress. His heart was
filled with pity and he signed to her to take the robe ; she did so and
gave him her blessing_and departed. Then Tukaram went oflf to
the Indraya^ti, leaving Avali much perplexed by the loss of her robe.3
At length the children told her what had happened and her lamenta-
tions were loud and long, * Curse the old woman,' she said, * he's
given her my clothes and gone off to the forest without a word to
me 1 My husband indeed 1 I never ate the food he earned. He tied
the beads * on me and made himself my master; he never did any-
thing for me. One wife of his died in the famine ; she was very lucky
to go before me.' Just at that moment relatives called mvitmg her
to a wedding ceremony and this added fuel to the fire of her wrath.
Just as she was all aflame with passion, nays Mahipati, she had a
vision of Hari standing offering her a silk robe — and the vision
acted like rain on the fire ! She put on the dress and went abroad,

' For M's embellishments see sect. 4 in Part III of this chapter.

2 So says M. in Bhakta Vijaya, but in his later Bhakta LllSmnta he
says Rakhumal came in the guise of a Maharanl.

3 S.T.C. has a chapter (14) on 'Tnkoha and JijabSi' (Ava}l) which raised
in the press a fruitless discussion on 'Who was to blame ''

^ A necklace of flowers, like the ring in the European ritual, is the symbol
of marriage among Hindus.

88 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

her friends astonished to see her splendour. One said : ' She must
always have kept it hidden ' ' And another : ' Tukaram pretends to
be an ascetic, but look what he's given his wife ! '

16. Tukaram as a Vaishnava Saint

Gradually Tukaram became known as a Vaishjjava and even
Brahmans began to honour him, but his humility did not forsake
bim.^ When other Vaishpavas gathered to dance and sing he would
sweep away the pebbles from the ground with his own hands and
stand behind them and take up the refrain. All his actions were
those of a true saint. ' What is a true saint ? ' asks Mahipati.
' One who grieves equally whether his own child or another man's
cries, who is not vexed when a thief carries ofif his goods, who feels
equally honoured when a king gives him a jewel and a peasant a
few vegetables. Such was Tukaram.' He would sit by the river
humbling himself before God and when night came on he would
return to the temple. Sometimes he would determine to keep
awake all night m meditation, but he would find himself growing
sleepy. * For though a man may have left the world, yet some
wesjsnesses of the flesh will cling to him, as a fragrance lingers
where camphor has been burnt, or as the potter's wheel goes on
whirling when he has withdrawn the stick, or as leaves tremble
when the storm is over, or twilight lingers when the sun has set.'
What did ' the prince of Vaishnavas ' do ? In order to ensure
constancy of devotion he tied his shendt — the sacred lock of long
hair worn by a Hindu — to a nail above him, and thus for four days
he abstained from sleep, and for four days he banished all thoughts
of ease. ' Probably Mahipati has based his statement on tradition ;
but if it be his own invention, he must evidently have made a
close study of Tnkaram's works, a fact which is borne out by
other evidence also. For Tukaram feelingly refers again and again
to his own laziness and the loss of time in sleep, so that nobody
need wonder if he actually tried the arrangement which some over-
zealous students sometimes resort to even in these days.' ^

In every possible way Tukaram served other men. He assisted
pilgrims. When he found in the jungle old cattle turned loose to
shift for themselves, he brought them grass and water and fondled
them. In hot weather he provided water for wayfarers and when
he found any sick he brought them into the temple and gave them
medicine. In short, he performed any service required of him and
he never failed in his word.

17. His Commissioti in Oil

Once when he was sitting on the bank of the Indrayapi, people
going to market bade him come with them. ' Very good,' said
1- Dr. P. E. Bhandarkar, Two Masters : Jesus and Tukaram, p. 19.

[V PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 89

rukaram, and he joined them, but so as not to be idle a moment,
^le sang as he walked. Now there was an old Brahman woman m
the company, very feeble on her legs, and Tukarara felt so sorry
For her that he offered to carry her on his back. ' Better if you
went to the bazar for me, and brought me my oil ! ' ' Very good,'
said Tukaram, and next day he brought her oil. And some days
ater she was telling everyone that the oil never ended ' And some
Deople said : ' He ought to be ashamed of himself ! His own
children haven't enough to eat.' But others sought to turn the
occasion to their own advantage, and they sent Tukaram to buy oil
"or them, loading him up with many vessels and bottles. He
iccepted the commission, and went to the bazar, where he helped
i?isitors to stall and feed their horses, then going to the temple to
worship. Afterwards he took the vessels to the dealer in oil and
landed him his money, but he had no idea how much oil ought to
?o in each vessel.

Tukaram's wife was very bitter when she saw him working for
3thers-and others taking advantage of him. But her friends said :
Every man suffers for his qualities ; the parrot wouldn't be impri-
soned ifjie couldn't talk ; if a cow has a white tail we cut it off.'
*\nd so Avail was silenced, but she was very discontented.

i8. The Holy Day of His Forefathers

Avail addressed him one day and said : ' To-day la the holy day
Df your forefathers and we have nothing to offer them.' ' I will go
o the forest,' said Tukaram, ' and bring some herbs for ,in ofTer-
ng. You may eat them and feast our forefather.s.' So off he went,
nnging loudly the name of Han : ' My burden is all on thy head ;
3o with me as thou wilt.' As he passed by a .spot where some
-eapers were at work, they shouted to him to come and help them.
They were labourers who were working half-heartedly but Tukaram
lelped them with all his might. He forgot all about the herb he
wanted.^

After some hours Tukaram came home from his labours, with a
Dundle of wheat the reapers had given him. And as he passed along
le disturbed a bees' nest, and the bees swarmed out and settled on
iim But Tukaram would not drive them off. ' This body of
nine,' said he, ' is doomed to perish ; let it spend itself in the service
3f other creatures. To-day is the holy day of my forefathers;
seradventure they have come to visit me m the form of these
Dees.' Then the bees left off troubling him and he reached home
without more annoyance. ^ Bidding his wife cook the corn and
Tiake a feast for their forefathers, he prayed : 'O merciful Mother

1 For another aspect of this episode see sect. 5 in part III of this cliapter.

2 M. says 'Han drove the bees away.'

X2

90 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM c

Vithoba, unless thou dine with me I will not dine '' ' Then,' sa"
Mahlpati, ' Han heard his words and appeared, and he and h
Lord sat down together. This was the work and effect of fait
God ate with him and vanished irom his sight.' ^

19. His Call to Become a Poet

The breathing into Tukaram of the spirit of poetry took plai
in a dream in which Namdev m the company of Han appeared
Tukaram.^ ' Rise up, Tuka,' said a voice to hira, ' and listen to m
Behold Nama, my worshipper, who vowed he would write me
hundred crores of abhaiigs. Before he finished his task he passi
away. Now you finish it for him. ' When Tukaram awoke 1
felt mightily rejoiced, and set to work at once, making himsc
hooks of rough paper and learning the BSlbhodh letters. " Nii
hundred* verses he wrote and they were heard with delight 1
Han's worshippers. Then he began to compose abhaugs and fa
they flowed from him : ' As when the ram pours down, unnur
bered shoots of grass spring up, even so verses poured forth ' fro
Tukaram."

20. His Daily Offering

Tukaram used to give milk daily to Vithoba, pounng it over Y
image. Avail greatly disapproved of this. She said : ' He giv
that black fellow a pot of milk daily ; why ever does he do it ? V^
have a troop of children at home; and not enough milk left to mal
a little curd for them.' Now her little daughter Bhagirathi alwa
went with Tukaram to the temple, so Avail said to her : ' Tl
milk your father takes to the temple, does that black fellc
really drink it '' ' Indeed he does,' said the little girl, 'and if the
IS any left he gives me some and dnnks the rest himself.' Avail w

' The last few lines ofler a striking Hindu paiallel to the Christian's ' gra
before meat ' and to Brother Lawrence's Practice of the Presence of Goal.

2 This story IS recorded in Tukaram's own Giftlia, abhangs 1320-13i
Indu Prakiish edition and 103-4 F. and M., but Dr P. R. Bhandarl
rejects them and this story also on the ground that m abhatig 1333 m whi
Tukaram gives a summary of his life, ' this dream is not referred to while t
other one (see section 22 below) in which his guru appeared is mention©
This seems to us inconclusive, for Tukaram was not bound to give every det
of his life in this one abhaiig ; moreover the incident of the guru-inant
referred to by him was by far the more important of the two. See.Ti
Masters Jcstis and Tukaram, p. 9.

■* In which Sanskrit is usually written.

^ Only 102 of these have been published. They are given in the I. P. editic
Vol. 2, pp. 655-717.

' On the subject of this sect, and sect. 22 below, see L. R. Pangark,
S.T.C., chap. 7, and P. R. Bhandaikar's later view in footnote, sect. 30 below,

IV

PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 91

astoni&hed, and one day she said to Tukaram, ' I am going to give
him iome milk myself.' ' Very good,' replied Tukaram. Mahlpati
adds : ' The Lord of Pandhari was perplexed. He knew Avail had
no faith in him and if he did show any sign_or wonder, she would
only torment her poor husband.' Now when Ava}i brought the milk
it was too hot, but she had no gentle feelings towards the god, and
she never thought of cooling it. So when she put the vessel next to
his lips 'and burned them', she was greatly astonished, and said :
' This black fellow looks like a stone, but there seems to be life m
him for all that.' Then Tukaram was sorely distressed and went
off to the temple, where tears stieamed from his eyes. ' Even as he
wept, however, the blister went down,' adds the devoted biographer
of the Maratha saintb.

21. The Healing of His Sick Boy

Tukaram had now two sons, Mahadev and Vithoba and one
time Mahadev fell very ill. Avail tried many remedies, whatever
were proposed to her, and she sent for adepts who were masters of
evil spirits. She tied threads and charms on the boy and waved holy
lights round him. All was idle, however ; the boy wasted away,
though drugs were poured down his throat. The neighbours told
her that it was Han that had sent the misfortune, and her feelings
were roused to the uttermost. She took her dying son and went off
to the temple to beat Paijclurang. Having reached the temple
Avaji listened m amazement to the prayers and looking upon
her son she saw that he was healed. So she took him home and fed
hira and his sickness returned no more. But when Tukaram heard
of this he exclaimed : ' Alas ! you have laid a burden on the Lord
of Paijdbari.'

22. Tukaram's Dream and the Mantra

A small band of followers now began to write down his poems,
which task was entrusted to Santaji Jaganaje the oilman.^ There
was also a Brahman member of the band named Gangaji Mavaja ;
day and night they went to the temple to sing and to worship Hari.
At that time Tukaram dreamed that he met a saint while going to
bathe. Laying his hand on Tukaram's head the saint imparted to
him the mantra: 'Ram-Kris^a-Hari,' adding that his own name
was Babaji and his predecessors RSghav Chaitanya and Keshav
Chaitanya. Tukaram then begged that he would go home with

I Some of these poems are now pubhshed from Saniajl's manuscripts by
Mr. V. L.Bhawe in his TuKdramace Assal (original) Gatltd, 1920-1, see our
chap. 5, I, sect. 1.

92 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

him and sanctify his house ; he would give him food and he should
cook it himself, ' Give me, then,' said the saint in the dream, ' a
quarter-seer of ghee and I will come with you.' This far went
Tukaram's dream and he awoke. ^ ' Mahipati suggests that Tukaram
did not like to lesort to a guru, because according to the usual
custom the latter would have put forth for the acceptance of
his disciple the doctrine of advatttsm or pantheism, for which he
had a great repugnance. The diificulty was solved when Tukaram
had a dream, in which appeared a person who declired his name to
be Babaji Chaitanya of the line of Raghava Chaitanya and Keshav
Chaitanya and who gave him the sacred formula, not ' tattwamasi',^
but " Ram, Knsna, Han ". " The Prince of Teachers," says Tuka-
ram, told me the simple sacred formula of my likmg that will not
lead to any entanglement anywhere " ' "'

In a paper before the BhSrata Itihclsa Sanshodhaka Mandala,
Poona, May Z9, 1921, Mr. A. Muzumdar said four newly-discovered
sanads showed Keshav and Babaji as one and not two individuals,
that Babajl died shake 1493, Tukaram recening the gurumantra
in shaks 1523. This view runs counter both to the traditional date
of Tukaram's birth and to the definite statement of Bahinabai — see
I, 4 (4) above — that Raghav, Keshav, Babaji were three distinct
persons.

23. Avail and Her Moods

His wife's conduct much chagrined him, and much he remons-
trated with her. 'Paijdurang,' said he, 'is our father; he will not suffer
us to want anything If you will listen to me, we shall gain a
glorious name in this world. Cast aside worldly hopes ; forget that
you have any children : go to the saints for protection, and call
on the name of Vithoba.' Eleven abhaiigs m this strain he
addressed to her.* For a time she was moved by his own spirit
of devotion, and one day, early m the morning, she called in a
party of Brahmans, and bade them carry off all their household
goods ; she even gave the ashes on the fireplace to a sanyasi,
to smear his body withal. After this she went to the temple
and there came up an old Mahar woman, a beggar, and asked for
a cast-off dress, whereupon Tukaram gave her one of Avaji's
that was hanging on the wall. The children of the village told
this to Avail, and she was bitterly incensed ; she took a stone
and went to the temple to break the image. There Avali
poured out her wrongs against Rukhmml.* (See footnote 3. Sect. 15;.

^ See footnotes at the end o£ sect. 19 above, and on sect- 30 below.

3 The Sanskrit for ' Thou art that '

3 Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Two Mastcrt, : Jesu!> and Tukaram, p. 'J.

iAhhang!, numbered 1573a to 1573k in voluffie 2 of F. and M.

5 M. says Rukmini gave her a handful of gold pieces and a dress, but when
Tukaram saw her returning he said, 'Greedy creature!' took the gold pieces
and gave them away to Brahmans.

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 93

24. Dining with the Chinchwad Brahman

At Chinchwad lived a Brahman named Chiijtamapi Dev, who,
hearing of Tukaram's fame, sent him an invitation to dine with
him. Tukaram reached the house just as Chmtamani Dev was at his
morning devotions. He approached unperceived and heard Chmta-
mani in the midst of recitations giving orders to the gardener and
scolding him for neglecting the plants. When Chmtamani came
forth, Tukaram laid himself in the dust before him ; but Chmta-
mani scorned to make any reverence to a Sudra. ' I am glad to
see you,' said he, ' when did you come ? ' ' I came,' said Tuka-
ram, ' when you were seated at your morning devotions and just
as you (mentally) went into the garden.' Chmtama^i's conscience
smote ium. ' Truly,' remarked he, ' you are well said to be a
searcher of hearts. But tell me ! They say Vishnu eats in your
company ' Is it so ? Will you show me this marvel '' So saying
he offered Tukaram a seat and a plate, for even a beggar
has a right to such if he comes at the moment when
the fire oblation is offered. Howbeit, Tukaram's plate was
set four cubits' distance from the Brahman's. Then Tukaram set
out two other plates and Chmtamani asked him for whom they
were, ' One,' said Tukaram, ' is for my god Hari, the other for
your god Gaijpati. Now you call on Ganpati to join us.' And
Chintamaiji did so, but in vain, whereupon Tukaram said : ' Know
that, while you were calling, a devotee of Ganpati was drowmng ; he
remembered Ganpati, who ran forthwith to save him. If you doubt
this, wait a while and see.' And according to the picturesque narra-
tive of Mahipati, ' an hour afterward Gaijpati came to'join them, his
silken robes dripping with saltwater,' and Tukaram bade Chmta-
raaiji invite hira to dinner. ' How can he dine with us ? ' said
Chintamaiji, ' when we offer him sacred food, he accepts but the
odour.' ' I shall not be comforted,* said Tukaram, ' unless he dines
with us.' And he ' turned to Ganpati ' and saluted him: 'Glory
to thee ! Giver of all accomplishment, saviour of thy worshippers
in all extremities, dispeller of the ensnaring world ? ' Then, so runs
the Hindu story, did Ganpati, ' a visible presence, sit down before
them ; and Tukaram closing his eyes called on Pancjurang, and he
came m all his glory and joined them. And they ate and were
satisfied and departed.' Then Chmtamani laid himself in the dust
before Tukaram but Tukaram raised him up' and said . ' My lord,
It is more fitting that I should reverence your feet.'

This remarkable event can best be understood by reading care-
fully Tukaram's own ab/iai'igs 1573 L to 1573 P in the second
volume of the Poems,* especially 1573 O, where Tukaram says: ' It
is Narayan who eats the food. At every mouthful let us utter the
name of Govinda , it is enough that the worshippers eat — God eats

I F. and M.

94 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch.

through them.' Or as Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar translates this
important abhatig . * ' If at every mouthful a man has faith then
God dines m his person. Keep hold of the essential thing
which IS to remember God, then the distance between is not great.
If you enjoy a meal in faith, God sits down to dine with you.' The
Hindu story thus supplies an interesting parallel to the sacramental
significance given by Quakers to every meal.

25. Tukaram's Six Children

Now Tukarim had the following children . three daughters —
Kasibai, Bhaglrathi, and Gangabai, and three sons — Mahadev,
Vithoba, and Narayan." His daughters had come to be of
marriageable age, and Avail pressed their marriage upon him. So
one day Tukaram went into the road and there saw three boys of
his own caste playing together; he called them to the house, sent
for a Brahman and forthwith he got them married to his daughters.
Fnepds met and a marriage teast was duly held, Tukaram's fellow-
devotees making contributions towards the expenses of the four
days' wedding festivities. ' Truly God protects those who make
friends of Him ; and the world shows itself merciful to them,' is
the comment of Tukaram's biographer.

26. Tiie Haughty Brahman Deshpande

A Brahman named Deshpande there was who sat and fasted
and practised austerities, in the hope that he might comprehend the
Puranas. Ten days he satjasting, tiWva a dream he heard Han
bid him go and worship at Alandi. To Aland! therefore he went and
twelve days he fasted before Dnyaneshwar's tomb, till he was
bidden rise and visit Tukaram. Then Deshpande awoke and the
counsel displeased him, for Tukaram was a Sudra. Nevertheless
he went to Dehu and told his tale to Tukaram, who said in dismay :
' O Hari ! all that I utter is but the words thou dost whisper m
ray ear. What can I do to instruct this man ' ' And he composed
for him eleven abhangs under the title ' The Best Knowledge', and
with these gave him a cocoanut ; but the Brahman was wroth and
said : * It is the old Puranas I desire to comprehend, not this
Prakrit " of yours.' And he refused Tukaram's ofifering of fruit
and away he went back to Alandi and complained to Dnyaneshwar.
But again he heard the same voice as beiore, this time saying:
'Your base suspicions are the fruit of your own past. You sat

* Two Masters : Jesus and TukarSm, p. 31.

'■* Narayan was born four months after Tukaram's death (see Part III,
sect. 18).

'' The common dialect of the people as contrasted with the sacred Sanskrit.

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 95

under the tree of wishes and tied up your wallet and disdained to
put therein what it gave you. In Tukaram's abhai'igs is the very
essence of the holy scriptures, but you despised them because they
were written m Prcfknt.'

27. The Pearls in the Cocoanut

Thus it was m Deshpande's case. But there was another
Brahman named Kondoba, a stout jolly fellow, unlettered and void
of self-conceit, who did reverence to Tukaram and accepted from
him the cocoanut which Deshpande had refused. He found inside
It a number of costly pearls valued at a lakh of rupees ' For a
banker of Ahmedabad had offered these pearls to Dnyaneshwar at
Alandi and he had been told at Dnyaneshwar's tomb to give them
to Tukaram. In sending them to Tukaram the banker put them
mside a cocoanut, knowing as he did that Tukaram miisi accept a
cocoanut in accordance with the courtesies of the country, whereas
he would be sure to refuse pearls. This cocoanut Tukaram -then
gave to the Brahman, and as the story goes, along with these
precious pearls inside the cocoanut Kondoba received the knowledge
of Sanskrit.

28. Tukaram's Kirtans at Lohogaon

Tukaram's fame continuea to spread and one day the people of
Lohogaon begged him to pay them a visit and sanctify their village.
He consented and went and held a klrtan there. One month he
stayed with them, and at last a Brahman widow begged him to
perform a kirfan m her house. When he saw her devotion he
consented, but before the day came there was a storm of rain and
the wall of her neighbour's house threatened to fall in. She went
to Tukaram m great distress, but he assured her the wall should
not fall until the service was finished So four days passed safely,
the service was completed, the feast was held, the house was
emptied and then the wall fell. TukSram bade the people build
her a new house, and he held a service there too,

29, Rameshwar Bhatt

Some men, however, cannot bear the sight of goodness, just as
the fevered stomach rejects milk ; such an one was the Brahman
Rameshwar Bhatt. A learned student of the scriptures, he lived at
Wagholi, and Tukaram's fame moved him to anger. Resolving to
drive him from the countryside, he sent a complaint to the Court, *

I A Mahommedan Court, the country at that time being subject to Anrang-
zib. TheCourt might presumably take cognisance of any actions that di'iturbed
existing customs and so threatened the public peace,

96 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

that Tukaram, a 6udra, was studying the scriptures and holding
hirtans and that even Brahmans were saluting him. The simple
people were deluded when they heard this complaint, even the
District Officer being incensed, so he ordered the PCtfU of Dehu to
drive forth the offending poet-saint. On this being made known,
Tukaram went to see Rameshwar Bhatt and deprecated his wrath.
But Rameshwar told him unauthorized preachers such as he would
go to hell and he enjoined silence upon him. * You Brahmans,'
said Tukaram, ' are visible images of the Lord ; I will obey your
command; I will speak no more. But what of those poems of
mine that are written down ' ' ' Throw them into the river,' said
Rameshwar. ' Very good,' said Tukaram.

So back went he to Dehu, and entering the temple, there
cried : ' O thou that doest all deeds, at thy behest I have uttered
these irregular words; now I must throw them in the river.'
Then with his own hands he committed every sheet to the water,
tying them in a cloth and sinking them with a stone, calling on the
name of God ^ as he did so. And the malicious said : ' Ha ' the
butterfly has lost his colours ! Rameshwar is a wise man ; like a
second sun hei has chased away the darkness of falsehood ' Tuka-
ram was at first quite cheerful, and for five days he continued
praising God as before ; at last, however, he began to feel men's
derision. ' You threw away the deeds of your property ; now you've
thrown away your poems. Aren't you ashamed to look us m the
face ? ' When he heard these biting words, his heart failed him,
and he sat down on a stone outside the temple, feeling ashamed
before the world. ' Speak a word, O Vitthal,' he cried, ' ere yet I
destroy myself; if I do not reach thee I must perish.' And he
closed his eyes, firmly fixed his thoughts on God ', ate not nor drank
nor ga^re any sign of life. In his silence he composed a number of
moving abhangs about the sad event.'

Though Rameshwar was a learned Brahman, yet, in the words
of our narrator, ' his enmity towards Vishnu's worshipper destroyed
the merit he had won'.' One day he came to Poona to salute
^iva — let us see what happened to him. At Poona there lived a
giBAt fakir, Anagadashah byname ; Rameshwar Bhatt unwittingly
entered his garden and seeing before him a pool of clear water
began to bathe. The fakTr heard him at his devotions and he
was mightily incensed, ' You have polluted ray sanctified water,"
said he, ' your body shall be burned without fire.' And as the
story goes, Rameshwar Bbatt soon felt himself aflame; sleeping,
rising or walking, an inward fire consumed him ; he knew not what
to do." Thoughtful people said, however, ' This is the wrath of

I ' Vitthala," says M.

2 ' Han's feet,' says M.

3 These abhaiigs are 15 19-73 in F. and M., with commento, p. 439, vol, 11,

4 A"! a Westerner would say ' He was ruined by his jealousy.'

5 I e., his conscience became a bell of torment,

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 97

God ; Anagadashah is His instrument.' And at last he went to
Aland! and sat m mute entreaty before the image of Dnyandev.

30. Recovery of Tukaram's Poems from the River

Meanwhile God ' laid His comforting hand on Tukaram, saying:
* I am thy protection. Many saints have I protected '. And He
settled ' like a bee in the lotus of the poet's heart ', and Tukaram felt
glad once more. That night He showed himself in a dream to
many of the village and said to them : ' I have kept dry all Tuka-
ram's papers ; they are even now coming to the surface of the river.
Make haste and take them out '. So m the morning they hurried to
the river, and, behold ' the papers were floating like gourds on the
water. Great was the joy among the poet's friends as some of them
swam out and brought the papers to shore. And Tukaram opened
his eyes and ssang a hymn of praise : ' One fault I acknowledge,'
said he, ' that I have troubled Him who wears the woodland
wreath. I have no right to lay my burden upon Him.' '

The Indu PraMsh edition ' presents the above remarkable story
as follows, adding * that the difficulty arising ' can easily be explain-
ed on rational grounds ' : ' Tukaram threw the books into the river
IndrayanI with his own hand, taking care, says Mahipati, to cover
them on either side with thin slates of stone and wrapping them up
m a cloth. . . With his poems all drowned in the river, and he
forbidden to compose any new ones, he seemed destined to live a
life of nonentity, . . . leaving the world to his persecutors, who
evidently thought they had gained everything they wanted. But no ;
by that inherent force of truth to triumph and to outlive, and by
that unforeseen and unexpected succour which the truly faithful and
sincere receive from quarters unknown, call it miracle or anything
else, Tukaram and his poems outlived his persecutors and inculcated
in the Maratha nation the great doctrine of Salvation by Faith. On
the 13th day according to Mahlpati's account of the event, the
drowned books began to float on the surface of the water and were
taken out by the people.' Such considerations will weigh differently
with different minds. Some might be disposed to consider favour-
ably the possibility that after several days in the river the cloth

' Han, says M.

2 Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar would here insert the narrative of TukarSm's call
to become a poet already given in .sect. 19 above, urging as be does that the
■ call ' came after the recovery of Tukatam's poems from the river, and that for
the occasion Vishnu came to the poet under the guise of a child. But it is
rlftar that TukSrSm was already famous as a poet before the poems were con-
signed to the river, as sect. 29 above shows, and to put his call to be a poet
after the recovery of poems which had made him famous seems an unjustifiable
reversing of Mahlpati's order of narrative (Nawayuga, March 1321, pp.
145-9).

3/. P., Vol. I., p. 11-12.

4 Ibid p. 20.

13

98 LIFE AND TEACPIING OF TUKARAM CH.

wrapping may have been washed away, followed shortly after by
the ' thin slates of stone ; ' the bundle of papers then increasing in
bulk, as suggested by Mr. V. L. Bhawe's word ' ^/;Mg^« = swollen,
they would naturally rise to the surface. A modern parallel was
the recovery from the sea of MSS belonging to the late Archdeacon
Dennis of the Niger Mission, who, returning to England in August
1917 on the S. S. Karma was sunk by a German submarine. His
sunken MSS — linguistic notes and the bulky typescript of his
English- Ibo dictionary — were sometime after washed up on the
coast of Wales and are now at Salisbury Square, London.

The story spread abroad like the fragrance of a bed of flowers,
while all the time Rameshwar Bliatt was sitting at Alandi. At last
in the temple of Dnyaneshwar he received this message : ' If you
assail the servants of Han no sacred waters will wash your guilt
away ; you must go and implore Tukaram for help and your misery
will end'. Then Rameshwar repented and wrote a letter, sending it
Tukaram by the hand of one of his disciples saying : ' I write to
you m fear and trembling for I have greatly wronged you,' Tukaram
was moved by compassion, and he sent him an abhaug : ' If your
mind is pure, your enemies will be your friends, tigers and serpents
will approach you but they will not devour you. If men revile you,
you will thmk they are speaking gently to you ; flames of fire will
feel cool to you,°

When Rameshwar read this, he rose and went to visit Tukaram
and praised hiq greatness and goodness. But Tukaram said : ' I am
a man of low degree ; I beg you will show me your kindness and
favour'. And the other answered . ' I shall go home no niore but
shall make my home for ever at your feet'. And so he did.'

Shortly afterwards the fakJr heard the story, and he set out to
visit Tukaram. When he arrived at Tukaram's house, Avali
received him with a curse, but little Ganga, Tukaram's daughter,
dropped a little flower into his bowl. The child's mother, Avali,
thereupon grasped Ganga's hand, seizing some of the flour left
there, but Gang! managed to throw a little more, filling Ihefakjrs
vessel. ' What ' and are you Tukaram ' ' he asked m astonish-
ment. ' Are you a fool ? ' replied Ganga, ' Tukaram is in the
temple '. Hearing this he went to the temple and paid Tukaiam
a visit, laying himself in the dust before him. Two days he stayed
listening to Tukaram's klrtans and then he went back home.

Among those who came to the Dehu temple was a young
woman, a stranger, and very beautiful, who one day when she found
Tukaram alone besought him to sm. Whereupon he trembled with
horror, spoke to her two abhaiigs — 121 and 122 on which s<$ie
chapter 6, section 9— and rebuked her.

im.Scir., p. 178

■^ See Ahhang lAfiC, Fraser and Marathe

1 M. here gives ' The Coppersmith and His Wife ' in sect. 6, part ui

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 99

31. Mumbaji the Jealoas Brahman'

There was living at ChincKwada Brahman named Mumbaji who
became an ascetic and changed his place of abode to Dehu.
As Tukaram's fame increased Mumbaji despised him as being a
Sudra by caste and a grocer by vocation. Now it happened that
Avail's father had given her a buffalo, and one day this creature
went mto Mumbaji's garden and ate some of the plants there.
Mumbaji cursed the buffalo and closed the path to his garden with
thorns. In so doing, however, he also closed the way round the
temple, and next Ekadashl'^ when the pilgrims came, Tukaram
opened it. Mumbaji burst into furious wrath, seized Tukaram
and severely beat hini. Tukaiam offered no resistance and no
word of remonstrance, merely calling devotedly on the name of Han.
But Mumbaji went on beating him as a thresher beats ears of
corn?

When all was over Tukaram went into the temple." It was
faoon time to begin the service, but Tukaram insisted they should
wait for Mumbaji. When they sent to remind him, however, he
sent word that he could not come. His body was achmg all over !
On hearing this, Tukaram went himself to the house of Mumbaji,
gently rubbed the aching body of the man who a short time before
had been thrashing him, and then brought Mumbaji to the temple
service. Thus was Mumbaji put to shame by Tnkaram's meekness
and splint of forgiveness. Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar well says that
it was 'a reaUzation of the precept of Jesus " that ye resist not evil "
m Matthew v. 39-40.' ' Mahipati rightly adds : ' Towards friend
and foe alike Tukaram showed the same kindly disposition. Free
from lU-feeling or resentment of any kind "le won the love of
all around him '.

32. Shivaji and Tukaram ^

Tukaram's fame now came to the ears of the future Maratha
King Sivaji, who said: ' I will call Tukaram here and listen to his
hirtatt myself." So he sent a horse with a torch and umbrella and

' This story of Mumbaji, m all the MarathI ' lives * of Takaram, is placed
very much earlier, before the incident of Rameshwar Bhatt and the lo^ and
recovery of TukarSm's poems. On the evidence of 'Bahrnabril— recently
tanught to light (see page 73 above and U. Siir, p. 193)— who distinctly states
ttat previous, to the Mumbaji incident Rameshwar Bhatt was a disciple of
Tukaram, we have placed this story after that of Rameshwar Bhatt.

3 For definition see p. 56,

•• On a glance from Han all his wounds were healed, adds M.

^Tltto Masters Je^us and Tukaram, p, 10.

' M here relates ' Vithoba and the Thieves ', sect. 7, part iii

« On the historicity of this event see Chapter V, part II, sect. 3.

100 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cii.

a clerk m charge of them. The clerk found Tukaram at Lohogaon
and delivered him the Raja's message. He was much distressed
when he heard it, apd wrote four abhaftgs excusing himself, which
he gave the clerk to take. ' Sit on the horse', said he, ' you will
soon get back.' ' I dare not sit on him', rephed the clerk, ' he is too
fiery in his temper.' Then Tukaram patting the horse, his temper
was subdued, and the clerk took the following message •

'Torches, umbrellas, and horses, these are not among things
good for me. Why, O Lord of Pandhari, dost thou entangle me
amongst such ? O God, says Tukaram, run to set me free from
this. . . I feel that I should avoid society. . . It is my
pressing request that you will not even talk of seeing me The
rock IS an excellent bed to sleep on and I have the sky above me
for a cloak. If I saw fine apparel and men wearing jewels, it
would at once be the death of me. Let me tell you this surprising
news, there is no happiness hke the beggar's. . • . There is
one thing that brings a blessing, and its purport is this, learn to see
one spirit in all created things.' *

Sivaji was amazed when he read the message and he resolved to
visit Tukaram himself. He set out in full state, with all his niinib-
ters m attendance and went to Lohogaon. He made his way at
once to Tukaram and laid himself m the dust before him. Then
with his own hands he put a garland of tulsT on his neck, and laid
a plate of gold coins before him. With a struggle Tukaram spoke
and said : ' What need have I of gold ? Vitthal is enough for me.
Thy fame, my lord, I know well ; to-day I know thy generosity.
Yet a man needs no lamp when he has the sun to give him light;
the Himalaya needs no fan to keep him cool ; the wealth you have
brought me is as cow's flesh to my senses. Now let me give you
this counsel, to ensure you peace ; let your only ornament be the
tiiW garland, your only observance the ekcldashJ^^ and call
yourself the servant of Vithoba.' A t this the Raja was well-pleased,
and the money he had brought he gave to Brahmans. That
night he spent listening to Tukaram's kJrtaii. ' The world is
p.erishable ', so he sang ; it will perish ; it will pa&s away ; worship
God \ and you will save yourself and your fathers'. As the Raja
listened, the message sank into bis mind and he said to himself : ' I
will renounce my kingdom and sit in the forest praising God * ', and
he took off his headdress* and laid it on the ground. Next morning
he sent away his ministers and gave himself up to the bliss of
devotion.

1 We have given Tukaram's message to bivdji in iunimary ouly, tiro'
message being given fully m vol. 3 of F. and M., abhangi> 1408-147'1.

i For definition see p. 56.

■' ' Vithoba ', says M.

* ' Han', says M.

» Dr. J Murray Mitchell [I.R.A.S Bo., Jany, 1849, p. ii) wrongly translates
' crown ', the Marathi word meaning simply a head-covermu

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTb 101

33. Message to Shivaji

Then they wrote and told Sivaji's mother what had happened,
and Jijabai exclaimed, ' This is bad news ;- Tukaram has ruined
the kingdom ? ' Nor was it long before she reached Lohogaon and
flung herself on the ground before the poet. ' My son,' she said,
' has given up the world ; he has no child, and who will guide the
kingdom ? ' So Tukaram bade her take comfort. That evening
after the Mrtan he thus addressed the Raja : ' To cross the sea of
the world there is but one rule ; observe the duties of your own
station. Should fish leave the water for the air, or birds the air for
the water ? Should an Arab horse be set to draw a plough, or a
soldier to ride a bullock ? Has not God set the sea round the earth
to contain it ? He has appointed to the Brahman m his student
days to learn the scriptures, as a householder to perform the six
rites\ and as a recluse to overcome his passions; now listen while 1
tell you the duties of a kshattriya. He must conquer his enemies
and protect his own faith ; reverence the Brahmans ; see the
Supreme in all creatuies ; oppress none; delight m worship ; speak
no falsehood ; feed the hungry ; and remember God ' continually.
Such an one may live without misgiving m the world — why should
he go to the jungle ? God visits him in his own house '.

When the Raja heard these words tears came into his eyes, and
he took up his clothes from the ground. His mother fell at Tuka-
rara's feet, exclaiming, ' How can I ever repay you ? ' Four days
later ^ivaji departed, but, ere he went, he begged a boon of the
poet, that he would give him as a present a piece of bread if the
kingdom was to be delivered, and a piece of cocoanut if he was to
have a son. Howbeit Tukaram gave him both."

34. Tukaram 's Disciples ; Way with Pilgrims

By this time Tukaram had a circle of disciples, several of whom
had been his bitterest enemies, the principal ones being Ramesh-
war Bhatt whose change of attitude is related in sections 29-30
above ; Kanhoba the poet's own younger brother who relieved him
of all business cares as stated in section 1 1 ; Gangaram Mavaja
Kaduskar the Brahman, and Santiji Teli Jaganade who were his
two chief assistant klrtankars and writers, Santaji's MS. having
recently been published ; ■* Koncloba, Brahman reader of Piirat}as
who took Tukarim's messages to distant holy places — see section
17. in part HI ; Navajl the flower-seller ; Sivaba Kasar the copper-
smith of whom the story is told in section 6, part HI ; Mal.aj! Gade,

^ The SIX rites are study, teaching, sacnficmg, causing sacrifices to be made,
bestowiog gifts, receiving gifts.
* ' Hari ', says M.

^ M. here gives ' The KunbT's. Cucumber ' m sect. 8, part III.
^ See sect. 1, part I, chap 5.

102 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cH.

hubband of Bbagirathi, Tukarain's daughter ; Malharpant, one of
his cymbal players ; Mahadajipant the kulkanil of Dehu referred
to in section 12 above; Ambajipant the kulkamT and fortune-
teller of Lohogaon; Kaceswar, a Brahman versed m Vedic lore;
Bahmabai— see paragraph (+), section 4, part I , and Gavars'et the
Lingayat grocer referred to in section 19 of part III.'

Four monihs later there passed Tukaram's house a company of
pilgrims bound for Bhimasankar and when be saw them he laid
himself m the dust betore them. He found among them Chmta-
mani Dev and they were glad to meet each other again. Chinta-
mani asked him for a mark of his favour, whereupon Tukaram
brought forth flour and herbs. Enough for one only he brought
forth, but every pilgrim begged for a portion. Then the saint was
perplexed, and he prayed that his little store might be enough for
all, whereupon, so runs the story, when Tukaram's flour was divided
each had a full share. Then the pilgrims embraced him lovingly,
prepared a meal, sat down and made Tukaram join them.'*

Again he succoured another company ot pilgrims which had to
pass through a wild country where there was a fierce overgrown
dog that no one could master. Tukaram went along the path and
the dog flew at him, but the saint was undismayed. ' I do
not growl at you,' said he, 'why do you growl at me ?' As he spoke
the dog was pacified and lay down like a tame cat. So the
pilgrims passed on, and when Tukaram returned, the dog followed
him and ever afterwards attended his kJrtansi^

35. Protest Against Pantheism

Once it chanced that a certain Brahman had copied Mukund
Raja's Hindu book Vivek Sindhfi ' expounding the Vedimta, and he
visited Tukaram and sought permission to read this book to him.
Now Tukaram would not dishonour the Brahman, so he granted
him permission and sat down before him, but he kept his head
shrouded in a blanketi for, said he, the siglit of the world disturbed
his attention. For an hour the Brahmau read, and Tukaram stirred
not nor spoke, till at length the Brahman lifted the blanket, and
behold ' Tukaram sat with his fingers in his ears ' ' What is this ',
said the Brahman, ' why are you wasting my time ?' ' I cannot
listen', said Tukaram, 'to the doctrine that God and His worshipper
are one.° If everything is a form of Bramha, then why this howl

i On these disciples, see L. R. Pangarkar, S.T.C., chap \i. '•'

'^ Here M has sect. '9. How Tukara n Helped the Needy', Part III,
■' Here come the stories 10-14 in Vart III entitled 'A lirahman Boy
Healed', 'A. Sctibe's Unauthorized Alteration", 'A Miraculous Visit Fiom
Siva ', ' Tukaram's Letter of Apology to Vithoba ', ' Supplying Oil and Alms.'
1 Dated 4 u USS bee SI. Sdr, p 2C.
' The advaitu ox panthctsttc doctrine.

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS 103

about gam or loss ? Between Himself and His worshippers God
has drawn a line ; that line we must recognize. A man may have
perfect insight into God's nature, but he does not acquire God's
power to create, preserve and destroy ; these attributes belong to
God alone. So Jong as God in His three forms exercises these
powers Himself let us mortals be humble and claim no identity
with Him.'

There lived at Lohogaon a certain Vaishnava who was devoted
to Tukaram and thereby offended his wife She resolved to test
the saint, and one day when her husband was away she cooked some
bitter gourds and invited Tukaram to her house to eat them. But
Tukaram had fully conquered his senses; he knew nothing of what
happened to his body ; and he ate the bitter gourds with pleasure
and even asked for more.^

36. External Methods Unavailing for Salvation

Once upon a time, according to a story that runs everywhere
in Maharashtra, several of Tukaram's devotees were to visit the
seven holy places of India and Tukaram gave them a bitter gourd,
bidding them bathe it in every sacred river they visited. On their
return a feast was held in celebration of the event and Tukaram
bade them divide the gourd among the assembled guests at the
feast. Each guest exclaimed that it was just as bitler as before
and asked m surprise why bathing it m holy rivers had not taken
away its bitterness. Whereupon Tukaram pointed the moral that
all external means, including sacred rivers, would thus fail miserably
in effecting their salvation.

37. Shivaji's Escape from Tukaram's Ktrtan

It happened once that ^ivaji came to Poona to visit Tukaram.
6iva]I fell at his feet, and the kirtan began, nothing wanting to
complete the general delight. But it chanced that the Mahomme-
dan official at Chakan heard ot SivSii's visit and he sent a troop
of soldiers to seize him. News was brought to 6ivajl and he rose
to leave the ktrtan. Then Tukaram prayed aloud for help : ' I fear
not death myself, but I cannot bear to see all round me troubled.'
And a message ^ came and comforted him; 'Be at ease ;^ go on
■\sjth the service; I, the Life of the World, will protect Sivaji '.
According to Mahlpati, Haii ' took on himself the form of 6ivaji,
and so multiplied himself that when the Pathans entered, whichever

1 M.here has sects. 15-16 ' The Fortune-Teller's Son Raised' and "Tukaram
and the Sanyasis' in Part III.

2 Hari, says M.

104 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

way they looked, they saw Sivaji ^ And as they pursued he led
them on, till within an hour they were miles away in the forest. '
Meanwhile Tukaram full joyously was singing the praise of God
in a stream of names which he poured forth, while his throat was
choked with sobs, and tears streamed from his eyes. '

Sivaji was amazed at his escape, and he set off himself for
Singhad. But first he asked Tukaram for a mark of his favour, and
the saint gave him a handful of horse-dung. This Sivaji accepted
with humble thankfulness and Tukaram returned to Lohogaon. "

38. Other- Worldliness

Tukaram was now victor over all enemies of the flesh. All
earthly riches he rejected ; but little he ate and at every mouthful
he called on the name of God. * Sometimes he would visit another
village, but if anyone asked him where he was going he would
ever answer : ' To the City of Vaikuntha .'" He never spoke save
in abhafig verse, and was received by all as a true saint. Often he
would go and humble his soul m the temple, confessing his sins and
rebuking himself. One day some birds flew away from him and
he became so distressed at their being afraid of him that he said :
' I look on all the world as myself, and yet the birds fly away from
me ! Truly all I have done is wasted. I have renounced nafne and
family, I have offered my body to Him to Whom it belongs. Yet
all is wasted ; the birds fly away from me ' There must be some
duplicity in me '. So he became very down-hearted, and again
rousing himself and giving himself up to religious contemplation he
cried ; ' O Merciful Lord ' As a blind man leans on his guide, so do
I lean on thee, I follow thee to salvation; yet I have stumbled into
a devious path, save me ! O save me '' So saying he stood still
without breath or motion, till the birds settled on him without fear,
and though he moved they were no more startled than they anj
startled by a moving bough."

1 The story of 'angels at Mons' is an interesting parallel to this story,
whether or no we believe either story.

2 In view of the 'legendary' atmosphere of Mahlpati's story as given above
It is worthy of note that the modern historian confirms it. ' One of the most
picturesque stories of his career', says Professor H. G. Rawlmson in his book
Sivdjl The Mardtha (p. 31), 'relates how, at the risk of his hfe, be once
stole through the Mussulman lines, into the heart of his enemy's camp at
Poona, to listen to a katha'. And again 'The story is well known, how,
when Shayista Khan held Poona, SivajI stole down through the enemy's
lines to attend a festival at which TukarSm's hymns were chanted ' (p. 86)

^ Here comes M's story in section 17, part III on ' The Coin and Letters to
Holy Places '.

* 'Hari' says M

'■ The nearest Hindfi parallel to the Jewish Paradise.

'This story is rejected by Re-/ N'jhemiah Goroh (TeneH of Tukiinim,
p. 72) on what appear inadequate grounds.

IV PROBABLE BIOGRAPHICAL FACTS , 105

i
39. Tukaram's End ':

Mahipati has expended all his powers in describing the eaif,'^.
Tukaram and the account will be found in its proper place at the
conclusion of Part III.' The ^only safe verdict, however, is that
of the Indu Prakash edition : ' Very great obscurity prevails as to
the end of Tukaram's earthly existence. The popular Hindu belief
is that he ascended alive to Heaven in the Car of Vishnu ... A
consistent meaning might be made out of the abhaiigs ^ and they
would seem to point out, that Tukaram . . . thought that his
worldly duty was over, wished to be rid of that visible existence
. which. . . separates man from the everlating, . . . and therefore
went on pilgrimage with the intention of never returning to Dehu,
and probably of putting an end to his existence.' " With this agrees
Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar's suggestion ' that he ended his life by means
of jalasamSdht, drowning himself in the neighbouring river. Some
of Tukaram's own abhangs show that he was aware of his ap-
proaching separation from the people and was constantly expecting
God to come and take him away ; and other evidence makes it
probable that he met his death by drowning. But whether the
drowning was a pre-arranged affair, that is to say a jalasamadhi,
or whether the constant expectation of God's coming to fetch him
away produced an illusion, and in obeying a fancied call from the
opposite bank he ran into the river and was drowned, it is very
difficult to say. But taking into consideration all facts, I am
inclined to take the latter view, that is to say, if we are to believe
that Tukaram met his death by drowning." ' It is beheved ', says
the Rev. Ganpatrao R. Navalkar, ' that he drowned himself m the
holy river of his native village, as is the custom of the Indian
sUdhus.' " Parallel instances of Indian saints who have ended their
lives hy j alas amadhi will occur to students of Maratha history, e.g.,
Eknath in 1599, Nijanand the guru and father of Ranganath in
1642, Brahmanand in 1775 and in recent years a Mr. and Mrs.
Kejuskar who both took jalasamSdht simultaneously. An equally
striking instance is that of Dnyaueshwar, the father of Marathi
poetry, who took sthalasamUdhi (getting oneself buried alive) in
1296, the moving story of which event may be read in Mr. Bhave's
fascinating Marathi work. " On the date of Tukaram's end see
section 1, Part II (p. 77) and footnote to section 18, Part III
(p. 116).

An interesting feature of Tukaram's disappearance is the dis-
covery of his blanket and cymbals a few days later, which fact

I See section -IS, Part III, '" Ascension " of Tukaram', which should be
read at this point.

a Numbered 1444 to 14S9, F. and M.

* Indu-Prakash edition, pp. 21-23.

* Two Masters- Jesus and Tukaram, p. 11.

* Tukaram, the Uaharashtrian Poet and Saint, p, 2.
'M. Sar. p. 51-2.

14-

106 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH. iv

some would adduce as evidence in favour of the theory of drown-
ing, while the biographer of the Saints ', whose narrative is given
m section 18 of Part III regards it as proof that ' he had been
received into Vaikuntha ', a phrase which the modernist Hindu
"IJ'f * '?^-^!:'^','^?^ m explaining as a Hindu poetic way of saying
that Tukaram's spirit had taken its flight '. ^ j s

On Tukaram's supposed ' influence after death ' see section IQ
in Part III of this chapter.

HI. The 'Legendary' Element in Takaram's Biography

The order and numbering of sections are explained on
page 77 1 Part II of this chapter. Dotibtless many of tlte
^traditions' given here have a substratum of fact, eg., much of
section 16 below. They are given in the form of a fairly literal
translation from Mahlpatis Marathi narrative, without comment
of our own,

I. Tukaram's Birth'

After some generations it happened on one occasion when the
great devotees were sealed round Han m Vaikuntha — like stars
round the moon, or ascetics round Siva, or mountains round Mount
Meru— that Han addressed them and said : * In the family of
Vi^vambhara there is now a saint named Bolhoba ; I am resolved to
present him with a son who bhali be a world-saviour and a world-
teacher.' The saints acclaimed this resolution, and Hari then led
aside Natna '^ and reminded him that he had never finished the
hundred crores of abhangs he promised to write ; this then should
be his opportunity to assume the fiesh again and finish the task.
Nama replied that in this Kali Yuga, Krisna had assumed his
Buddha form and gave no answer to mankind.' But Krispa
answered that he would show himself to the world again if Nama
would return there. Thereupon Nama fell at his feet, and he
raised him up and embraced him. Thus Tukaram, who dwelt m
God's heart, was set in Nama's heart ; whereby God filled Nama's
heart with the nectar of love, and God offered Nama his own
power of creation and destruction, and that devotion which lies
beyond liberation. This peculiar treasure of His, Tukaram who
was part of His innermost nature. He thus by an embrace
conveyed to Nama, and as He did so, He said : * Help each other to
know what love is.' Then said Nama, ' Where shall I assume
flesh ? Tell me some holy family,' and Hari pointed out to him
Vi^vambhara's house

Then even as the Lord of avafaras descends into the ocean shells
and forms pearls therein, even so ihe Spirit of Loving Devotion
entered the womb of Kanaka! and Tukaram was conceived.

1 To be read in connexion with sect. 3, Part II of this chapter, p. 7S.

2 ' Nama ' lefers to Namdev, the Maratha poet saint of the 14th century.

^ This silence of the Buddha form of Kns^a is entirely characteristic of
Buddha, one of the names of Buddha meaning, ' meditator ' or, ' one who
remains dumb.'

108 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

2. Adversity and Self- Dedication *

Then did Han make himself hke the Great Serpent of Siva,
and He encompassed Tukaram, loudly hissmg with his hood
uplifted, and he bade Tukaram open his eyes and look upon him.
But he answered : ' If God has visited me m this Serpent form,
assuredly I will not look upon Him. I am a servant of Pa^duraijg,
i5o other will I behold- ' When Han thus learned Tukaram's
innermost thoughts, he came before him in his true form, with his
four arms, his conch and disc, and Tukaram opened his eyes and
beheld him. ' My darling, ' said he, ' I have never forgotten you.'

3. Withdrawal from Business ^

When at last Kanhoba came to Bhambanatha he saw there an
amazing sight — Han glittering in his robes and jewels, with Tuka-
ram seated on his thigh, and he heard Hari say : ' From age to age
I show myself in the world: it is for my votary's sake. For
Pundalika's sake ^ I stand by the Bhima with my hands upon my
hips ; for Vilvambhara's sake 1 stayed at Dehu ? And Tukaram
fell at his feet — the spot is known to this day ; Kanhoba carved a
pair of feet there.

4. The Troubles of His Wife*

Off Avail started, ' with Hari behind her,' if we are to follow
Mahipati. Tukaram, the prince of Vaisnavas, when he saw them
was astonished but also very pjeased, and all three sat down to-
gether. Then Tukaram bade Avail offer him food, but she answer-
ed, ' I have brought only one cake, it will not be enough for two.'
Avail in confusion opened the bundle, and lo ! it was full of dishes,
for Han had previously eaten. * Surely,' she said, ' my family god
has come to help me.' But nevertheless she found it hard to believe
in his power. So she went on serving her husband m silence, till
he needed water. Now she had spilt her water on the way, and
there was none on the hill. Han suggested her going to the dell
and when she went and lifted a stone, she found a spring of clear
water and brought and gave it ' them ' to drink.

5. The Holy Day of His Forefathers '

Tukaram having forgotten all about the herb he wanted, Han
took pity on him and assuming the form of Tukaram, went to his

^ To be read with sect. 10, Part 11 according to footnote 3, p. S'l

2 To be read with sect. 11, Part II, see footnote 3, p. 84

3 See pp 41-2, 48, 51 and chap 6, sect. 4.

* To follow on sect 14, Part II of this Chapter ; see footnote 1. p. 87.
5 To be read with sect. 18, Part 11; see footnote 1, p. 89.

IV

TRADITIONS 109

house with a load on his head, gave the stuff to Avaji and told her
to start cooking. Wheat and pulse and ghee he gave her and every
sort of sugar and spice. Then he went through the village and
invited everyone to the feast. He brought them to the Indrayapl
and showed them all due respect, set them down and pressed upon
each of them the food he preferred. And they said to AvaJi : ' This
is astonishing ! Tukaram has turned_his thoughts to the world
again.' ' My mind misgives me,' said Avail. Then the Mahars and
the beggars came forward for a share which they obtained. At last
Hari saw the dishes washed, restored his own dish to every guest
and then vanished.

6. The Coppersmith and His Wife '

A Brahman, having to pay a debt of ten thousand rupees, was
sitting in supplication before Dnyanoba's temple. In a vision he
was instructed to go to Tukaram. He did so and was again sent
to a kSsSr (coppersmith) who gave him two small copper coins m
charity. Tukaram took them, and touching them with a stone
turned them into gold ; but "as this was not sulBcient, he turned
his copper sacrificial vessels also into gold. The kasSr seeing this
thought Tukaram must be possessed of the pansa f and began to
pay him court in every possible way. After a year, a wonderful
event occurred. The kSsar had procured thirty-six bullock loads
of tin from Bombay, all of which was turned into silver. On this
the kSsar gave up the world, became Tukaram's disciple and, with
his money, built a well, still called ' the kasSr's well.' The
wife of the kcisctr was exceedingly angry with Tukaram on
account of the change that had taken place in her hus-
band. She one day pretended to make a feast on his account, and
when he went to bathe, she poured down upon him vessel after
vessel of boiling water. The god however turned it into cold
water. She then set food before him, with poison in it ; but that
too the god rendered harmless. Over the body of this woman there
immediately appeared leprosy, and she was exceedingly distressed.
She then obtained relief by taking (at the suggestion of Rameshwar
Bhatt) some of the clay from the place where TukarSm had bathed,
and anointing her body with it.'

7. Vithoba and the Thieves *

The buffalo given by Avaji's father and which had done the
damage in Mumbaji's garden was once carried off by two thieves.

1 This sect comes m sect. 30 of Part II, see footnote 3, p. 98.

2 A stone, the touch of which turns metals into gold

3 Sects. 6-11 and 14 are here given as translated by Dr. J, Murray
Mitchell in /.R.A.S.Bo., 1849, Vol III; pp 19-26.

4 This story comes between sects. 31 and 32 in Part II; see footnote 5, p. 99.
The story of Mumbajl being placed m part II later than is usual
(see footnote 1, sect. 31in Part II) necessitates also our placing later than is
usual this ' buffalo ' story.

110 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM m.

'They had gone a considerable distance when Vithoba appeared in
the shape of a tall black figure, with a huge cudgel over his
shoulder, right in front of them. The thieves turned to one side,
but so did it. Whenever they tried to turn off, the terrible bhiit
(ghost)-looking shape posted itself m the way. The thieves became
terrified, and taking back the buffalo, bound it in the place whence
they had carried it off. 'Now' thought they, 'we shall get off.'
But no ! for there stood the ghost, as frightful as ever. So they
went to Tukaram, and confessed all they had done. ' If you want
the bullock, take it,' said Tukaram. ' No,' said they, ' we only
want to be delivered from that frightful ghost.' On this Tukaram,
by mental vision, perceived that the god was not there and he began
to invoke his presence. Whereupon, m the sight of all, Vithoba
entered the temple, with a huge cudgel over his shoulder.

8. The Kunbi's Cucumber'

A certain Kiinbl (peasant) was a very religious man. He brought
a small cucumber to Tukaram out of affection. Tukaram divided it
into four parts, and had eaten three of them when his disciples said,
' Kindly give us part of the fruit.' Tukaram replied, ' This is not
good to eat ; but never mind; take this, and give the dumb Brahman
half.' As the Brahman ate, his speech returned. When the other
disciples began to eat the other half, they all cried : ' Oh, how
bitter ! ' and secretly spit it out.

9. How Tukaram Helped the Needy ^

A Brahman who wished to pay off a debt was sitting before
Dnyanoba's temple, and by him was sent to Tukaram, who again
sent him to the KSsSr mentioned above. The KSsSr gave him four
iron pas (bars), a load which the Brahman could not carry, so that
he hid three, and came with one to Dehu. Tukaram turned it into
gold ; whereupon the Brahman went back, and searched for the
three others, which however he could not find.

10. A Brahman Boy Healed'

About this time too a Brahman sent for Tukaram to his house
and entreated him to help his son. He was a boy of eight years,
who was dumb from his birth, and his thread ceremony could not
be performed. Tukaram caused the boy to be brought to him and
bade him cry ' Vitthal ' and immediately the boy spoke.

t To be read with sect. 33, Part II; see footnote 3, p. 101.

" To be reed with sect. 34, Part 11 ; see footnote 2, p. 102.

3 Stones 10-14 follow section 34, Part H ; see footnote 3, p. 102.

IV TRADITIONS 111

II. A Scribe's Unauthorized Alteration i

Tukaram was composing abhangs, and in celebrating the sports
of Kri^na, he said, ' His face was dirty.' Rameshwar Bhatt thought
this would never answer, and he changed it to 'His face was pale.'
Whereupon the god appeared to him in a vision and reproved him.
' Was I afraid ?' said the god. ' What could make me pale ? My
face was dirty ; in my childhood I was eatmg dust ; Tukaram was
quite right.' So Rameshwar corrected to what Tukaram had
written,

12. A Miraculous Visit from Siva^

Once in the month of Chaitra Tukaram went on a pilgrimage
to a temple of 6iva ; the journey took six days and on the seventh
they descried the temple. Then Tukaram faithfully greeted it
with a prostration. Kothaleshwar was the name of the hill whereon
it stood ; at its foot there was a tank, where people bathed
before visiting the temple. But ere they climbed the hill Tukaram
bade them cook a meal and conceiving his purpose they cooked a
meal and set out dishes for four. Then suddenly a naked form,
sky-clothed, appeared before them, the very Lord of Kailasa, with
braided locks and ashes smeared upon him. ' Give me food,' said
he, ' I am hungry.' ' Very good,' said Tukaram, and he bade his
companions serve the guest first. Then did the Lord of Kailasa
refresh himself, and he ate all the food that Tukaram and his
friends had prepared for the party, and after that he blessed them
and went his way. They must needs send to the village for more
victuals, but when they opened their pots (for they had tied them
up to keep the flies off), behold they were full of food '

So Tijcaram and his friends knew that undoubtedly it was 6iva
who had visited them, and they ate themselves and climbed the
hill and saluted the god. And then they returned and on their way
they met a householder who was troubled by a Brahman ghost.
Now the ghost had said to him: 'Offer a solemn sacrifice, and
bestow on me the merit thereof, and I will trouble thee no more.'
But the householder was too poor to offer the sacrifice, and his
spirit sank at the words of the ghost. Wandering from house to
house, he begged men to help him, and many regions he had passed
through before he reached Lohogaon. ' If any has the merit of a
sacrifice, pray let him give it to me,' he cried, and there was one
that heard him, a follower of Tukaram, that uttered the name of
Vitthal as he passed along the road, and every time he did so tied
a knot in a cord. When he heard him he cut off a knot and bade

I See footnote on sect. 10 above,

112 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

him steep it in water and drink it. And he did so, and the instant
he drank it the evil spirit departed from him and he fell down as
one dead.

13. Tukaram's Letter of Apology to Vithoba '

Once it chanced that Tukaram fell sick and on the eleventh day
he could not visit Pa^dharl. So he wrote a letter and sent it by
the hand of a pilgrim. He laid before Hari all his longings and
the weakness of his limbs and he cried to him for help. The
pilgrim took the letter and went with his company to Fandhari,
and there he read it before Vithoba. Then Vithoba felt his throat
choke with sobs, and he said to Rukhmi^I, 'Tukaram, my faithful
servant, is ill ; he cannot come to Pandhari ; shall I go and visit
him?' And Rukhmi^i answered, 'Nay, rather .send Garuql and
bring Tukaram here.' So Hari called for Garud, who came and
did obeisance to him, and he sent him whirring away to Dehu, He
found Tukaram with little life in him, but all his thoughts devotedly
fixed on the Lord of Pandhari. Gently he roused him and gave
him a letter from Vitthal, bidding him take his seat on the sacred
bird. But tears came into Tukaram's eyes. 'How can I presume
to do this ? ' said he, 'it is your oifice to bear my lord ; I beseech
you, tell tny lord how I am, and beg him to visit me.* And Garu4
went and told Hari, and Hari came flashing through the sky in all
his splendour, and he alighted and embraced Tukaram. And
Tukaram slowly opened his eyes, and when he saw his lord before
him he fell down and kissed his feet.

Then Hari taking Tukaram's hand went into the house with
him — a broken-down hut it was, open to the wind on every side.
'_I am* hungry, ' said the god of gods, ' give me a meal. ' And
Avail gave him a simple meal, such as the Bhil woman once gave
him and he ate till he was satisfied and then departed.

14. Supplying Oil and Alms^

A Brahman made a feast for Tukaram on a Monday. At the
proper time of dining, the oil was deficient, and the lamp was going
out. The Brahman was distressed, but Tukaram said, ' Look into
the skin-bottle and see.' His wife went to look, and saw a large
quantity of oil, and the oil lasted afterwards as long as the
Brahman and his wife lived.

There was a stone before the door of a ip&ni's house in that
village, on which Tukaram used to sit. He was sitting there one

I See {ootnote on sect, 10 above.

IV

TRADITIONS 113

day when a very poor man came and asked alms. At Tukaram's
command he went and begged m the village, and some pieces of
iron were given him. Coming back, he said, ' I have got this iron,'
and laid a piece down before Tukaram on the stone. It was
immediately changed into gold. He put down another, and another
which were changed in like manner. The people of the village
seeing this wonder, brought pieces of iron and laid them on the
stone but no change took place in these.

15, The Fortune-Teller's Son Raised

Many miracles did Tukaram perform.^ He turned salt water
sweet and filled vessels with oil for the needy and faithful. And
once at Lohogaon when he was holding a hirtan the joshfs (sooth-
sayer's) son died, and the father said to him : ' If you are truly a
servant of Vishnu, raise up my son again.' Thus the service was
interrupted and the worshippers were distressed. Then Tukaram
closed his eyes, and centred all his thoughts on the Lord of Pand-
hari. ' From of old,' said he, ' the saints have given thee a good
name, do thou establish it now m the sight of us all. If thou
comest not now to our help I will not consent to live more'.
Then the Lord of Pandharl came speedily, and he roused Tukaram
and said : ' O crest-jewel of devotion ' have you not in the worship
of Han the very water of life ?' Then Tukaram rejoiced and he
called on the worshippers to sing, and for an hour they glorified
Han till Tukaram's spirit dwelt no more m his body. Meanwhile
the corpse was laid in the assembly and when the hour had passed
it lived again, and the young man sat up and praised Hari.

16. Tukaram and the Sanyasis ^

Two Sanyasis heard the recitation of Tukaram, and going to
Dadu Kond Deva, a high authority in Poona, complained that
Tukaram was destroying the Karma Marga, and that Brahmans
were falling down at his feet. Dadu Kond Deva, on this, fined
the Brahmans of Lohogaon fifty rupees and summoned Tukaram.
The Brahmans said: ' How can we pay fifty rupees ' ' Then they
accompanied Tukaram. At the Sangam where they rested, people
came to see Tukaram in numbers like an army ; and Dadu Kond
Deva himself proceeded to pay reverence to him. In the first

1 This story and the ne'it one (section 16) follow on section 33 in Part H
see footnote 1, p. 103.

2 0a this claim see the last sentence in first paragraph, p. 69,

3 See footnote 1 on preceding section 1$.

15

114 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

recitation a great avadhilta ' appeared, naked, with his body shining
with dazzling brightness and with the ensigns of a GosSvi^. He
embraced Tukaram, and made obeisance to him. ' I longed to see
you,' said the wonderful visitant, ' now I have done so.' So
saying he went up into heaven. Thereupon the people said :
' Surely that was Mahadev or Dattatreya.'

Next night, in Poona during the recitation — the Sanyasis that
complained, as well as a great number of other people, being present
— the Sanyasis were seen to rise up and prostrate before Tukaram.
Dadu Kond Deva was exceedingly angry that the men who
complained so bitterly of Tukaram should do this. ' But,' said
they, ' he now appeared to us in the form of Natayan (Vish:9u)
four-armed and resplendanl.' On this Dadu Kond Deva ordeied
them to have their hair shaved off in five lines, to be mounted on
the back of an ass and led round the city. All was ready for this,
but Tukaram interceded on their behalf and the punishment was
not inflicted.^

17. The Coin and Letters to Holy Places*

There went from Lohogaon a disciple of Tukaram's named
Kondoba as a pilgrim to Ka&T and Tukaram wrote and sent
abhangs as letters with him. To help the pilgrim on his visit=
Tukaram gave him a gold com saying, 'When you change this,
always set aside one piece for next time, binding it carefully, and
it will become a gold com too.'

The first letter was to the ' Lord of Creation ' : ' This mar-
vellous universe, this is thou, O Lord of Kailasa, therefore thou
art called Lord of the world. Pity then the feeble and lowly that
approach thee. Asaki with the braided locks, give me a morsel
of thy favour ' ' And the second letter Tukaram wrote to Bhagi-
rathi : " ' O mistress of all holy waters ! The very sight of thee
cleanses from the greatest sins ; and he attains to liberation who
believes and bathes in thee. I, Tukaram, the foster child of the
saints, send thee a flower of speech.' And the third letter he
wrote to Visbnnpad : ' Greater art thou than Gaya ! Whoso lays
a ball of rice on thee, he pays off all the debt he owes his fathers.'
These three letters Kondoba took to Benares, and he first read the
letter to BhagirathI, Then a hand rose from the water, with a

I A term describing a roaming, naked BrShtnin or GosavJ (on which term see
p, 6, footnote 2) who is considered to be an avatara of ^iva or Dattatreya and
who recites metrical pieces from the Bhagavata FurSna,

'^ See p. 6, footnote 2

3 Translation of this sect. 16 is taken from J.R.A.S. Bo., p. 26-27 by Dr, J.
Murray Mitchell.

4 This story follows section 37, Part 11 , see footnote 3, p. !04.

* ie,apart of ihe Ganges, see F. and M. 1462-3 with 'Notes', vol. 2,
p. 438.

IV TRADITIONS 115

jewelled arm glittering like the sun, and Kondoba placed within the
hand the letter and it closed on it a-id disappeared. Then Kondoba
read the letter to Siva, and the Holder of the Trident slowly
moved from side to side, while a shower of bell-flowers fell from
heaven. And last, at Gaya, he performed a srSddh, and then came
back to his own country. When Kondoba returned home Tuka-
ram asked him for the gold coin. Kondoba falsely told him it
was lost. When he went home and looked for it, the coin bad
really disappeared, but the knot in which he had tied it, was still
there.

1 8. 'Ascension' of Tukaram ^

Now if you ask, what was the divine purpose of Tukaram's,
incarnation, I reply : ^ What avails a mirror if there be none to
observe his features m it ? What avails a scented flower, if there
be no nostril to smell it ? God's mighty power is nothing unless
there be a worshipper to recognize it ; for this reason, then, God
has divided Himself, that He might worship Himself. Hence did
Tukaram assume his incarnation that he might show, as the
Bhagawat declares, that Loving Devotion is the highest worship.

And the Lord of the World, with the saints around Him, took
their seats in their chariots and dascendmg to the earth they came
to Dehu, embracing Tukaram and saying to him : ' Without thee
Vaikuntha is a wilderness 1 ' And for five davs they held high
festival by the Itjdrayaij! unseen by all save Tukaram. Never-
theless, all the village sat listening to Tukaram ; and though the
6'/zj»/gi? " fell at that time no one joined in the Sliimgct mirth; a
spirit of peace and heavenly joy possessed them all.

Then Hari bade Tukaram accompany him, but he fell at Han'b
feet and said : ' Nay, my lord, here is Pap^lharpur, a very
Vaikuntha on earth — why need I go hence ? ' ' Pay me but one
visit,' said Hari ; ' I will show thee my glory on the sea of milk;
if thou livest for ever in the world the fond desires of men
will be unsatisfied.' Then Tukaram answered in four abhai'tgs,^
proclaiming his freedom from the earth and earthly passions,
and the gods listened to him with ]oy and wonder ; ' Blest, indeed,'
said they, ' is our lot that hear him.'

Then said Han, ' Let us go to Vaikuntha,' and Tukaram sent
for his wife and said to her, ' Behold, I go to Vaikuntha ! Come
with me '. But she answered : ' I am five months gone with
child — there's a buffalo at home to look after — the children, too,

1 This section should be read before sectioa 39, Part H on pp, 105-C.

2 Says Mahlpati.

3 A Hindu annual festival called 'The Holi '.

'*See F. andM. 1389, S87, 15S6 — three remarkable abliangi>, whose genuine-
ness IS doubtful, one abhaiig not being in the /. P. edition and therefore not
translated m F. and M.

116 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cH-

who will take care of them ? ' And the samt was amazed and said,
' She is still in love with her house ; the Lord of Vaikuntha calls
her, but she will not go with him '' Yet it was not her own fault,
for often Tukaram had said, when she asked where he was going,
' I am going to Vaikuntha '. So now once more she only thought,
' The fool is going to some village or other.'

Then Tukaram moved away, but his followers understood not
that he was leaving them for ever , they supposed he was setting
off on a pilgrimage. ' He is weary of us,' they said, ' so he jour-
neys to the Himalaya Mountains.' And other abhai'igs he spoke '
till a great marvel took place, chariots appearing in the sky,
wherein were seated Narad and Tumbara singing, and Parvati and
the Lord of Kailasa, and Brahma and Vishiju and Rudra. The
lustre of the sun was dimmed by their splendour and mortal men
closed their eyes, as they close them when lightning flashes in
the sky. Then Tukaram sat himself m a chariot, and began his
journey through the sky.

When his followers opened their eyes, behold 1 he was with them
no more." Loud were the voices of lamentation ; and Avail
lamented with them, crying : ' He told me to come with him, but I
thought he was lying. The fiery flame of his renunciat'on burned
my own body, and, before our eyes, he has gone away ; if I had
known he was going I should have clung to his robe.' And she
fell on the ground and swooned.

Three days and three nights Tukaram's followers sat lamenting
for him when suddenly there fell from the sky his cymbals and his
blanket. Then they knew he had been received into Vaikuntha,
for his cymbals were sent them as a sign of farewell.

On Tukaram's End see further the last eight lines on page 126.

19. Influence after Death

Tukaram while yet on earth had promised a Lingayat Want to
appear to him at his death." Accordingly when the WSnl felt his
death approaching, he sent to Dehu for Rameshwar, for Tukaram's

1 Of these some are tianslated m F and M edition (e g„ 513) Some are
in the I. P. Ed. (e.g. 10, 28, 8, 9, 11) but not translated by F. and M.;
others are not m the 1. P. Ed. None has any special propriety m this context.

2 The date is given • In the year 1571 of tf e ^ake era, the year Virpdhi, on
Monday the second day of the latter half of the month of Phalgun (Feb-March)
between 6 a.m. and 9 a.m This has usually been thought to indicate a.d. 1649
a!> the year of Tukaram's end, but L R Pangarkai's book published in 1920
(p. 19, footnote) concludes in favour of March 9, 1C50, while on the evidence of
Santaji the oilman, and the Hindu almanacs (as he writes in a personal letter),
V. L, Bhave, TuMramace Assai Gafht'r, vol 2, p, 13, M Sar, p. 189, be-
lieves. Tukaram "left this world' when Shaka 1572 was completed, that it,
m Shaka 1573 or 16th Feb. 1652. See fuither Sect. 1, Part II.

" Modern parallels to this are provided by the cases of dying saints who
assure gnef-stricken loved ones that in some way or other they will help them.

jv TRADITIONS 11^

vounger brother, and for his younger son. When they arrived,
Tukaram appeared. The Want alone perceived him and made
obeisance to him and put sweet-smelling powder on his forehead
and garlands on his neck. The two then spoke together, and all
around marvelled, for they saw nothing but the garlands of flowers,
which seemed as if suspended in the air. To faithful rnen Tuka-
ram still appears. Of this we have many witnesses. To NUoba
Gosavl of Pimpalner. to Bahinabai, and Gangadhar he appeared
in vision, and gave them instruction.' The last three lines may be
viewed as an anticipation of modern spiritualism by the eighteenth
century biographer of the Maratha saints.

I Up to this point this sect. (19) is from Dr. Mitchell's translation, J.R.A.S.
Bo., Vol. Ill, p. 29.

ME MISERABLE

Since little wit have I,

hear my mournful cry.

Grant now, O grant to me
That I thy feet may see.

1 have no steadfastness,
Narayan, ' I confe6&.

Have mercy, Tuka prays,
On my unhappy case

BEYOND THE MOUNTAINS, GOD

Here tower the hills of passion and of lust, —

Far of} the Infinite '
No path I find and all impassable

Fronts me the hostile height.

Ah, God is lost, my friend. Narayan i now

How can I e'er attain'
Thus It appears that all my life, so dear,

I've spent, alas, in vam

THOUGH HE SLAY ME

Now I submit me to thy will,
Whether thou save or whethei kill ;
Keep thou me near or send me hence,
Or plunge me m the war of sense.

Thee in my ignorance I sought.
Of true devotion knowing nought.
Little could I, a dullard, know,
Myself the lowest of the low

My mmd I cannot steadfast hold ,
My senses wander uncontrolled.
Ah, I have sought and sought for peace.
In vam , for me there's no release.

Now bring I thee a faith complete
And lay my life before thy feet.
Do thou, O God, what seemeth best ;
In thee, m thee alone is rest.

In thee I trust, and, hapless weight.
Cling to thy skirts with all my might.
My strength is spent, I, Tuka say ;
Now upon thee this task I lay.

* That IS, the Supreme Being,

The poems on this page are translations from Tukaiam's Abhaiigs, P,M.S
pp. 62, 67. 69,

Chapter V
Tnkaram's Autobiography

From the writings of Mahipati we pass to the poems of
Tukaram himself, so many of which are purely autobiographical.
The treatment of Tukaram's autobiography as found in his ahhangs
presents itself naturally under three aspects: First, the critical
problem arising in connection with Tukaram's autobiographical
poetry ; second, the literary characteristics of the autobiography ;
and third, Tukaram's picture of himself.

I. The Critical Problem

I. Variant Editions of Tukaram's Poems

One of the most serious difficulties confronting the student of
Tukaram arises from the existence of several different collections
of his poems, each of which has a system of numbering of its own.
The edition which has been widely accepted as the best, the
Indu PrakUsh edition of 1869, subsidized by the Bombay
Government at a cost, it is said, of no less than Rs. 24,000^ has for
many years been out of print. With other editions adopting
different texts and numberings of the poems, these being arranged
variously by different editors on their own principles, we have a
perfect illustration of ' the disorganized state of the literary world
of India'.' Truly a heavy task, and a worthy one, awaits the
TukSrSm MandalT and the BhSrata Itihas Sanshodhaka Mandala
of Poona. Until a really scientific attempt has been made to
settle the true authentic text of TukarSm's abhahgs many funda-
mental problems affecting his biography must remain unsolved and
any correct estimate of him is impossible. An interesting dis-
cussion of the question, without anything new, appeared in the
Suhodh PatrikS of Dec. 14, 1919.

The following is a list of the various editions of Tukaram's
poems with their dates and other details" the last one in the list being
added by us. By ' editions ' in the whole of this discussion is meant

1 V. L. Bhave, Tuhardmaca Assal GathS, vol. 2, p. 2

2 Preface to Vol. Ill, F. and M.

3 The list is taken from V. L. Bhave's TukarmUcQ Assal GathS, Vol, 2,
p. 1.

120

LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

CH.

of course Marathi editions, the only English edition being that by
Eraser and Marathe which contains translations of 3721 abJiai'igs.

6

Date of
publica-
tion.

Place of
Publica-
tion,

Name of Publish-
ing Press.

Name of Editor.

Number

of
abhangs

1

1867

Bombay

G. KrishnSn .

G. Krishnajl ...

4500

2

1869

do

Indu Prakash...

Shankar Pandu-
rang

4521

3

1886

do

Nirnaya SiTgar

V. Madgaokar

4645

4

1889

do

Stibodh PrakSsh

TukSram Tatya

8441

5

1901

Poena

Indita

Messrs. Jog &
Gnlve

4575

6

1903

Bombay

Indu Prakash f-
Chandrodaya
(Poona)

K. Heralekar ...

4475

7

1909

Poona

Jagaddhitechhu

V. N. Joga

4149

8

1912

Bombay

Ntrnaya 8 agar

V, L. PSnsikar ...

4505

9

1913

Poona

Aryabhiishaii ...

Dravid and Apte

4092

10

1913

Poona

Jagaddhitechhu

V N. Godbole ...

4499

11

1920

Tfaana and
Poona

AryablmshaV ..

V. L. Bhave ...

1323
(incom-
plete)

Since the publication of the above list m Mr. Bhave's book and
whilst our own book is passing through the press a 12th edition
has been published, in Bombay, by S. Narayan & Co., edited by
E. T. Padwal, containing 9,000 abhaugs.

Of these variant editions three call for special mention, (l)
The Indu Prakash collection, referred to as No. 2 above, contain-
ing 4621 abhangs and — rara avis — has a ' critical preface '. Even
m this edition, however, the problem of a critically ascertained text
of Tukaram's poems, one of the most diiKcult and most important
problems in the whole range of Marathi literature, is dismissed m a
page and a half. Moreover, the principles followed leave much to
be desired. None of the MSS on winch the editors base their
text is described in any detail. Of these the best would appear to
be the ' Dehij MS' and the ' Kadusa MS' the others being the
' Talegaon MS' and the ' Pandharpur MS'. The two former are
superior only because the Dehu MS is ' said to have been written '
by Tukaram's eldest son, Mahadev, no proof of any kind being
adduced, and because the Kadusa MS is * said to have been written '
by Gangaji Mavala — who is described as ' the person who put down
in writing what Tukaram composed'. As for Mahadev, had he
indeed written his father's abhangs, as is afiSrmed, surely Mahipati
would have known and mentioned the fact. As for Gangaji
Mavala, he cannot be allowed to occupy his position of solitary
distmction as Tukaram's amanuensis, for there were at least two

V TUKARAM'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY 121

others who are mentioned as having done similar work — Rameshwar
Bhatt and Santajl the Oilman,' and the editors do not appear to have
obtained any original writing of Gangaji, while there is room
for doubt whether they made the best use of what MSS
they did see. Since therefore they appear to have accepted
mere traditions as trustworthy evidence, our faith is somewhat
shaken m the value of the critical principles adopted by them. The
Indu PrakSsh editors are honest enough to tell us that some of the
MSS on which they rely had been ' corrected ', ' further corrected '
and ' arranged ', all of which are very damaging terms, indicating a
grave diminution of value in any of the MSS so doctored. It is
unsafe to conclude, therefore, that the text lying behind the Indu
Prakelsh edition is either the best text or that it has reached us in
its original form. At the same time this edition may be regarded
as exceedingly well-edited, the aim of its editors being ' faithfully
to reproduce' the text they considered available in 1869, and
though their basal MSS should eventually have to be considered
imperfect, the editors were conscientious enough ' not to leave out
any word or verse even where it appeared indecent '."

2. If such are the methods obtaining in the only 'critical
preface ' found among all the editions published up to 1920, what
shall be said of those collections which conceal their methods from
our view ? The late Vishnuboa Joga's edition of 4149 abhai'igs
(numbered 7 in the list above), with its excellent commentary, must
be pronounced the best edition from the standpoint oi interpretation
and for that reason it is approved by the Wifrkans (see chapter 7,
sec. 2), though its text is probably not of the best. The edition of
TttkSrilm Tatya (No. 4) is well-described by Dr. R. G. Bhandarkar'
as ' uncritically made and oftentimes one same piece is given
a second time with the opening lines omitted. Still, this. . . .
contains abhai'igs. . . quite in the style of Tukaram with the usual
fervent devotion and purity of thought'. For this reason the
Prarthana Samaj have taken several of their hymns from this
edition. The late Hari Narayan Rpte took a leading part with
Mr. Dravid in editing the collection numbered 9 in the list given
above, embodying an order of the poems accepted by the WSrkaris
of Pan4harprir but as this is based on the Paij<;lharpur MS already
referred to, and of secondary value, being characterized by the
Indu PrakSsh editors as ' very recent ', ' modernized ' and * less
accurate ', we may safely leave it ont of our reckoning. Numbers
1 and 10 in the list are based on Wtlrkari MSS of doubtful authority
while the editions numbered 3, 5, 6 and 8 were prepared from other
printed collections such as the Indu Prakitsh.

3. We come to the last and most recent edition m our list, the
one which presents the nearest approach to critical principles,

» See pp. 73, 101, 111, and 122.
" Indu Prakash, Vol. 1, p. 2.
IF. S.M.R.S., p, 94.

122 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

though still incomplete. It is a collection claiming to be ' Tuka-
ram's Original Gatha ' {TukSrSmSce Assal Gstha, 2 vols.), edited
by Mr. V. L. Bhave of Thana, Bombay. Two volumes only have
been published, the first containing 865 o6/2a«gs, the second 458.
In his preface to the first volume Mr. Bhave points out that
' original ' poems may be of three kinds — those written by the poet
himself, those dictated by him, and those corrected by him after
being written by someone else. Mr. Bhave claims that his collec-
tion IS one of poems of the second order, having been written by a
disciple of Tukaram, either as Tukaram uttered them or — a modi-
fication of the same principle — as the disciple remembered them
afterwards. The particular disciple m this case is one Santajl the
Oilman, or, to give his name in full, Santaji Tell Jagnade who along
With Gangaji Mavala and Rameshwar Bhatt wrote down Tukaram's
verses, and one of whose MSS bears a date a few years previous to
that of Tukaram's death along with what is claimed to be Santaji's
signature. This MS itself has been in Mr. Bhave's possession
and photographs of the MS show up this very early date quite
clearly. One is reproduced on the opposite page. Santaji's
descendants a£Srm that he wiote four volumes of Tukaram's
ahhafigs and Mr. Bhave claims thus to have discovered an early
authority consulted by no previous editor, not even the Indu PrahSsli.
It is much too early to say whether Maratha scholars will accept
the authenticity and uniqueness of this MS of Santaji, and all that
can be said at the present stage of investigation is that it represents
a worthy attempt to solve a most baffling problem. Mr. Bhave's
22-page critical discussion at the beginning of his second volume
is, up to the time of writing (early 1921), far and away the most
praiseworthy effort made at elucidating the difficult questions raised,
the old spelling of MarathI words also being preserved, and probably
their pronunciation as in Tukaram's own day. ^

2. Poems of Doubtful Authenticity

It appears fairly certain that of Tukaram's fourteen disciples
no less than three — Rameshwar, GangajJ and Santaji — are known to
have written down his poems as they remembered them, but how
faithfully we cannot say. No doubt there were many poems which
they did "not preserve, many also which were preserved but did not
find their way into well-known MSS, whilst other poems may have
been inserted which are not authentic. Tukaram's style is easily
imitated and we have seen that one collection has nearly twice as
many poems as the Indu PrakUsh edition, many abhaiigs probably
existing also which have never been printed but which pass from
mouth to mouth throughout the Maratha country.

1 See DnySnodaya, Dr. J. E. Abbott's Notes pn the Maratha Saxnt% No. 9,
April 28, 1921.

3t#i

*t;

^^^JTJM

A I'AOI' OF SAN'lAjT TM-T JACANADli-'s MS OF TUiaRAM'S ahhaiil>!

V tllK ARAM'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY 123

This stale of thinKs is annoying' in two ways. First, there are
many poems even in widely-accepted collections which are possibly
not Tukui .mi's and there is no means of distinguishing them. A
good iudge of Maialhi can sometimes form an opinion from the
languaHC, but the t-ritic who bef,'infa in this way is soon in danger of
reiectinK lines Imcausu the sentiment does not seem to bo Tukaram's
and such a proccedinK may take us any lengths,

,?. Shivaji't. Visit— Apocryphal or Genuine?

Put in this dnubllul class sometimps are some abhangs whose
reicction would inodily seriously 'I'ukfiram's biography, those
describing tiio visit of the rising prmce and future kmg Sivaji
{ahhai'ijis 14(!iS '/•( in F. and M.). " It is impossible in the present
stage of investigation in Mai.itha history and literature to pronounce
dolbitcly either way. Wo shall therefore content ourselves with
presenting the evidence as it appears to botli sides in the matter,
first stating tho point of view of those iiucslioning the historicity of
tjiviijj's visit and ilw. authenticity of Tukaram's verses on the
subject, and then giving hricllv what is said m reply by those who
are inclined to acr.ciH both the visit and the verses. The ground
common to both Hi<ies is that Tukaram wae probably born in 1608
and died sometime hettween I(>4H and ]f)5J, while Sivaji was bora
in 1627 though some think a Itttlo later (see p. 17), all these dates
being subject to alturatinn (see pages 7f) 7).

Those who consider the. visit arid the verses apocryphal make
the following point'i. (1) When Tukaram died Sivaji was still a
young man with all his future before him. {.i) In 16-1') SivajT
was juht beginning his npeiations against the Deccan hill-forts and
his coronation did not take place till 167-1. (3) His system of
government canntJt pos.sibly have been in operation by the time
when Tukaram die.d. (1) Had there ever been .such an episode as
a projected letireinent of .'^ivaji from the world in the train of
Tukarilm surely he would at some time in his life have shown some
interest in l'ai.)<jhari or Vitboba's shrine. Hut nothing of the kind
is recorded. Hiv.iji on the contrary maintained a close connection
with,the family shrine of Tuljapflr and never visited Paijdhari.
(5) .'^iviiji had his own nurii in Kamdas, a most interesting person,
who forms a ronmrkal)!o contrast with our poet. He was politician
as well as devotee, a patriot as well as a sage, a shrewd and
amusing moralisl, and a more useful au-siliary to the warrior prince
than Tukaram could have been. (On Kamdas see p. 18).

A^s^yering the abo\'e points in Hcrialim, those who are inclined
to hold .Sivaji requested Tukaram to go to him and that in declining
to do so the poet sent the prmce the verses, do so for the following
reasons. (1) The first point in the above stated by a Westerner
and for Western readers, sounds very plausible. When, however,

* See pp. 90-101 above.

IM LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cH.

it IS remembered that Sivajl was very precocious as a boy, even
at 8 or 9 cherishing ideas of wresting independence from the
Muhammadans, that he was married at 16, had two wives before
Takaram died, and had already made a great mark in Maharashtra,
to say that Sivaji had 'all his future before him' is not strictly correct.
(2) In reply to the second point, Sivaji had already, when Tukaram
died, captured the famous Torna fort and several others, including
some in Tukaram's own neighbourhood, thus extending his kingdom
over the Poona district. Moreover, the royal title chatrapah is
found ascribed to Sivaji as early as 1647, at least a year or
two before Tukaram's death.^ (3) The very special circumstances
of the time when Sivaji and his followers were in open revolt
against the Muhammadan power, rule out any dogmatic statement
such as is made under (3) above. Moreover the royal title already
mentioned carries with it the existence of 'ministers of state ' such
as Tukaram referred to in his verses. Besides which, a document
dated shortly after Tukaram's death proves the full ' system of
government' to have been in operation under Sivaji. (4) The
' projected retirement ' referred to above was nothing but a passing
mood, the result of the poet's moving hlrtan^ and there/ was
therefore no necessity for Sivaji to visit Pandharpiir. But who
can say for certain that he ' never ' went there ? This is an
argument from silence, which is always perilous Sivaji's greater
devotion to Tuljapur must be accounted entirely natural because
It was ' the family shrine '. (5) The fifth point above far outruns
the evidence. Granting, however, that Sivaji had Ramdas as his
guru at that time — though this point is somewhat fiercely debated
(see Chap. I, p. 18 of this book) — no one suggests that there was
any idea of Tukaram supplanting Ramdas as Sivaji's preceptor and
guide. Indeed, assuming for the moment the authenticity of the
verses, Tukaram discourages Sivaji's clinging to him and directs
attention to his own guru : ' Fix your thoughts on the good teacher,
Ramdas : do not swerve from him.' (See abhat'tg 1471, F. and M.).
Further, ,that Sivaji already had a guru in Ramdas is no argument
against Sivaji visiting Tukaram. Some of the greatest Hindii
saints have had more than one gtiru. Indeed, Sivaji himself had
accepted as guru, and taken a guru-mantra from, a Brahman at
Mahableshwar, the original sanad given by Sivaji being still in the
possession of the Brahman's descendant and now published. (6) In
addition to the above are the considerations arising from the
topography of the neighbourhood and Sivaji's close proximity to
Tukaram at that time, the altogether unique position occupied in
Maratha public affairs by Sivaji's mother, Jijabai, and the fact that
she and Sivaji's preceptor Dadoji Kondadev were of such a deeply
religious turn of mind. All these considerations taken together
make it at least highly probable that Jijabai and Dadoji would wish

1 V. L. Bhave, M. Sat., p. 1S6 footnote 1,
* See pp. 100-1.

V TUKARAM'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY 125

the greatest saint of the time, and one residing so near, to
give his blessing to the young prince, and it is not at all unlikely
that they arranged it. (7) Sivaji's sanad (grant) of four villages
to Tukarara's posthumous s-on Narayan' after the poet's death
must be given some significance m this connexion. (8) The
preponderance of Indian opinion should be given its true value.
The incident is not only recorded in Mahlpati and m MSS of
Tukaram's poems considered by the Indu Prafcdsli editors as
the best, one of them being the MS ' said to be in the hand-
writing of the eldest son of Tukaram ' and therefore probably dated
before Sivaji's coronation ; it is also found in those trustworthy
historical authorities, the early Marathi bakhan (historical
memoirs). Sir R. G. Bhandarkar accepts both visit and verses
(see his Vaishnavism, p. 9-^), as did also the late Christian
poet Narajjan Vaman Tilak who in an unpublished essay
observes: 'Sivaji had paid his homage to Tukaram and was
greatly impressed by the latter's saintliness.' We may add that
both visit and verses are accepted by Frof. H. G. Rawlinson in
his book on ShiviijT the MarcllltCc pubhshed in 1915 (see pp. 85,
113-4. See also L. R. Pangarkar's Marathi work, pp. 436-46)
and Prof. N. S. Takakhav's English translation of Mr. K. A.
Keluskar's Marathi Life of ShivajT.

On the whole we incline to ihmk the balance of evidence is m
favour of the historicity of Sivaji's request to Tukfiram and subse-
quent visit, the authenticity of the poet's verses perhaps not being
m quite so strong a position. It is due to Mr. I'Yaser to say that
the first of the last two paragraphs— the one viewing verses and
visit as apocryphal — was found among his jiapers just as it is given
above, the latter of the two paragraphs coming entirely from the
pen of his co-author.

4. No known Chronological Order

The second annoying result referred to above affects the
biography in another direction, for we are unable to fix the chrono-
logical order of the autobiographical abhaiigs. This appears, indeed,
well-nigh impossible m the piesent state of our knowledge. The
efTort, however, may well be made, and those making it will find
that all the editions of Tukaram, without exception, have thrown
to the winds all idea of any possible chronological order, and what
is worse, they have modified the language by attempting to moder-
nize it, though Mr. Bhave's edition is an exception on this last
point. This means that the task of discovering any possible
chronology in Tukarum's poems is made much more difficult than
it might have been. In view of these facts, therefore, we cannot
say, for instance, whether Tukaram moved, as time went on,

1 See footnote 2, p. 94.

i26 LIFE AND TEACHIlSfG OF TUtCARAM cil.

towards or away from the advaita position, towards or away from
idolatry. We cannot say if he found more or less peace of mind.
One would like to thmk his devotion did not go unrewarded. But
on this point as on others certainty is not possible, and indeed
Tukaram's own nioodb and views may have gone on varying to the
day of his death. In the English translation* the abhai'igs are
presented in a sort of ideal order, the problem poems coming before
the poems that find solutions, but no reader must infer that they
were written m this order.

5. Genuineness of the Autobiography

Despite many unsolved problems, however, we need have no doubt
that the abhat'igs describing Tukaram's feelings and habits of life
are quite genuine. And they appear to be exceedingly sincere.
This is not said without the full sense of the difficulty of judging
the sincerity of words. The portraits which writers give of them-
selves are usually false, and false, one may say, in proportion to
their air of candour. But Tukaram's self-revelation seems to leave
no room for suspicion of pose. The things he says of his weakness
and misery are not the things men say to add to their merit. What
he might say to his own credit he leaves unsaid. We learn nothing
for instance, from his own lines, of the unselfish kindness to his
neighbours that strikes us so much in Mahlpati's biography. And
the inconsistencies of view and conduct that come to light in study-
ing them are laid before us with such simplicity that we may
justifiably trust well-nigh the whole record. Unquestionably, there
are incidents which never happened. We have for instance a
number of abhai'igs purporting to give his last words {abhaiigs
1444-1459 F. and M ) These fit in with Mahlpati's account, but
cannot be received as authentic, unless the reader is ready to
believe that Han really did come whirring through the air and
earned off Tukaram" m a vimciti (balloon or aeroplane). The
account by Mahlpati will be found on pages 115-6 and a brief
discussion on pages 105-6. We only need add here a view
prevalent among Tukaram students, one helping to an intelligible
understanding of the abhangs on the subject. It seems that when
Hindu saint dies, his body is usually carried m a framework
resembling a viman, for burning or burial as the case may be.
Tukaram's abhangs concerning his going to Vaikuntha (' heaven ')
are therefore regarded as nothing more than a symbolical forecast
of his approaching death.

1 By F. and M

*!^^;-#V*'f '

IV

?''i''ia

ifiti::^:

'J*';- '"r"

L'tt" :

'r,n

it,f«

'^1

•t^Ji

V LITERARY CHARACTERISTICS 127

II. The Literary Characteristics of the

Autobiography
I, Tukaram's Verse Extempore and Original

Tukaram's verses were probably all extempore, and there is
little reason to think that he either prepared or revised them, though
we have seen that a well-founded belief exists that his ahkai'igs
were written down by at least three disciples during his lifetime.
Distinction or fame as a writer Tukaram was probably far from
courting. He speaks of his own accents as stammering and
childish. They are the feeble means he possesses to utter his
message and make known his Master's glory. It does not occur to
him that along with the message there was sent any gift of
speech.

In this modest view of his literary merits the modern critic
must in the main acquiesce. The abliai'igs as a whole do not rise
above rustic simplicity. Many are quite prosaic. But others are
fully inspired by the spirit of poetry. ' His abhangs are not mere
paraphrases ; they are original effusions, the outcome of the poet's
own inward experience and of his obiervation of the facts of
human life. They are full of shrewd and often-times humorous
delineation, and they reflect unmistakably the features of the poet's
character. . . They reveal a strange rai.\ture of religious ideas,
high spiritual aspirations mingled with the infatuations of idolatry,
exphcable partly by the underlying pantheism in all HmdQ thinking
and partly by the fact that Tukaram saw beyond his time and with
a true spiritual instinct."

2. His Debt to Predecessors

That Tukaram's poems are to be regarded as ' original effusions'
does not mean that he owed no debt to the bhakti poets who had
preceded him. On the contrary, he himself states plainly in more
than one place that ' some words of the Saints he had committed
to memory with reverence and with faith.'' On this important
subject Mr. Pangarkar has an exhaustive and informing chapter
"{the sixth in his book) in which he shows, on the basis of clear
quotations from Tukaram's own poems and of the confirmatory
testimony of Mahipati in his Bhakta Lll3tnrita (chapter 30) that
Tukaram had given special attention to Dnyancshwar, Namdev,
Eknath and Kabir. The last-mentioned, who had preceded the ,
poet-saint of Dehu by more than a century and a quarter, Tukaram
may have come to know on his visit to Benares referred to by him

1 Dr. Mackichan, I. /., Vol. VII. No. 4, January 1913, pp. 173 and 175.

2 See abhafig 101 in F. and M„ 1333 m J. P,

128 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ch:

in his ahhang numbered 2488 in the Indu Prakash edition.^ It
is suggested that the BhagavadgJta and Bhagavata PurSfta, the
scriptures of the Bhagavata Religion of Maharashtra (see our
chapter 2, p. 27), had been'the objects of Tukaram's special study',
from which conclusion the deduction is made that Tukaram had also
become sufficiently acquainted with Sanskrit to study Sanskrit
works with avidity (Pangarkar, 178^ 214), some even affirming,
though on what grounds is not indicated, that soon after he had
renounced the world, Tukaram spent a few months at the important
centre of Paithan on the Godaveri river where from a devout
Shastri he learned much sacred lore."

This much at least is certain, that, compared with his predeces-
sors, Tukaram's religious ideas are both more mature and more
advanced, that there is much greater variety of subject-matter, of
expression and of imagery, and that Tukaram himself admits his
indebtedness to tho^e predecessors. ' Indian writers have always
exhibited a marvellous power of working up into new shapes again
and again the same material of metaphor and phrase ',* and we shall
see that Tukaram was no exception,

3. His Brevity, Obscurity and Metaphors

The best of Tukaram's abhangs, from the point of view of
literary merit, are those distinguished for their vigour. He is
able, on occasion, to speak with good point and force. Indeed he
never wastes any words, and his defect is that he sometimes falls
into obscurity. To the foreigner, one may say, he is almost always
obscure, the ellipses of true vernacular Marathi being confounding
in the extreme, but even the Indian is often perplexed by Tukaram's
inconsiderate brevity. There is always a meaning inside the un-
promising shell of his language, and the student (like the student of
Browning) ends by admiring the form of expression. It has cost
him so much labour to master that he is more inclined to love it
than to pardon or to apologize for it, but perhaps he has reached a
point where he may no longer speak as a literary critic. We only
need add that the linguist and philologist would find a study of
TukarSm's expressions repaying.

Tukaram's style is enlivened by a copious use of metaphor, most
likely influenced by his close study of Dnyaneshwar and Eknath
who are masters of metaphor in Marathi. The conventions of
Asiatic literature do not forbid a poet enriching himself by borrow-
ing from his predecessors, and a good metaphor once discovered
becomes common property for ever. Tukaram borrows in this way
quite freely, while he is also able to use his own opportunities and

1 L, R. M. Pangarkar, S.T.C., pp. 203, 93.

2 Ibid, pp. 161-3.
» Ibid. p. 179.

* h.},Se&gwick,J.R,A.S. Bo., Vol.33, No. 65.

V LITERARY CHARACTERISTICS 129

invent images for himself. The most interesting of these are the
images derived from his hfe as a grocer, which we shall presently
collect, having first brought together some examples of figures no
less striking but perhaps less congenial.

4. Pictures of Life in the World

The world of sensation is a mirage ; the world of desire a net ;
the task before us to tear up the very root of desire, so that it
may never sprout agam. Otherwise, desires flourish like wild
creepers ; it is no use hacking them down, you must dig up their
roots. The victim of desire passes through one wretched hfe after
another like the pots that ascend and descend on the Persian wheel ;
what he needs is to make a bonfire of the past, similar to the
bonfire of the Ho//'. Like a man caught in a press gang the
victim of desire toils and gains nothing by his toil; like a bee
with a siring tied to its foot, the plaything of a child, he starts off to
force himself and finds himself a prisoner. In this bondage, life
slips by, and death is waiting for him like a cat waiting for a mouse.
In its confusion life resembles a village fair; in its perplexity
a trackless forest. Hari's name is like a moist shadow in a
parched land, it is a flowing spring'^ of delight. His grace flows
like the Ganges in flood, freely ofTered to all, like the sunlight. Life
is a dehrious fever ; a swollen river that lies before a traveller; how
can he cross it ? There is a boat ready waiting for him, the boat of
Hari's name ; he has only to sit in it, he will be carried over the
stream. This metaphor of the river is characteristically Indian,
' Perhaps the symbol that, more than any other, takes the place
in Indian mysticism that is taken m the mysticism of the West by
the pilgrimage of the soul is that of the crossing of the river in a
boat. By the Maratha saints and by Kabir, in the meditations of
Maharshi Debendranath Tagore and in the poems of his son, this
picture is again and again made use of to represent man's perilous
passage to what is sometimes God's bosom and sometimes a land
unknown, but what is perhaps to most, both of these at once. It is
strange thai to the West, death is the dark river to be crossed, but
to India it is not death but life. " Your friend," says Kabir,
" stands on the other shore." Taking a wise guru for his ferryman,
and embarking on the boat of a surrendered spirit, the traveller
crosses the perilous waters safely to the place of union and of bliss.' '

5. The Motherhood of God

The way of God with his worshippers is like the way of a
mother with her child. However ugly he may be, she loves him

1 An annual Hindu Festival.
» Perhaps rather ' well'' ; springs are rare in India.
•> Dr. Macnicol,/. R. M., Vol, 5, No. 1«, April 191C, p. 21C.
17

130 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

none the less ; she is patient with his ill humours, she interprets
and fulfills his wishes and she is satisfied to be thanked in such
imperfect accents as he can command. He does not understand
the depth of her devotion, but he trusts her, and with this she is
content. (See further chap. 6. sect. 1 ; and chap. 8, II, 3).

As the fruit corresponds to the seed in the field, so the fruit
corresponds to the seed m spiritual things. Sow the seed of faith
if you wish to gather the fruit of spiritual bliss. Listen to instruc-
tion, whoever offers it you. It is the Saints who instruct mankind
by their example, as a teacher shows children how to form the
letters by drawing them on a slate.

6. Similes {rom Animal Life and Business

Countless illustrations are drawn from animal life. The
passions are like unruly cows that struggle and break into pastures
and defy the herds, man's efforts being to drive them into their
shed and tie them up. The snake drinics the same water as the
people but his spittle turns to poison. The worldling's life is like
the daily round of a blinded ox turnmg an oil mill. Why do
ascetics pride themselves on ceremonies and needless austerities ?
Tukaram cries for mercy as a nestling cries with open beak for
food, as a calf or a fawn in the jungle cries after its mother.

Tukaram's special property no doubt are the similes drawn
from business. He often compares himself and the Saints to
dealers in God's mercy ; they have opened a shop where full value
is given, the only coin they take is faith. There is no fear of the
stock running short ; it can be measured out for ever and ever and
the store will never decrease. Then at other times he refers to the
anxiety attending worldly business, to the perplexities of account-
keeping, and to the misery of debt, and he rejoices that he has done
with it all, for God manages the affairs of the godly. Also he
compares himself to the measure with which corn is measured out ;
a thing of no value in itself, thrown aside when it is empty.

7. Tukaram's Gravity and Humour

Though usually a very grave philosopher Tukaram does
occasionally sm'ile. In this he is not unlike his countrymen. A
general misconception among Europeans is that Hindus have no
sense of humour, those who have never met them supposing that
they are all as sad and silent as ascetics and those who live among
them being surprised that they cannot understand foreign jokes in
a foreign tongue. The fact is that Hindus are for the most part
very humorous and their popular religion has a humorous vein, This

V LITERARY CHARACTERISTICS l31

is not in the least incompatible with the melancholy and pessimistic
philosophy common among them. Human nature is capable of
anything m the way of paradox, and the alliance of humour and
melancholy is one of the most usual that it admits.

Tukaram's humour, to be sure, is seldom blithe. In a lighter
moment he says : ' We beggars are lucky folk : thieves are
frightened when they come near us. We have wealth and grain in
every house, for we live on every one's chanty.' But for the mobt
part his humorous jests are bitmg sarcasms levelled, like those of
Solomon, against eveiy sort of fool. The rich man's spoiled wife
{abhang 1070), and the hen-pecked husband, are vigorously hit off
here and there. The seamy side of married life seems to have caught
his eye pretty often. If he laughs at it his laugh passes quickly
into stern denunciation.

Allied to Tukaram's humorous vein us that iu which he rallies
Vithoba on his treatment of men. His favourite idea is that
Vithoba is a thief, who runs away with men's property and leaves
them penniless. He is a cheat, and cheats men out of their
worldly goods. This is only an affectionate way of saying that
Tukaram thinks they get something better instead. We notice
those ahhahgs here only as a point in hii, literary method.

8. Allegorical Value of Common Life

A curious group of poems is formed by those which make an
allegorical use of images drawn from common life. Many of them
are based on games. Hindu Iioys have many games and these
must be understood in order to follow the poems, the explanations
given in the notes* being perhaps auflicient. In general we
must distinguish two kinds of games, those in which there is
rivalry and those in which there is only common effort. Where
there is rivalry the boys of one side are trying to catch or
beat the boys of the other, probably one representative boy of the
other. Such a game therefore is an imago of the contest of the
soul and the world. The soul is struggling to escape, the world is
trying to detain it. In the poem on Afyiflxlfya, rather unexpec-
tedly the soul is represented by the side that guards the base (as
we should say in prisoner's base), the player that struggles to get
through is a passion. These innges, it appears, illustrate the hard
struggle that lies before the man who seeks salvation by works,
good deeds or austerities or the observation of ceremonial law.
Contrasted with his case is that of the devotee of Vil.lhal who joins

' At the end of each volume of F. and M.

132 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

in loving union with God, just as two players do in the friendly
recreation of tiparl. '

9. Images ffom Low Caste People

Of the same type are poems employing images from village
characters. In a Hmdu village there are various low caste persons
who perform services to the community, to Government, to passing
strangers, and are paid by a share in the village produce. Such
are the Mahars who live on the outskirts of the village but perform
services of importance, such as carrying the revenue to the
treasury, a common salutation of theirs being the cry ^ johar\^ In
abhang 1351 the Mahar calling for the revenue typifies the world
or the claim of karma which calls on a man for the penalty of
his actions, in contrast with the devotion to Vitthal which either
cuts that short or enables a man to view it with indifference. The
allegory here is clear enough, but such is not always the case, indeed
allegory is always a treacherous form of exposition, losing its
message as soon as it comes to details.

10. Images from Doubtful Religious Characters

Tukaram employs images from religious characters, some of
them religious mendicants of a sorry and disreputable kind.
These have not been included in the translation by Fraser and
Marathe but may be mentioned here. One of the reprehensible
customs of the country is that of marrying girls to a god, m which
case they fall back on prostitution for a living, while at the same
time they go about singing the praises of the god. We have
already seen that in the Deccan the god to whom they are usually
married is Khandoba, ° more or less identified in popular opinion
with Siva. Murall is the name given to these unfortunate girls,
while that of the boys is Waghya, the male devotees and mendi-
cants of Khandoba. On behalf of a woman thus devoted to this
god at Jejuri, Tukaram writes a poem m which she describes
her life. The language is so chosen as to suggest that instead of
what she possesses or thinks she possesses she ought to turn to
Vitthal and accept the treasures which he can give. In a
similar vein Tukaram writes a poem on behalf of an adulteress,
making the guilty love suggest the divine love which she is neglect-
ing. The double meaning can scarcely be rendered in English.

It is a question how far in these poems tbe poet is inspired by
anything hke the pity which a modern observer might feel for the

1 See the whole Section on Games numbered \\s PP. -H-SO, Vol, II, P. and
M. with a 'Notes', pp. 433-5.

2 Seep 19.

3 See Chaptei 3, page ■i7, also Moleswoith t Maunhi-F.iii^hsU Ihctioiuity,
p. XXVI, footnote.

V LITERARY CHARACTERISTICS 133

victims of destiny. Probably Ibis sentiment did not pass through
his mind : it does not belong to his age. He would think of them
as mortals besotted by the world, as a grasping tradesman or a
cavilling Brahman might be, but not specially as creatures whose
case called for the philanthropist.

The interpretation of these poems is obscure, their subject un-
pleasant, and it is a relief to turn to others in which the fidelity of
the day-labourer and of thepclTk (see abhaitgs 134-4-54) or the joint
labours of two women grinding together furnibh images of sturdy
piety or faithful trust. By a piitk is meant an armed attendant, a
peon, messenger or courtier, and around IheabJiangs on the subject
(numbered 3655-3G6S ui Vibhnuboa Joga's commentary which see)
has raged a contioversy m the Maralhfi country as to whether
Tukaram enfeebled Maharashtra by directing its attention exclu-
sively to things spiritual. Those who argue that Tukaram advocated
mihtary virtues are answered by those who affirm that while the
language of these abliai'igs is secular their meaning and message
are distinctly spiritual.

II. Popularity of Tukaram's Style

A poet whose verse is quoted by millions of peasants as a final
authority and who supplies s-ome of India's greatest reformers
with religious nourishment must be regarded as having couched
his message in a popular style. And such is the case with the
poet-sauit of Delm The late Christum poet, Narayan Vamafa
Tilak, no mean judge either of poetic power oi of popular taste,
observes in an unpubliftbed essay we have quoted elsewhere : ' That
Tukaram is still the most popular Maiflthi poet of the day even in
the 20th century .show.'i how 'J'ukanim's hteraiy characteristics
appealed to the people of Mahaiashtia and still appeal. As
Shridhar, ' a poet born a generation after Tukaram's death, remark-
ed: "I fully sympathize with the common people who do not
understand the Sanskrit language ; they are like thirsty persons
standing by the side of a deep well without eithei a rope or
a vessel, knowing that the well has no steps to go into it, and that
their hands can never reach the surface of water in it." So Shiidbar
provided this rope and this vessel as Tukaiam had done more than
half a century before hiin. rukslrara is aliU unequalled among all
the Maralhi poets. The flow and force of Tukuram's music is
simply wonderful, his diction is easy, his iilu-stiaiions are homely
and exact; he had glimpses of the past, but he niainly dealt with
the present and the fulmc. 1 hi was an invfistigalcir and a painter of
human nature and ho, did his wuik so well tliat none among the
Marathi poets merits conipaiison with hini.'

' bee V 1 *, tntl oi btction 11, cliap ].

134 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

III. Takaram's Picture of flimself

I. A Trustworthy Picture

From Tukaram's own poems, assisted by the pages of Mahipati,
we have no difficulty in drawing a portrait of his character which
is almost as full as we could wish and as we have seen (see Part I,
this Chapter), probably quite trustworthy. His own account of
himself IS frank and simple and clearly inspired by nothing else
than a desire to be ii'-eful. There is no trace of egoism about it
and no affectation of any kind. His religion was nearly his all m
all. This is illustrated by what the late Narayan Vaman Tilak sets
forth : ' He walked with his god, talked with him, took him to task,
settled quarrels with him, consulted him, shared his lot with him.
None other and nothing else was so dear and so near to him as his
Vithoba. This attitude of his mind has made his devotional flights
so real that while reading his poetry one finds one's self as it were
in the midst of a new life, not merely of thoughts. Excepting a
few abhaiigs, all his poetry had for its theme his own experiences
in his relation to the world and to his god, Thus Tukaram him-
self is the hero of most of his poems, and his presence goes with
a reader of them, and makes them exceedingly charming. One
cannot get half of Tukaram's meaning unless one has first read
and studied his life thoroughly well, and unless one has learned to
sympathize with him in his wisdom and folly alike.'

2. An Honest Tradesman

We notice that he did not wholly give his heart to God till he
was laid prostrate by misfortune. At his father's request he took
over the family basmess and, no doubt, had prosperity attended
him he might have continued all his life a thriving and respected
tradesman. An honest tradesman we need not doubt, and a devout
man, but perhaps not the author of our poems. It was calamity
that made him change his path in life. We may therefore con-
trast his experience with that of other Indian devotees who have
left the world m the hour of success and glory. As for example
Ramavalabhdas, son of the Prime Minister of Devgiri (Daulata-
bad) and a contemporary of Tukaram, who during the plunder
which followed a successful battle by chance found a copy of
Eknath's BhSgwai and viewing this good fortune as a divine
favour he gave himself up entirely to religious meditation.'

A similar example of Indian renunciation, though one con-
nected with another of India's faiths — Jainism — and another part

' See V L Bhave, Sar, p. 163 ; in the same volume see also the c&ses of
Dasopant, p. 117, Kesarinath, p. 350, and Banajl, p. 135-6, footnote.

V PICTURE OF HIMSELF 135

of the country, is one many travellers have come across, viz., the
Jain princes and princesses whose names are inscribed on the rock
at Sravana Belgola, with a record testifying that they who took their
seats upon that rock had closed their lives by starvation, because
they had found that worldly pleasures were unsatisfying.

3. His Failures in Business

Of his life in the world before he retired from business Tuka-
ram has httle to say. It is summed up m abhaugs 101-125,
He does not specially complain of hard treatment from man or
destiny or accuse himself of wanting the qualities needful foi
success. He never gives us to understand that he failed because
he was too good for a wicked world. His view of the world is
more detached, as he makes sufficiently plain. Human life fills him
with extreme horror. ' The whole world is an eddy of misery. I
cannot bear it : adamant would break beneath it : my soul is filled
with trembling fear : I utterly shrink from the tale of this fetid
world' (361). Many poems dwell in detail on the guilt and
misery of men and there is nothing to tell us that Tukaram ever
lighted on any scene with satisfaction save the assembly of
Vaishnava Saints.

4. Conviction of Sin

Meditation brought a great conviction of sin. Very numerous
and most earnest are the poems that speak of self-accusation. The
poems on this subject number several hundreds out of the whole
collection. They speak chiefly of sloth that wastes time, of desire
that longs for pleasures. We need not think that Tukaram any more
than John Bunyan was worse than his neighbours : he has learned
to reproach himself. We cannot date these poems, and neither
psychological nor chronological principles justify the supposition
that they must have been written in the first days of spiritual
struggle. How utterly overwhelming was Tukatam's sense of sin
may be gathered from the poems. Without commenting we give
a brief selection in addition to the renderings on page 50 : ' O God,
protect me and still my agitated soul. Cast no reproach on me ;
receive within thy.self, tays Tuka, the million offences I have
committed' (347). 'Regard not my mountainous guilt' (348).
' I see that my own heart is not pure ; I have fallen
into the destructive power of the senses. O Hari, do thou
swiftly cut off this evil that clings to me. Other evils too why
need I count up ? sinful illusions, evil affections. I am tortured by
lust and rage ; who but thou can set me free ? ' (353) ' Though I
speak gentle words, yet lust and rage flourish within me ; my
spirit is not pure, as the saints describe purity ' (354). ' God,

136 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

, ... do thou banish all in me that is deceitful and come in thy
genuine nature to dwell withm me. Smful as I am, let thy power
save me ' (356). ' Where there is falsehood, there is a heap of sm '
(364). 'Obest of beings, pity ray sms, past and future' (365).
' What purity have I, of descent, lineage or action, that thy secret
should be revealed to me ? ' (372). ^

' I have sought thee because I was fallen ' (I860). Why dost
thou consider my faults or merits ? I am altogether a heap of sins,
yet am united to the Saviour of the sinful ' (1870). ' We cannot
see how to unwind these meshes. We are beset by the dogs of
rage and lust, we are fallen into the whirlpool of temptations'
(1879). ' I am vicious, guilty, how guilty, how can I tell ? ' (1881).
' Give me, O God, the happiness of solitude ; take away all that
brings rum on my soul. I am a heap of sm, says, Tuka, O set me
behind thy back ' (1891). ' O ye Saints, I am a sinful man ' (3009).
' Who would care to enquire into my merits ? Thy name is Puri-
fier of the Sinful. We are fast bound by greed and error. Truly
1 am a smful man, but I seek shelter in thee ' (3026). 'I am nothing
but a heap of sms ; thou art altogether the best of all beings '
(3030). See also section 7 of chapter 9, also chapter 8, III.

So striking indeed is the sense of sm evinced by Tukaram that
we could well imagine some of his despairing cries had been taken
from the pages of the ' Penitential Psalms.' There is perhaps an
even more instructive parallel m this matter of a sense of sm and
unworthiness between St. Paul and Tukaram. St. Paul's descrip-
tion of himself as ' the least of the apostles' (1 Cor. 15 : 9), ' less
than the least of all saints' (Eph. 3 : 8), and ' the chief of sinners '
(1 Tim. 1 : 18) finds a worthy echo in the penitential cry of
Tukaram for mercy : ' I am helpless, guilty and chief among
sinners' (1609) ; ' I am a depraved sinner, O God, and I have come
to seek Thy mercy : put me not to shame. I do not know how
many men thou hast saved, but this I know that I am the worst of
them all . . , . I am a supplicant for Thy mercy ; cleanse thou me
completely from my sm, God." This sense of personal sinful-
ness in Tukaram is all the more impressive when we remember
that there is little of this quality m the Maratha poets before him.
None of his predecessors ' was so thorough-going ', says Prof.
W. B. Patwardhan, 'm his rage of self-examination and self-
exposition ; none before him was so subtly sensible of his own
defects, so keenly conscious of his evil doings and evil tendencies,
of the erring habits of the mind and predilections to evil and sin.
No one before him has so lively a sense of the power of passion
and sensual affections, of the weakness of man when beset with
temptation in the outer world and torn asunder by conflicting
promptings of the flash. His outlook upon life and the world
may be right or wrong. But the intensity with which he feels the

I Rev. G R Navalkar's translation in Tnkgram, tho Mah^mshtrdan
Poet and Sainf, pp. 23-4,

V PICTURE OF HIMSELF 137

need of divine grace and support and the anguish and agony with
which he realizes the tyranny of the world on the soul of man, the
imaginative vividness of his apprehension of the vanity of all
pomp and splendour, of the futility of learning and logic and
philosophy, the sincerity of his cry for help, and the whole hearted-
ness of his devotion, these are points ot Tukaram's life and work
that cannot fail to strike any one who reads his abJiafigs.' ^

In view of these tacts we are unable to agree with Dr.
Macnicol in his exquisite Psalms of Marcltha Satnts (p. 33) where
he says that m the Bible there is ' a profounder sense of human sin
and the alienation that it brings than there is m Tukaram, nor can
we agree to his observation that Tukaram was a stranger to the
truth 'that the sacrifices of God are a broken heart" (P.M.S.
p. 33). If ever there was ' a broken heart ', broken because so deeply
conscious of its wrong and plague, it was the heart of Tukaram.
His hundreds of abhaiigs on the subject ate sufficient proof of this.
We would agree that the sense of sin is not so constant a feature
as the Christian Scriptures show, probably due to the abiding sense
of the stainle&s purity of God in the latter, but in our view the
Bible Itself has no more poignant cries of shame than those which
escape Tukaram's lips. For ourselves the essential difference
between this Maratha saint and the saints of the Bible lies in
another direction. We would place him in the school of Romans
VII. 7- 24 . The self -analysis there fits Tukaram's case perfectly, for
he realizes most painfully his ' moral impotence '. What is missing
from Tukaram is the song of complete dehvcraticc in the last verse
of that chapter and in chapter viii with its experience of a final
moral and inward emancipation. The Christian's deep sense of sin
is what the theologians call ' a saving sense' while that of Tuka-
ram was nearly always a cry of despair : ' my heart testifies to me
that I am not redeemed' (126). ' Whomever I meet on this road
I enquire of him : Will God be merciful to me ? ' (19) That he
had fleeting glimpses of something else we shall see in Section 8
below.

5. ' De Profundis ' : Saved by Misfortune

This conviction of personal guilt is accompanied by a dreadful
sense of the inscrutable problem of the world. Some of his poems
testify to an extreme depression of mind. ' False alike are laughter
and tears, the false nature floes to falsehood. False is " mine ",
false is " thine ", the false nature bears a false burden. There is
falsehood in thought and falsehood in song. The false finds it& way

1 F. C. M. February 1919, pp. 140-1 .

2 The same idea appearing in his illummatmB article on ' The Indian Poetry
of Devotion* (Hibbert Joimial, October 1917, pp. 74-88) where he says . 'the
dark barrier of a sense of sm does not lower above Hieqi as it does above the
saints of Israel. '

18

138 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cii,

to the false. False is the life of senses and false renunciation :
the ascetic is false, the world an illusion. False is Tuka, false
IS his faith ; he speaks falsehood to the false ' (2345). This is per-
haps the De Profuiidts of our poet, though it possibly belongs to
time when he had already begun to teach and preach. After this
we can beheve him when he says, ' My words are not figures of
rhetoric ; I beseech thee in accents of true misery ' (1886).

In this harsh scene of suffering Tukaram comes before us as a
common man with no claims to any kind of worldly distinction.
Strenuously he repels the idea that he has any kind of unusual gift,
an attitude in which he may be compared with Walt Whitman. ' I
am neither learned nor skilled m debate or pure in lineage ' (358). He
does not even allow that by nature or early instinct (like his brother)
he was drawn to the rehgious life. It was misfortune that saved him.
' It is well, O God, that I became bankrupt, that I was crushed by
the famine ; this is how I repented and turned to thee, so that the
world became odious to me' (113). He began his religious life
modestly, hstening to the songs of the Saints and the sermons of the
preacher, taking up- the refrain al their meetings and finally ventur-
ing himself to preach. He spent much time outside the village in
solitary meditation among the hills.

6. Sorrow and Self- Dedication

Weaving together Mahipati's story and Tukaram's own autobio-
graphical abhangs we see clearly that it was sorrow that led to his
self-dedication. The death of both his parents and his brother's
wife followed by that of his own wife and eldest son filled the cup
of his sorrow and he decided to retire into solitude. In the words
of Prof, W. B. Patwardhan : ' The vanity of human wishes and
worldly pursuits came bitterly home to him and there was
nothing left m the world of men which could give him peace of
mind. He would seek the life that could not die, and the wealth
that could not run short. He would have nothing to do with a
world that had so much suffering, so much misery, so much that
could not last. That which would never fade, never wither, that
which cloved not, died not, that would he seek and m that would
he rest. Nothing short of the eternal and the absolutely good
would satisfy him. So complete was the change of spirit that
canie upon him, so long and hard and potent was the conflict
raging in his heart, so profound the gloom that sat brooding over
his soul, that he emerged a new man, purified and chastened and
illumined. Tukaram the Wani, Tukaram the worldly, Tukaram
the son, the brother, the husband, the father was no more, and
there lived, moved and had his being Tukaram the spiritual seer,
Tukaram the saint, Tukaram the prophet, Tukaram the moral
teacher, Tukaram the servant or bondsman of Vithoba. . . ,

V HCTURE OF HIMSELF 139

That it was the series of afflictions that befell hitn and the
bitter expetiences and the cruel reverses of fortune he was subject
to that brought on the spiritual transformation is apparent from
the poet's own words.'

7. ' Spiritual Growth '

Tukaram's autobiography shows how steep and rugged was
the ascent he climbed before he could say, ' In the Stainless One
I have established my home ; in the Formless One I abide '
(2755); 'Tukaliashis Home in the Inconceivable' (1578); 'my
simple-minded faith has put an end to pilgrimage to and fro'
(2773); 'rank, race, colour, creed and caste — all are gone ' (2790).
A worthy ' tentative ' elfort at delineating this long inward struggle
has been made by Prof. W. B. i'atwardhan 111 his paper on
'Tukaram's sphitual growth' which occupies nearly sixteen
pages, the Marathi original being given along with English trans-
lation ; the following continuous extract is in his own words
without indicating the explanatory context.

' For days and months and perhaps yeats, TukarSm appears to
have been groping about for want of a sure guide. lu vam did
he pass from gosaol to nosclvi with a view to secure a pilot who
could steer hun straight to the other and safer shore. Just then
he came upon a band of Varkaris — annual pilgrims to Paijcjhari,
contact and conversation with whom reassured him that he had
hit upon the right path. " Take up the Till (a kind of musical
cymbol) and the Dimll (a stringed instrument), and dance for
love of God," said they. What with the spontaneous impulses
of his heart and the words of confideuce from the Saints,
he applied himself wholly and entirely to the pursuit of the
blessing. He would sing to his god, dance to him, pray to him,
and concentrate his eye upon him. With all that, he was where
he had been spiritually. " I have put on this outward mask. But
there has been no renunciation from within. I have no experience
of awakening. My heart has not yet emerged out of the toils of
the world. Devotional practices have been mechanical. They are
neither spontaneous nor soul-affecting." His heart had not yet
been purged of a fond attachment to the domestic and worldly
life. But there were others that were deeper-seated, viz., his
passions. " Sexual desire and angry passion are still alive in me.
My mind has not been purified. No advance towards -spiritual
well-being is possible unless the heart is washed clean of all evil
taint." He was an ttaroest seeker after God— alter the L>ivine
Presence, after Divine Love. Tukfirfun has now arrived at a very
delicate stage. The goal is not yol in sight ! The world around
him, on the other hand, poiutb the iiiigor of scorn at him, scoffs at

' P C. M., Vol. i, No. J, Septcmbur I'JIO, ijp. 2-i.

140 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

him. Friends and foes alike set him down for a madcap.
Tukaram was human and like all human beings apt to lose heart
and waver. His is an intensely emotional soul — timid, gentle, and
yet^turdy and strong in Us own sphere. What is he to do now
when his doubts have grown insistent ? Whom shall he consult ?
He will again go to his god, and ask him what he should do. " Who
will put heart in me ? I am neither an expert in the Shastras,
nor a learned man, nor again am I a member of the pure caste. 1
have no secure anchorage — no piece of firm ground to stand upon.
Now I will take this whole-hearted resolve. 1 will not consult
others hereafter. I will be thy subject — thy bondsman — earmarked.
"That is," saysTukaram, "the firm and settled purpose of my heart."
Yet the expected and long-wished-for bliss does not come. The
vision makes no approach to reality. In the yearning impatience
of soul he breaks into a pathetic cry : " Come Vitthal, do come,
my life bursts with imploring. Bitterly does the heart repine • it
seems thou hast deliberately kept me at a distance. We are sheer
orphans having no anchorage. Venly the land is come to be deso-
late of God." After this long trial Tukaram's long-cherished wish
is realized. His spiritual craving is satisfied, and he feels within
himself, with all the authority of his own expeiience, that eternal
Love is won only by devoted patience. Now that he has discover-
ed the way, he must show it to others. He therefore proclaims
to them : " The only thing to do is to have patience. Do not give
up taking food ; do not retire to a wood, to solitude ; only think of
Narayan in all your experiences of pam or pleasure. All other
notions should be lopped off. Commit everything to the care of
God and proceed — go on, neither involved m enjoyment or suilering,
nor 'making an ado of renunciation." Here it appears to me,' says
Prof. Patwardhan, ' is the process of spiritual evolution in
Tukaram complete. It has been a long and laborious circle no
doubt." See also chap. 10, sect. 2, where Prof. Patwardhan
characterizes Tukaram's bhakti as ' individual ' and ' one-sided '.

8. Life after Self- Dedication

Of his life after dedication we have sometimes h picture that
presents bim as going quietly on with his business. ' 1 go on with
my daily business, yet 1 love thy feet. I keep thy form ever before
my eyes, though outwardly I acknowledge the tie of the woild.
I govern my actions according to the occasion but with my speech
I smg thy praises. Like a pressed man I walk the round of
worldly duties. I am like a puppet that life .sets in motion. I am
resolved that my soul shall not be parted from thee' (2311).
Clearly this is not a solution of the problem of life, though it shows

' ^ Boms Abhangs of Tukaiam' I- CM. Vol. I. No 3 Seplembei 1910,
pp. 4-lf.

V PICTURE OF HIMSELF l4i

that Tukaram'i thoughts were once approaching a solution, and we
need not be surprised that he left the world for the life of the
professed devotee. Of his sentiments then the following abliarig
speaks : ' I have grown heedless of the body ; I caie for one thing
alone. Wealth and poverty are the same to me : 1 have weighed
them and set them aside ' (885). ' I stand outside the courtesies
of life, the proceedings in which men display their pride and love
of honour' (3451).

Let us note how he escaped from his slough of despond. ' I
have come to know God by serving him ' (565). We may take
this as probably the piofoundest truth that he utters, but Tukaram
is perhaps too modest to repeat it often. He prefers to speak of
God's generosity and condescension, of the flood of love that the
worshipper feels to be poured into his soul, and of the ' ecstat.y ' that
comes with it. To take a few sentences quite at random from one
section headed ' triumphant happiness' where these are placed : ' I
have found a sea of love, an inexhaustible flood, 1 have opened
a treasure of spiritual knowledge, it difl'uses the lustre of a
million suns arisen in thy worshippers' souls. Unexpectedly,
without an eCfort, I have heard the eternal secret, I have learned
to know God. The very ]oy of peace and compassion is found
in this joy that accompanies the knowledge of the being and
knowing God' (573). And in this mood he speaks often as if no
relapse was possible . ' I have ciosscd over : I have justified my
confidence: 1 have spoken thy name: 1 have dismissed the world.
I am tied to nothing now ' (.S7'j). Tins mood was, however, far
from abiding and would seem to have, come mostly in 'gatherings
of the Saints '. Sco chapter '), section 12 and chapter 10, sections A
and 8 where N. V. Tilak reminds us that such ' ebstasy ' is not
devotion, or salvation.

9. Chani>:in^ Moods

There is an oscillation of view between a humble and a lofty
view of himself. There are poems in which there is quite a note
of self-esteem. ' A pebble may look beautiful till the diamond
flashes forth ; a lamp may look beautiful till the sun rises. Men may
talk about saints till they havu seen Tukfi' (M22). Were these
really his own words ? Probably they were, but m any case they
were not many. We may bo suio that he speaKh more in his
habitual mood when he tells us how he despi.sds himsc-lf if any feel-
ing of self-complacency uses up in his mind. 'I have become
skilful in m,y own conceit ; I have given up faith for idle self-
satisfaclion ' (351). And ' I dislike to hear my praises ; when men
extol me they weary my suiil ' (17()). lie knows his busniisss
better ' My chief duty is like a servant to forward my lord's
purposes' (690).

142 LIFE And tEACHlNG OF WKARAM cH.

He speaks much and no doubt with justice of his simplicity and
sinceritv. ' I utter fond and foolish words but they come straight
from the core of my being ' (3407). This remains perhaps the
strongest impression that his character leaves upon us. Along
with it we may place a passionate desire to save and serve mankind.
There is no doubt about the horror with which he sees men 'run-
ning to hell '. He speaks of human wickedness with nothing short
of horror and agony, and his language of indignant reproof
IS in marvellous contrast with the sweetness of persuasion with
which he lays before them the bliss and rapture of the devotee's
life. We may sometimes feel that he overdoes the language of
mere rage and den.unciation, especially when the poems of this
type are collected together, but viewing the case in a just per-
spective we shall see that he did not rest satisfied as the censorious
do with mere denunciation, but that he showed the way to
something better, though sometimes in rough, and even coarse,
terminology — on which coarseness see V. L. Bhave, M. SSr., p. 182.

lo. Service for Others

An unselfish desire to raise the world around him is the noblest
feature of Tukaram's character, and, breathing as it does from so
many poems m one foim or other, remains the final impression.
On this question we are compelled to take a different view from
that adopted by Dr. Macnicol m Psalms of Maratha Saints
(pp. 31-2) and by Dr. Farquhar in An Outline of the Rehgious
Literature of India (p. 300) : ' His own need and his own concerns
absorb him,' says theformer ; 'it ishisown religious life that occupies
his soul,' says the latter. That Tukaram, however, had a true
concern for others also is very manifest throughout the whole of
Mahipati's narrative, as will be seen from many incidents recorded
m our chapter 4. There we see Tukaram spending his time help-
ing anybody he finds m need. When we come to his autobiogra-
phical poems it is clear that for Tukaram religion does not mean
a selfish concern for one's own soul or concentration on religious
exercises only, for he speaks of ' wearing out his own body ' by
' serving others '.' How emphatic a place this practical principle
occupies even in his poems is shown by those classified by Fraser
and Marathe under the heading ' The Service of Others ', a classi-
fication found in each of the three volumes, the following being
samples from the first only. ' Whoso makes himself the friend of
the oppressed, recognize him for a true saint, know that God
dwells m him. He who takes the unprotected to his heart, Tuka
says — how often shall I tell you? — he is the veiy image ol the
Divine? ' (709). ' He who serves other creatures and shows them
compassion, in him the supreme spirit dwells' (710). 'Merit

lAbhans 10], F. and M., 1333 I P.

V PICTURE OF HIMSELF 143

consists in service to others' (711). In 712 we have interesting
examples of this practical benevolence in the lives of Kabir,
Namdev and Venkoba. ' Blessed in the wot Id are the compas-
sionate; their true home is Vaikuntba, bnt they have come here to
serve mankind * (713). 'A benefactor knows not the difference
between himself and others' (715). 'One whose mind is for
ever unquiet and discontented, let me never meet such a man, he
knows not the highest word of all, do good to others ' (717). ' We
should use our best endeavours for the afflicted ' (720).

On this subject Mr. PangSikar has some excellent observations,
particularlj' on pages 131-6 of his MarfithI biography of our poet-
saint. He not only refers to the remarkable chapter 31 in
Mahipati's Bhakta LllCtmnta which we have summarized in our own
chapter 4, but he points out a striking ahliaitg of Tukamm's own
which Fraser and Marathe have classified in theii second volume
under ' Peacefulness ' and numbered 2200. In this abhai'ig Tuka-
ram propounds the problem : ' Are you in need of God ? ' and he
supplies a twofold answer. 'The ideal method is to sing His
praises with devotion, or with faith ibhctva) ', but another method
is: ' Do good to others, whether it be much or little '. (See akso our
Section on 'The Saints', Chapter 8, Section viii, 3, 'Their Service
to Men '.

11. His Mission as a Preacher

Our la.st glimpse of Tukaram leaves him pictured in our
memory as a preacher. In Mahipati's pages ws find him helping
poor widows or working miracles, but his own portrait of himself
is that of a preacher, though conscious of bis unworthiness. His
native equipment is small ; he has little intelligence, he is wholly
unlearned, he knows nothing of the Vedas. ' What knowledge
have I? What authority have I ? ' (1134). But this question he
answers — he bears a message, he is sealed with the seal of a mighty
prince (70-71), He feels his language is childish and feeble, and
all Tukaram can say is that God makes it sufficient to convey the
message. Tukaram is but the measure that measures out the
truth; 'the measure says, "I measure out all," yet its master
fills it and lays it aside empty ' (70). At other times, however, he
seems to think his poems are powerful because they are vot his
own, because his master speaking through him inspires him with an
eloquence not his own.' These are not my words, I am a hired
messenger of Vithoba' (1420). He has a strong sense of the need
for preaching and for good honest preachers. He denounces the
professional orator who lakes money for holding a h'lrtan. Making
terms and extorting money Tukaram always reprehends. The
numerous poems on this topic are amusing and one gathers that
religious impostors turned up in the Deccan as regularly as tramps
in England or America, Like these gentlemen too they found

144 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM cit.

their chief supporters among such women, as were impressed
and indeed misled by their magic and false pretensions. They are
often accused of over-eatmg— over-drinking not being a Hindu
failing — and of smoking bhang and of gratifying tbeir lust with
women. 'Their desires are set on shawls and pots and money' (1196).
' They shall not escape hell, says Tuka ' (1195). And he adds m
one place, ' If I have polluted my tongue m making these wretches
ashamed of themselves, O purify me ' (2028).

Inspiration is needed by the preacher. Tukaram is honest
enough to admit that this rule has its exceptions : ' There are
people who follow crooked paths and yet point out straight paths
to others' (2398). But he does not dwell much on this paradox —
indeed the subtlety of human nature is a thing that Hindu moraHsts
hardly ever handle. He prefers to insist on the straightforward
view that the teacher must be sincere. ' Matted hair and ashes
are a scandal when the mind has neither patience nor forbearance'
(1199). ' If God ceases to speak to a man, he too ought to be
silent ; Tuka says, People act very differently — when God has
ceased to speak to them they go on talking about Him ' (561).
And the preacher must not spare his efforts. 'If a man stands
up to preach and spares his energy who can measure his guilt ? '
(2525). The right conditions, however, being fulfilled, the preacher
' rescues others by the sweet perfume of his words '. But the
hsteners must do their part. Tukaram denounces with unsparing
energy those who sleep while the speaker holds forth, those whe
talk and above all those who raise cavilling objections to the
discourse. No doubt his patience was often tried. ' Such people
sink themselves and destroy the ship of salvation.'

Our study of the biographical and autobiographical facts of
Tukarain's life having brought him before us as a preacher, we are
now to learn what his themes are, first by noting his attitude to
contemporary Hinduism (chapter 6), second by enquiring in which
directions he may be influencing men to-day (chapter 7), and third
by seeking to discover what may be regarded as his religious tenets
(chapter 8).

19

THE HYPOCRITE*

Possessed with devils they grow long their hair
No saints are they, nor trace of God they bear.

They tell of omens to a gaping crowd.
Rogues are they, Tuka says ; Govmd's i not there

WITHOUT AND WITHIN*

Soon as the season of Sinhasth 3 comes in.

The barber and the priest — what wealth ihey win '

Thousands of sins may lurk within his heart.

If only he will shave his head and chin '

What is shaved off is gone, but what else, pray '
What bign that sin is gone ' Hi'^ evil way
Is still unchanged. Yea, without faith and love
All IS but vanity, I, Tnka, Say.

DROWNING MEN

For men's saving I make known
These devices — this alone
My desire.

Can my heart unmovSd be
When before mv eyes I sre
Di owning men ?

LOVE FINDS OUT GOD

Thy natuie is beyond the grasp
Of human speech or (hoiigbt

So love I've made the measnrc-rod.
By which I can be taught

Thus with the ireasure-rod of love

I mete the Infinite
In sooth, to measuie him there is

None othei means so fit

Not Yoga's power, nor sacrifice.

Nor fierce austerity.
Nor yet the strength of thought profound

Hath ever found out thee.

And so, says Tuka, graciously,

Oh Ke'?av,3 take, we pray,
Love's service that with simple hearts

Before thy feet we lay

I Got>!Md=K{-isna. 2 see pp 47, 50 of this book, 3 K'es'/JU^Kiisna.
* Translated from Tukaram, P M S , pp. 90, «8, 73.

Chapter VI
Takaram's Attitade to Conventional Hindaism

This chapter is not intended to be a criticism either of
Hmduismorof Tukarambut an enquiry into the relation of the
ktter to the farmer. On every side Tukaram found himself
surrounded by the conventional beliefs and practices of Hinduism.
The question presents itself ; Which of these did he adopt or
sanction? How far was he a reformer ? Ii is a question not a
little diiBcult to approach or solve, forinconsistencies and contra-
dictions of thought appear on well-nigh every page. So true is
this that very different schools of interpretation claim him as
favouring their views. What we need to remember throughout is
that he was a poet with a poet's varying moods and that he was
also a Hindu, the Hindu's ability to accept positions which to
others are mutually exclusive being the constant despair of the
Western enquirer.

I, Tukaram's Idolatry

No better illustration can be found of the f(jily of trying to
reduce Tukaram's attitude to one of logical consistency than his
relation to the all-surrounding idolatry of bis day. The lofty
theistic aspirations of the small but influential community of the
Prarthani Samajists and the sordid — though sincere — idolatry of the
vast multitude of Tukaram's Deccan followers to-day are both able
to turn to his pages for confirmation of their respective tenets.
His irreconcilable views on the subject of idolatry are accounted
for by the fact that the worship of Vithoba, the idol at Paij^lharpur,
with all its traditional ceremonies, Tukanlm regarded as sanctioned
by lime and custom on the one hand and by the wish of the god
on the other. At the same time he desired something very much
higher than the ceremonies of the central shrine at Paijcjiharpur,
something much more inward and spiritual, but he nowhere
condemns those particular ceremonies and he believes that they
make some sort of impression on the divine nature.

This raises the whole question of images or idols in worship, a
feature of Hinduism which has naturally struck the world but has
received very little scientific attention either from the HindQ
theologians or others. A few words are therefore advisable on the
views and practices of Hindus. Not long ago it was unnecessary
to distinguish between the educated and uneducated in this matter,

148 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

though educated men, one may suppose, cannot ever have looked
on images or idols with the simple unquestioning faith of the
masses.

With the Hindu masses the use of an image or idol is the
natural way of approaching the divine, and for this purpose
the Hindu view is that the image must be one definitely con-
secrated to the god and accepted by the god as a place of resi-
dence. The consecration ceremony must always be performed by a
Brahman and is called PrSnapratistha. This important cere-
mony was defined nearly a century ago by the great reformer Ram
Mohun Roy in words reproduced by The Indian Messenger, the
Sadharan Brahmo Samaj organ of Calcutta, which we give below.
Kam Mohun Roy was refuting the position of those Hindus who
maintain that an image or idol is merely a lifeless symbol meant to
remind the worshippers of the One Living God. As proof that the
worshippers do not take this view the reformer stated : ' Whatever
Hindu purchases an idol m the market, or constructs one with
his own hands, or has one made under his superintendence, it is
his invariable practice to perform certain ceremonies called Pratfa-
pratt^tha or the endowment of animation, by which he believes
that its nature is changed from that of the mere materials of which
it IS formed, and that it acquires not only life but supernatural
powers. Shortly afterwards, if the idol be of the masculine gender,
he marries it to a feminine one with no less pomp and magnificence
than he celebrates the nuptials of his own children. The
mysterious process is now complete and the god and goddess are
esteemed the arbiters of his destiny, and continually receive his
most ardent adoration. At the same time the worshipper of the
images ascribes to them at once the opposite natures of human
and superhuman beings. In attention to their supposed wants as
living beings, he is seen feeding them.'^ If it be asked what is the
result of such a ceremony, the Hindu reply is that a portion of the
god's own nature is infused into the image. It is then possible for
the worshipper to meet the god by adoring the image or idol.
The god once present is always present, unless the image somehow
gets polluted, m which case the god forsakes it, though it can be
reconsecrated.

What IS Tukaram's view ? The only way to answer the question
is briefly to review the facts. How utterly devoted to Krisija was
the saint of Dehu is indicated by such abhangs as number 245 in
Fraser and Marathe's translation : ' Krisna is my mother and father,
sister, brother, aunt and uncle. Kiris^a is my teacher and boat of
salvation. He bears me over the river of the world. Krisnia is
my own mind, my family, and my bosom friend. Tuka says. Holy

I Quoted from The Indian Messenger in Dnyattodaya, April 10, 1919.
On this ' life-implanting ceremony ' see further Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson,
The Rites of The Twice Born, the section entitled ' Consecrauon of Idols',
pp. 409-15.

VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 149

Kjrisicia is my place of repose ; I am resolved I will not be parted
from him.' With questions afFectmg Krisija's historicity, his rela-
tion to Vishnu, etc., we have dealt on pages 29-33. * That Tuka-
ram's mind dwelt sometimes on the amorous character of his god
IS clear from the 29 pages of abliaiigs m Eraser and Marathe given
up to this unsavoury topic, on which there is no need to add to what
we have said on pages 31-33. A point of interest arising out of
Tukaram's relation to Krisna is the view held by some that for a
part of his life it was the idol-form of the child Kirisna that he
worshipped, one proof of this being the dream he had after the
recovery of his poems from the river, in which dream Kris^ia
appeared in the guise of a child , '' and that there was a time when
Tukaram viewed the Pan(iharpur idol as being the image of Kris-
^a's wife Rukminl, exactly at what stages of his life he held these
respective views it being impossible to say, since there is little or no
available historical evidence ".

It is m the poet's relation to Vithoba, Krispa's ' incarnation ' at
Paiidharpur, a relation alternating between rapture and detpair, that
his devotion to Krisna is chiefly manifested. For the raptuie see
abhai'tg 136 which we quote only in pan : ' Vitthal is our life, our
ancestral god, treasure, family and spirit; Vitthal is the darling
of our hearts, our gracious and tender master, the embodiment of
om love; our father, mother, uncle, brother, sister; apart from him
we care not for our family ; Tuka says, Now we have none but
him'. For the despair see chap. 9, sect. 6 and chap. 10, sect. 5 To
undeistand this relation of Tukaram to Vithoba and the develop-
ment which led to Vithoba's exalted position at Pai.Klbarpur, see the
various sections on Vithoba in chapter 2. Like most other Vaisliria-
vas or devotees of the fiftilgavatcc religion of Maharashtra, Tukarim
recognized also the equality, if not the oneness, of Vishnu and Siva,
on which see page 27 above and section 4 in this chapter on ' Siva
and Vithoba'.

In Tukaram's pantheon other deities were included as the
objects of his praise and homage, for the BhSgavata religion or
Vaish^iavism of Paiidharpur recognized a plurality of gods; see
chapter 3, section 6. It will suffice here to refer by number only to
the abhat'igs employing stories from mythology in t. and M. vol. 2.
Those numbered 1281-94 are written in praise of Rama, 1295-6
in praise of Ganpati (or Ganebha), 1297-1300 in praise of Maruti
(or Hanuman, or Hanumant), while 1301-5 contain the amorous
'complaints' of Radha, Salyabhama and Sita. In abhatig 1462
we learn that he offered worship some time or other to the Ganges,
the Bhagiratbi there referred to as ' cleansing from sin ' being a
sacred tributary. Yet other deities are mentioned in 147, while m

1 See further chap 10, sect. 6, espooially Pandit Tattvibhushan's. view
regarding Vibhnu.

2 See footnote 2, p 97.

3 Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Navayuga, March 1921, pp. 14S-9, 159,

ISO LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

991 ' the evil age ' has for one of its characteristics that a man ' does
not revere his village god '.

Of course it is possible, m seeking to harmonize the above
facts with the lofty spiritual aspirations and monotheistic utterances
of the preceding chapter (see pp. 134-144) and of our ninth chapter,
to adopt the ' easy ' solution offered by the Frarthana Samajists
as expressed by Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar: 'It is evident that at an
early stage of his religious life Tukaram was a pure idolator and a
polytheist, but it is easy to trace his progress to monotheism.'' It
would be an inviting solution oi a perplexing problem could we
accept it, but formidable difKculties of chronology and the lack of a
critical edition of Tukaram's writings present an msurmountable
obstacle. It is doubtless allowable to use in a monotheistic sens-e
for devotional purposes, as does the Frarthana Samaj, abhangs
which have no specific mention of Knsga or Vithoba, e. g., ' make
this your gain, the contemplation of God, with a mind centred in
Him ' (953), though it is probable that even in such abhangs the
bhukta's thought was of his beloved Vithoba at Fandhari.

Mr. L. R. Fangarkar categorically affirms, without any quali-
fication, that Tukaram was an idolator outright to the very end, and
he points out that in the sanad or government grant of property to
Tukaram's son Narayanrao at Dehu there is the definite
statement that 'Tukaram the GosSvi " used to do pujil to
the god with his own hand.' ' In defending the lifelong idolatry
of his hero, Mr. Fangarkar observes that the reason idolatry is not
understood by those not practising it is that its secret lies in
the complete identification of the worshipper and his god. The
scathing reply of the Frarthana Samajist compares idolatry to
a carnage meant for conveying the spiritually lame, the carriage to
be cast aside when its invalid occupants are able to walkjOtherwite
they become ' confirmed invalids ', who when they see anyone else
moving along without any such adventitious aid infer that the
carriage is hidden away in some mysterious fashion.* Idolatry
and its evil effects have indeed no more scathing critics anywhere
than the leaders of the Indian Samajes. As far as Tukaram's own
attitude is concerned we are probably quite safe in concluding,
despite the additional considerations given later in this section, that
he was probably never quite as denunciatory of idolatry as was his
predecessor Namdev, on whom see pp. 38-9. In the picturesque
metaphor applied to him, Namdev burnt all his boats, (i.e., his idols),
hitherto used by him m crossing life's river, while the saint of Dehu
never took so daring a step.° Nevertheless, as we observed on page

1 Two Masters Jesus and TukSrani, pp 32-3 , the same view appearing
from the same writer in Navayuga, March, 1921, p. 152.

2 See p. 6, note 2, for a definition.

3 S T.C, pp 332-4

i Dr. P.R Bhanii3.r)iar, Navayuga, Mixch 1921, pp 152-3.
« Ibid. p. 162.

VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 151

39, even Namdev continued idolatrous practices, his denunciations
notwithstanding.

Tukaram's prevailing view,therefore, as far as his poems show, is
that God IS really present m the image or idol and he gives reasons
why he consents to this manifestation : ' He assumes name and form
to protect devotion, to show how God and worship are related '
(2603). Without some bodily aspect, says our poet, the moral mind
cannot grasp God : ' Give something visible to pray to, let someone
fulfil my helpless desires' (1153). In another place he describes
himself as ' supported by the beauty ot God's visible form ' (2036).
This is expressed in a fanciful poem where the bodily members
all demand that Vithoba shall be made accessible to them : ' My
mouth sings thy attributes, my ears listen; but, say the other
members, such is not our case ; the sight of thee alone can gratify
all, whereby each shall receive his own portion' (3143). It is to
comply with this longing that Vithoba takes form, but Tukaram
goes on to add that Vithoba is not really present unless the wor-
shipper brings faith with him : ' It was our faith that brought about
your full incarnation' (288) ; ' the essence of the matter is faith ; it
is a matter of experience that stones become gods ' (2605) ; ' men
give the name " god" to a stone and faith in it can save a man '
(3203) ; 'if a stone be placed on the highest seat it should not be
treated as a common stone ' (907) ; ' by singing his praises we have
induced the formless to assume a form' (282).*

There are various passages showing that Tukaram was alive to
the mysteries, perplexities and inconsistencies of this view and
those perplexities and inconsistencies lead to moments when Tuka-
ram's faith IS so much shaken that it almost vanishes : ' we have
formed a Vishnu of stone but the stone is not Vishpu ; the worship
of Vish9U is offered to Vishiju, the stone remains m the form of a
stone' (1144). Commenting on this last abliai'tg, the MarathI gram-
marian Ganpatrao R. Navalkar, Fellow of Bombay University,
observes: 'The mind is so constituted that it cannot separate in
worship, the image from the object it represents, and the image
itself becomes a god and receives the worship.' ' Sir E. G.
Bhandarkar, writing out of a full and sympathetic understanding of
Tukaram's whole position, describes him as 'a devotee only of
Vithoba of Pandharpiir and a monotheist in this sense', adding that
' though he worshipped the idol at the place, still he had always
before his mind's eye the great Lord of the universe.'"

It is interesting to note how Tukaram recoiled from the
inconsistencies we have indicated and how he retained his own hold
on the Divine Personality in ' an atmosphere of idolatry '. Though
God was worshipped idolatrously by all the people in Tukaram's

1 See also L. R. Pangarkar, S.T.C. p. 130.

2 Tukaram the Maharashtrtan Poet imcl Saint, p. 10.
i* V.S.M.R.S., p. 95,

152 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

environment, yet the following threefold position appears from a
careful survey of his poems on this subject :

(1) No special image of God is necessary : ' If you mean to
worship Him then conceive Him as the Universe, it is vain to limit
Him to one spot ' (224) ; ' my spirit is at peace because I see thee
in every quarry ' (2588), ' wherever I look, there I see God — give
me such faith as this ' (3117) ; * one whose god is a stone will reap
fruits like his faith ; preserve your faith ; you will prove the sweet-
ness of it, though hindrances arise to part you from it ; God is
secured by faith ' (2598).

(2) The true image of God is His faithful people : ' In holy
places we find water and an image of stone, but in the society of
good men we have the actual presence of God ' (926) ; ' it is the
saints who are gods ; images of stone are pretences ' (2606) ;
* through love to men he dances and sings in the person of the
saints' (287).

(3) Mere idolatry, accompanied by external rites without inward
religion, he condemns outright : ' Why do they worship stone and
brass and the eight metals? The wretches have no faith. "Tis
faith that moves us and is fitly called the means of salvation.
What avails your rosary ? 'Tis only pleasures of the senses you
count on it. What will you do with your learned tongue ? It will
make you proud and conceited. What will you do with your skill
in song, as long as your will is foul within you ? If you serve God
without faith, says Tuka, how will you become fit for Him ?' (2597)
' Diversity of gods is an offspring of our own thoughts ; there is no
truth in it; God is one' (184) ; ' these gods and goddesses smeared
with vermilion — who could worship such masters? ... I have
known what it is to wait on them ; it is in truth a base and vile
inclination; . . . only beggars call such things gods' (1169).

(4) The seemingly insoluble riddle presented by the various
contradictory elements m Tukaram's belief as regards idols is
perhaps brought nearest to a solution by an aspect well brought
out by Prof. W. B. Patwardhan who shows that Vithoba — how, we
are not told — had come to embody for Tukaram the conception of
God as a Mother, which conception solved for Tukaram himself
most problems about the Divme Being. ' This phase of Tukaram's
faith,' says Professor Patwardhan, 'is particularly remarkable
since it emphasizes the personahty of God. To those who have
never been idolaters it is perhaps a difficult task to conceive
an impersonal God in a personal aspect. But to Tukaram it was
an easy thing. He had bean brought up in an atmosphere of
idolatry and the idol at Paodharl was to him for a long time invested
with a glory and splendour and grace nowhere else realized
on earth, endowed with a presence and power that could be
visualized only in moments of rare bliss. In course of time
the ecstatic frenzy of Tukaram rose to a height wherein the idol at
Pan<Jhari ceased to be an idol ; the dead material image was

VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 153

nowhere ; and he was wrapped up in a personal presence of Vitthal
like that of bis mother, only with a halo of glory around her. All
the devotional raptures of Tukaram's poetry are due, perhaps, to
this personal element m the conception of God's Motherhood.'*

That' God is our Mother is an Old Testament view (Isaiah 66 :
13), just as His Fatherhood is the note of emphasis in New
Testament teaching. On the Divine Motherhood it has been
pointed out that 'the worship of the Mothers' has often been
among the grossest forms of popular superstition. ' How far these
associations mingle with Tukaram's fervent expressions of affection
we cannot say, but there is little doubt that even on his lips it is an
imperfectly moralised relationship." Nevertheless it is at this point
that Tukaram's idea of God approximates most closely to the
Christian conception; see chap. 8, II, 3.

It IS impossible to leave this subject of idolatry without
observing the unfortunate consequences of Tukaram's ambiguity on
so vital a matter. It must be regarded as one of the saddest
aspects of the popular Hinduism of Maharashtra, that there are
millions of Marathi-speakmg Hindus who, forgetting the lofty
principles of the saint of Dehu, follow only the idolatrous part of his
example, viz., his worship of the idol Vithoba at Paiidharpur,
while those who follow the nobler part of his example, viz..
his earnest quest for inward purity revealed in many of his abkai'igs,
axe probably to be counted only by thousands, possibly hundreds.
It would gratify us to be shown that this diagnosis of ours is not
correct and to learn that more people follow Tukjiriim the bhakta
than Tukaram the idolater, but all our information points the other
way."

To Tukaram's ambiguity is probably due another result.
During 1920 a curious development took place in the Bombay
Prarthana Samaj on the question of * idolatrous rites ', confirming
one item in Dr. Farquhar's description of the Samaj* to
the effect that there are some members who ' have banished
neither idolatry nor caste from their homes '. At a meeting held
in June 1920 the two following resolutions were proposed with
regard to this : ' (l) That at the time of becoming a member
each applicant be required to declare : " I undertake to perform all
domestic and other ceremonies according to theistic rites, discarding
idolatry." The resolution was carried, 19 members voting for it and
12 against it. The second resolution was : (2) That the following
rule be added to the rules of the Samaj : " Any member who performs
a domestic or any other ceremony with idolatrous rites or worships

1 /. I., April, 1912, pp. 25-26.

'Macnicol, ' Indian Poetry of Devotion,' The Hihhert Jotimal, October
1917, pp. 74-88.

" The last twelve lines we wrote in the Dnyilnodaya of July 1, 1920 and we
have not yet (August 1921) seen them controverted.

* E. R. E„ vol, 9. Art, Pn}rth(tn5 Sttmuj, p. 151-2,

20

154 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

any idols while performing such rites will ij>so facto cease to be a
member of the Bombay Prarthana Samaj." The resolution was
lost, only 7 members voting for it.' '

2. Holy Places, Holy Rivers, Holy Seasons

Another feature always conspicuous in Hinduism is the belief
in pilgrimages to holy places,^ lustrations in holy rivers and strict
observance of holy seasons. The belief holds that the water of
holy places can wash away sin, and it leads to vast and constant
pilgrimages to such places. The sense of sin is no doubt present*
in Hinduism, but it is mostly identified with ceremonial unclean-
ness, though often it has been purely moral. The whole subject
raises one of the most intricate problems that the moralist can
attempt. On this subject as with regard to images, Tukaram
halts between two opinions. In several places he maintains the
value of pilgrimages. He mentions among unacceptable people the
man whose ' feet move not to holy places, and who says. Why should
I spend money on them ? ' (1043) Several times he mentions the
Ganges with respect : ' He who attributes impurity to the Ganges
and to fire he is a miscreant' (1007) ; 'dwell alone and bathe
in Ganges water, worship god and walk round the tuJsi ' (731) ;
' fail not to visit holy places ' (722). On the other hand :' If I go on
a pilgrimage, my mmd goes not with me ' (615). He even condemns
those who ' pnde themselves on pilgrimages and austerities , they
glory in a thing unreal ; they are sunk in the pit of rules and pro-
hibitions' (2531). God IS present to the faithful everywhere:
' We may go to all countries : thou art ready for us ' (1714) 'A
man's own parents are his true Kast (Benares) ; he need not visit
any holy place ' (2230). ' Being now under the inspiration of God
I need not go anywhere ' (3165). ' Ill-starred is he who sets off on
the path to a holy place, the very p'ace he reaches becomes
an obstacle to him' (3195). Besides his deprecation of religious
austerities noticed above, we may add one interesting passage ;
' Do not put an end to your own life : he knows not his own true
good who throws away a treasure lodged within him ' (2232).

It IS fairly certain that he always observed the ektcdasht* fast in
spite of his objection to fixed seasons : ' He who observes not the
11th day know him for a living corpse' (1054).

Sometimes he uses language condemning unsparingly rites
and practices which are merely external, proclaiming plainly
their utter inability to wash away the sins of the heart, as for ex-
ample in his abhafig numbered 4733 in Tukaram Tatya's edition

1 Subodh Patnka, June 27, 3920 and Dnyunodaya, July 1, 3920.

2 S»e pp. 43-9.

3 See Chap 3 especially, pp. 49-50 , also pp. 135-7 , and Chap, 9, sect 7,

4 For definition see p. 5C.

VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 153

and translated by Sir R. G. Bhandarkar as follows : ' What hast
thou done by going to a holy river ? Thou hast only outwardly
washed thy skin. In what way has the interior been purified ? By
this thou hast only added a feather to thy cap (literally, prepared a
decoration for thyself). Even if the bitter vfattdaoatia fruit is
coated with sugar, the settled quality of the interior (bitterness) is
in no way lessened. If peace, forgiveness and sympathy do not
come m, why should you take any trouble ?' '

3. His Idea of Pandharpur and its Practices

Much that Tukaram saw at Pam.lharpQr must have vexed his
soul or at best must have seemed to him wasted devotion. The
veneration of the image of the river, the red paint bestowed on the
great Hanuman, all the homage to the minor deities represented on
the river banks — all this lies probably outside the system which he
personally regarded as fundamental. But he does not attack it, or
he only does so when he sees anything definitely degiadmg or
leading to immoral practices. His denunciations indeed are some-
times so fierce as to pass over into coaiseuess, on which we need
add nothing to what Mr. V. L. Bhave has said in his Marathi
work on the History of Maralhl Literature, page 182. Among
his ahhahgs are those denouncing the worship of powers that lick
up bloody sacrifices or of powers that offer magical accomplish-
ments. We have also constint denunciation ol all religious
impostors, among whom are the sleek rogues who cheat wromen, the
pretenders 10 magical poweis and tlie disputalious self-important
pundits. These and their victims aic vigorously denounced, some-
time.s in language of mci.sive sarcasm.

raiidbarpur has been dealt with in an earlier chapter, but
we may note here the dilferonco between the ancient view of
PaijdharpiJr and thai characteristic of Tukuium. To him the
river appears nothing like as ini pot taut. Ho seldom recommends
the rite of bathing in it : ' Lei your batbiug he in the Chaiidra-
bhaga ' (1634) is a kind of advice very rare, lie often, however,
speaks of the joys of the pebbly shore, but they are the joys of
the klrtans held there in praise of Vnhobii. We need not doubt
that when he went to Paijdhari he bathed in the stream, for that
would be part of the routine of the visit though in all probability
he rejected the idea of the waters of the Bhimii having any power
to cleanse from sin (see pages 56-'J, 61 -2). Hut there can be few
cities on earth whose praises or merit-imparting values have been'
more sweetly chanted than those of this city on the banks of the
Bhima : ' I»e a pilgrim and gaze on Fai.xlhari; why need you prac-
tise other means of salvation ' (154) ; ' uo guilt enters ten miles of

I See also the " paragraph on ' Self-Accusations of Deocan Pilgrims ',
pp 49-50.

156 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH,

its circuit ' (157) ; 'you can buy liberation ' there fornothing, for
nobody wants it ' (159); ' when I see the spire of the tenaple, weari-
ness, sleep and hunger will vanish ' (1627) ; ' happy are they who
dwell in Paijcjhari; they have no pnde of caste' (see pages 54-5),
* they are all emancipated souls ' (2827) ; * the spirit which none
could control was naded by Pundalika to this spot ' (2836).

Pandharl, in his view, owes no sanctity to any such source as
a triumph of the devas (gods) over the asuras (demons) : it is holy
as the spot where Vishnu stands ' incarnate ' before his worshippers.
This 'incarnation' Tukaram does not connect with the story of
Rukmmi's bad temper or Kris^a's search for her. Such an expla-
nation he would probably have rejected as paltry and absurd.
Allegory is not in Tukaram's line nor is controversy, and these old
legends he neither explains nor controverts. He has his own views
and he remains content to place these before the world. To him
the ' incarnation ' is vouchsafed to Pundalika m reward of his filial
love, which somehow — Tukaram never says how — is identified with
the figure on the brick.

4. Relation Between Shiva and Vithoba

One of the most important aspects of Vaishijavism or the
Bhagavata religion m Maharashtra is the equality, possibly one-
ness, of Vishnu and Siva referred to on page 27 and m other places
m this book, and in order to understand Tukaram's attitude on
some questions, particularly his attitude towards Siva and the
^aivites, we need briefly to dip into the far past. Inscriptions
indicate that in the 12th century Pandharpur bore two names —
Paundarika Ksetra and Pa^duraiigpur or city of Pa^idurang, the
local name of 6iva. The most important temple on the sandy
beach is that of Pundalika (on whom and on ' the name Vithpba',
see pages 41-3 and 48), in which temple is worshipped the Siva-
linga. How Vithoba or Vitthal came to receive the Saivite name
of Paijdurang it is impossible to say, save to suggest that it .possibly
represents one of the many efforts of the time to unite Siva and
Vishnu, Pundalika being the agent m this particular effort. This
is the line on which Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar attempts a solution and
he suggests that as the name Vitthal may be a Kanarese form of
the Sanskrit Vishnu, and as the worship of Rakhuraai (Krisija's
wife) followed on that of Vitthal, therefore the worship of kfisijia
and Rukmini must have been brought from South India where an
inscription of the 10th century shows this worship to have been
prevalent, confirmatory evidence being supplied by the fact that
though the outward garb of Rukmini at Paipdharpur is Maratha in
character, yet that carved on her image is undoubtedly of a South

I On this important word see chapter 8, part IV, section 1.

Tlia 'lAKI'nUVA' (iMITAIIOn) VnilOIlA at rANDIlARPDK

VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 157

Indian pattern. This line of reasoning would appear to be supported
by an abhang of Dnyaneshwar indicating that Vitthal and its
worship came from the Carnatic,, while another of NivrittinSth's
affirms that Pundalika 'brought Siva with Vishiju to Parnihari'/ a
joint-worship very ancient and images of which belonging to the
8th and 9th centuries are found in various parts of India. The
present image, however, is that of Vishnu only, the severe persecu-
tion during the Mohammedan invasions, as well as other reasons,
necessitating the removal of the original image which never
returned.' A popular tale runs to the effect that the present image
IS the original one, stolen by some marauding king and brought back
by Pundalika at Vithoba's command in a dream.

These facts, taken along with others affecting the Bha^avata
religion of Maharashtra (see page 27), may help us lo understand
both Tukaram's recognition of Siva and the paucity of his references
to the subject : ' I love the town of Paijclharl, . . . the lifiga and
Pundalika' (2826). No need therefore, in light of the above considera-
tions, to conclude as Fraser and Marathe did on page 333 of vol. 3,
English translations, that ' the mention of the lifiga is unparalleled
m Tuka and suggests that this abhai'ifi is spurious'. That it is not
unparalleled, indeed, abhang 1579 in the Indti PrakClsh edition
shows : ' Having worshipped the liiiga,^ Tuka stands with folded
hands and makes a request to which, O Siva! kindlxpay attention :
Let my mind remain always at thy feet'. And similarly, 2484 in
F. and M.'s own translation, where in his picture of the mean man,
Tukaram says ' he never dreams of worshipping the village lit'tga '.
For though^the original image representing the Hari-Hara worship
of Vishpu-Siva may not have returned, yet the Wtga is still present
in Pa^dharpur, and not in PundalTka's temple only. The tope-like
crown on the head of Vithoba — see page 27 and the picture opposite
page 53 — clearly symbolizes the presence of i^iva worshipped
along with the ' incarnation ' of Kiri.sijia. That this tope-like crown is
the SivBL-Ui'tga is accepted as 'unquestionable ' " by some scholars.
We would humbly suggest to the latter that it is worthy of investi-
gation whether the present one may not be the original image
after all ' and whether the mark of Siva on Vithoba's head may not
be what Nivfittinath refers to in his abhafig.

It is in light of these considerations that we are to interpret
Tukaram's attitude towards Siva and the Saivites. He often uses
the common joint form of the names Hara and Hari, a feature of

1 Nivnttinaih's abhat'ig Iranslsited reads: 'None can describe the good
fortune of Pundalrka who brought Siva along with Vishnu to I'a^jifjhart on the
banks of the Bhima.'

2 Dr. P. R. Bhaodarkar, Navayuga, March 1021. pp, 155-0, IfiSd.

* This IS Mr. L. R. Paiigarkar's verdict in a personal communication to us
dated Feb. 1, 1921 in which, besides Nivrittinflth's abhafig, he quotes also in
support a ' well-known verse' from the Manohodh of KamdSs.

4 'Without prejudice ' to the ' new image ' theory on pp. 60 in our chap. 3.

158 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM Ctt.

the Bhagavaia religion of these parts, the former being of course a
name of Mabadev or 6iva, while the latter refers to Krisna. There
are, U is true, one or two passages in Tukaram where the worship
of Siva is discountenanced, but we cannot feel sure they are
genuine, for m one of the most popular of his abhangs Tukaram
observes : '6iva is made, of mud, but the mud itself continues
to be called mud, and Siva alone receives the worship, mind
turning to mind' — see Fraser and Marathe (1144) for another
translation. In one place, indeed, Tukaram bids us 'raise no
question whether Hara or Han (i.e., Siva and Vishnu) be different ;
one resides m the other a& sweetness resides in sugar; ... it
is but a vtlanii that marks the diflference' (176), the vtlant'i being
the minute Marathl sign distinguishing between two particular
vowels.

5. Shakta Worship, Sati, Brahmans

On the other hand we need not doubt that he is quite fairly
represented in the attacks on inkta worship. This, as is well
known, is a form of worship of the female energy of 6iva. Its
details are repulsive, and the iakta meetings often appear to end m
nothing but licence and gratification of any sensual passion that
presents itself. Dr. Farquhar points out that the literature of the
sSkta seels shows ' some ' of them have ' foul, gruesome and degra-
ding practices.'' The extent of its prevalence m India is difficult
to estimate, for it comes to light unexpectedly. In this matter
Tukaram departs from hisusualruleof not criticising his neighbours
and he attacks sakta worship in language of the most exasperating
hostility.

Passing on to the field of morals one may note with interest
certain practices which Tukaram leaves quite unassailed. One is
sail, although even as far back as the 7th century a.D. we hear a
note of protest against satT in a well-known passage m theKcidam-
batT of Baija Bbatta, a work regarded as the best extant prose in
Sanskrit literature. Tukaram refers more than once to the rite as
an example of fortitude. He commends the woman who walks
firmly to the pyre and speaks of the holy joy which she feels m the
act. But it does not occur to him that social pressure may drive
women to it, that it is a form of cruelty, and that after all it is an
undesirable way of testifying to faithful love. He seems to feel
towards the rite just as an orthodox Hindu of those days felt, that
it was a commendable piece of devotion.

There is no hostile tone m his poems towards Brahmans.
Passages even occur in which men are censured for not freely
supporting them : ' We should pay reverence to sages and Brahmans ;
we should not accept it ourselves' (2521). Here is his description

'O.R !,./., p. 107.

VT ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 159

of a worldly man : ' To support a cow never enters into his
thoughts ; he never says, Let me bathe the feet of the Brahmans'
(3605). 'He who never worships holy men, visits no holy spot, he
is a dowry of hell ' (1066). He even goes so far as to say : ' Should
a Brahman lose all his attributes, still, says Tuka, he is supreme in
the three worlds' (3352b). There are passages, however, m which
Brahmans who neglect their duties are censured. How Tukaram
reverenced Brahmans has already been made clear by several
stories in his biography (see pp. 83, 93, 96-9).

We may note, also, that he has no belief in any magical
or mystic power of Brahmans. There is for instance no reference
to their recognized right or privilege to consecrate an image,
described earlier (p. 14S) in this chapter. And m general Tukaram
shows no leaning towards the occult. Of omens he says : ' All the
good omens I recognise are the feet of Han in the heart ' (225+).
So too of auspicious moments : ' You need not seek the proper
moment for a good deed, an unsought time is the best for it'
(2224) ; ' charms are impracticable, likewise acts and seasons pre-
scribed' (263) He does occasionally mention mystic powers but
m so slight a manner that their mention appears to be little more
than a figure of speech.

d. Cows, Vedas, Puranas, Ceremonies

From several passages we see that he shared the leelmg of his
country about cows : ' He alone will reach the highest life, who is
compassionate towards all creatures, a protector of cows, who
supplies them with water when they are thirsty in the wilderness'
(2313). But there appears no definite statement showing he beheved
that the excreta of the animal have the power to cleanse mankind
from sin, a belief well-nigh universal among Hindus.

Passages about the Vedas, like those on other subjects, fall
into two divisions : ' Study the Vedas before you &ing the attributes
of Hari' (2620) ; ' Tuka looks into the arts which the Vedas teach
and speaks by the favouring grace of ViUhal' (527). It is un-
certain if this means that Tukaram had read the Vedas or that he
considered Vitlhal had spared him this labour by revealing their
meaning to him, but in any case it is a passage upholding their
value as authorities. On the other hand Tukaram points out that
the Vedas are unintelligible : 'Teachers themselves do not under-
stand the Vedas' (265). He occasionally speaks slightingly of
them and professes his own independence of this source of enlight-
enment : ' We waste our time over the dots and dashes of the
Vedas' (1227). Finally : 'The recitation of the Vedas cannot equal
this name, nor pilgrimages to Prayaga (Allahabad) and KaSi
(Benares) and all holy places' (1740); 'his name is more glorious

160 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

than the Vedas' (281). Mr. L. R. Pangarkar^ has given references
to the poems showing, first, that Tukarlm felt that he had no
authority himself to read the Vedas, in accordance with the view
common among Hmdus that no one but Brahmans may study the
sacred books ; second, that his knowledge of them he owed to
reading predecessors like Dnyaneshwar ; and third, that while he
accepts the Vedas, the Puranas, and the words of the ' Saints ' as
authorities, he yet always despises those whose attitude towards
these has degenerated into one of mere formalism.''

Here we should note that Tukaram is fully familiar with all
the old puranic legends about Vishnu and Hari and accepts them
all. He is fond of mentioning one after another the marvellous
deeds of the ' incarnations ', especially those which show the con-
descending kindness of God.

The general impression to which the poems lead is that
we have in Tukaram a man naturally and by reflection
averse to ceremonies, averse to magic and averse to every-
thing that interposes even with the offer of aid between
man and his Maker. We see him advancing with halting
steps towards clear views in these matters and to watch him is
an occupation of profound interest.

7. Tukaram No Reformer

Great caution is to be observed in reading him and drawing
conclusions. Our uncertainty about the text prevents us from
being sure on many individual points affecting his attitude to the
Hinduism of his time. Since we know nothing of the chronological
order of the poems we must avoid drawing conclusions as to the
development of his views. It is always possible that he kept to the
last some sympathy with ideas really hostile to his own and even
expressed it.

We should greatly misconceive Tukaram if we thought of him
as a reformer setting out to attack abuses. He is primarily a
servant of Vithoba, whose object is to sing his master's praises.
It is only by accident that he is led into conflict with other people's
creeds or religious practices : ' You need not abandon your own
order of life or the pious ways which have grown up in your own
family' (1172).

Certainly there are things which he does attack. First,
pretences of magical power : ' To procure intelligence of past,
present or future is an achievement of worthless people' (1163).
Then all sakta worship. Also the worship of various greedy
menacing deities. Some of these gods are denounced as stone
gods : ' ' They offer vows to their stone gods ' (3566). But a passage

' S. r. C, chap. 6, pp. 148-153.
* See further, chap. 8, II, 4.

VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 161

of this type must not be mistaken for a denunciation of idolatry.
Tukaram only means that the images of these people not being
consecrated by the needful faith remain but stone.

Wntmg of Tukaram and other Maratha hhaktas the late
Rev, N. V. Tilak said: 'They are considered as Hindu religious
reformers by some, but in my humble opinion they were sages who
had hardly any idea of reforming Hinduism on national lines, but
who had lofty visions, were personally true to them, enjoyed them,
tenaciously treasured them and thus became examples and gurt,s
to their co-religionists. They caused a powerful religious revival
among the Hindus, and thus gave Hinduism a new impetus which
preserved it from the fearful downfall which was anticipated in those
days.'

Prof. Patwardhan has attempted to show that this feature,
what we may call, for want of a better term, Tukaram's 'easy-going
tolerance,' is characteristic both of the spirit of bhakti and of the
Maratha people. 'The fact is,' he says, 'that the saints of the
bhakti school were of a pacific turn of mind and did not love con-
troversy or contest. I may go still further and say that is the frame
of mind of Maharashtra. The people of Maharashtra are imbued
with the spirit of conciliation, of quiet resignation and catholic
toleration. A sense of the inherent defectiveness of human
reasoning, of all human systems, be they of government, of religion,
of morality, or any other, is ingrained in the blood, and hence
the militant dogmatism and the furious fanaticism that stir and
make or mar other races or other peoples have been generally
conspicuous by absence m Maharashtra. We Marathas would
mind our own business, and would not quarrel with our neighbour.
Let him be a Parsi, a Muhammadan, a Jain, a merchant, a tailor, a
government officer, a fciklr, a Siidhu, or a Sanyasi, we would
let him pursue his line unmolested as long as he does not molest us.
We lack the conviction that we alone are in the right and all the
rest of the world in the wrong. Consequently we are very rarely
fired with the fury of the fanatic. Being the eloquent embodiment of
the peace-loving spirit of Maharashtra, the saints of the bhakti school
have always been eager to reconcile the conflicting .systems ....
Their principle was the principle of conciliation.' ' And again : 'The
bhakti school neither started as a revolt against nor aimed at the
demolition of any established system. It has been the special
feature of all Indian movements in the past — and especially of
Maratha movements — that they assimilated more than discarded.
They disarmed opposition and contest by assimilation. It may be
that India and Maharashtra have had to suffer in the struggle for
existence and for supremacy among the nations of the world, for
want of that militant spirit and self-assertive energy.' ^

' F, C. M., February 1919, p. 142.
*/6»rf,Jnlyl919, pp. 33-4.

21

162 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

8. Tukaram and Caste

We need all the illumination we can derive from Prof. Patwar-
dhan's exposition of the Mabarashtrian spirit of toleration in order
to understand Tukaram's attitude on caste. It is a principle
fundamental with Tukaram that God does not consider a man's
caste, that all worshippers are equally dear to Him, and yet we find
Tukaram doing practically nothing to enforce this far-reaching
principle. Some of his predecessors among the bhaktas had uttered
nohle words against caste. This had been the message of Eknath,
a De^asth Brahman who a generation before Tukaram's day had
been out-casted, his poems being thrown into the river Godaveri
because he would persist in ignoring caste-distinction and in
recognizing the 'luxuriant foliage of devotion to the Highest'
wherever it might be found.' ^ On this matter we have some of the
loftiest utterances m Tukaram's poems : ' Our Lord knows nothing
of high or low birth ; he stops wherever he sees devotion and
faith . . . Blessed is his story '(207 7) — the whole of this remarkable
abhafig should be studied. Many other similarly high utterances
on this subject have we from our poet-saint : ' Consider him as a
Brahman, vile though his birth may be, who utteis correctly the
name of Rama Krisna ' (266) ; ' a Vaishnava is one who loves God
alone, his caste may be anything at all ' (942). Abhaftg 4297 in the
Indu PrakUsh edition, too long for quotation, is specially worthy
of study .with its long list of ' people of the lowest castes who have
been saved ', including Mahars like Cokhamela, and ' of whom even
the Puranas became the bards '.

' His name belongs to no race or creed or caste ; all are free to
utter it ' (1744) ; ' Tuka has nothing to do with a man's caste ; he who
utters the Name is truly blest ' (2395). In this group of sayings we
have the plain assertion that the worship of Vithoba is open to any-
one and that devotion is equally welcome to Vithoba from whatever
human being it proceeds. The question then naturally arises
whether Tukaram drew the practical inference that the observance
of caste should be abolished. One or two abhafigs seem to show
that he was moving in this direction : ' I find the whole world
peopled with relatives, I see nothing to cause contamination of man
by man' (832) ; ' is the world divided intp parts to hold the various
castes ? ' (945) * We think 6ot of times or seasons or of any man's
caste' (2259).

We must however be cautious how we draw any extended in-
ference from these sayings, which are few compared with the mass
of the poems, and there is nothing in Tukaram's biography to
suggest that he appeared as one who took any strong line against

> See p. 39 for Eknsth's disregard of caste m everyday life.

VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 163

caste. In practice most probably he acquiesced in it, relaxing its
rules only so far as to permit all worshippers of the upper castes to
mix freely in the gatherings on the shore of the Bhima. He appears
to have seen without protest the 'untouchables' excluded, as they
still are, from the temple ; and probably it never entered his head
that there was anything open to criticism in the ordinary treatment
of the 'pariah' classes.

Sometimes the fact that Tukaram had his daughters married to
men of their own caste* is adduced as proof that he observed caste
practices. This incident, however, is probably to be viewed m the
same light as the custom prevalent among people in the West
according to which they generally prefer relatives to marry those of
their own social rank or station. Similarly, the Prarthana Samaj,
whose aim is to abolish caste and idolatry, though but gradually
as we have seen above (pp. 153-4), and one of whose chief tenets
IS that all men and women are children of the one Supreme God,
yet marry their children within their own caste.'-'

There appears, however, no cause to doubt thai Tukaram
accepted caste as an institution of the Hindu world and that hq
looked upon it as an inevitable part of India's social organization.
The only way in which it might have troubled him was that it
prevented humble men from embracing Vithoba's feet and that some
of his worshippers were denied the comfort and satisfaction granted
to others. One feels that Tukaram was called upon to demand the
right of admission to the temple for all worshippers alike. That he
did not do so, and that many were denied this common right in a
temple of religion, seems to be overlooked by Prof. Patwardhan
when he says : 'There is no bar here in this land of bhakii. Here
all are admitted, all have aright to enter. Love of God and service
of God, hence service of man, are their birthright. Everyone, man,
woman, child, rich and poor, Brahman and non-Brahman, is a privi-
leged heir to this sweet legacy. It is the most romantic democracy.'^
Romantic, true, but what of Cokhameja, cast out of the temple at
Pa^dharpQr when he had crossed its threshold moved as he claimed
by a divine impulse ? We have already shown how the treatment
meted out to this Mahar saint and poet bears on the question of
caste prejudice : see the section entitled ' Vithoba and Caste Distinc-
tion', pages 54-5 in chapter 3. In addition to what is stated there,
reference may be made to Mahipati's beautiful poem on Cokha-
mela's persecution by the high castes after he had left his native
place at Anagod near Paydharpxir and, grateful for Vithoba's help
m his Mahar duty of dragging a dead cow, had taken up his abode
in the sacred city itself. Refused entrance into the central shrine

I See p. 94.

'■' Dr. P R Bhandarliar.iVirpajiMjja, March 1921, p, 152.
3 F. CM. vol. IX, No. IV, Feb. 1919, p, 14i ; .see also our own sec: 20.
Chapter !•

16-1 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

by the Brahmans, Cokhameja retorted in moving words translated
by Mr. C A. Kincaid thus :

Base though I be, no evil have I done

Him m whose eyes all castes and creeds are one ;

and he reminded his high caste persecutors of an even deeper
principle :

Bat if He finds no temple m your heart,
Close to His shrme, you yet are far apart.

Many years after Cokhameja's death, from the crashing down of an
unfinished wall he was building with other Mahars, a divine direction
came to the tailor-poet Namdev to collect Cokhameja's bones
and take them to Pa^dharpur where opposite Namdev's staircase
leading up into Vithoba's temple, on the opposite side of the
street, Cokhamela's tomb was erected. Here in Tukaram's day,
as m our own, the untouchable Mahars offered their worship to
Vishnu, worship which Vithoba is represented as accepting, for
Tukaram clearly states : 'God does not feel ashamed to help anyone;
He seeks to comfort people of all conditions'. Such cosmopolitan
teaching it was that, despite the glaring contradiction of it presen-
ted by the persecution of out-castes like Cokhameja, welded the
Marathas into a nation as is affirmed at the close of chapter 1.'
Hence it comes about that Tukaram can claim, in an abhaiig left
untranslated by Fraser and Marathe : 'I have been to JBenares,
Gaya and Dwarka, but they cannot be compared with Paiidhari.
At Pai?dhari no one is proud and people fall at each other's f eet.'"^
This last mentioned practice is still in vogue among the Warkans
without any distinction of caste; see page 171 below.

When, however, the fullest possible weight has been given to all
the considerations in this and the preceding section, this must
needs be said concerning the absence of any effective protest by
Tukaram against caste, that a unique opportunity was surely missed
when a man of his convictions and mduence failed to demand
for every worshipper the right and privilege of admission to
Vithoba's temple, and when he failed to realize the national evil of
caste as a thorough-going reformer would have done. ' In personal
inward religion Tukaram was democratic enough but he was too
much of the " mild Hindii " to fight the battle of religious rights
and privileges'." He had practically the same freedom-loving
instincts as his far-off contemporary the Enghsh Milton, but training.

See Ishtur Phakde by C. A. Kincaid, especially chaps. V, ' An Un-
touchable Saint . CokhSmela', and VI, ' The Saints of Pandharpur : The Daw-n
of Maratha Power'.

2 Abhaiig No 2488, / P. edition, 1728 in Joga, where the comment should
be noted,

3 This sentence we have taken from our art. Tukaram, E. R. E. Vol. 12

VI ATTITUDE TO CONVENTIONAL HINDUISM 165

environment, and religious system were all against him. There-
fore to call Tukaram a 'revolutionist' as does M. M. Kunte^ is to
misunderstand him.

Whether, therefore, Tukaram's mild teaching against caste
lapsed through lack of courage or of conviction or of inspiration, we
see one consequence m the paradox with which the bhakti school
presents us. While this movement stirred the soul of an emotional
people, and while its leaders sought to abolish the priestly caste, to
substitute heart-religion for ceremonia} formalism, and to make the
worship of God open to all irrespective of caste, the historian's
verdict is that ' the movement had little real effect upon Indian
life and to this day, Brahmans who recite with admiration the
verses of Tukaram hold jealously to caste-distinctions '.*

p. Ambiguity and Self-Contradiction

Impartial study of Tukaram's poems yields the inevitable con-
clusion that his spirit of compromise, ambiguity of expression, and
lack of reforming zeal arise from what must be described as a lack
of religious certainty, and from what Westerners cannot but regard
as acquiescence in mutually exclusive principles. Both these points
are characteristic not only of Tukaram but of most other Indian
sages. They certainly explain much of the self-contradictonness
of Tukaram which meets us on almost every page.

In one abhang he will address his god in the most endearing
terms, in another upbraid him with the harshest epithets imagin-
able ; on one page he will condemn idol-worship unspatingly, on
another approve it. And so we might go on compiling a list of
ambiguities, many of them affecting fundamentals. We are com-
pelled to fall back finally on Sir Alexander Grant's conclusion" that
Tukaram ' is never really philosophical — only always moral and
devout'.

Narayan Vaman Tilak, the late Christian poet» wrote eight
abhangs ^ m which this feature of Tukaram's self-contradictoriness
was well brought out. Seldom baa Tukaram been extolled in
warmer terms than by this Christian hhakia whose ' rank as a poet
is very high ' and who has been sometimes called the ' Rabindranath
Tagore of Western India'"'"' as said Mr. N. 0. Kelkar, editor of
the Kesari. But the praise is discriminating. After pointing out
that anyone who fails to recognise Tukaram as the very home of
spiritual devotion is void of all sense of appreciation, he says
Tukaram must be acknowledged as a king among Indian saints, but

' Vtoissttudes of Aryan Civihsafion in India, pp. 279, 595.

2 The Times of India, Oct 8, 1919.

3 Fortnightly Review, Jan. 1867.

4 Dnydnodaya, May 24. 1917.
S/. /.April, 1915.

166 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

also as a seeker often given to self-contradiction. Now he views
God as mabsp (father and mother) and lord, now as man's oppo-
neijt ; now God is personal, now impersonal ; now He is the embodi-
ment of sagacity, now a simpleton. The chief defect of Tukaram,
says this appreciative critic, is that of moulding God according to
his own changing ideas, instead of letting God mould the
ideas. So at one time Tukaram appears as an idolater, while at
another he is angry with the very notion. Is then Tukaram hypo-
critical? A thousand times no. He is merely inconsistent and
self-contradictory. In one mood he says : * Had the good God not
made me a humble peasant I bad been swallowed up of pride' ; in
another he declares that ' a Brahman is superior m the three worlds
though he fails in duty'. In his speech there is no consistency—
the opinion prevailing with him to-day is just as true as will be its
opposite on the morrow. Despite it all, Tukaram is true-hearted
and devoted— let none doubt that. One day he may be— indeed he is
— a dvaitist, the next day an odvatHst, a^d then the third day he is
found haltmg between the two. Nevertheless, the Christian
poet solemnly declares that he will persist in regarding 'all India's
saints as so many Providential boons and divinely ordained paths
to God,' and to the saint of Dehu he owes a specially sacred
obligation . see chapter 10, section 3.

Therefore, though Tukaram far too often speaks with two
voices regarding the Hinduism of his day, he has nevertheless come
to wield among his people an influence of an altogether unique
kind. This influence, and the position it seems to mark out for
him in India's religious history, we are to examine in our next
chapter.

BY FAITH ALONE'

In God, m God — forget him not ' —

Do thou thy refuge find.
Let every other plan or plot

Go •with the wind '

Why toil for nought' Wake, wake from sleep
By learnmg's load weighed down,

Thou m the world's abysses deep
Art like to drown.

O, flee from thence. Only by faith

Can&t thou to God attain.
And all thy knowledge, Tuk3 saith,

Will prove m vain.

A STEADFAST MIND *

Honour, dishonour that men may pay.
Bundle them up and throw them away.

Where there is ever a steadfast mmd.
There thou the vision of God shalt find.

Whereso the fountains of peace abide,
Stayed is the passage of time and tide.

Calm thou the impulse that stirs thy breast ;
Surely, says Tuka, a saaall request.

THE DEDICATED LIFE *

Ah, wherefore fast or wherefore go

To solitude apart '
Whether thou joy or sorrow know

Have God withm thy heart.

If m his mother's arms he be

The child knows nought amiss.
Cast out, yea, cast out utterly

All other thought than this.

Love not the world nor yet forsake

Its gifts in fear and hate.
Thy life to God an offering make

And to him dedicate.

Nay, Tuka says, ask not again.

Waking old doubts anew.
Whatever else is taught by men,

None other word is true.

♦ Translated from TukarSm, P. M. S., pp. 83-4.

Chapter VII

Tokaram's Permanent Place and Influence
I. His Inflnence Among his Conntrymen

This obviously is a subject on which foreigners must express
themselves with caution and what we offer here are personal
impressions based on reading and observation.

I. His Popularity with Peasants

Tukaram is best known among the twenty million peasant
people of Western India. His language, difficult even to a
Deccan Hindu, would seldom be intelligible to readers from other
parts of India. In the Deccan he is exceedingly well known to
the peasantry. Almost all of them know a few sayings or lines
from his abhaiigs and many know much more. There are some
who commit many of them to memory. Amongst these classes
the pilgrimage to Pandharpur is often undertaken, some devotees
being such as retire from worldly life and spend a great part of
their time in pilgrimage between the holy places associated with
Tukaram and Vithoba — L'ehu, Slandi and Paij^lharpur. The
influence of these devotees of Tukaram, who bear the name of
WarkarJ, and who include both men and women, has probably
been the chief factor in the popularizing of the Dehu bhakh poet.
That a grocer, one of the despised Sudra caste, should have been
accepted as a religious guide in the face of Brahman pretensions,
helps to explain his becoming literally the idol of the people's
devotion and his being worshipped to-day all over the Deccan as
an ' incarnation ' of the divine. When we remember, too, that the
cosmopolitanism of Vithoba's worship referred to in chapter 3,
section 9,' which makes it so acceptable to the masses, finds remark-
able expression in ' the WilrkarT preachings of equality', we have
sufficient explanation of Tukarum's unique position in the religious
life of Western India. That these WSrkarJ teachings find willing
hearers everywhere is m no .way smprising, in view on the one
hand of the history of Bruhmanism, and on the other ot the fact
that the Marathas of the Deccan, ever since the golden age of
6ivaji, have always manifested a hankering after equality with
the highest of their countrymen. This democratizing enthusiasm

' See pp. 54-55 and chap. 6, seet, 8, pp. 163-5 for the sad exception of the
' untouchables '.

22

170 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

and disregard of caste,' partial and defective though it was, provided
'a valuable counterpoise to Brahman domineering' after Sivaji's
death, in the century of Biahman rule (1714-1818) which was
probably ' the only lime during the last two thousand years when
Brahmans ' united political and rehgious power in the Deccan.'"
No wonder then ths.t th&bhaktt poets enjoy such popularity among
the Deccan peasantry, especially Tukaram the greatest of them,
who has been so devotedly preached by the sect of the
Warkarts.

2. ' Warkaris ' and the Reli£:ion of Maharashtra

Who are these Warkaris, the most devoted of Tukaram 's
followers ? And what are the principles which have enabled them
up to the present hour to provide Maharashtra with an effective
offset to Brahman exclusiveness ? Their name Wffrkart means
literally ' time-keepers ' and indicates simply their habit of
travelling regularly on pilgrimage between the places named in
■the preceding paragraph. A few of them know no less than four
thousand of Tukaram's abhangs by heart, a statement which
may stagger Western readers but which can be substantiated.
The sect is said to have been founded by Dnyaneshwar m the
13th century and consolidated, either by Tukaram himself or
by his immediate followers m the 17th, " but the whole subject
calls for careful investigation. They are divided into several
groups or schools, each of which has its acknowledged head.
For an account of them m English which is reliable as far as
it goes, though it needs supplementing in important particulars.
The Bombay Gazetteer (vol. xx. pp. 471-3) should be read,
while those able to read Marathi should not fail to master
chapter 5 given up to this sect in the Marathi Life of Tuka-
ram by Mr. L. R. Pangarkar, himself a present-day Brahman and
a respected leader of the Watkari sect, a chapter let us add whose
information needs confirmin g in som e particulars by other authorities."

So simple and catholic are the beliefs of the Warkaris or ' time-
keeping pilgrims ' that most of their number are drawn from the
lower classes of the people, while some members are even Moham-
medans. Each WSrkart must travel to Paig^harpur so as to be
gresent on the great ekadashi' days, which are the 'elevenths' of
Ashadh (June or July) ° and Keirtik (October or November), and for
such other ekadasht days or ' monthly elevenths ' as are technically

I See last three sections of chap. I.

'■' B. G., vol. XX, p. 473.

^B.G. vol. XX, p. 471

i See Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Navayuga, March 1921, pp. 149, ICS,

" For definition of ekadashJ see p. 56, sect. 10, last two hnes.

1 See pp. 48-9, 62-3,

BABURAO HAUI DEVADIKAR OF PANDIUFPUR A BUND
'hARIDAS' f preacher) and 'WARKARl' WHO KNOWS

Vn HIS INFLUENCE AMONG HIS COUNTRYMEN 1^1

called VSrfs (periodical pilgrimages). From the known attendance
of pilgrims at the annual festivals (&ee page 48), and from the fact
that other followers of Tukaram go up to Pa^dharpur for this pur-
pose, it may be inferred that the WarkarTs cannot exceed 100,000
even if they reach that number, but certainty is impossible. All the
members are on an unusually equal footing and anyone, man or
woman, anxious to become a WSrkan may do so by merely indicating
his or her wish to the head of the sect he or she desires to join.
While ehadashl days are regarded as the luckiest, a person may
join at any time by bringing a rosary or necklace of basil or tiiUl
beads and an ochre-coloured swallow-tailed banner. The leader
then bids the candidate lay the rosary upon Dnyane&hwar's com-
mentary on the Bhagvadgitil named the DnySneshwat7 kept in a
niche of every Wiirkari monastery. Taking back the rosary the
candidate then puts it round his or her own neck and falls at the
feet of the leader by way of salutation who returns, the salutation
in the same way whatever be the caste of either party — an unusual
feature m Hinduism. The candidate is told regularly to visit
Pandharpur on the ekadashl days, ttie rule is urged that no WUr-
kari can serve two masters, since Vithoba cannot tolerate worldly
rivalries, and the principle is enunciated that to serve Vithoba
well a Witrkari should remain poor, seeing Vithoba dwells
chiefly with the poor and lowly. The only books a Witrkari is .
expected to read besides the GrtO. and Blidgawat are the follow-
ing ten, all being works of the four great Maratha bhaktas : Dnya-
neshwar's D/jycfMt's/jwtrri, his Ahhuitgs and AmritUimhhav; Ek-
nath's Bhclgwat, Abhaii^s, BhUviirih Riimciyan, Rukmini Svcly'
amvar, and Hasfitmalak ; Namdev's Ablmngs ; and Tukiiram's
Abhangs. Other ' saints ' are regarded s.", less important and their
writings aio not quoted. Of the tour great bluiktcis a traditional
interpretation is preserved among the Wilrkarls who will produce
It if requested, but it is often uncritical and unsatisfactory in
obscure passages. A .step in advance was taken by the late
Mr. Joga, head of one of the Witrkari schools, when he produced a
large commentary on Tukaram's Oilthit, and it was highly fitting
that his remains were buried at Aland! near the samildhi of
Dnyaneshwar.

If the chapter on the Warkarls by Mr. L. R. Pangarkar may
be trusted as free from the over-statement due to the special
pleading of a case, then they are to be considered the chief
repositaries of the Bhagavata Religion of Maharashtra (on which
see page 27). He sets forth their tenets under 15 separate heads :'
(l) Their chief object of worship is Vithoba, though the formless
Brahma and his manifestations under various forms are regarded as
one and indivisible, all the avatilras of Vishnu being accepted (see
chap. 2, sects. 3-4), especially Rama and Krisija. (2) Their

' See S. T. C, pp, 113-5,

172 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM dH.

authoritative Sacred Books are the Bhagavadgftaznd the BhSgwat,
the two chief scriptures of the Bbagavata Religion, along with the
others already indicated. (3) Their Ideal or Goal is that of
becoming one with God, by deep devotion to a God regarded as
Personal, thus ultimately realizing unity in diversity. (4-) Their
chief Methods for attaining the Goal are the nine forms of devotion —
sravana (hearing), kirtans (praise), SOTarana (meditation), j^^dase-
vaiia (worshipping the feet), arcana (worshipping an image),
wandana (salutation), dasya (attendance), sakhya (friendship), and
atinanivedana (communion), with special emphasis on smarana,
remembering or repeating the name of God, aadoaklrtans performed
disinterestedly. (5) Their chief Mantra being Rama-Kn^na-Hari,
all the thousand names of Visb^u are worthy of remembrance.
(5) Their Bhakta-RHj (exemplars for all devotees) are Pundalika,
Garud and Hanumant. (7) Their great Pioneer is Shankar, there
being no distinction between Han and Hara, i,e., Vishnu and Siva,
a characteristic Doctrine of the Bhagavata Religion (see pp. 27,
156-8). (8) Their chief ' Saints ' are ancient ones like Narad and
Pralhad,^ and modern ones like Dnyaneshwar, Sopan,'' Muktabai, '
Eknath, Namdev and Tukaram. (9) Their Doctrine is that by
remembrance of the ''Saints' comes salvation just as it comes by
rsmembering the names of gods, m line with the principle that ' the
gods are saints and the saints are gods'. (lO) Their objects of
Veneration are 'Saints', Cows, Brahmans, Guests and the Tit/sj
plant. (11) Their chief Observances are — ekadasM for Vishnu
and each Monday for Siva; pilgrimage to Pa^idharpur duimg
AshUdh and KSrttk being essential save under exceptional circum-
stances, and even then at least one visit must be paid ; the MahS'
$tvrSfra (the gieat night in the Hindu year devoted to worship of
Siva) also being essential. (12) Their chief Holy Places are the
river Chandrabhaga and the town of Pandharpur, Trimbakeshwar
near Naiik, Alandi, Paithan, Saswad, Dehu, these being viewed as
sacred because of ' Saints ' who hved there ; the Ganges, Jumna
and Godaveri as sacred rivers; and Benares, Dwarka and Jagannath
as pilgrim centres. (13) Their Prohibitions are — another's wife, an-
other's wealth, speaking ill of others, also the use of flesh and wine;
ahimsS is obligatory under all circumstances, the taking of any life
being utterly forbidden at all times and in all places. (14) Their
Rules of Conduct are all caste, sub-caste and family observances,
with performance of duty according to life's four stages,* all rites
and duties to be performed with a view to pleasing the Unseen.
(15) Their Vow is that of Benevolence, based on the principle that

' On these two see F and M., vol. I p 408,

' Brother of Dnyaneshwar.

* Sister of Dnyaneshwar.

^ Branthacarya (unmarried hfe of a student), gnhasihasrama (life of a
householder), vanaprastha (the life of meditation or of preparation for the
ascetic stage), sanySsa (abandonment of the world).

VII HIS INFLUENCE AMONG HIS COUNTRYMEN 173

the Divine is present in all beings, that every man we meet is God
Himself; therefore to help every man is to do the service of
God.'

3. Popular Kirtans and Kathas

Acknowledged authorities on Tukaram and his views serve the
cause by holding kit tans at Pandharpur and other places for the
exposition of his principles, both to praise the god and to explain
the poet's lines. Special kirtans or kathas " are held on the famous
shore of the Bhima and they may best be seen and their effect
appreciated at this spot. The arrangements are simple. An
awning is spread on bamboo poles suiBciently large to shelter
perhaps a thousand people sitting closely together on the ground.
A narrow circle is left empty for the klrtaiikar or lender of the
service who stands there waiting for the gathering to compose
Itself into a reverent attitude before he begins. As they enter, the
more devout of the vibitors make their way into his presence and
fall down and embrace his feet — whatever be his caste, whatever be
theirs — setting apart the recognized ' untouchables ' : this is per-
mitted or even enjoined.

Round the klrtankcfr stand a small group with little cymbals m
their hands who are ready to support him by taking up the refrain
when he quotes any well-known poem. Anyone who feels inclined
may join their number. The performance may begin at any hour
but as a rule it occupies the night, starting say about eight and going
on sometimes till dawn. It begins with a few well known lines of
invocation and then proceeds with exhortation to a devout life,
interrupted by illustrations of God's dealing with men drawn from
the well-known punl/jic stories which Tukaram sometimes introdu-
ces. As far as a foreigner can ]udge or conjecture these addre.sses
appear, to be always on well known lines. They contain no study
of Tukaram's character, no discussion of doubtful points and no
interpretation of obscurities. They are straightforward exhorta-
tions to praise and trust Vithobfi whose incarnation on the brick
stands before them as a proof of his unwavering goodwill to
men.

Marathi-knowing readers will do well to supplement this section
and section 9 in chapter 1 (page 1 0) by reading Mr. L. R. Pangiir-
kar's pages (123-8) on the subject.

1 In view of the above tenets it is perhaps not surprising that the WarJ^aiTs
are sometimes criticized for not helping on the nationahstic spirit of Maha-
rashtra as the somewhat similar sect of the RSmaiUrsls — devotees of Ramdas —
are supposed to have done The Wdrkar'is, nevertheless, are not w/ithont
their modern defenders ^see JJr. P. K. Bhandarlar, Ncivaytiga, March 1921,
p. 16Sk)

" See sect 9, chap. 1.

174 LIFE AND TEACHING OP TUKARAM CH.

4. Tukaram and Indian Pessimism

It IS not unlikely that much stress is laid by Mrtank^rs on those
poems in which Tukaram speaks of the unreality of the world and
the path of escape from it. Hindu sentiment always moves in this
direction, just as clouds which appear stationary in the sky are
nevertheless always falling. It by no means follows that Tukaram
succumbed to this impulse himself but his followers seem to prefer
the lines written under its influence. And some of his admirers are
ready to place him among the thorough-going advatta philosophers,
to whom the deep-seated unreality of the world is the most profound
of spiritual truths. Enough is said elsewhere m this book — see
chapter 8, Part II — to show that this may be an imperfect view of
Tukarara's teaching, but it certainly is one which some of his
admirers support.

These admirers are to be found among Brahman pundits. It is
somewhat of a mystery why men of this class are always such
ardent friends of the pessimist view. Perhaps it is the view which
comes nearest to suiting the requirements of the systematizing
temper which seems to be the Hindu temper m things intellectual.
Certainly many obscure questions of human nature and of Hindu
psychology are involved. It is easy to understand why the country
people of the Deccan like to listen to those poems of Tukaram that
deal with the darker side of things. The Deccan as elsewhere
stated has its pleasant aspects but as one goes into the interior it
grows very dry, very stony and very unpropitiousto the agricultura-
list (see pages 1,9). When bad seasons predominate as they hare
done sometimes for years together, though much less now than
formerly owing to British irrigation, life is one long dreary struggle.
Crops are sown that never yield return. Harvests are gathered
that permit the maintenance of life to the next scanty harvest only
with the most penurious management.' The water is scanty and
bad, overhead there is always the scorching unpitying sun and on
earth nothing to relieve the weary eye or take the thoughts
pleasantly away from the struggle for existence. And it is easy to
see that times of this kind are not good for human relations. They
encourage parsimony, even dishonesty, m the bazar and check
generous impulses. The whole round of life becomes m every way
a trial to be borne and the pleasantest thing you can hear about it
IS that it will some day pass out of existence.

Such reflections will certainly rise on the mind at the sight of
the crowds that assemble on the pebbly bank at Pandharpur,
especially if they are seen at the close of a long period of hard
years. The battered features of the people tell unmistakably of

' ' In the terrible DiiygS Dcvd famine cf 1396-1408, no rain at all fell for
twelve whole years, and tor two decades the land was a desert,' H. G. Rawlm-
son, Shivajl the Marafha, p. 14.

VII HIS INFLUENCE AMONG HIS COUNTRYMEN 175

want and toil. Clearly what they come to Pa^idhari to enjoy — if
you were to ask them — is the thought of a gracious Being whose
love IS not like the seasons, capricious and unaccountable, but
eternal and inexhaustible, nor like the small measure of grain
bought after long haggling in the bazar, scanty and grudgingly
doled out, but free and abundant. As this assurance steals on their
minds they pass into ecstasy, and the outpouring of song and joy
that fills the night at a Han-klrtan provides a demonstration that
only deep religious passion can evoke. Whether this is rightly^ or
wrongly based is not just now before us. That the ecstasy is there
is unquestionable, and the worshipper puts away from him, at least
for the time, the throng of cares and duties, and the world recedes
into the far distance. It is most likely, however, if only we could
find out, that life as a whole for the Deccan millions is one of blai:k
pessimism and that the incessant struggle with poverty and with
other ills compels the vast majority to take the dark view of life
just as some mterpreteis of Tukaram do. We cannot say how far
this pessimistic impulse is influenced in saner, quieter hours by a
truer estimate of Tukaram's teaching, That would require a
knowledge of the Hindu people which foreigners do not possess.
But we may surmise that Indian pessimism in Maharashtra as
elsewhere is ' environmental, temperamental and speculative ' and
has become quite stereotyped and conventional.^ It would be a
service to the present generation to induce the Marfilhfi people to
see that in this aspect their favourite is not seen at his tiue.st and
his best.'

5. Tukaram and the Prarthana Samaj

The poems of Tukaram have been largely used by the Piarthana
Samaj of Western India both for private reading and for public
worship. The Samaj is a body whose views with certain essential
differences resemble those of the Brahmo Samaj m Bengal. Its
members' list, howevei, is much smaller in number, though includ-
ing a few' distinguished men who may be said to possess wide
influence on the political and religious life of India. The student
of developments finds it interesting therefore to note that such a
body has given prominent place to Tukaram in its religious litera-
ture. They hold that Tukaram'b spiritual experience is genuine
and that the same experience is accessible to each devout wor-
shipper of God. "" An informing lecture on the relation between
Tukaram and the Prarthana Samaj may be found in that ' unique
Marathi book,' Religious Writings and Scrmotis, (the latest edition

1 H. D. Griswold, iS. K.U., Art, ' I'essimism (Indian)', Vol. 9, p. 813.
* For another 'antidote to Indian I'essiinism ' see The Holy Spirit the
Christian Dynamic, p. 29i.

3 JS. R. E. Art, Prarthana Santa], Vol. 0, pp. 151-2.

176 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

of which was published in 1919) by Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, ' an
attempt to purge the existing Hindu religion of its accumulated
dross of superstitions and to impart to it its pristine purity'.^ The
following paragraph summarizes Sir Ramkrishna's Marathi narra-
tive of facts on pages 505-513 of his book.

Founded in 1867, it was not until more than two years later that
the Prarthana Samaj began the devotional use of Tukaram, the
first occasion being some annual festival when four or five of his
abhaiigs were printed on a hymn-sheet to the great delight of those
present. Thus far religion had been viewed by the Prarthana
Samajist as an intellectual and philosophical matter, but the
influence of Tukaram meant the spiritualizing and individualizing
of religion. The Samaj had had no hymn-book worthy of the
name but now a hymn-book was produced largely of Tukaram's
verse. In each succeeding edition more and more of Tukaram's
aspirations have been embodied, until m the present edition, the
ninth, there are no less than 550 of his abhangs. The monotheism
of the Samaj ' had strictly limited the number of Tukaram's
abhangs in the first three or four editions, his usual terms of
Vithoba, Pa^durang, Keshav, etc., being inadmissible to ekeSwarJs
(worshippers of one God). The difficulty has, however, been over-
come by these names being changed to ' God ', ' Han ', ' Narayana,'
etc. Besides providing assemblies of the Samaj with material for
their songs, Tukaram began to supply their preachers with themes
for their sermons and a verse of his, as often as not, is given out
as the text in much the same way as Christian preachers take a text
out of the Bible. It has been Tukaram's insistence on faith in God,
on heart-devotion, on the necessity of minute self-exammation, and
on prayer, that has won for him this exalted place, despite changing
times and customs. That Tukaram has become so great a factor
in the life of the Prarthana Samaj, some of whose members are
among the leading social reformers m India, illustrates the extent
of Tukaram's influence in the India of the twentieth century.

If we remember, too, that many of his verses are household
words among the twenty millions of the Marathi-speaking popula-
tion, the grocer who failed in business at Dehu may 'be said to
occupy a unique position among his countrymen. Probably there
is an element of truth m such criticisms as Father Nehemiah Goreh '
a generation ago, and the Rev. G. R. Navalkar m more recent years
(see page 179 below) expressed, that the Prarthana Samaj has
sometimes put Tukaram in too exalted a place, reading a lofty theism
into abhangs which have either been interpolated or have been
interpreted in light of later Christian knowledge. Against all such
' false scents ' the honest expositor must ever be on his guard.

J Prof. G. E. Bhate, Indian Social Reformer, Sept. 14, 1919

2 On the attitude of the Prarthana Samaj to idols, see pp. 150, 153-4.

3 The Tenets of Tukaram, pp. 1-4.

II HIS INFLUENCE AMONG HIS COUNTRYMEN 177
6. Tukaram's Usefulness for Religious Exercises

It is of more than passing interest to note to what elements in
Tukaram's poems his present-day followers attach most importance.
We are enabled to do this by the seventy-six ahhafigs translated
by Dr. Macnicol in his Psalms ofMaratha Saints, for most of these
were supplied by Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar, as a list of those
which he himself uses daily in his own personal rehgious exercises.
' To anyone who knows Sir Ramkrishna Bhandarkar as not only a
great oriental scholar, but the outstanding representative in India
to-day of the ancient school of hliahti, the fact that these psalms
minister nourishment to a spiritual life so beautiful and so sincere
is in itself suiBcient testimony to their religious value.** A similar
list of about forty abhangs 'which the ideas of the Prarthana
Samaj would select as most valuable from a devotional point of
view' was kindly supplied for the purposes of this^ present work by
Sir Narayan Chandavarkar whose letter' stated : ' I have selected
these because ever since I joined the Samaj in 1882 I have heard
them more often than any other abliangs chosen for prayer and
sermon.'

One of the most interesting features in recent years of the
MarathI portion of the weekly Subodh PairikH, organ of the
Bombay Prarthana Samaj, has been a series of articles expounding
the more devotional abhangs appearing in the Prarthana Samaj
hymn-book referred to above. Some of these MarathI expositions
of Tukaram, as also a few by Sir Nnrfiyan Chandavarkar in his
published (Ergl'sh) Speeches and Writings, and particularly the
Maratbi work containing Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar's Reltgiotts
Writings and Sermons, provide the student with some of the
richest devotional reading we know. Doubtless a deeper meaning is
imported into some of Tukaritm's seventeenth century terms than
they would then have yielded, possibly even theistic interpretations
may be foisted on to language originally idolatrous. Nevertheless,
though these expositions may occasionally reveal historical
anachronisms, their value in purging the Hinduism of Maharashtra
from Its grosser and more debasing elements cannot be estimated,
aud it is such work as reformers of every religious creed should
heartily encourage.

7. Tukaram's Claim on Christian Missions

Tukaram makes a special claim on the Christian missionary
who is working among Tukaram's own people. The claim is that
Tukaram's verse shall be carefully studied. Some careful students

I PM.S., Preface, p, S.

' Found by me among the late J. Nelson Fraser's papers in March, 1918,
Sir Narayan 's letter being dated Jan. 21, 1910— J. F.g,

2,Z

178 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH

of India's religious literature hold that, along with TulsidSs, the
saint of Dehti represents India's closest approximation to Christian
truth and that a study of his poetry is the best possible introduction
to the treasury of Indian religious devotion. Tukaram may therefore
be regarded as a true index to the depth and nobility of those
religious aspirations the satisfying of which is the acknowledged
aim of Indian Christian missions. There are two reasons why the
foreigner should utilize all the available treasures of Indian religious
literature ; first, as supplying a most excellent means of bringing
about that union of the various races in India without which
British rule cannot achieve its ideals ; and second, because it is
through the avenues of a people's own literature and through sym-
pathetic study of its inner life that any people can best be
understood. Happily this duty is recognised to-day in Indian
missions more fully than ever. This was amply demonstrated by
a questionnaire sent out in preparation for the World Missionary
Conference of 1910. 'The replies, one and all, lay emphasis upon
the necessity that the missionary to Hindus should possess and not
merely assume, a sympathetic attitude towards India's most ancient
religion, ^hey emphasize, too, the need of prolonged and patient
study, in order that sympathy may be based upon knowledge and
may not be the child of emotion or imagination. . . . Even
when a missionary has got some hold on the intricacies of practical
Hinduism, in its mixture of philosophy and ceremonialism, in its
innumerable connections with almost every detail of human life, he
may still be an outsider if he has not mastered the third and most
essential part of his study, the religious hfe of the individual.
Below the strange forms and hardly intelligible language, lies life,
the spiritual life of human souls, needing God, seeking God, laying
hold of God, so far as they have found Him. Until we have at
least reached so far that under the ceremonies and doctrines we
have found the religious life of the people, and at least to some
extent have begun to understand this life, we do not know what
Hinduism really is, and we are missing the essential connection
with the people's religious life. . . . Nothing is more re-
markable than the agreement that the true method is that of
knowledge and charity, that the missionary should seek for the
nobler elements in the non-Christian religions and use them as
steps to higher things, that in fact all these religions without
exception disclose elemental needs of the human soul which
Christianity alone can satisfy, and that in their higher forms they
plainly manifest the working of the Spirit of God'.'^ For mission-
aries and Indian Christian leaders there could be no better
example of the 'religious life of the individual' within the pale of
Hinduism than Tukaram affords. That his is also the religious
life of one enshrined in the hearts of the people of Maharashtra

* The Mtsshnary Message, (1910), Vol. iv, pp. 171-2, 2C7,

Vti HIS PERMANENT PLACE IN RELIGION 179

further enhances his claim to be carefully studied by missionaries
and the Indian Church. On this subject Miss M. M. UnderhiU
(Oxford), a Z B.M.M., missionary m Western India since 1904,
reviewing the Psalms of the MarStha Samfs said: 'There is a
wealth of love and faith and devotion m these poems which ought
not to go unknown or disregarded by either the Indian Christian or
the European missionary. ... As a missionary from Western
India the reviewer would like to see some of these hymns used in
the worship of the Christian Church in India.' ' Not all would
approve of this last suggestion as readily as they would to the
further observation that the following verse by Tukaram better
expresses the feeling of an Indian Christian congregation than do
some of the English and American hymns in use at present.

The duty of the man of faith

Is trust and loyalty,
A purpose hid withm bis heart

That cannot movdd be.a

U. Tnkaram's Permanent Place in Religion

We shall attempt to indicate very briefly in this Part the
type of student who may expect to learn from Tukaram or obtain
through him religious edification. We do not here seek to evaluate
his religion : that will be done in the last chapter.

I. Erroneous Attempts to Classify Tukaram

Sufficient has been said to demonstrate the erroneous character
of most modern attempts to classify Tukaram. The commonly
accepted biographical facts and the trend of his writings aUke show
that none of the resemblances fit his case. ' While the Prarthana
Samajists have transformed Tukaram into a deist, believing in
nothing but m the unity and supremacy of a personal God that has
not revealed Himself in human form or in a book- revelation ; and
the Vedantists represent him as a transcendentalist, to whom the
deity was a vast abstraction, the Universe a dream, and moral duty
the creation of a morbid imagination ; some Christians would regard
him as almost a Christian believer'.' We believe all three are
in error, the two former for reasons which this book should already
have made clear, the last for reasons which will appear.

Let us state at once that there are whole classes who from the
personal religious standpoint have but little to gain by reading

' / R.M., April 1920, pp. 299-300.
2P. M.S., p. 72.

3 Rev. G. R. Navalkar, TukarSm the Maharashtnan Poet and Stunt,
Introduction.

180 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Tukarani, though they may learn something of value as to how
best they may approach his type of religious experience. Such are
all those who have attained a matured faith according to any systema-
tic or widely-accepted form of religious belief. To all those living
under the protection of any organized religious system no spiritual aid
from an ' outsider ' like the bhakta and poet of Dehu is necessary.
What is needful on their part, if they are at all to understand and
appreciate this ' gentile ' of the seventeenth century who lighted
on many aspects of truth, is to approach him with sympathy. In
short, they must approach Tukaram with a mind freed from all
dogmatic prepossessions. They must be willing to accept that
striking principle laid down by the greatest Teacher of all, that
He ' has other sheep which do not belong to this fold."

2. Tukaram and the Religious 'Outsider'

Tukaram is of most value as a religious teacher to that large
number of human beings who follow no definitely organized
religious system. A great English thinker once said he would give
his right hand to be able to believe some things, and it may be that
there is a type of temperament unable to accept systems. They
see the blanks in all the systems, their assumptions, their fallacies.
They realize the danger of accepting as solutions of problems what
are really restatements of them, the possibility of the covert
reintroduction of principles professedly rejected, in short the laxity
which often lurks under the guise of theological definition.

It is a matter of regret that such men who revolt against
organized system cannot all be brought into general accord under
the guidance of some simple interpretation of the world. Often
they drift through life undecided, wanting in impulse, neglectful of
opportunities, sometimes melancholy at heart and mostly ineffective.
Any definite appeal to men of this type is hardly likely to create a
' mass movement ' among them. But more religious writing might
with good results be directed to their case, and the testimony of
religious experience outside stereotyped forms might be presented
to them. Tukaram's writings may be regarded as a testimony of
this kind, living as he did in contact with a gigantic religio-
philosophical system but standing somewhat outside it, and attain-
ing a religious experience far above its level.

3. Essential and Non-essentials In His Message

As we read Tukatam's poems we find that spiritual contact with
God is almost the whole of what he means by religion. In a

' Moffatt's rendering of St. John %. 16, on which verse Dr Westcott has
the significant comment. 'He (Christ) "knows" others as His whom we
cannot recognize. . . He " has" other sheep, who even if they know Him not
are truly His.'

Vil HIS PERMANENT PLACE IN RELIGION 181

casual way he holds certain traditional tenets of India. He does
not reject the dogma of reincarnation. But with him it is so small
an affair that you may reject it without altering the centre of gravity
in his world of thought, while under the management of a skilled
theosophist it becomes a monster of such prodigious dimensions
that almost all one's energy is needed to comprehend, accept and
live up to it. The embodiment of God m the stone image of
Vithoba occupies a very different position, for he is very serious about
that. If you take this away you do certainly dislocate his position,
for the fact of the image standing there is what proves to Tukaram
that God sympathises with man's needs. An atheistical reader may
very well say : ' If you take away this proof what is there in
Tukaram to turn anyone to religious faith ? ' But Tukaram has no
message at all for such a reader. It is for those whose impulses
bring them on the side of religion but find a difficulty in taking the
definite step of faith. To these it may be pointed out that though
Tukaram thought his faith was established by the fact of God
standing there on the bnck, sober psychology, not to mention any
other factor, forbids us to suppose the contemplation of a stone
image was the whole cause and explanation of his spiritual
experiences. The truth is that he had these experiences because,
though in his thought he apprehended Vithoba, in the real longmg
of his spirit he approached the living God. And what is reassuring
to us IS that even he could make this approach. He had
his 'treasure m an earthen vessel' but it sufiGiced for him
to carry it. Tukaram's example shows clearly how little
the * vessel ' really matters, and we can see this the more easily
because it is only Vithoba, a stone idol, dumb, lifeless and unattrac-
tive. And among his ahhangs there are some which show that
Tukaram could and did often take the view that the stone idol was
a mere stone, neither embodying nor even symbolizing the divme
presence, as we have seen in the section on ' idolatry ' in chapter vi.

4. His Influence often Christian in Type

Even to sketch a view of Christian belief would be quite beyond
the province of this book : we are only concerned to show what help
a writer like Tukaram can give to the religious enquirer who is not
built on organized lines. And so we place first his daily testimony
to the fact of spiritual experience, to the fact of God's personality,
and to the condescension of the divine nature to the needs of man,
in whatever way these be manifested. Let us add that Tukaram's
morality is often of a Christian type and those who accept this type
will surely accept the aid of a writer who puts the call of morality
into such emphatic and moving words- From him we learn the
need of constant watchfulness and of resistance to temptation. We
hear nothing of ingenious arguments of self-indulgence, of pleas for

182 LIFE ANt) TEACHING OF TtJKARAM CH.

more enjoyment, though we may suppose sophistries of the kind
were not unknown in his day. Tukaram stands as a great example
of the austere type of morahst.

It IS from this pomt of view that we may observe him with great
admiration and pleasure. There is nothing much in his surround-
ings to produce him. Whatever the ' saints ' may have taught him,
the ordinary village life in the Deccan of his day assuredly did not
contain much to encourage the life of a self-denying saint. It is not
easy to say what does do so and perhaps we shall never get further
than to remember that' the wmd blows where it lists', that ' there is
a light that lighteth every man '. We may say, however, m a
narrower sense that the encouragement of help and approbation was
not specially bestowed on Tukaram and that what he accomplished
was accomplished only by exertion. Perhaps it was his view
of God as Mother which gave him most practical encourage-
ment, a view which brings his religious thinking nearer to the
Christian plane than does any other factor in his whole system.
See chapter 8. II. 3, and Prof. Patwardhan on this idea m chapter
6, pp. 152-3.

5. Tukaram 's Mystical Conflict

His spiritual struggles we may view variously. We should
know better what to make of them if we knew something of the
chronology of his writings. It is possible that they belong chiefly
to his early years, but it is just as probable that his inward conflict was
lifelong. There are so many abhangs speaking of spiritual desola-
tion and they are so scattered throughout his other poems and so
interwoven with them that it seems unlikely they were all produced
at one epoch. We must suppose Tukaram had many oppressive
hours even after he had seen all the final truths he ever saw. This
is a saddening conclusion whichever way we look at it, though our
chapter 9 will confirm our previous conclusion that he had ghmpses,
and let us hope more than glimpses, of something brighter. And in
any case his inward conflict, so intensely personal and mystical in
character, has stamped upon it throughout something of the true
nobility of all spiritual struggle. To the very end, however, he
appears to have been deeply sensible of the mysteries of the world,
feeling acutely all the perplexities of the universe, the inscrutable
ways of God, the unsounded depths of human nature. What
sustained his soul, probably, was his favourite doctrine that man
must somehow live in companionship with God, whatever the form
of His manifestation. This is a deep mystical truth which knows
no East nor West, for it is applicable to all people m all
climes.

It is therefore by his mystical vein, found in so many of his
poems, that Tukaram makes a religious contribution of enduring

VII HIS PERMANENT PLACE IN RELIGION 183

value, expressed though his mysticism was often in rough and
uncouth phrases, and often again in terminology tinged with
idolatry ; but it was always religious passion none the less, and very
often religious passion of the noblest kind. The mystical aspect of
religion, being timeless m character, is independent of either time
or place, and it is from this timeless element, which breathes in all
his poems, that the saint of Dehu must be given a place m the rank
of the world's teachers. Tukaram teaches his fellow-men not chiefly
by what he says, though that is worthy of attention, but by what
we realize him to have felt and experienced of aspiration, conflict
and communion. As a poet he belongs to India ; as a true
mystic he belongs to humanity. Being a mystic, his worth
is further enhanced when we remember that compet-
ent observers consider the mystical aspect of religion to have
been invested with richer significance by the world-war and its
aftermath. One scholar of world-repute,' speaking of 'the
increasing sympathy with mystical types of religion ', affirms that
' far more people than we should ever suspect, not recluses but
ordinary citizens, have been drawn to the mystical view of life ' and
that many of the religious developments of our time are ' due to
the interest we now take in religious experience, as distinguished
from abstract doctrine '. By his repeated emphasis therefore on
experimental rehgion as distinct from doctrine and dogma Tukaram
may perform a ministry of lasting value not only for his modern
countrymen but for men of other races who have similar aspira-
tions.

Dr. T. R. Glover has suggested that Tukaram 's mystical vein
gives him deep affinities with Madame Guyon, the French Mystic
and Quietist whose life was beginning — she was born in 1648 —
just as Tukaram's was closing. ' Some of Dr, Nicol Macnicol's
verse renderings of Tuka,' says Dr. Glover, ' might be interpolated
among Cowper's poems from Madame Guyon, and not be detected
without reference to the French.' " Nor is the parallel inapt, for
Madame Guyon's ' obscure night of the soul ' in 1680, occasioned
by successive bereavements and much personal suffering of her own,
followed as it was by a new ' unitive ' state in which the old
' self-me ' was supplanted by a new ' God-me ',' has some resem-
blance to the inward experience the saint of Dehu had gone through
some fifty years before, as outlined in part iii of chapter 5 on the
Autobiography. The heroism and solitude of Tukaram's ' obscure
night of the soul ', with but little in his immediate environment to
help him, invest his deep and prolonged inward conflict with
something of an epic character. '

' Dr. Ernest F. Scott, Union Theological Scminayy Bulletin, New York,
Jan. 1921, vol. iv. No. 2, pp. 14-S.

^ Jesus in the Experience of Men, Ja,a, 19ZI, p 40. ,
• B- R- E,, vol. X. p. 536, art. Quieiism,

184 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

6. His Place in Theism

It is comforting to feel m reading Tukaram that his devotion,
like that of all true men, was known to the same God and Father
and was accepted by Him. This great truth is open to abuse and
m no country more so than in India. But that need not prevent us
from recognizing it and feeling grateful for it and making it a
working principle in our dealmg with those of other faiths. The
conceptions which men have formed of God have varied, but in so
far as they have been the fruit of reverence and of true devotion,
the supplications of men have never failed to reach His ear.
Tukaram teaches, especially his fellow-Hindus, that it is a man's
duty to seek still to purify his faith, and to accept light from what-
ever quarter it comes. This does not mean that any creed will do
if only it saves us the trouble of reflection. It is still and always
our duty to purify our faith, and even to bear patiently with
error where it is not such as arises from spiritual pride or self-
deception.

In the absence of a critical edition of Tukaram's writings and
of any approximate chronology of his religious experience it is
impossible to reach any accurate estimate of his place in Indian
Theism, though praiseworthy efforts have been made with the
available material.' Unless, however, interpolation has taken
place in the poems on a far more extensive scale than in the present
state of our information seems probable, the Prarthana Samajists
are likely to be correct in assigning him a high place in Indian
Theism though we cannot calf him a monotheist. This twofold
position is largely owing to the fact that though he was unquestion-
ably an idolator, and recognized Siva, Ganpati, Maruti and Ganga,
etc., as deities — see our section 1, chap. 6 — yet his worship was
offered mainly to one idol only, and that one of the purest, Vithoba
being an 'incarnation' of Krisna whose worship is not vitiated by
erotic accompaniments as elsewhere, for as Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar
has pointed out, Vithoba is regarded not as the lover of a mistress, as
Krisna so often is with lamentable results, but as a husband and con-
sequently 'the Vaisb^avism of the Maratha country is more sober and
is purer ' {V.S.RI. JR. S., p. 89). And as Vithoba is pure m compari-
son with most other Indian idols, so is Tukaram one of the purest
and most high-mmded of Hindu devotees. How closely, indeed,
he approximates to the theistic position of many Western Theists,
particularly those of the Unitarian type, may easily be seen by
changing the name of his god, as the Prarthana Samajists do so

1 Dr Sir R. G. Bhandarkar in V. S. M. R. 8., pp. 92-101 ; Dr. Macniool
in P. M. S., pp 18-33, Indian Theism, pp. 122-6, 217-9, and scattered articles
in/,/.,/ R. M., and Hibbert Journal , a.\so Dr. Sydney Cave m Redemption,
Hindu end Christian, pp. llG-9.

VII HIS PERMANENT PLACE IN RELIGION 185

freely, and substituting for it such divine appellations as obtain in
the religious literature of the West. It then appears that on most
of the fundamentals of Theism, such as a consciousness of mdwell-
ing sin, prayer, faith, sense of the Divine Presence, longing for
union with God, personal experience as the essence of religion, etc.,
Tukaram makes a contribution of surpassing interest as we shall
see in our next two chapters. What finer, for example, can
Western teaching, merely Theistic, show than Tukaram's query,
' If the ears drink no nectar of God's glory, what use are they ? '
(151). Or than his aifirmation, 'God is my bosom friend; the
bosom friend of this helpless creature • according to His glorious
might let Him adorn us with purity ' ? (771)

Finally, though the claim of novelty is to be admitted with care
in an age which has so many cranks, yet in a reasonable way it
may be admitted and even urged as a reason for the study of alien
books of devotion. Old truths shine forth occasionally with greater
force in unfamiliar language and the problem how we are to
sanctify our daily life receives fresh light when considered in the
light of human experience amid different surroundings. Tukaram's
language and his abhangs often illustrate this, and his rugged
diction, his quaint examples, as well as his occasional beauties of
expression and his command of the language of religious passion,
make him an author for whom the Westerner may have a great
regard. As Sir Alexander Grant, a former Vice-Chancellor of
Bombay University, wrote in 1857 : ' If intense personal religion can
he found anywhere it can be found in Tukaram. It is impossible
to avoid comparing his songs with the Psalms of David. They are
the natural expression of a mind holding constant communion with
God, poured out like the notes of a bird, in all the occasions and
various moods of life.'

This chapter on Tukaram's place in religious thought may fit-
tingly close with his description of ' the heart to which God makes
Himself known'. The crowning-point of all Tukaram's teaching
has an imperishable message for Occident and Orient alike :
'Where pardon, peace and purity dwell, there God abides' (706).
' Blessed are the pious, for their heart is pure' (894).

Ha«ng concluded that our Indian poet-saint of the early 17th
century must be given a worthy place in man's agelong story of
quest after peace, another conclusion is forced upon us, vix., that
his Religious Ideas may be worthy of sympathetic investigation.

24

' I CANNOT UNDERSTAND , I LOVE'*

Thy greatness none can comprehend ,

All dumb the Vedas are.
Forspent the powers of mortal mind ;

They cannot climb so far.
How can I compass him whose light

Illumes both sun and star?

The serpent of a thousand tonguesi
Cannot tell all thv praise;

Then how, poor I? Thy children we,
Mother of lovmg ways '

Within the shadow of thy grace,
Ah, hide me, Tuka says.

THE INWARD PURPOSE*

To keep the Holy Order pure,—
This ever is my purpose sure.

The Vedic statutes I proclaim ,
To imitate the saints m5 aim.

For, with no firm resolve withm,
To quit the world is deadly sin

Vile he who does so, Tuka says,—
El il the worship that he pays.

' I LONG TO SEE THY FACE"

I long to see thy face,

But ah, in me hath holiness no place

By thy strength succour me.

So only, only I thy feet may see '

Though Sadhu's robes I've worn,
Withm I'm all unshaven and unshorn.

Lost, lost, O God, am I,

Unless thou help me, Tukil, — me who cry •

1 The serpent of a thousand tongues, Sesa, the thousand-headc-d snake
which js at once the couch and canopy of Visnu and which upholds the
world.

* Translations from Tukaram, PM.S, pp. 67, 85, 64

Chapter VIII
Takaram's leading Religions Ideas

This IS to be a chapter on Tukaram's teaching, and his poems
are our chief, almost our sole, authority. Our investigation cannot
pretend to be anything hke exhaustive, either as to range of subject
or extent of treatment. As to the latter we shall let him, in the
main, speak for himself; as to the former, the subjects will comprise
his teaching about God, God's Worshippers, Sm, Salvation, the
Religious Life, the Moral Ideal, the 'Saints', Animals, Reincarna-
tion, Death and the Hereafter. It will be noted that nearly all
these subjects are practical and experimenlal. We attempt no
final synthesis of his teaching, this being impossible without a
critical edition of his writings.

I. God and Hss Relation to the World

I. The Divine Existence: 'Lila'

Tukaram enters into no formal proof of the existence of God,
nor does he contemplate the downright atheist among the enemies
he has to face.

He seems in many passages lo accept most of the orthodox
answer of the Hindu system. God dwells apart from the world :
He IS formless and void of qualities. Personal, no doubt ; we do
not think that Tukaram ever incline? to the view that the supreme
Spirit slips off personality along with other limitations, but he
sometimes tends to think that God has no dealings with the world.
But this does not always content him. Elsewhere he says that
God at once pervades the world and h left outside it, and again
that 'God makes and unmakes the world: it is He who makes
all action visible ' (406). How or why has this come about ? The
answer is that the world is a diversion {ills) of the eternal Spirit :
' You have created amusing games to soothe your eyes with
watching them; apart from that end we all know what the
world is, a wooden tiger and a wooden cow' (2,21). Being
void of qualities He had &ought diveision m the drama of the world
(1286).

This lllcT, however, when it meets our eyes,, becomes a veil that
hides God from us. ' Take off the veil of illusion that thou hast
spread between us and thee' (442). 'False is the world; Han
alone is real, apart from him all the senses are futile ' (1665). ' 'Tis
Thou, O Vitthal, art real. Why then hast thou shown us this

188 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

outward form of the world ? Thou hast given a name to a thing
that has truly no form ' (3427). Tukaram here drifts towards the
advaita view, yet he always seemed to be hovering near the
discovery that the world which is a Ills of God's, may become
the same thing to us as to God if we look at it in the same spirit.
It will then be as permissible for us to enjoy it as for God to
create it.

2. Was Tukaram a Pantheist?

What is Pantheism ? We really do not know any meaning for
the word except a loose and evasive way of talking as though the
world was God and God was the world. This sort of talk is
commoner in popular Hinduism than in other popular religions,
]ust in proportion as Hinduism concerns itself more with cosmo-
gony than other systems do. But it is paying it too much of a
compliment to treat it seriously as a system of thought When
Tukaram says that God pervades the world he really means, though
he does not quite say so, that God directs the world so that it all
serves a divine purpose. God with him is always a Being, an over-
ruling Being. If he had gone a little further we might say a
Providence.

As to whether, therefore, Tukaram is to be regarded as an ad-
vaitist or Pantheist, opinions diflfer violently and it is well-nigh
impossible to say more than that he sometimes seems to incline
towards the advaiiist position and sometimes towards its opposite,
the dualist. We have on the one hand Mahipati's story of
Tukaram sitting under a blanket, with his fingers in his ears as a
protest against the act of a Vendantist who was leading to bim an
advattist treatise (seepage 102) ; also Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar's sug-
gestion that Mahlpati views the receiving of the guru-mantra in a
dream as a Providential interposition saving Tukaram from the
repugnant advattist tenets which any guru of the time would have
been certain to pour into his ear had Tukaram needed to obtain a
mantra in that way (see pages 91-2) ; and lastly the note of
triumph with which Tukaram himself dismisses the advatta
philosophers : ' Away with knowledge of Bramha and intuitions
of the self within the self (518). See further pp. 194-5 below
a^id also 218-9. On the other hand we have references m his
poems which appear to show that it was only when the advattist
became 'void of devotion ' that he raised any serious objection to
his teaching : ' Listen not to such a one ; the wisdom he dis-
courses is like chaff, void of devotion. He extols the doctrine that
seeks absolute union, he sets aside devotion .... Saying " I am
Brahma ", he nourishes his own person ; we should not speak to
such a disputant as he' (1177) . For both sides, see on the one
hand, the thirty abhafigs in Eraser and Marathe's translations
under the heading, ' Distinction From God Necessary ' ; and on the

Vlli HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 189

other, see Mr. L. R. Pangarkar's MarathI Life of Tukaram, p. 114,
etc, and Joga's Commentary, Vol. 1, p. 280.

Some students, however, would state Tukaram's inchnation
towards advaita far more strongly, adducing as evidence in their
favour all the abhahgs m Eraser and Marathe's translation bearing
the headings, ' Union with God Necessary,' — 54 in all — and ' The
All-Pervadmg Character of God ' numbering 36, m particular such
abhaiigs as : ' Pan4ura9g has truly shown us his grace by driving
out of us all doubts, all sense of diflerence from him ' (2866) ; ' I
am melted, I am lost in Thee ; when fire and camphor mingle, is
blackness of any sort left behind ? _ My flame and thy flame, says
Tuka, are become one' (1679); 'God and his worshippers are
bound together, they appear separate but they are really one' (201);
' God and devotee. Lord and servant — this duality had its birth in
unity, there is no diflference here, says Tuka ; the devotee is God
and God is devotee ' ' ; and the pathetic cry m 200, an abhai'ig
reminiscent of the bhakta's heavy bereavements : ' Many have died
who were dear to me ; how is it, O Hari, you have survived them ?
. . . Thus I conclude that all men, myself too, have to be placed
m you as a deposit'. Those who believe Tukaram hold the
advaittst position have m their favour the fact that the BhSgavata
Ptiraiia is regarded by most an advaitist book, and the Bhagavad-
glta also, in spite of the bhaktt dominating them, these two
great works being the most sacred books of the Vaisbnavism or
Bhagavata religion of Maharashtra. ''

Modern scholars are equally divided on this subject. Dr.
Farquhar concludes — though his dealing with questions of Maratha
religion is necessarily scanty — that ' so far as philosophical thinking
may be traced, Tukaram tends to be a monist.'" Concerning the
24 abhaiigs narrating the end of Tukaram the writer of the brief
English sketch of the poet's life in the Indu Prakash edition says
he ' was absorbed m contemplation and the actual realization of the
Vedantic doctrine of Pantheism ', though we need to add that these
abhaiigs can scarcely be regarded as other than spurious. * In his
Tenets of Tukaram the converted Brahmin, the late Rev. Nehemiah
Goreh, strenuously argues for the advaitist character of all Tuka-
ram's teaching, seeking to harmonize its many contradictions by
his theory that from the worldly standpoint of practical everyday
life the poet was certainly a dualist, while from the spiritual or
' other-worldly ' point of view he was a pantheist, a view which,
however tempting and convenient, cannot be accepted as solving
the real difficulty. On the other side, among those who regard the
saint of Dehu as a dualist, ure to be reckoned the Prarthana

I See F. and M 823 for another rendering.

'' See pp 171-2 and Dr. Justin K. Abbott, Dnyanodaya, June 9, 1921.

3 O. J?.£,./., p. 300

' See p 126 above.

190 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Samajist thinkers whose authority concerning everything relating
to Tukaram, their chief gunt, is indisputably high, the Prarthana
Samaj position being represented by Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar ^ with
whom agree Dr. Murray Mitchell who wrote about the middle of
last century and Sir Alexander Grant who wrote in 1867. The
last-mentioned regrets that Tukaram ' impairs his poetry by the use
of the metaphysical terms of Vedantism ' and that he is ' extremely
wavering in his point of view ', his apparent pantheism being
merely an intense form of devotion.

Could we have asked Tukaram himself as to his true position he
would probably have pointed to his words in abhai'tg 1924 : ' We
will give up this dispute ; let us go before the saints to settle this ',
meaning, ' Let us grant that the monist position is strictly correct,
that God has not really created us as beings with individualities of
our own. . . Still, why not leave it so ? Why not let the attitude
of worshipper and worshipped continue ? ' > He would probably
have summed up the discussion in the words of the cradle-song
sung over him by his mother • * Monism and dualism are each half
true' — see page 79. See also Dr. Macnicol's similar conclusion.''

II. God's Relation to His Worshippers

I. God's Way of realizing Himself

Tukaram is not greatly interested in cosmogony and he spends
no time in speculating how the separation of the human soul from
God became possible or was accomplished. But he has no doubt
of the purpose in view when the development took place. It is only
through this that God realizes Himself, that He becomes truly
God. ' God becomes what we make Him ' (586). ' It is our faith
that makes thee a God' (1795). ' What is the head without the
feet? We are the feet that suffer and bear thee ' (1787). With-
out His worshippers God would not know the bliss of receiving
devotion and sharing in mutual love : ' What does the lotus flower
know of its own perfume ? ' (207) ' Water cannot taste itself nor
trees their own fruit. At the sight of the child the milk comes
into the mother's breast. What delight there is when they meet
each other' (211). Accordingly, 'God calls Himself His wor-
shippers' debtor : He is even grateful to them. He feels especial
delight m the helpless, because He can do most for them ' (282).
'In those who are helpless He feels His chief delight' (286).
' Had I not been a sinner how could there have been a Saviour ? '
(213). Much IS said of the delight shared by the worshipper and
the God who is worshipped : ' 'Tis like a father with his child, who
feels and gives pleasure at once ' (210).

' Two Masters Jesus and Tttku>um, pp 35-45.
2 See F and M. vol. 2, ' note ' on p 444.

^ P.M S.. nn. 91. ^A-t^.

'seei» ana m. voi.:i.
3 P. M S„ pp. 21, 25-6.

viii HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 191

2. Unity of the Divine and the Human

Tukaram strongly maintains the unity of the divine with the
human spirit : ' That my soul is the soul of all things — who can rob
me of this truth ?' (1698). ' Narayana gives and hmiself enjoys the
gift ' (227). This means that it is the same "spirit that is active m
both the giver and receiver, the same thought being expressed
in the lines, ' If we are burned or fall into fire it is Narayana
that suffers in us ' (1802). ' He pervades my frame, yet he keeps
our two beings distinct' (1130). Tukaram does not feel called
on to reconcile the opposing aspects of the divine nature,
indeed he seems rather to rejoice in the thought that God is
' incomprehensible by mind or reason ' (1657). And time after time
he tells us that * He exists and exists not in all things ' ; ' He is all
and none of us ; ' ' not by knowledge or reflection canst thou be
comprehended, nor can any system search thee out' (3213). But
he looks with horror on a final emancipation or absorption into
Brahman that will leave behind no sense of personality, because
It will rob bim of the joy of union, devotion and service. See
further, all the abhat'igs in F. avd M. in each volume under the
heading ' Union with God Necessary '.

We may note other ideas of God's relation to His worshippers.
He knows what they need without being told • ' Thou knowest
our hearts though we tell thee nothing; thou dost pervade the
world, there is no need to tell thee aught ' (307).

3. Divine Accessibility and Condescension

God makes Himself accessible to the infirm apprehensions of
the worshipper : ' He has embodied himself in forms to suit our
pleasure : he has laid out paths such as we can discern and follow,
while he himself, beyond our comprehension, surveys the circle
of the skies' (1753). This refers partly to the embodiment
in an image, partly to the willingness of God to receive humble
devotion. Tukaram insists often on the feebleness of human
devotion and hugs the thought that God is pleased with the stam-
mering childish accents of humanity. Then again God accepts as
evidence of devoted faith the mere utterance ot His name — it is
little, but if offered in the right spirit it is enough. Thus ' God
meets every man in a shape fit for him ' (1757) ; ' God conforms
himself to every man's speech ' (1756).

This leads to a very trustful relation between God and His
worshippers. The image of the child and his parents may even
seem to us somewhat overworked by our poet and his language of
fond familiarity somewhat wanting in due gravity : ' We are God's
companions, his old crazy frolicsome friends : he led us by the
hand ' (2164). Sayings such as this justify the observation that

192 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

the relation between man and God as conceived by Tukaram may
occasionally to a Christian seem wanting in dignity or reverence,
and that he presses the image of a playful childhood too far. It
IS only a partial truth that ' men are but children of a larger
growth' and Hegel with greater insight than Tukaram has observ-
ed that we are not to be httle children but to become as little
children. Let us not forget the pleasing simile in which he points
out that ' the bee has no fear of being imprisoned in the flower
that encloses it' (2601). At the same time the figure of Mother
and child as applied to God and His worshippers is Tukaram's
closest approximation to the Christian idea of God. See also
quotation from Prof. Patwardhan on pp. 152-3.

4. Ancient Scriptures and 'Authority'

The general tone of Tukaram's writings shows he is not in the
least a theologian. He seldom raises and still more seldom answers
the thousand and one questions that delight theologians. The exact
extent of Tukaram's learning we do not know. See pp. 127-128. It
is possible that he picked up a little Sanskrit and read some of thf
iiistras in the original tongue and even drew some of his ideas
from them, but he never admits anything of the kind. We must
remember that the Vedas in the strict sense were quite unintelligi-
ble both to him and to anybody he ever met and even the great
commentators were probably beyond him. It is not surprising
therefore that he sometimes regards the written word — the word of
tradition — as unimportant. Along with the place of the Scriptures
we have to settle the place of authority and the extent to which an
immediate revelation is vouched to the enquirer who seeks it.

Hinduism, one need hardly say, has no centre of dogmatic
authority, that is to say, no living centre.' Hindu bodies look
mostly to their scriptures, but even here there is no absolute
agreement as to which scriptures are inspired. It appears however
from Tukaram's example that a Hindu may almost throw off the
authority of the scriptures altogether. * One must be careful however
not to press this point too far, m view of ahhafig 2561 : ' He who
admits not the authority of Scripture — his face you should not see.'

1 For several centuries past Hinduism has recognized the authority of four
^ankaracharyas whose 'four spiritual seats are — ^Joshi Math in the Himalayas,
Northern India, in the district of Garwal , Sarada Math m Dwaraka, Western
India, m the State of Baroda ; Sringeri Math in Srmgeri, Southern India,
within the Mysore State ; and Govardhan Math in Pun, Eastern India . . .
Two Gadls in those of Sarada Math and Joshi Math are at present without
their recognized Spiritual Heads. . . As regards the Sarada Math viU'ious
complications have arisen' (Mahamandal Magazine, May, 1921), Of
interest to HarathS students is the fact that there is also a Karvlr Math in
KolhapGr State.

3 ' I believe our present knowledge of the Hindfi scriptures is in a most
chaotic state,' said Mr. M. K, Gandhi in Young India of October 6, 1921.

VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 193

An abhaiig like this shows he was not a rebel against the Vedas.
He probably thought that Vedic authority if duly explored would
be found on his side, that the Vedas were obscure, that many
interpretations were against him, that many scriptures of less but
much- vaunted authority supported views w'lich he rejected, and that
the study of all scriptures led to much wrangling. Simple devotion,
on the other hand, was rewarded by peace and light and for him at
least this was sufficient. What chiefly roused his anger was a
merely formal devotion to external 'authority' without any corres-
pondmg inward religion of one's own : 'What have they achieved
by committing texts to memory? They kept their self-sufficiency.
They have a scrap of knowledge ; they are pufTed up with pride ;
they are scoundrels, says Tuka, batter in their faces ' (2544) ; ' it is
in vain you have studied the Vedas, unless you feel sobs of love rise
when you hear God preached (2543). ' See further pp. 159-60.

In the brief account which he gives of his spiritual life we learn
that he met a guru who placed him in touch with his Vaishijavite
predecessors, and we may recall the importance he attaches to
intercourse with the ' saints ' (see section vni in this chapter). It
is they who preserve doctrine in its purity, they who point the
enquirer to the source of light. Thus tradition plays a great part in
Tukaram's system, though he never asks in a critical spirit how
tradition is related to personal experience ; it is on practice that he
lays the greatest weight.

III. Sin

The natural state of the human soul, Tukaram would say, if he
knew what 'natural' meant, is union with God m mutual love.
What is the state in which men's souls actually are ? How has it
arisen ? It is a state of separation. The first beginning of this is
a matter on which Tukaram offers no speculations — indeed the
Hindu speculations concerning the origins of things, though in
general more elaborate than Christian, do not much discuss the
fall of man. At least they do not treat it from the human side ;
they consider more how the divine nature may be supposed to
have thrown off emanations. That these emanations should be
sinful is perhaps thought to follow without further explanation,
as a matter of course. In Tukaram the sinful nature of man
appears as a matter of common knowledge. Thus, sin consists
in (i) breaking the appointed rules of caste; (ii) breaking the
rules of morality in a narrower or wider sense as we may variously
phrase it ; and (lii) indulging the sense of mtpai.ia.

The first (i) and second (ii) we may leave aside for the present
and examine the notion of mJpaija (self-centredness). This offence
is often and strongly condemned by Tukaram, yet he never tells
exactly what he means by it. Nor is it a thing easy to express
in English. It is not selfishness nor self-indulgence nor even
25

194 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

self-satisfaction or self-conceit, though these last come near to it.
An exact equivalent would be the word 'egoism' if it were not so
often used in conversation for boring other people by talking about
oneself. Mipwui means wilfully dissociating oneself from God,
nourishing the feeling of independence instead of gratefully leaning
upon Him. It may easily but not necessarily be associated with
pride. A man may be guilty of it without taking any exaggerated
view of his own merits.

Anyhow this fault separates man from God and is, one might
say, a mortal sin in Tukatam's theology. God does not willingly
see this separation. He perpetually offers all men the opportunity
of reunion : ' All are empowered to approach Him, Brahmans,
Kshatriyas, VatSyas, Sudras and low-caste men, children and all
others * (247) ; 'Han does not remember a man's origin' (228);
' here prince and peasant are alike ' (532). On Tukslram's own
sense of sm see pp. 135-7 and 225-7.

IV. The Means of Salvation

I. Tukaram's Attitude to 'Moksha' or 'Mukti'

It is necessary to remember what a Hindu means by ' salvation.'
One of the many striking aspects of TukarSm's teaching is the
energy with which he sometimes dissociates himself from the
common Hindu desire for moksha or mukti, which terms he uses
synonymously (see below). On this subject it is not sufficiently
recognized that when the Hindu speaks of ' liberation ', the usual
translation of the Hindu terms moksha and muktt, and the
Christian of ' redemption ' or * salvation ', they are usually moving
in diiferent worlds of thought, the Hindu referring to liberation or
release from rebirth, the bondage of karma, the Christian to deliver-
ance from the guilt and power of sin.' In Tukaram, however, there
would appear, as far as we can understand him, to be an approxi-
mation to the latter idea seldom found in Hinduism (see also
pp. 196-7 below). We have already seen how ambiguous and
uncertain the saint of Dehu was concerning the Vedantist view
of the Impersonality of God — see pp. 187-90, this chapter.
Similfirly he seems to waver between acceptance of and opposition
to the Vedantic idea of 'liberation ' for which he uses moksha and
mukti alternatingly. Again and again, however, he definitely
disclaims the desire for such 'liberation' in the common Hindu
sense of cessation from personal existence. See p. 211 below
on Reincarnation, especially two striking abhangs there (3134 and
3325), in which he states positively that he ' desires not liberation '
and 1692 where he prays, ' O Paiiijurang, grant me not liberation ' ;

' See TS. R. JS. vol. xi, pp, 132-7.

VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 195

also 211 : ' I am thoroughly resolved to desire liberation no more ' —
m all of which the word mukti is used ; and note 208 and 209 where
the twin word moksha is used : ' Liberation belongs to you,
O God ; keep to yourself that hard acquisition ' (208) ; ' your
worshippers do not seek liberation ' (209). Another of Tukaram's
strong disclaimers has been turned into English poetry by
Dr. Macnicol, the ahhang numbered 763 m Eraser and Marathe
and 1462 in the Indu Prakash edition, the word used being mukti

Hear, O God, my supplication-^
Do not grant me liberation.

' Tis what men so much desire ,
Yet how much this joy is higher '

But that name how strangely dear
That m songs of praise we hear !

Ah, says Tuka, it is this

Makes our lives so full of bh&s.'

Nothing short of a critical edition of Tukaram's poems, followed by
an exhaustive investigation, can determine exactly how far
Tukaram was either consistent or whole-hearted in his disclaimer of
'the great release ' {mukti or moksha) — see further pp. 218-9 in
chapter 9 — but it is a disclaimer characteristic of bhaklt which
prefers to continue in the fellowship of the saints on earth, singing
God's praises and doing His service. This follows on the rejection
by hhaktt of the view that the Supreme Spirit is impersonal.

2. Hindu Methods which Tulcaratn Rejects

What are the means of salvation ? We shall begin with certain
things that Tukaram rejects. He rejects (i) The complete fulfil-
ment of the rules of caste. This is out of the question, no matter
how much we strive after it : ' You may give up doing or undoing
or looking into sacred texts ' (273) ; 'this business of rules and
prohibitions is heart-breaking ' (540); 'not through the burden of
rules and prohibitions mayest thou, O generous lord, be found '
(1727).

(n) Austerities. ' By sacrifice and austerity and union with the
body or by recourse to contemplation thou canst not be found '
(231) ; ' such men (i. e., those who practise austerities) cast rudely
from them the rug they long have worn , this is an impediment to
service, it is a craving too hastily conceived' (336).

(in) Mystic intuition. ' We trust not to knowledge of Brahman
or union with the supreme sonl' (204). Doubtless Tukaram
joined Kabir m protesting against the immoral doctrine that reading

1 See P. M. S. pp. 83-4 for the whole otbhanQ.

195 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

and hearing PurSnas destroys sin and that a man may be Sbsolved
from the guilt of murder if he hears scores of PurSnas ; though see
abhang 265 quoted in line 7, page 198 below.'

3. Tukaram's Way of Salvation

Then what is the right path ? (i) Repentance. The necessity of
repentance, though imphcitin Tukaram's system, is not emphasized
m the same clear language as we find in the New Testament and in
Christian writings generally. He speaks often of the purifying
effect of God's grace and of course there can be only one motive
for seeking it, but the actual moment or mood of repentance is not
prominent in his lines. This does not mean that he is silent on the
subject : Through repentance, guilt vanishes m the twinkling of an
eye and the transgressor remains at peace ; this is the true cere-
mony of purification, to bathe the mmd in repentance ; sm cannot
touch repentance' (485).

(ii) Following on repentance there must be goodwill towards all
creatures : if he be merciful towards all living creatures, be he
learned or ignorant, the infinite one loves him more than his own
soul ' (487) ; to lay aside hatred is the secret of attainment ;
other rules of renunciation are waste of words ' (489). And to this
we may add : ' If you would attain means of salvation you must
be calm and silent ' (549). You must also be humble : ' With the
exalted he is exalted, with the lowly he is lowly ; you cannot seize
him by an efiort of strength ' (294). ' Conquer your senses, control
your mmd, lay aside pleasure ; this is how to secure salvation.
Some fast and break their fast, others persevere with texts ; these
practices will bear fruit only if they are quite void of error. You
will llnd fruit where the root is. Make haste to seek shelter in
God (2538).'

(iiiT Most ^important of all is faith, the firm belief that God is
able to save : ' you will reach God by faith (bhava) ; by efforts to
know him you will not understand him ' (505). ' The joy of faith
(bhakti)^ enhghtens the ignorant thiough their own fond desire'
(233). Faith {hliava) controls God Himself (2034). 'p-aith
(blufva) is the all-sufficing principle of the saints ' («89). One
of Tukaram's richest aOlictiigs on the futility of external rites
reads : Why do they worship stone and brass and the eight metals ?
The wretches have no faith. Tis faith {bhava) alone that moves
us and IS fitly called the means of salvation. What avails your
rosary ? 'Tis only pleasure of the senses you count on it. What
will you do with your learned tongue ' It will make you proud and
conceited. What wil! you do with your skill in song, a^ long as
your will is foul within you? If you serve God without faith

' See also E.R.B. vol. xi, p. 562 a.

vin HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 19?

{bhava), says Tuka, how will you become fit for him ?' (2597).
Concernmg the object of faith see chapter X, section 6.

As for the content of Tukaram's idea of salvation it is probably
not incorrect to conclude that sometimes he looks towards the
commonly accepted Hindu idea of mofcsha and sometimes towards
the ethical deliverance connoted by our term 'salvation'. See
p. 194 above on these terms.

4. The Question of Merit

The question may be raised whether the power to accept what
God bestows in salvation is a reward of merit. This brings us to
the troublesome question how merit is conceived by Tukaram.
We doubt if any particular answer can be given to this question.
That there is such a thing as merit he does not doubt ; he is always
talking about it but he never defines it.

As a rule Tukaram is quite clear that God's grace is not bestowed
as a consequence of merit: ' He requires no store of merit' (30*1).
But passages may be quoted m flat contradiction of this : ' If you
have merit stored up from the past you may suddenly meet with
perfect satisfaction ' (524) ; ' my merit has bestowed it on me '
(324) ; ' this immeasurable flood of nectar — it is due to our great
merits that it runs along this path ' (338) ; 'if merit is stored up
gram by grain then this is the reward after manyhves' (339);
'my store of merit has found its consummation ' (1831). Every
man's future thus corresponds to his store of merit.

The above passages, however, do not represent Tukaram's most
habitual or profound conviction. What he really feels is that the
whole problem of the place of merit is troublesome and insoluble,
and it does not repay men to hunt after its solution. Arguments
on the point belong to that verbal theology which he deprecates.
He would say plainly that to suppose God saves us because we
deserve sakation is' a piece of presumption, and he would tot
countenance this. On the other hand he would have said just as
plainly that if merits do not count then the action of God may be
called capricious. He would have seen these issues had they been
presented to him, but as a matter of fact they were not so pre.sent-
ed, for Hinduism has not debated this point with the persevering
interest of Christian theology. It faintly emerges in TukarSm't.
poems but the conclusion to which he hastens is that the man who
beeks salvation should waste no time in argument but throw him-
self at Ihe feet of God. And he con.sfquently expresf-es his own
joy that he is done with the totmenting question whether his merits
are sufficient or not : ' The Vai&hnavas have brought down heaven
to eaith with Vittho the chief thereof ; merits past, present and to
come, are all buried deep; they are driven forth as feeble creatures
into e.xiile ' (3476a); ' exertions will leave you nothing but e.^ertions,

198 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

if you embrace peace it will bestow joy upon you ' (327). Various
lines dwell on the ease with which this great acquisition may be
made : ' Vitthala stands forth easy to attain by songs of praise *
(287) ; ' unexpectedly without an effort I have heard the secret, I
have learned to know God' (573). Much is said of the power of
God's name : ' Uttering his name it takes not one instant to burn
up millions of the five great sins ' (265).

V. The Obstacles to Salvation

Of the obstacles that hinder men from approaching God, from
seeking and iinding salvation, we can make a long and interesting
list from Tukaram We might place at the head of it the habit of
saying to oneself ' 1 ', ' I ' and ' Mine ', ' Mine ', for Tukaram often
blames this, but strictly speaking this is not the cause of separation
but the separation itself : ' If a man keeps within him his private
purpose — were it as small as a sesamum seed — or his sense of
self, Narayana will not draw near him ' (320/).

Perhaps the same might be said of desire or the habit of indul-
ging desires. The pi-openaity of the mind to form desires is
compared to the exuberance of a wild creeper just as the headlong
impetuosity of the mind is compared to that of an unruly horse.
All this we can understand, but there is one curious uncertainty
about Tukaram's position ; we do not learn whether he teaches that
it is the pains or the pleasures of life that most keep us from God,
though we are quite certain that it was life's pains that led him to
God :^ ' Wasted is labour on wife, son and wealth, where the fruit
is sorrow the seed is sorrow ' (1730); ' through the attractive power
of life, the mind is filled with hopes' (3183); 'the world is an
imposing uproar of pleasures ' (1842). His thoughts often dwell
on the misery of life, the disappointments that befall the votary of
pleasure, and then again he observes that men are often swallowed
up by worldy pleasures so that all serious thoughts escape them.
Putting the difficulty another way we may say that if by a pessimist
we mean one who holds that human life is usually or always
wretched, by an optimist one who holds that it is or may be always
enjoyable, Tukaram is neither an optimist nor a pessimist. He
has not realized the question or analysed the case. Nor has he any
firm hold on the difference between pleasure and happmess. though
this IS essential to a philosophic statement of his viewf.. He really
gets no further than a perception of the fact that a man who is
busy with the pursuit of objects of desire cannot open hib mind to
the love of God.

He sees also that fear of ridicule keeps many men from God.
Much as Indian sentiment has always respected the devotee, men

' See pp. S3-4, 137-8.

vril HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 199

have never been wanting in India — any more than in other
countries— who have been swayed by worldly sentiment and have
laughed at religion or at least at any religion that calls for the
sacrifice of comfort: 'Shame and prosperity stand m the path'
(324).

Above all he is afraid of learning.^ The most hopeless of men
in Tukaram's eyes is the theologian : ' God is hidden by arguments
good and bad and by the reasoning of theologians ' (556) ; ' know-
ledge of God =!ets us far from God' (551) ; ' search not the forest
of philosophy ' (509) ; ' discussions of thy nature are a maze of
error, let me refuse to enter into them' (217); 'annihilate this
separation, the fruit of learning, between us; save me, O Vitthal,
I am better off as an ignorant servant' (463). The source of
separation is partly the pre-occupation with arguments, partly the
pnde which learning fosters. Nothing parts man and God more
than pride, but to him who bends, God bends Himself ; He is
not found where pnde rules.

How great a hindrance to salvation was encountered in
philosophical disputation, as Tukaram saw and heard it, is clear
from the following vigorous words : ' If you would attain to means
of salvation, be calm and silent. Tuka says, Verbosity has ruined
crowds of Brahmans ' (549) ; ' O ye pious, quit the company of
reasoners ' (2542). The love of disputation was certainly associated
m TukarSm's mind vyith the champions of the advaita philosophy,
though it must not be forgotten that this system has its practical
side and a monist might rely on its central doctrine of maya and
yet might protest against a disposition to dialectics as much as
Tukaram. Actually, however, the advaita schools are more verbal
and verbose than the other, though Chaitanya is fond of disquisition
about the various sorts of love enjoyed between Kpisna and Radha.

VI. The Religions Life

I. Renunciation and Trust

How will the believer treat the world? There are passages
m which he is exhorted to leave it behind him, to thrust it away
from him with violence: 'There is peril m worldly affairs: seek
shelter in God ' (2305) ; * resign the world ' (841) ; ' I am angry
against the world ; it is a poisonous snake gleaming before the
eyes ' (322) ; * take not on your head at all the burden of the
world; devotion itself compels you to cast everything aside'
(846); 'if pleasure seeks me out I will renounce it forthwith'
(850); 'the saints look on birth and death as a dream' (888) ;
' avoid the world, let no stain of affection come upon thee '
(510). He who has conquered his senses and destroyed his
desires, thereafter forms no designs: 'Tuka takes a stick and

200 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

fiercely assaults his body ; he has made it pay for all the luxuries
it has enjoyed ' (842) ; ' strip the trees of their foliage and eat
It ; pick up rags and sew them together with a thread and cover
your loins therewith' (2329); 'reduce your speech to silence,
keep it away from all objects of sense ' (277) ; ' there was one
who lived a life of fourteen ages, yet he took shelter under a
bundle of straw ' (2328).

We have quoted a number of these passages in oider to
present fairly what Tukaram actually does say, but they probably
do not represent his final or most characteristic view. We may
now turn to those m which a different opinion is expressed. In
some moments Tukaram seems to think that the religious man
will simply look on at the activities of his body m a detached
sort of way like a spectator. This is summed up m many passages
about the body ' A vigorous body is the instrument needed for
your service ' (480) ; ' let the body be treated with all respect, for
thereby we attain to all happiness through the recitation of his
name' (820) ; see also 825, 829 and 836. This idea, however,
IS only fugitive, and the same may be said of pain and pleasure :
' Pleasure and pam we should view as coming of themselves ; our
business is to store up merit ' (2298) ; ' labour suffices your belly
but never forget Rama ' (834).

His final principles appear to be these : (l) Mere renunciation
leads to nothing : ' What avails to live in a glen of forest if peace
be absent ? ' (828). The essential thing is that we should not place
ourselves in the power of desires : ' If you are to become an ascetic
do it in this spirit : renounce desires of the world — it matters not
then whether you live in a town or a forest, sleep in a cot or on a
rock' (2316).

(2) Let the satisfaction of desire be viewed as an oflfering
to God : ' I go on eating and drinking but I keep the account m
thy name ' (1798) : ' in eating or drinking alike say : It all passes
on to Govinda ' (1802) ; ' renunciation leaves room for pleasure ;
.... what keeps God away from us, that is sin ' (822) ; see also
3414.

(3) Thus the right course is certainly to stay in the world and
go on with our duties : ' Whatever I do, O God, I offer thee as a
service ' (193) ; * your proper course is to ask nothing of God, but
to do the work appointed you to dp, provided it be not done through
any sort of desire' (3199) ; 'let us return to our tasks but refuse
to identify ourselves with them ' (183) ; ' it is not murder when a
soldier does his duty, for he seeks no personal gain from the action '
(2400) ; ' entrust your body to God but employ its strength in due
season yourself (3189); see also 222. Such passages may bp
contrasted with those in opposition to them : ' God does not suffer
His worshippers to follow any worldly vocation' (3188) ; ' worldly
life and life with the highest — he who acts both parts together, in
the end achieves neither ' (3465) ; see also 494.

VIII HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 201

(4) There is thus no objection to pleasures that cotne in the
course of our duties : * Be ready to honour pleasure when it comes :
do not moan over sorrows' (3477).

(5) Tukaram deprecated anxiety about our worldly lot. It is a
common thought that God takes sufficient care of His own: 'God
undertakes the care of acquiring and keepmg for them' (286). Perhaps
it is m this connection that we should take the lines : 'If God is
friendly to you then all the world is kindly to you' (243) ; 'God is
bound to feed all animals, we need not trouble ourselves what we
shall get to eat ' (1653). The result is the devotee enjoys true and
perpetual peace, the passionless state, vairagya : ' I enjoy peace
because my thoughts are fixed on hira '^ (2272). Resignation is
mentioned, but it is hardly conspicuous : ' Silence now my foolish
speeches, what the Giver resolves will come to pass' (1817).
Those are condemned who approach God for wealth : ' The ignorant
seek for wealth through devotion ; how can there be any true
perception in their souls ? They perform rites with their thoughts
set on gain ' (3466). For himself he says: 'If I cannot fill my
belly with food I will eat dust, but I will not lay a burden on thee '
(3323). Words like these reveal the depth and disinterestedness of
Tukaram's religious devotion.

2. Religrloti an Experience

Some of Tukaram's most valuable observations are concerning
the necessity and value of personal experience in religion and the
worthlessness of all else without it : 'if you have no experience
do not assume the exterior of knowledge' (550); 'you must pass
along the road if you mean to reach the spot ; it is no use listening
to mere tales of It' (554); 'if God ceases to speak to a man, he
too ought to be silent ; people act very difFerently — when God has
ceased to speak to them they go on talking about Him ' (551) ;
' if we do not meet him face to face, what is the use of dry talk
about him? Listen to the evidence in your own hearts' (584).
Apart from inward religious experience the ' holiest of holy places '
will bring no blessing to men : ' What good will Kail and the
Ganges do you if you are not pure within ? A man who talks
without love is merely barking ' (543) ; ' without the sweetness of
spiritual experience both teacher and taught increase their tribula-
tion ' (549). With tKese statements agrees the striking saying of
Eknath a generation earlier than Tukaram ; ' You may visit one
tirtha (holy place) after another, but if you have not forgiveness in
your heart your merit vanishes.' Without such heart- experience of
religion all profession is mere words : ' Till a man has some experi-
ence of his own, who would honour mere words ? ' (2081). ' The
man has a crooked perverse heart, let not him wear the garland;
the man with no sense of religious duty, void of compassion and a
26

202 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

peaceful spirit, let not him put ashes on his person ' (2089). A
religious experience of one's own is all-sufficing : ' Look at my
experience; I Lave made God my own. I need only speak what he
puts into my mouth ' (3230) ; * experience will enlighten the mind
m its own season ' (3231) ; ' you must make experience your own,
by putting up a prayer to God' (3233).

It goes without saying that Tukaram has many poems dealing
with the ecstasy of communion : ' I feel an inward sweetness
as I gaze upon my treasure of faith- God is my bosom friend '
(771). The thought is many times expressed in general terms, but
It is an intercourse marked by a special limitation. One charac-
teristic of Tukarilm is that he appears to know nothing of the
prayer of petition or intercourse in the New Testament sense.
Prayer in a general sense — prayer for grace, for spiritual help, for
purihcation — is found on every page of Tukaram, but prayer in
detatl is not customary with him. We read nothing for example
of prayer against a specific failing, e.g., against falsehood or
cowardice, or of piayer for material wants. 'Give us our daily
bread ' is a form of petition we have not met in Hinduism. It is
replaced in practice by the vow. For instance a woman will
not pray that she may have a son but she will vow a certain
off'ering or pilgrimage if a son is born to her. Tukaram has
nothing to say about such vows, though there are passages in
which he deprecates asking God for worldly blessings. Some
might say he held the view that God ' knoweth that we have
need of such things.' Nor does he mention prayer on behalf of
others, even for spiritual blessings. ' The fact that there is in it no
impulse to intercession for men ' would appear to argue a grave
'lack in Hindu mysticism even at its highest' as seen in Tuka-
ram. 'The prayers of the Hindu saints are for their own needs',
nor ' for the sake of sinning, suffering men.'^

VII. The Moral Ideal
I. Tukaram 's Picture of a Good Man

It will be understood that v/e leave out of account here the
qualities of devotion that have been dealt with m connection with
the religious life. We are counting up the' common virtues that
are needed m daily life. In a good man then we shall find :

(a) Humility. This means not simply the absence of mZpana
but the simple absence of a high opinion of one's merit : ' Possessing
all accomplishments, the saints claim no knowledge ; one who
knows all, yet keeps as still as though he knew nothing— such a

1 1, R. M., Vol. 5, No. 18, April 1916, p. 220.

VIII , HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 203

one the saints come to visit ' (888) ; * give me, O God, a humble
condition, for grandeur brings sharp torments ' (362) ; see also 702.
(6) A peaceable disposition : * As we utter Krisija's name a
peaceful love to all men is born within us ' (3403). This will show
Itself for one thing in avoiding argument: 'We ought to answer
yes to every argument, to show that we have no mind for disputa-
tion ; we ought to pursue no controversy' (2536); 'hate none; be
jealous of no being' (3346); 'much the best thing is meekness'
(3362).

(c) Kindness : ' The saints cannot bear to see another hurt ; it is
a sort of pain to themselves; they feel the soul in all creatures is
the same ; this is the law of morality ; this is what is meant by
worship ; it keeps the soul at peace ' (3477).

(d) Truthfulness : ' When a man speaks the truth, pleasures
come welling up ' (354) ; ' a man whose spoken wordb take effect,
who leaves no debts unpaid, who restores loans to those who lent
them, such a man is esteemed ' (2196).

(e) A cheerful contented disposition : ' Each should take refuge
in his lot' (3370). Perhaps along with this we may put the lines
— all too few— in which he recommends a brave heart : ' Why
should we lead abject lives ? Our past brings us into the world ; the
right thing then is a steady spirit of courage ; whatever can betide
us can be no great disaster ' (3434) ; ' you should be ready for the
lot that overtakes you ; you should not throw your troubles on God '
(2219). The Christian would have left out this last negative
because of his different conception of God.

(/) Simplicity, Though this is not often mentioned expressly,
no doubt it should receive a prominent place in Tukfiram's moral
ideal, as instances in the biographical chapter show. It means
an absence of duplicity, of concealed motives, of a calculating
disposition, even though the objects of the calculation may not
be discreditable. Tukaram would in any case think that very
little in the way of prudence goes far enough. Not that he is
without an occasional trait of shrewdness, which is amusing, even
refreshing, in so unworldly an author : ' If a man irritates us it is
best to keep away from him ' (3373) ; ' we should give food to all
creatures, but money only after a due consideration of their fitness'
(3354) ; ' speech brings its own evils but a silent man is like a
dumb post ; avoid too much and too little, this is the wise plan ; let
your speech and silence be both appropriate ' (984).

2. Hindu Toleration: 'The same to All Men'

Perhaps the most generally received, the most often quoted,
maxim of Hindu morality is that we should be the same to all men.
It is usually enforced by some illustration, such as that of the tree
which offers its shade to the man, who waters it and to the man who

204 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

cuts it down. Clearly, however, this elegant simile does not clear
up the exact meaning of the maxim, concerning which one is
generally left m doubt. There appear to be the following possible
interpretations: — (1) We ought not to allow any feeling of displeasure
or anger to arise m our minds over bad actions or of pleasure over
good actions. (2) We ought not to seek to injure men guilty of bad
actions, even though they cause us displeasure : we ought to seek
only to make them better. (3j Identical with this is perhaps the
doctrine that we ought not to feel any warmth of love towards the
good nor any hatred towards the bad. It is possible to add either
that we ought to love all men or that we ought not to love any, but
remain wholly unmoved towards all men.

In its essential meaning, the maxim ' the same to all men' seems
to hover between these various positions and those who use it seem
reluctant to define it. In practice it has done good as a force
against harsh judgements and malevolence ; it has also done much
harm as an excuse for the lazy toleration of other people's mis-
conduct, or for compromise m matters of principle. It is certainly
abused in India.

How far does this maxim appear in the writings of Tukaram ?
When we meet with it, it is never far from something that
interprets it as a practical rule : ' God is bound to enquire into
guilt and merit: to us all men alike are good ' (1653). This sounds
in strange contrast with Tukaram's wrathful denunciations not only
of mankind and of whole classes of men but even of individuals,
including those who went to sleep in his gatherings or interrupted
him with objections. Possibly Tukaram, who freely confesses his
own shortcomings, would have admitted that he broke his own
precepts occasionally m rebuking evil-doers with such personal
severity. But under no circumstances would he have maintained
that we are not to distinguish between right and wrong conduct.
Probably, however, if pressed he would have said that we have no
right to decide the degree of guilt m any particular action ; we can
only say that in our opinion it is right or wrong. And probably,
too, he would if pressed have told us that he saw the difference
between the warm love which the saints feel towards each other
and the benevolence which the good man feels towards all
companions of his human lot. He would have seen too that
punishment, involving pam, is often necessary to save offenders
'and is not m the least the same thing as vengeance.

All these positions seem to be implicit in his sayings, but he
does not make any of them quite explicit. With this admission we
quote a few passages, but to estimate their meaning it would be
necessary to read all the poems — not very numerous — m which
Tukaram discusses our attitude towards mankind: 'Let me not
distinguish the guilty, the vicious, the holy, wise; they aie all
forms of thine, God ; let me bow with my whole heart and serve
them' (2238) ; ' a cloud distinguishes not a dunghill and a field ;

Vin HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS ^05

consider not what the result will be ; devote yourself to the w^!^ in
hand ' (2242) ; ' God is our friend ; through Him all are our fridndpL
(2247); see also 2246 and 3372.

3. Vices, Despondency, Ecstasy

A very large number of the poems are devoted to censure of
vice. If we enquire what are the faults chiefly rebuked our list
will comprise— (a) lust, especially running after other men's
wives; (6) slothfulness; (c) a fault-finding and quarrelsome dis-
position ; this appears to have been the commonest fault that met
Tukaram's eyes, at least it is the fault of which he speaks most ;
combined with it appears the love of gossip and ill-natured
criticism of one's neighbours; (d) meanness and stinginess; (e)
hypocrisy and false pretence of piety ; (/) gambling, though we
do not hear much of this ; (g) lying, though this again is not very
often mentioned, and rather curiously there is little about dishonesty
in trade ; though Tukaram must have seen a good deal of this and
even suffered from it ; 'he who swears falsely in court he is a
sinner in the worst degree ' (3592) ; ' doubtless the liar will fall into
hell ' (2495) ; {h) ail faults are deepened when they are combined
with hostility to the ' saints ' and Tukaram does not spare those
who disparage them or refuse to help and cherish them.

On the whole he takes a desponding view of humanity : ' I am
sick of mankind ; I cannot contain my disgust for.them' (994). He
IS strongly impressed by the difficulty of reforming the wicked.
Their obstinate self-conceit and love of error seem beyond the
reach of instruction, for some men are just like animals ; you can
do nothing to help them : ' The heart of the wicked cannot be
penetrated though you reason with him all his life long ' (2455). He
heaps simile upon simile to illustrate this melancholy truth.

Tukaram never turned his eyes to schools or to schooling as an
instrument for elevating our race. Indeed he has hardly anything
to say about the young except for the constant use he makes of the
image of the child and the mother to illustrate our relation with
God.

It will be seen that Tukaram really escapes from the perplexities
of the problem of the state of mankind by dwelling on the duty to
serve all men. His strong sense of this duty swallows up all minor
difficulties as to how we should judge them or even how we should
feel towards them. We shall return to this point when we speak
of the ' saints '.

Notice too that Tukaram has no doubt about the duty of
examining and judging oneself. We should sit down and examine
ourselves, like a tradesman does : ' When his accounts will not fit,
he hghts a lamp and sits examining them * (2194). When we find
anything wrong let us freely take all possible blame : Let the

206 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

object of our irritation and resentment be ourselves, then the rest
of the world we shall look on as Han' (3380).

What IS his view of the worship we should offer to God?
Tukaram by no means rejects outward ceremonies, as we see in
another place, but here we may notice what he requires as an
attitude of mmd. There are places where he says : ' To contem-
plate God is to serve Him ' (106) ; ' blessed is the time that is spent
m contemplation ' (201). But mere contemplation is not enough
for his ardent spirit. He longs to fling himself at God's feet —
literally at his feet in the temple, to roll m the stone courtyard m
ecstasy. He loves to find himself in the joyous gathering of saints,
with his cymbals m his hand, lost m rhapsody. Whatever else
the pious devotee will do he will find time for these seasons of
ecstasy and rejoicing. (On the distinction between ecstasy and
devotion see chapter x, sections 6, 8.)

But we must credit Tukaram with a more practical piety than
that of the mere ecstatic or enthusiast. A man's daily life must
prove his devotion : ' Work for the master, devotion to the teacher,
obedience to parents, service to the husband, these are the solemn
service of Vishnu : it cannot otherwise be experienced ' (2059) ;
' every action should be offered to God ; this is the only worship that
reaches Him ' (1126).

VIII. The Saints

I. Their Calling' and Character

Tukaram often refers to 'the saints', by whom he appears to
denote the body of devotees who undertake no worldly duties, look
to the faithful for support, and spend their days praising Vishiju.
Such people existed m the Deccan, as they do still, and it is certain
that Tukaram looked on them with no unfavourable eye.^ He
probably thought that the world was at least none the worse for
the example of these simple, trustful, harmless enthusiasts, but
if we weigh all his utterances concerning the religious life we
shall feel that he did not think this retirement from practical' life
either a positive duty or a plan to be deliberately encouraged. One
wishes he had spoken more plainly on the point ; we should at
least be more certain what his opinion was, but Tukaram leaves
many things doubtful and the nature of the saint's calling is one of
them. He leaves us in no sort of doubt, however, as to their great
helpfulness personally. On this see page 139 and section 12
in chapter 9. ^

Tukaram would not have denied the name of saint ' to any man
whose life was saintly. What this means may be gathered from

I See section on 'The Wartaris ' pp 170-3.

vm HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 207

the passages already quoted concerning the religious life. Many
others may be added from the pages given up to the subject of the
' saints ' in the volumes of the poems. To take the first volume
alone ' Tukaram emphasizes (l) their humility and unselfishness :
' Possessing all accomplishments, they claim no knowledge; they
cannot tell their own from what is other men's ' (888) ; (2) their
parity : ' Blessed are the pious, for their heart is pure. The saints
worship the visible God, they testify that they have faith therein.
They know nothing of rule<5 and prohibitions; their hearts are
filled with devoted love' (894); (3) their happiness: Here come,
Tukaram's priceless words on the peace of the saints : ' Wherever
we be, our minds are at peace m themselves ' (897) : ' mercy,
forgiveness, and peace — where these are, there is the dwelling
place of God ' (705) ; (4) their other-worldlinesF : ' We tell you we
live m heaven, but we have no dwelling of our own place ' (896) ;
(5) their love: 'A Vaishnava la one who loves God alone, hia
caste may be anything at all ' (942).

2. Their Service to Men

Tukaram dwells with special earnestness on the services of the
saints to mankind. Time after time he says something like this :
' They wear out their bodies in serving others ; forbearing love is
their stock-in-trade ; their happiness is in the happiness of others '
(2375). Of what service is he thinking ? He does not make this
point clear, but evidently religious and moral instruction is part of
it. From the saints men learn what devotion is ; they practise it
and preach it. But it is probable that Tukaram included in the
service of men the most ordinary help in the recurring needs of
daily life. His own practices described by Mahipati would bear
out this view and it is a little curious that he does not explain his
meaning more clearly. His influence for good would probably
have been larger if he had been more concrete in dealing with the
practical aspect of bis teaching, though he gives us suggestions
that help us.

Note the part of the 'saints' in helping to save mankind.
There is no idea that they intercede for men or that their merits
are in any way imputed to others, but they remain always a channel
through which the grace of God is poured forth and made accessible
to the world. Perhaps this is only through their spiritual example
but Tukaram does not consider this a trivial service. On the
contrary he is always brimming over with gratitude to the great
company of the samls and exhorting his fellow mortals to fall at
their feet: ' Cling to the robe of the saints' (232). In particular,

1 F. and M. vol. 1, pp. 288-504.

208 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

the saints help to save mankind by serving their fellows : — (i) by
means of their own companionship and fellowship : ' In the society
of good men we have the actual presence of God ' (926) ; ' make
me a servant of the servants of saints ; let all my thoughts be
employed on service to the saints ' (235) ; ' let me sacrifice my life
to win the company of the saints' (917 ; ' let me keep company with
the saints m any guise ; let me lie at their doors like a dog ' (948) ;
(ii) by the peace they impart : ' To converse with them is perfect
peace; ... I ask not who or whence they are; . . . true heroes,
pure in spirit, every one of them ' (930) ; ' it is a blessed season
when you have met the saints and embraced their feet ; the knot
of doubt is unravelled; there is calm within the heart ' (931); 'in
the village of the saints there is a full harvest of love, there is no
pain or disquietude' (911); (iii) by the message they give:
When shall I hear the saints tell me, Pa^durang has accepted
thee ? After that my spirit will be at rest ; I shall feel assured that
I am saved' (937) ; (iv) by the way they ignore caste and give every
man his true value : ' A Vaishnava, his caste may be anything at
all ' (942) ; ' shame on a Brahman who is void of devotion ' (946) ;
' one who sells his daughter, his cow or his sermon, he is rightly
called a low-caste wretch ; the standards of goodness are merits and
demerits ; God considers not a man's caste ' (944). (V). We have
already seen (at the close of chapter 1) what the ' saints' or
bhaktas did towards building an Indian Democracy.

There appears to have been no definite organization of the
'saints' but since Tukaram does not raise the point we are left
largely to surmise. Those professed devotees of Vithoba who had
left the world and who gave themselves wholly to religious exercise
were not ascetics in the usual sense. Thejr practised no austerities.
But neither did they do any work or earn money in any way. They
seem to have trusted for support to the less thorough-going
votaries of the god, who entertained and fed them and in recompense
for this received spiritual instruction. This life as we have said
Tukaram does not in set words either encourage or forbid. We
may suppose he thought it a noble life for those who felt called to
it, but there is a vein of common sense running through his poems
and he was no doubt quite able to see that without pious friends
these teachers would perish and that such friends must help them
whenever needed. There are passages where he clearly says that it
is permissible for a man to live in the world and to be a faithful
servant of God, and he probably remained satisfied that most men
should take this line. His genius was remotely averse to any sort
of organization and he seems to have done nothing in the way of
organizing the saints in spite of the Bombay Gazetteer assertion
that he organized the WarkarJs?

' B. G. XX. p. 471-3.

vin HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 209

IX. Dnty towards Animals

I. Tukaram and 'Ahimsa'

The doctrine of ahimsa is that it is wrong to take animal life.
This doctrine has been stated to be a deduction from the doctrine
of transmigration, the inference being that the slaughter of any
animal interferes with the process by which a soul is working its
slow way towards emancipation, but this is very doubtful. It is,
however, certain that we have here a reflex influence of philosophy
on life. The doctrine is by no means accepted by all Hmdus. In
the Deccan for instance many Hindus are flesh-eaters and are no
more scrupulous about mutton than anybody else, Maharashtra
Brahmans, of whom there are twelve divisions, all abstain from it,
save the Janals who are fish-eating Brahmans.^ The doctrine of
ahimsa makes its appearance in Tukaram's pages. Strange to say,
the caste to which he belonged, the Marathas, do not hold it, the
use of animal food being common amongst them, though Tukaram
shakes his head over the taking of animal life : ' What have the
water creatures done to the fishermen that he seeks to destroy
them ? ' (2523). But his most devoted followers, those belonging
to the WSrkarl school of thought, hold tenaciously to the principles
of ahtmsS. See their principle numbered 13, _pn page 172, in
accordance with which all WSrkarl pilgrims to Ajandi, Dehu and
Paii^harpur are vegetarian m their habits.

2. Affection for Animals, especially Dogs

He recognizes duties towards animals : ' Despise dogs and pigs
for their bodies, but show them respect for their souls — embrace
spiritually beasts and trees' (876). This vein of reflection is not
much worked and Tukaram does not, for instance, ofTer any
suggestion how the needless suffering of animals may be averted.

On the other hand his attitude towards animals is extremely
sympathetic and he shows a degree of observation rare m his
country. He makes use of images from animal ways to illustrate
all sorts of spiritual truths. Some of the images are drawn from
the quaint old beliefs about animals that abound in every unsophis-
ticated land. As the flamingo can separate milk and water with
the tip of his break so Tukaram can distinguish the true and false
doctrine. It is believed that the chataka bird will not drink water
from the surface of the earth but waits for it to fall from the sky
into his mouth (2144) ; in the hot weather therefore he has to
exercise a good deal of patience ; in the same way will Tukaram
wait for God's blessing.

I See R E. Enthoven, Tribes and Castes of Bombay, pp. 241-2, 246.
27

210 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Other images again are drawn direct from nature. Some may
be stereotyped. Tukaram cries for mercy like a nestling crying
with open beak for food, like a fawn for its mother when
it IS wearied by hunger and thirst in the jungle : ' What messenger
need go to the ants' house? At the sight of sugar they come
running' (2422). So too, he thinks, it should be unnecessary to
proclaim the mercy of God, or tell men it is offered them since they
feel the need of it themselves and know thew own instincts. And
Tukaram recalls in beautiful language the PurHnic stories of the
bird^and the hunter (318), the hunter and the deer (238), Gajendra
(ISO), the birds on the battlefield of Kurukshetra (1782), to show
how God protects His people when they call upon Him.

Finally one recalls, even with amusement, the similes that
Tukaram produces from his own observation. On one occasion he
remarks how people are deceived about the importance of their own
affairs : * A bedstead is a mountain fortress to a bug ; how much he
has to climb up and down ' ! (2572). This will only be appreciated
by those who have chmbed up and down the mountain fortresses of
the Deccan. ' A false teacher is as greedy as a cat, he goes
begging from door to door ' (1187). ' We may beat a thievish dog
on the head ; he howls but he does not give up his tricks ' (996).

This mention of the dog, however, reminds us that the most
beautiful and interesting of all TukarSm's animal similes are to be
found in the series on dogs. The dog is not a favourite m India,
as he is generally a mere scavenger, a lean, mangy, cowardly brute
who picks up a disgusting living on the heaps of filth that surround
the village. His humble condition makes him to Tukaram an
appropriate image for the devotee of God, and at the same time he
shows a surprising sense of the affection of the dog for the human
species and his capacity for being trained. We cannot say if this
vein IS quite peculiar to Tukaram, since our knowledge of Hindu
literature is so small, but we do not know of anything like it else-
where. The abhangs concerned are 2143 and 2708 to 2712 : ' If
a dog be encouraged he hovers round his master's feet ; so it is with
me — I keep close beside thee ' ; (2143); as dogs suspect strangers,
so ' Tuka trusts nobody but God ' (2710).

X. Reincarnation and the State After Death

I. Reincarnation

That reincarnation is accepted by Tukaram as by all Hindus is
a simple fact which needs no proof. The continuation of individual
life through various stages appears to him no more difficult to
comprehend than its continuation through waking days interrupted
by nights of sleep. The soul may pass from a human body to
an animal tenement and back again to a human : * If you behave
hke an owl you will return to birth as a pig ' (972).

vin HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 211

Holding this view, most Hindus hold that the final end of the
spiritual life is to escape from this cycle of rebirth, from personality
at the same time, and to enter the state of final ' liberation ' concern-
ing which the only statement you can make is ' not that, not that' ;
nothing you could say about it would be true. This idea of final
beatitude is by no means shared by Tukaram. He seems to think
that It is somehow possible for those who desire it, but for his part
he would reject it with horror.

What lb It then to which he aspires ? We get contradictory
answers to this question. Complete faith m Vilhoba tiansports the
votary after death to swarga or vaikuntha, (Paradise) where he en-
joys the bliss of devotion : ' Men of low degree that might not hear
the Vedas have found a place m vatkuiitha ' (2394) ; ' utter this
name which will save you from the cycle of rebirth ' (1730) , ' the
worshippers of Hari have gained an everlasting gam ; they will
return to the womb no more ; they will enjoy supreme bliss in the
highest Brahman ; there is one alone who passes not into the
womb, it IS the servant of Vishpu ' (2146); 'the name of Hari
drives away death and incarnation ' (248) ; 'supplicate Pan^ura^ig,
save yourself from the 84 lakhs of rebirths' (320).

At other times, however, Tukaram seems to reject the escape
even into vatkuiitha and goes so far as to express a positive pre-
ference for mortal rebirth, as it will afford him an opportunity to
praise Vithoba and glorify Vithoba : ' Make me servant of the
servants of the saints, then I will gladly return to the womb till the
end of time ' (936) ; ' grant me future lives wherein I may serve thy
feet ; I shall rejoice to be born again ; great is the gam if one goes
time after time to Pan(Jhari ' (2304) ; ' we desire not liberation nor a
place in Vatkuntha ' (3325) ; ' 1 desire not liberation, 1 should re-
joice to be born again into the world ' (3134) ; ' O God, grant me
this boon that I shall not forget thee ; all my wealth is with love
to sing thy praise ; I desire neither mukti, wealth nor offspring ;
only give me the constant companionship of the saints ; if not, then
grant me rebirth' (Translated from Jfidu Pmkash 2306).

We do not see that any reconciliation of these conflicting
views IS possible as a matter of strict system. But Tukaram
leaves the question of rebirth to his master, provided he is not cut
off from personal service and from the joy of praising him.

3. Penalty of Evil-Doers

So far, however, we have only considered the reward of the
really good, but there is the question what becomes of those who
do not reach this level but die like ordinary mortals with their
imperfections on their head. With regard lo these Tukaram adopts
the usual Hindu view that they are allowed a period of reward or
of punishment according to their merits, after which they return to
the earth m a form appropriate to those merits. This period is

212 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

spent in Vaikmttha or in PatSla, (a place of punishment corres-
ponding to the Christian hell). Tukaram has, however, very few
references to the good man's days of happiness m heaven : 'What
shall I ask for ? Should I ask for the joys of Swarga ? When my
merit is exhausted I must return here agam ' (3135). On the other
hand he has many references to the pains of hell, of which vivid
descriptions are given. The ruler of this realm is Yama who is the
agent of eternal justice, but not like Satan a tempter of mankind :
' The stern servants of Yama beat and cut and thrash them m
countless ways ; they make them pass over the edges of swords,
over glowing coals ot khatra wood ; they roll them on the burning
ground ; they make them clasp fiery pillars ' (1033). Illustrations
of these proceedings may be bought anywhere m India.

This sojourn in hell is part of a man's karma, though as we
have seen, Tukaram does not solve the question how merit can be
stored up and operate. He does not try to solve the question how
karma operates, and for himself he prays only that his karma may
be broken up and dispelled by the power of God's name. But
when he is reasoning with the wicked he makes much use of the
threats of hell ; he considers it certslin the wicked will eventually
find wickedness does not pay. For this reason he often stands
amazed at their folly. And having this certainty of punishment
in view he feels acutely how urgent it is that men should reform
while there is yet time. Western thinkers have sometimes con-
sidered that the Hindu system perhaps encourages a procrastinat-
ing attitude towards moral reformation, for if according to the
karma philosophy we have endless ages to accomplish the reforma-
tion, it is easy to postpone this ; especially if after all it is not oneself
that will suffer but some other person theoretically identical.
Whatever is true of Hinduism as a whole, there is one place in
Tukaram's system for this comfortable quiescence : the evildoer will
suffer in hell with a full recollection of himself and his offences.
To learn what Tukaram says on this whole subject all the poems
in Eraser and Marathe should be studied under the headings : ' The
impossibility of escaping our past ', and ' Rebirth '.

Many are his vigorous appeals to men to be prompt and wise.
Make the most, he says often, of what your merit has already
brought you : ' After many lives you have at least been born a
man ; now make yourself a friend of God ' (3537) ; ' after many a
birth you have secured this gam, you have entered a human body '
(958). But how fast the opportunity passes away : ' Measure in
hand, Time sits measuring out your days and nights ; as thieves
follow bhort cuts, so inubt we run ahead of time ' (2302) ; ' no one
can avoid the end ; I have seen hair cherished with scented oils yet
m the end it turned grey ' (2322). Men interebt themselves in
perishable things, acquiring them by questionable means : ' What
will they do when Death with his adamantine chain seizes and
binds them ?' (1029) ; ' neither milhons of wealth can foljow us nor

vni HIS LEADING RELIGIOUS IDEAS 213

the rag upon our loins ' (2326). Yet the lesson is lost upon men :
' You know you are to die, yet you look for foundations to build a
house upon earth' (439) ; 'you watch the bodies of your fellow-men
burned, how IS it the sight does not awake you?' (2396). Such
sentiments inspire the most powerful of Tukaram's poems.

3. The Future Life

Tukaram does not share the Christian interest in the Future
Life. In this he resembles his countrymen who have given little
thought to this matter. Hindu speculation is much more con-
cerned with the question how the world began than with the
question how it will end. It is perplexed as to why the Indivisible
Eternal Spirit came to take the step — so unnecessary, so deplor-
able— of suftering portions of Himself to paf<s out of His control,
but as to how this step in the end will be retraced they have much
less to say. Tukaram follows their lead in directing his specula-
tive interest to cosmogony rather than eschatology. He does not,
however, debate matters much He finds it sufficient that God
created man, created His own ' incarnation ' in order that the bliss
of mutual love might be enjoyed between them. As regards the end
of the world he is quite obscure. Of one thing he is sure, that
the wicked are punished after death. And he seems to regard
' liberation '— the end of personal feeling — as a possibility, for he
often says he does not want it; he even paradoxically seems to think
that a man might go to Paradise, but he does not want that; the
only thing he cares for is that the true devotee may on earth
experience the bliss of the spiritual union with God.

If you ask his followers where he is they will tell you that he is
m Vatkttiitha, the Paradise of Vishnu — not devoid of personal
feeling but a glorified spirit. You may suggest that it is curious
that Tukaram does not say more about his hope of attaining this
end and some will answer that his modesty prevented him from
anticipating such a reward. On the other hand m Mahipati's record
It is said that whenever Tukaram was asked where he was going he
used to say he was going to Vaikuntha (see pages 105, 115-6, 126),
and such a belief may without difficulty be attributed to him.
From all the above it follows that there is nothing in Tukaram's
teaching corresponding to the Christian faith in the resurrection.

Our enquiry in this chapter has sufficed to demonstrate the
impossibility of seeking to reduce Tukaram's religious ideas to
anything like a system. A man's own religious experience, how-
ever, may both be deeper and more consistent than his terminology
would indicate, particularly if as m this case the terminology is that
of a religion dominated by a time-worn philosophy. In the two
remaining chapters, therefore, we shall examine Tukaram's per-
sonal experience of hhakti religion and estimate the value of that
religion for the life of to-day.

MAN'S EXTREMITY*

Ah, then, O God, the efforts all are vain

By which I've sought thy blessed feet to gam.

First there was loving faith, but faith I've none;
Nowise my restless soul can I restrain.

Then pious deeds, but no good will have I

For these ; nor wealth to help the poor thereby ;

I know not how to honour Brahman guests;
Alas ' the springs of love m me are dry.

I cannot serve the gnfu or the saint ,
Not mine to chant the name, with toil to faint,
Pertorm the sacred rites, renounce the world
I cannot hold my senses in restraint.

My heart has never trod the pilgrim's way ,
The VOWS) I make I know not how to pay.

' Ah, God IS here,' I cry. Not so, not so.
For me distinctions have not passed away

Therefore, I come, O God, to plead for grace,
I, worthy only of a servant's place.

No store of merit such an one requires.
My firm resolve is taken, Tuka says.

THE SECRET OF PEACE *

Calm ' is life's crown ; all other joy beside
Is only pain.

Hold thou It fast, thou shalt, whate'er betide,
The further shore attain.

When passions rage and we are wrung with woe
And sore distress,

Comes calm, and then — yea, Tuka knows it — lo !
The fever vanishes

HE LEADETH ME *

Holding my hand thou leadest me,
My comrade everywhere.

Ai I go on and lean on thee.
My burden thou dost bear.

If, as I go, m my distress

I frantic words should say.

Thou settest right my foolishness
And tak'st my shame away

Thus thou to me new hope dost send,
A new world bringest m ;

Now know I every man a friend
And all I meet my km

So hke a happy child I plav
In thy dear world, O (Jod,

And cverv'vhere— I, TukA, say
Thy blibs is sptead abroad

' Calm, or Feari' {Stiiili) * Tranfilaled &C/m Tukaidni, P. M. 6'., pp. 03
.SO. 71.

Chapter IX
Tnkaram's Experience of Bhakti Religion

There is no need at this stage of our investigation either to argue
the case for the inward character of Tukarani's Ihakk religion or
to seek to estabhsh the real moral strain marking it throughout.
Both points should be clear from the preceding pages. Our
remaining task is twofold: to dehneate, as far as the available
materials will allow, Tukaram's own personal experience of the
bhakfi faith ; and then to evaluate his hlwkti as a religion for the
India of the twentieth century. The former enquiry is the subject
of our present chapter, the latter that of the concluding chapter of
the book.

I. Importance of the Bhakti School

We fail to reach the heart of our Dehu saint |until we seek to
understand his experience of that Indian bhaldi which transformed
Hindu philosophy into a religion, effected in India a reformation
and revival contemporaneous with Europe's religious awakening
out of her long sleep of the Middle Ages, and introduced into Hindu
thought a spiritual element which represents India's closest
approximation to the Christian faith. We are not here called upon
to trace the origin of this doctrine of bhakti ' professed by at least
one hundred and fifty millions of the inhabitants of India ' ' nor to
show how in bhaktt ' India rediscovered faith and love ' ". This
has been done in the luminous article on the Bhakti-Mclrga by
Sir George Gnerson in the Encyclopcsdia of Religion and Ethics
and by Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar in Vaishiiavism, ^aivism and
Minor Religious Systems. Suffice to say that apart from bhaktt
we shall miss the deepest secret of Hinduism, its enduring past, its
present trend and its probable future, for bhakti has been the
watchword of that purer and more democratic type of Hinduism
which has enabled the system to adapt itself to all conditions
through the changing centuries. The secret of the enduring
character of Indian bhakti lies in its aspiring after a personal relation
to a deity conceived as personal, in its use of the people's own
vernaculars as distinct from the Sanskrit of the Vedas, and in its
predominantly emotional character. In contrast with that type of
Hinduism concerning which Tulsi Das complained that * the worship

' E R. E., Vol. 2, S39a.
" Ibid 550b.

216 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

of the impersonal laid no hold of my heart ', the religion of bhakti
may be defined in general as a ' clinging of the heart ' ' or a
' personal faith m a personal God, love for Him as for a human
being, the dedication of everything to His service, and the attain-
ment of moksha by this means, rather than by knowledge, or
sacrifice, or works '.' Such a religion, after ages of barren Hindu
philosophy, conld not but make a moving appeal, besides which,
hhaktts power of adaptation to differing environments is greatly
assisted by the fact that ' the highest hhakh may be directed not
only to the Adorable in His highest form, but also to any of His
incarnations '. "

2. Moksha, Yoga, Bhakti in Indian Mysticism

We have already seen ' the attitude of disclaimer adopted by
bkakti ' and particularly by the bhakta of Dehfl, towards the
Vedantic conception of moksha.' How far Tukaram was consistent
and whole-hearted in this attitude we cannot say, but it seems
certain that some of the stages leading to moksha or mukti were
regarded by him as both attainable and desirable. For moksha or
mukti, the goal of an orthodox Hindu's religious quest, has four
stages : salokata, dwelling in the neighbourhood of the Paramatman
or Supreme Spirit; samlpata, nearness to God, 'as near as a
a nestling child to its mother ' ; sarupatS, likeness to God, reflect-
ing His glory ' as the glory of the moon is reflected m a clear still
lake ' ; and selyujyatcl, complete union with God, absorption in
Him, ' as the river is lost in the sea, or as the nectar of a flower is
merged m the sweetness of honey '.' There were blessings ob-
tainable en route to this last goal of moksha — those of salokata,
samlpata and sarnpalcl — which Tukaram doubtless desired. I!ut
connected with the highest stage of all, sayitjyata or absorption m
the Supreme Spirit, there are two features which Tukaram often
controverts: ' there is no persistence of personality '° and as a rule
it is held that the highest stage of religion can only be gained by
Yoga. Both these aspects are disliked and often rejected by the hhakh
school and Tukaram. For the latter see chapter 8, IV. 2, ' Hindu
Methods Rejected ', and in the present chapter pp. 227, 230. How
emphatic Tukaram can be against the notion that man must
lose his personality m order to scale the summit of devotion, the

1 A. S. Geden, Studies in the ReUgioni of the Bast, p. 351.
2L. J. Sedgwick. I.C S, J.R.A.S.Bo., Vol XXIII, No. LXV, (1910),
p. 109.

3E.R. B„ Vol.2, p, 539 b.

4 See chapter VIII. pp. 194-5

5 Mrs. Sinclair Stevenson, Rites of the Twice Born, pp, 197-S,
6/6(rf, p. 198.

IX

HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 217

following utterances indicate : ' This doctrine that God and I are
one is false, I shall not let it interfere with me' (212); 'the
servants of Vishnu are separate from him ' (1685) ; 'Thou art void
both of guilt and merit: we carry them in our hearts, whether
washed away or still clinging to us ' (1686) ; ' had I not been a
sinner, how could there have been a Saviour ' ' — a profound sugges-
tion. See also 1695 with Fraserand Maralhe's note uponit, p. 443,
vol. II. It follows therefore that of the three chief Hindu
' Ways ' to salvation, Tukaram appears to have decisively rejected
both the Dnyan MSrga, the Way of Knowledge, and the Karma
Marga, the Way of Works, while the Bhakti Mdrga, the Way of
Loving Devotion, has had few nobler devotees.

India's mystical tendency, of which Tukaram is so outstanding
an example, has followed, generally speakmg, two chief lines of
development, one of Yoga, the other of Bhakti. Devotees both of
yoga and of bhaktt have experienced a mysticism of a unique kind,
but m the case of the former it has been linked with an asceticism
absent almost entirely from the latter. Eknath, Tukaram's
predecessor, well expressed the difference between yoga and
bhakti : ' The senses that yogJs suppress, bhaktas devote to the
worship of BhSgavat. The things of sense that yogXs forsake,
bhaktas offer to BhSgavat. ^ Yogis forsake the things of sense, and
forsaking them, they suffer m the flesh ; the followers of bhaktt
offer them to BhSgavat, and hence they become for ever emancipat-
ed '.^ The two types have been further distinguished as follows :
' The YogXn seeks the bliss of contact with the Absolute by rigour
and self-disciplme ; the bhakfa seeks it through the beauty of song,
dance and hymn. The former tries to suppress his desires, the
latter to express them. The watchword of the former is
" concentration ", mamly an intellectual effort ; the watchword of the
latter is " devotion," largely emotional " abandon ". To the YogTii,
Peace is the goal of the mystic quest ; to the Bhakta, Joy. Thp
former tri'js to satisfy man's craving for the .changeless by penetra-
ting ever deeper into the spiritual profound ; the latter is allured by
exuberant vitality, expressed symbolically in movement and rhythm.
The former is individualistic, preoccupied with solitary meditation ;
the latter is social, deriving joy and inspiration from the company
of kindred souls. The Yog7n neglects the accompaniments of
sacerdotal worship, and loves the seclusion of forest or cave. ThjB
bhakta makes full use of temple, idol, hymn. The former may
adore Eternal Being whether personally or impersonally conceived ;
the latter's rich and full devotion is directed towards a Kama
or a Krisna who represents the supreme Divinity in human
form.' ^

1 Dr. Macnicol, Indian Theism, p. 270.

2 W. B. Streeter and A. G. Appasamy, The Sadhu, a Study in Mysticism
and Practical Religion, pp. 238-242,

28

218 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

3. Bhakti— Pure and Impure

It is true that the bhakti faith has often grown in unpromising
soil, that it IS found hnked with pantheism and idolatry, that in the
words of Grierson the karma philosophy ' hangs like a pall over it ',
and that the blesting it has imparted has too often been as fugitive
and fleeting as the emotionalism accompanying it. The divinities
to which some forms of bhakti have oiFered their devotion have
occasionally been somewhat ' misty ', and the extravagances of
some other forms have degenerated into gross sensuality, the
female element being so idolized as to lead to disgusting corruptions.
But these degrading elements have been the debasement of bhakti
and from these grosser aspects Tukaram's experience of bhaktt is
well-nigh free, though abhangs like 539, 1301-5, 53, 2495 (and
p. 667 Itidu Prakctsht, vol. 2) cannot be overlooked.' 'There
are bhaktt sects which can justly claim a place among the
higher religions of the world. There are others which counten-
ance, some which even aim at, a religious exaltation which finds
symbols of mystic union in rites of an immoral character.' °

Happily the bhakti experience of the saint of Dehu belongs to
the former type, the erotic imagery familiar to some other forms of
bhaktt being rare in his poems, thus giving the student the plea'^ant
task of studying bhaktt at its best. Such a student, moreover, is
driven to the conclusion that he is studying one to whom bhakti is the
whole sum and substance of religion, of whom it might be said, what
was said of Kablr, that to him ' religion without bhakti was no
religion at all.'

What Tukaram's experience of bhakti meant to him has already
been partly set forth in chapter 5 on the ' Autobiography', while
our eighth chapter sets forth much of his teaching gathering
around the bhaktt ideal. In the sections dealing with the Ideas of
God, Sin, the Means of Salvation, the Obstacles to Salvation, the
Religious Life, The Moral Ideal, The Saints — m all these sections
the exposition of ' Tukaram's Religious Ideas ' deals with most of
the fundamental aspects of Tukaram's bhakti. It only remains there-
fore to bring together Tukaram's personal experience of bhakti and
his teaching about it, seeking to trace the deep underlying idea of
the whole — the soul's quest after God, its faith in God, its devotion
to God.

4. Bhakti Poetry and Terminology

In all study of the experience of Maratha bhaktas two or three
preliminary cautions are necessary. The first is a repetition of
something said more than once in the preceding pages, vj?;., that we

' On these see chap. X, sect, S.
' Slreeter and Appasamy, p. 238.

IX HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 219

cannot be sure of the authenticity of our documents or of the
chronology or correct sequence of the poems on which we have to
rely m our study of Tukaram's experience and teaching. This makes
impossible any deductions as to the stages of his inward progress.

The second reminder is that a poet has his moods and that the
religion of every bhalcti poet was largely a religion of emotion.
Says Sir Narayan Chandavarkar, one of the most enthusiastic of
Tukaram's modern admirers : * To understand the hymns of
Tukaram aright we must. . . trace the difTerent phases of transi-
tion through which his soul had passed. . . (l) exaltation, (2)
humiliation, (3) self-abnegation or self-surrender. Of the experience
of Tukaram while he passed through his mood of exaltation we
know nothing with certainty.' '

The thtrd reminder, perhaps the most important of all, is that
it is impossible always to be certain regarding the exact content of
the terms he employs in expressing the yearnings of his soul. It
is probably as incorrect to read into these terms all the commonly-
accepted orthodox Hindu connotation as it is to give them the
Christian interpretation sometimes adopted. We know his envi-
ronment was entirely Hindu and that the ancient Hindu heritage
had been handed down to him from his fathers. We know too that
he by no means succeeded in breaking loose from that heritage,
even if he consciously attempted to do so. That much of his
religious terminology bore the Hindu stamp is therefore quite
certain. Bat when we ask how much and how far, our difficulties
begin. And yet the question is of the utmost importance when we
deal with fundamental terms such as 'Sin', 'Salvation', ' Faith '
and many others. We are probably safe, however, in concluding
on the one hand that such terms conveyed to him far more than
the merely ceremonial or philosophical implications held by most
Hindus of the time, and on the other hand that they could not have
for him that full ethical and spiritual significance with which they
are invested m the New Testament documents and later Christian
literature. For example, we cannot afford to forget the probable
chasm between his view of God and that held by most of his
modern readers, his own educated followers not excepted ; for even
his loftiest flights of religious communion were probably more or
less connected m some way with the image of Vithoba at
Pancjharpur, Of course on a matter like ihis, no one can be
dogmatic, but it would appear unsafe in light of his poems to rule
out the possibility of his having held communion with God of a
purely spiritual character, altogether unconnected with the idol. In
many abhafigs there would appear to be a measure of approximation
to the richer moral meanings of some of the fundamental terms of
religion, such an approximation indeed as to justify present-day
bhaktns and expositors of Tukaram like Sir Ramkrishiia

I Speeches and Writmgs 0/ 6'iV NiinTyatt ChatuUSvarkar, pp. 525, 557.

220 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Bhandarkar in attaching some deeper significance to Tukaram's
devotional phraseology, as we do in the following exposition. But
so many keys to the understanding of Tukaram are yet missing,
that it is well to premiss the possibility that there may be whole
tracts of Tukaram's experience concerning which every modern
interpreter has gone wrong, ourselves included.

5. Divine Presence and Guidance

Alternating rapture and despair have left a deep mark on all
Tukaram's pages, but on one theme he is unvarying and consistent :
' Cling to God always ; think of God always ; make God part and
parcel of your life.' This is the one steady beacon-light that shines
through all his poems. ' If you place your hopes in anything but
God you will surely be disappointed;. . . when God is made the
settled goal, He bears the burden of that man's welfare and does
not forsake him.'* No particular time is necessary for the
contemplation of God, says he: it should be done always. That
mouth is pure which always utters the name of God. . . So
preaches Tukaram to all people ' ''■' 'Tukaram has his home in the
Inconceivable' (1S7S). ' In the Stainless One 1 have established my
home ; in the Formless One I abide. In the unconscious I dwell
serene' (2755). ' God is ours, certainly ours, and is the soul of all
souls. God IS near, certainly near, outside and mside. God is
benignant, certainly benignant, and fulfils every longing even of a
longing nature. God protects us, certainly protects us, and subdues
strife and death. God is merciful, certainly merciful, and protects
Tuka '.'' ' Wheu thou takest service from anyone, it is service
beyond measure ; when thou givest, O God, though givest without
measure. . . . When thou leavest us, thou leavest us far from
thee ; when thou drawest near, thou dwellest in the very heart '
(1663). ' My spirit is firmly lodged at thy feel ; wherever I am
I will keep my eye on them. Tuka says, I am able to speak
of thee, because God is contained m my heart' (1670). 'Thy
feet are lodged m my heart, they point me out thy secret, O God,
Thy feet guide my blindness, m thy wisdom thou leadest me ; my
mmd is at rest, my senseE: repose; this is no strength of mine, O
God. The difference of guilt and merit — this darkness thou hast
removed. . . . Tuk.l says, This is an act of thy valour, O
Generous One, I know it who seek thy aid' (2147). There comes
next to the last abhaiig in the order of the English translation, one
which might well have been a Hebrew psalm : ' Wheresoever I go,
thou art my companion ; thou takest me by the hand and guidest

I I P. abhaiifi C61. TranbHted by Dr. P. K. Bhandarkar, Two Masters
Jesus and Tukdi am, p IS

i Sir N. G Chandavarkar's trans-lation, Spcecha, and Writings, p. 5'27
-' SirK. G. Bhandarkar's tr& , K.S.iU.R.S., p. 05.

tx HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTl 221

me. As I walk along, I lean on thee, thou goest with me carrying
my burden. If I speak wildly, thou orderest my words ; thou bast
taken away my shame, I am made bold. I look on all mankind as
gods and protectors ; they are kindred and dear to ray soul. Now,
says Tuka, I pray with childish delight; I feel thy bliss within
and without me' (2149). Of this beautiful hymn Dr. Macnicol has
given the charming translation, with the title ' He Leadeth Me',
which we have quoted opposite the title page of the present chapter
In a sermon on this abhafig Sir Narayan Chandavarkar has the
illuminating comment : ' Mark the successive changes of the
relation. We start in life with God as our Master ; we begm by
obeying him ; His will is our law ; and soon the Master develops
into our Friend as we go on serving Him ; then the Master and the
Servant begin to be familiar ; and the Master stoops to serve the
Servant. . . The nectar of Tukaram's hymns is shed for us when
they are sung ; and of this hymn it is especially true. It has no
falls — line rises upon line, thought grows with thought, and the
poet pictures to us our God changing from Master into Friend,
Teacher, Lover until at last His companionship turns Him into
our very being. . . And growth from within means walking with
God, feeling His touch, realizing His presence and communing
with Him, filling ourselves with the spirit of what the Bible speaks

of as the Holy Ghost and the Upanishads term flfftfT^*?.' i
6. The Non-plussed Bhakta

This ' pilgrim of eternity', however, had passed through many a
' slough of despond' ere he reached so exalted a summit. 'O God,'
he cries in one place, ' how many days I have spent m meditation
and in praise of Thee ' To meet with Thee and to enquire of Thee
I came, but Thou dost not even turn to look at me. Not one word
dost Thou speak of concern for my condition. Thou art altogether
silent. I am in distress. For some word of comfort from Thy
lips I waited, but Thou art so unconcerned that it seems as if Thou
hast covered Thyself with a cloak lest my very shadow should
defile Thee. I am ashamed at being called Thy servant.' " Many
passages of Tukaram's passionate pleading with his god remind us
forcefully of that non-plussed prophet of the Hebrew Old Testa-
ment, Jeremiah, who in the paroxysms of his doubt and grief accused
God of having ' played with him and made a fool of him ', as well
as having deceived IIis own people. 'Ah, Lord God!' the prophet
cries, ' surely thou has greatly deceived this, people and Jerusalem,
spying. Ye shall have peace, whereas the sword reacheth unto
the soul. . O Lord, thou hast deceived me and I was deceived ; I
am become a laughing stock' (Jer. iv. 10, xx. 7). ' No need to

1 Su N. G. Chandavarkar'S Speeches and Writings, pp 629-31.

2 Translatpd from M. W. etc., pp. 177-8.

222 LIFE -AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

tone down the complaint of deception,' says Dr. A. B. Bruce/ ' let
it stand there in its unmitigated bluntness. The Divine Spirit,
Author of all noble impulses, judges men by the habitual bent of
their will, not by the verbal escape of their dark doubting moments.'
Nor must we judge the earnest hhakti pilgrim when he cries out to
his god, ' Thou art jesting, thou art joking with me," or ' Thou
hast begun to play with me '? The Hebrew prophet had exclaimed :
' And if I say, I will not make mention of Him, nor speak any more
in His name, then there is m my heart as it were a burning fire
shut up in my bones, and 1 am weary with forbearing and I cannot
contain ' (Jer. xx. 9) ; and our Maratba bhakta cries out : ' Effect
my salvation or acknowledge defeat ; stand fast, O God, by the
words Thou hast spoken. ... I have clung fast to Thee. ... I
am sorely cast down ; I cry to Thee, O God, for mercy ' (1938).
And he waxed even bolder m remonstrance with his god : ' You are
cruel and inconceivable, you are stern and heartless ; you do what
should not be done ; what no other has done, you do. You took
from Harishchandra his glory. . . You brought together Nala
and Damayanti, and you parted them ; this all the world knows. . .
Those who worship you are brought to such straits as these. Tuka
says, We know not what you will do m time to come' (426).
But just as the prophet, despite the self-contradiction, resumed his
mission in spite of his repugnance towards it, so Tukaram, in spite
of the disappointing attitude of his god, will still cling to him m loving
loyalty. Despite the utter unconcern m place of the desired
response, the longsufFering Tukaram resolves he will persist m his
devotion.

It must be faithfully recorded, however, that Tukaram sometimes
expresses views that cannot be harmonized with any worthy
conception of the divine. Along with our hhakta's earnest remon-
strances with his god there are reproaches which go far beyond
either reverent doubt or good-humoured raillery : ' God is a timid
creature; when He sees violence coming He hides Himself ' (1755).
* Why dost not Thou run to my cry ? TThou art keeping thy own
body secure ; for all thy strength thou art turning a rogue ' (1963) ;
' I have now-well learned the nature of God ; . . . people know
thee for a thief and vicious wretch. . . Many found thee false in
days gone by ; this has been my experience too ; Tuka says,
O hypocrite, thou hast moved me to anger ; now I cannot restrain
my mouth ' (2138). Such abuse of his god, however interpreted —
and there are various interpretations— must be regarded as a dark
trail across the bright path of the noblest bhaliti* as is also the
strange idea of sin in ahhang 1862 : ' Fail not m thy duty, O Lord

' the Providential Onler, p. 349
5 Translated from M W. p. 180.

3 P. and M 29t-6.

4 See further chap, x, sect. 5.

IX PIIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 223

of Rakhumai ; it is appointed to us to sin ; it is thine to save the
fallen ; our part we have carefully performed ; thy share must be
done as it will.' That Tukaram had other ideas about sin our next
section will show.

7. Bhakti and the Sense of Sin

How grave an obstruction, in his great quest, was his sense of
sin, Tukaram has made abundantly clear, as we have already seen
on pages 135-137 of chapter 5. Since that section was prepared
for the press there has appeared the eleventh volume of Dr.
Hastings ' monumental Encyclopaedia of Rehgion and Ethics with
iiu exposition of the Hindu teaching on Sin by Dr. A. Berriedale
Keith, Regius Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Philology in
the University of Edinburgh. It must be pronounced inadequate.
Apart from the statement that ' the {Gita) doctrine of grace in
effect overthrows the whole rationale of the karma theory, without
substituting for it any basis of a moral system ', and the mention
of Kabir's ' indignant protest ' against ' sin-destroymg ' ceremonies
that are either non-moral or immoral, there is no recognition of the
depth of moral feeling which characterizes the sense of sm in not
a few bhakti devotees. ' The later Hinduism of the Ptiranas and
the law digests,' says Prof. Keith, ' devote their energies to multi-
plying the number of sins, ceremonial, social and moral, between
which they make no distinction, but at the same time regard all
those offences, of whatever degree, as capable of expiation by
prSya§chittas, ... or by the saving grace of a sectarian deity
whose favour can be won by acts of pilgrimage or devotion of
purely formal character — doctrines wholly incompatible with the
development of any deep moral sense of the heinousness of wrong-
doing in itself '. ' This imperfect characterization entirely overlooks
the deep-rooted sense of personal sin and of moral need which finds
expression in South Indian Saivite saints like Apparswami and
Manikka Vasahar ' as well as in our own Vaishnavite Tukaram :
' The Endless is beyond, and between him and me there are the
lofty mountains of desire and anger ; I am not able to ascend them,
nor do I find any pass.' " ' I know my faults, but I cannot control
my mmd ; O Narayana, stand before me to shield me ; prove thou
art truly called a sea of mercy ; I speak but I find it hard to act,
I am a slave of the senses; I serve thee as best as I can, says
Tuka, be not heedless of me, O Narayana ! ' (1369) ; ' call this
sinful one to thee; do not rake up any memories; root out my
sinful acts * (1503) ; * I know not how to cleanse me of sin, so I
have seized thy feet. . . . Tukii says, if thou dost take a thing in

I E. R. E., vol. xi. p. 562a.

••' See Hymns of The Tamil Saivite Saints, Heritage of India Series,
pp. 43-7, 97-9, 101.

• V.S.ilif.R. S.,p.96.

224 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

hand, what is impossible? ' (2035); ' thy title " Lord of the humble"
is justified in the eyes of men , thou hast saved many a humble,
many a guilty, many a sinful man ; Tuka dwells at thy feet ;
preserve him, O God ! ' (248) ; * my strength was wasted by the
long drag of the senses ' (768) ; ' what can I do now to this mind
of mine ? In spite of all my prayers it will not stand still ; ... it
seeks to drag me down to hell ; ... it is full of eddies of sensual
pleasure; . . . hopes and projects are full of sm; they have
rumed me altogether' (3031) ; ' I heard thy name, thy established
fame as Saviour of the Sinful, therefore I hoped on; now I have
found thee pitiless ; 1 have lost all hope, says Tuka ' (3036).
' What prayer can I put up ? Who will decide that what I say
has found favour ? O Store of Grace, I can form no inference
concerning this ; most piteous cries have 1 uttered ; no answer
have I heard ; up till now, I felt sure that some of my service had
been accepted ; Tuka says, now nothing but the struggle is left me;
I see no sign of assurance m him who stands hand on hip ' (3010).

I am a mass of sin ;

Thou art all panty ;
Yet thou must take me as I arr

And bear my load for me;i

' though I made" myself ceremonially pure, some impurity would
cling to me. . . In every ceremony, errors arise, a fruitful cause of
sm • (296S).

So remorseless was his introspection that even in his kit tans
and in the popularity resulting therefrom he saw 'the snare of
pride' within. Abliang 1858 in Eraser and Marathe has been
rendered by Dr. Macnicol :

None skilled as I in craft of subtle speech ;

But, ah

Who knows my inward part '

I proud became from honour that men paid
To me, and thus my upward growth was stayed,

Alas ' the way of truth I cannot see,
Held fast by self in dark captivity 2

In a sermon on this abliai'ig preached at the Golden Jubilee celebra-
tion of the Poona Prarthanl Samslj, the Hon'ble Dr. Sir Narayan
Chandavarkar said : ' In this abhafig, Tukarfim warns us against
the danger of self or conceit, showing how every moment of our
life we are apt to be victimized by it. . . He says, I started with
the idea of conquering myself but in the very process people come
and praise me which is apt to swell my head. . . . They call me
saint, but they do not know how much of sinfulness there is in me.
They do not know how I have to struggle with myself.' "

1 P.M.S,p.6S.

2 Ibid., p. 76.

.1 Subodh Patrika, May 22, 1921.

IX HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 225

In view of the foregoing and of many other proofs of a 'deep
moral sense' in Hindu bhakias, Dr. Keith and other scholars need
greatly to revise their estimates if they are rightly to understand
India's agelong religious passion.

8. The Quest for Inward Purity

Inward purity thus becomes a prime necessity in order to achieve
the quest for salvation. ' I heed not ascetics and preachers of
Han, their views are many and diverse ; I may salute them out of
courtesy, says Tuka, but what I delight m is purity of heart '
(2632) ; ' let this be your renunciation, to expel the sense of self ;. . .
what you need, says Tuka, is a clean heart and a spirit at peace '
(2309) ; ' blessed are the pious, for their heart is pure ; the saints
worship the visible God, they testify that they have faith therein ;
they know nothing of rules and probibition ; their hearts are
filled with devoted love ' (894).

How shall this needed purity be found ? Not by ceremonies
nor yet by pilgrimage . ' What hast thou done by going to a holy
river ? Thou hast only outwardly washed thy skin. In what way
has the interior been purified ? . . . If peace, forgiveness and
sympathy do not come in, why should you take any trouble ? ' *
* Do not give up food ; do not betake yourself to a forest-dwelling
. . . Dedicate everything you do to God, and have done with it ;
nothing else is to be taught but this.' " Not by anything which this
' helpless sinner ' can do will he wm the haven of rest : ' We cannot
reach this God by hypocritical words ; He knows the smallest thing
that keeps you from Him ' (2187); 'when I look for some means
of escape, I am caught in such a strait that my intellect and
force are reft away, ... I am held as in a cleft by rules and
prohibitions, ... I am tortured by the desires that pursue me ;
now set me free ; I am altogether feeble, O God ! ' (334). For
Tukaram has full confidence that God can satisfy His child's
desire ; ' Tuka says, When God assists, He makes the incomplete
complete' (2218).

9> Where the Path of Blessins:?

How then obtain the divine blessing ? It is a great question
and Tukaram has a great answer : 'It is faith {bhava) that procures
the grace of God ' (812) ; ' my single-minded faith (bhava) has
put an end to pilgrimage to and fro ' (2773) ; ' Tuka says, the
chief thing needed is faith (bhava) ; God comes quickly and stands
where He finds faith' (3671); 'it is faith (bhava) that moves us
and is fitly called the means of salvation. ... If you serve God

1 V.SM.R.S., p. 95. % Jbid p. 97,

29

226 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

without faith (bhava), says Tuka, how will you become fit for
Him ? ' (2597) ; ' says Tuka, without devotion {bhaktt) and faith
{bhSva) everything else is useless trouble;' 'lay reasoning or learnmsr
aside in a bundle, for here faith (bhSva) is the one great criterion ; "'
or as translated in Fraser and Marathe : ' Wrap up and put away
your knowledge ; here faith is what you must trust to' (558). In
Tukaram's own mind there appears to be no doubt that bhava,
translated as faith in all the above cases, is the path of blessmg.
But when we ask his modern interpreters what the word bhava
means they seem to speak with muiBed sound. Sir R. G. Bhandar-
kar defines it as ' faith, love, or the pure heart ' (V.S.M.R.S., p. 109);
and again he says it has different meanings in different contexts and
it is necessary to examine each case;* in the last instance given
above the word meaning simply that heart-religion whereby the
knowledge and vision of God are attained without conscious effort ;
and he supplies a deeply instructive parallel from the Svetaivatara
Upanishad referring to * those who by the heart know the Supreme
Spirit who dwells within '.* Without importing into the word too
much it would certainly appear to be on one side of it a
remarkable anticipation of that heart- trust m God's mercy which
alone brings peace to the troubled conscience. On its more practical
side, what we may call its ethical aspect, Sir Narayan Chandavarkar
well points out that ' this faith on which Tukaram insists ' has for
its ' basis ' the 'three principles of DUn, Daman, Dharma — charity,
self-restraint and self-reverence. . . . The cultivation of these
three virtues constitutes faith and we say with the saint that it i."?
practical for ordinary men to live the life described by Tukaram ?''
It is, however, with the inward aspect that bhaktt is most concerned,
what Tukaram alludes to when he says : ' The great precept of
religion is to hear God in the heart ' (812).

lo. Change of Heart necessary

Without this personal experience of religion, both purity and
comfort will remain as strange to us as sorrow is to a Gujarati
woman who will readily feign grief and will mourn to order for a
few annas a day." ' Fortunate, indeed, are those persons in whose
heart dwells forgiveness, . , . who both internally and externally
are pure like the Ganga and whose heart is tender.' ' The great
problem resolves itself therefore into one of change of heart,

1 V.S.M.R.S . p. 95.

2 Translated from M.W., p. 223.
3iU.W., p. X87.

4 Translated from Ibid, pp. 187-8

5 Sir N. G. Chandavarkar's Speeches, ■■pp. 577-9.

6 ilf.W., p.248-9.

'' R. G. Bhandarkar's tr. of abhatig number 5383 m TukarSm Tstyii's
edition, V.S.M.R,8.,p.97,

IX HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 227

as many at>hatigs quoted above have already shown. ' Whether I
am indeed God's child, truly accepted by Him, how am I to know ?
How shall I know of a surety that my heart is purer, my mind less
tainted with anger ? For if love be not m my heart how has
my heart been changed ?' ' This wonderful seeker, says his greatest
interpreter, points out three ways aspired after in his own experience
of bhaktii (l) personal meditation and worship, m which the whole
powers of mmd and heart are concentrated on God, His words and
saints, the latter especially; (2) personal self-examination, so
intense as to root out pride and self-esteem, and Tukaram's
self-exammation — an essential part of his hhakti — was of a most
merciless type ; and (3) personal self-surrender to God, taking
refuge in Him, so that there is no need of man or of his approval, no
voice being desired but the voice of God, for man is the child of
God his Mother and in that experience he may find a peace
affecting the whole range of conduct.' If Sir Ramknshna Bhandar-
kar's richly-laden Marathi paraphrase of one cry of Tukaram has
not read too much into the bhakta's simple words — a possibility
against which we always need to guard — then in one abhat'tg
Tukaram has brought all the above three ' means ' together. Sir
Ramkrishna's Marathi paraphrase we translate thus : ' How sinful
my body was, O God ! But by meditation, by self-inspection, and
repentant prayer my sin is cleansed and now my mind is full of
love '." Fraser and Marathe render as follows : ' My body was
filthy, but it was cleansed by thy name ; my heart was washed
clean with love ; penitence brushed off the dirt ; the chain of my
deserts was severed; Tuka says, I laid my body at thy feet and
bought myself off ' (2064). With this agrees the commentary of
Mr. V. N. Joga," the meaning of the phrase 'the chain of my
deserts was severed ' being that his * karma was broken ',
illustrating how orthodox Hindii ideas and deeply devotional
aspirations are mingled throughout.

II. The Steep Road to Bhakti's Summit

It was a long, rough road this pilgrim had to travel in quest of
peace of heart. He confesses that his mind by turns is fickle, dull
and restless. Often have faith and devotion been preached to him
but what they really are and how they are attained he does not
know. Let God therefore do with him what He will ; let Him
save or let Him kill ; let Him be near or far away ; at His feet
this seeker will persist in staying, tarrying there m the spirit of a
deep humility, a simple faith in divine protection, and a despairing

1 Translated from HI. W. p. 315.

'■' See V S M. R. S . ^0, 55 ; and M. W., 315-21.

* TranUatcdfromM.W. pp. 143-4.

i See Joga'i. adiUon, vol II, p. Q75 on abhaitg 3997.

228 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

abandonment of self and its whole powers.^ Deeply moving is the
abhaitg expressing this resolve, too long to quote in full : ' Now
thou shalt do as seems fit to thee ; . . . I have sought thee,
all ignorant, ... I cannot rule my waywaid senses; I have
exhausted every efiort ; peace and rest are far from me. I have
offered thee perfect faith (bhava) ; I have laid my life at thy feet ;
do now as thou wilt, I can only look to thee ; O God, I trust m
thee, I cling firmly to thy robe. Tuka says, It is for thee to deal
with my efforts ' (92). In reaching so noble a resolve, despite its
note of half-despair, Tukaram reached bhakh's summit, though he
knew it not. In making the steep ascent, he had been compelled
to leave behind much that had encumbered him, for only by the
bhaktt path could the Eternal be discovered, and the path was
narrow as well as steep. Not by yoga could union with the
Supreme Spirit be attained , nor by mantras. ' The five fires' ^ brought
much tortute but not God. Utterly vain too were all other austeri-
ties, and all mere knowledge. Not by these could th» assurance of
the Divine Presence be imparted to the soul. ' So devotion has been
invented to measure thee withal, . . . for verily there is no other way
to do it. By sacrifice and austerity and union through the body, by
recourse to contemplation, thou cai^st not be found ' (23 1). Thus it
IS only by smgle-hearted devotion {bhakh) that God is reahzed.
To such a heart He appears everywhere and creates therein
penitence for all wrong, says Tukaram ; losing himself in God, such
a one is filled with joy and his ' life becomes entirely fruitful".
On bhakh's summit Tukaram discovered a trio of graces — pity,
pardon, peace — of which he grew especially fond, for we find
them again and again in the hymns he sing<!. The Vtshiiu-d&s
or servant of Vishiju he describes thus : ' Fie who gives to God
simple-hearted devotion which manifests itself m manifold ways,
within his soul there dwells that spirit of pity, pardon, peace which
keeps pain far away ;' * ' there is no Saviour of the needy save
God alone ; for m Him are pity, pardon, peace and those other
eternal graces which are the secret of bliss;' " ' where pity, pardon,
peace abide, there God dwells ; thither He runs and makes His
home, for spirit is the place of His abiding, and where these graces
have free play He tarries;'" 'when I attain the bliss of him who
sees Brahma in all mankind then shall the ocean of my life swell
with billows of joy, my heart will be turned from lust and other
sorrows and in their place pity, pardon, peace will have free
play."

' Paraphrased (ro.n M. W pp. 461-J.

2 See p. 45, la&t two lines.

3 Paraphrased from Hi. W. 179-SJ

* Translated from Jbui -130 , s.ee also F. and M. 1 707.

5 Translated from IbiJ 581.

6 Tianslated from Ibid i35-iC> , b«e another translation, F. and M. 706.
'' Translated from 1 P. 2467 ; bee also F. and M. 21t.9,

as
P

<

H4

Q

<

h
<

n

>
2
w

E

o
w

cu

HI
h

IX HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 229

12. The Fellowship of the Bhaktas

We noted above in passing that Tukaram attaches special
importance to nieditation m company with saints. ' One special
characteristic of the bhakti school,' says Sir Ramkrishna Bhand-
arkar, " ' is that all the devotees meet together, enlighten each other
as to the nature of God and contribute by discourses on Him to
each other's elevation and gratification. This is almost a charac-
teristic mark of bhaktas as distinguished from the Yogins, who
have to go through their exercises singly and in solitude '. ' In the
Marathi bhakti poets ', says Mr. Sedgwick, ° ' the saints, i.e.,
bhaktas, men whose spiritual life is already developed are treated
with extraordinary honour. Their society is to be continually
enjoyed '. According to Namdev, the true disciples of bhakti must
' abide ever near the saints '. We may be very sure therefore that
Tukaram's eager spirit was not out of their company for long.
For the place they occupy in his system see the section on * The
Saints' in the last chapter. Here we are concerned with their
place in his own experience of bhakti '. ' I learned by heart some
speeches of the saints, being full of faith in them ; when others
sang first, I took up the refrain, purifying my mind by faith ; I
counted holy the water wherein the feet of the saints had been
washed. . . I honoured the instruction my teacher gave me in a
dream, I believed firmly in God's name. . . God never neglects
his worshipper; I have learned that he is merciful' (101); ' O
Lord, thou art impatient to serve thy devotees. . . Sages and
samts without number have learned what thy great purpose is ;
imperishable is the bliss thou hast bestowed on those that have
altogether ceased to heed the world ' (747) ; ' there is unending
peace with the saints ' (749) ; ' they dance and clap the hands and
roll on the earth in a transport of love ; my friends are the saints,
the simple and faithful people of Hari; they have no concern
with the world ' (895) ; ' the meal which the saints have partaken
of is a plate of nectar ' ". On the defective aspect of this ecstasy
among the saints, see chapter 10, sections 6 and 8.

13. ' Unsatisfied Relisrious Anxiety '

Stimulated in his inward conflict by the examples of the saints,
and buoyed up by personal faith, Tukaram would appear to
have reached some kind of goal in his soul's great quest. What
goal he did reach, and how intense a ' lover of God ' Who had led
him there he became, is hinted in hymns like the following : ' I
feel an inward sweetness, as I gaze upon my treasure of faith ; God

IV.S.M.R.S.P 20

2J.R.A.S. Bo., Mol.wm, no h,', 1910,p 1J3.

3 L. J. Sedgwick, 's/.iv' A.S Bo., vol ixiii, No. Ixv, 1910, p. 133.

250 • LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

is my bosom-friend, the bosom-friend of this helpless creature:
according to his glorious might let him adorn us with purity.
Tuka says, God eats with us, to give us a share in his love ' (771) ;
' If I praise any other than thee let my tongue rot away. If I care
for any other, let my head be crushed. If I find pleasure in others,
surely it is sinful that very instant. If the ears drink no nectar of
God's glory, what use are they ? Tuka says, If I forget thee for
one moment, what purpose can life serve?' (151). How he
solved that other problem of his haunting guilt the following stanzas
show :

Guard me, O God, and O, control
The tumult of my restless soul.

Ah, do not, do not cast on me
The guilt of mine iniquity.

And again :

My countless sins, I, TukS, say,
Upon thy lovmg heart I lay ^

The self within me now is dead.
And thou enthroned in its stead.2

Students of Tukaram find themselves longing that the above
might be regarded as descnb'ng the final haven of rest reached by
our ' wrestler with the troubled sea' but we cannot be quite sure
that they express more than a passing phase of emotional ecstasy,
not uncommon with devotees of bhakti. If so, we have to fall back
upon Dr. Wilson's diagnosis of Tukaram's highest attainment as
having been one of ' unsatisfied religious anxiety' '.

That there is real ground for this view is shown by the following
considerations regarding our preceding paragraph, illustrating the
constant need of the watchfulness spoken of on page 221 above.
First, the lofty abhang 151, just quoted, is addressed to his
favourite Hari, that name of Vishi^u which characterises him as
* sin-remover '.* Second., the first three stanzas quoted above in
poetical form are given m Fraser and Marafhe (347) as a bitter cry
arising from a poignant sense of sin not yet wholy appeased ; ' Still
my agitated soul; cast no reproach on me ; receive within Thyself
O God, the million oflfences I have committed '. Third, the last
poetical couplet on ' the self ' belongs to a class concerning which
there is a violent cleavage of opinion ; in place of the triumphant
note of self-surrender, one school of thought representing some of
the best authorities interprets the whole clause as expressing the
destruction of personality itself through its becoming absorbed in
the Supreme Spirit.'

1 P.M.S., p. 75.

2 Ibid, p 79.

3 J, T, Molesworth's Marathi-Enghsh Dictionary, p. wvu.

4 See note in V N, Joga's edition, vol. I, p. 87 on abhang 260 there
' Ibid, vol. II. p. 153 on ahhang 2611

IX HIS EXPERIENCE OF BHAKTI 231

Thus our bhakta had not discovered any sure inward stay, but
advanced and receded by turns, suffering as a victim of bhakti's
moods possibly to the end. All these possibilities are indicated in
1434 : ' Such faith (bhava) as once I had I have not now. . . I see
a loss of my capital before me ; I think of the faults of others whom
I see around me, to exalt myself thereby; I am like a cock, says
Tuka, who goes on scratching the dung-hill and knows not if he is
gaining anything or not.' By the very honesty of his introspection
Tukaram here enables us to draw three inferences : first, that his
faith was no abiding refuge — probably because it had no sure basis
(see section 6, in chap. 10); second, his inward life suffered
from a corrupt environment, leading to self-comparison with
imperfect standards ; third, he was still far from the goal of final
spiritual assurance, for he ' knows not if he is gaining anything'.
As we leave him, his heart is all ' agitated' with deep dissatisfaction
concerning his own inward life and concerning his god : what these
meant ' once ' to him they mean ' not now '.

One task remains to complete our inquiry, that of estimating
the adequacy of Tukaram's religion for the needs of present-day
India.

A TRUE DEVOTEE

A true devotee, says TakarSm, is one who not only takes delight in singing
God's praises but holds fast by Him and implicitly relies on Him, one too who
is holy ; and humble m his dealings with others and for whom no distinction of
* mine ' and ' thine ' exists. How is such devotion to be attained ? It is pri-
marily a work of self-discipline to which grace may m time be added. To
promote such self-discipline is the object of this and other Samajes. As such
their work can never come to an end. Nor can they show quick results.
Tukaram's abhaAgs are sufficient evidence of the long and laborious journey
which spiritual progress involves and the ups and downs to which it is liable.
None therefore need despair but all should faithfully and earnestly strive for
their moral and spiritual uplift till death itself releases them from the perpetual
effort and the never-ending strife in whicfh they are placed in this world.

Part of a sermon preached by Mr. V G. Bhandarkar, B.A., LL.B. at
the Opening Divine Service of a PrSrthanS Samaj Anniversary.

Subodh Patriha, May 4, 1919

THE DEVOTEE'S PERPLEXITY

What may I know ' What may I not know ?
To turn to Thee for hght is the thing.

What may X do? What may I not do '
To turn to Thee for light is the thing.

What may I speak ' What may I not speak '
To turn to Thee for light is the thing.

Where may I go' Where may I not go?
It IS well now to remember Thee

Says Tuka, What thou doest is easy.
Righteous acts become sms in our eyes.

Translated from TukSrSm in Subodh Patriha, Aug. 21, 1921.

THE DEVOTEE'S IDEAL

' Blessed are they who in their sojourn in this world carry mercy in their
hearts , who came hither for doing good unto others, but whose abode is in
Heaven ; whose words never come untrue and who are indifferent to their own
bodies; who have sweet words on their lips and big hearts within: so says
Tuka.' •

Translated from Tukaram, Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, Two Masters ; Jesus
and Tukaram, Foreword.

INDIA'S DESTINY

With a liberal manhood, with buoyant hope, with a faith that never shirks
duty, with a sense of justice that deals fairly to all, with unclouded intellect and
powers fully cultivated, and lastly, with a love that overleaps all bounds, reno-
vated India will take her proper rank among the nations of the world, and be
the master of the situation and her own destiny. This is the goal to be reached,
this is tbe promised land.

M, G, Rahade,

Chapter X

Is Tokaram's Religion adequate for To-day?

I. Conclusions reached : Remaining^
Problem

Our studies thus far have established the unworldliness and
other-worldliness of Tukaram's character, the nobihty of his long
inward struggle, and the fact that while he largely acquiesced in the
Hindu formalism of his day there Tyas yet burning in his heart the
lamp of a fervent faith whose light is reflected in his verse. We
have heard his poignant cries for inward peace and through the
three intervening centuries have felt something of his travail of
spirit with his aching heart unsatisfied, fiis life-story represents
the revolt against the ceremonialism and intellectualism of the
contemporary Hinduism and illustrates once more the truth of
Augustine's prayer, ' Thou hast made us for Thyself, and our
hearts are restless till they rest in Thee'. Tukaram's religion was
essentially personal and experimental, surrounded though it was by
a desert of pantheism and a wilderness of polytheism. He supplies
an instance of that epic struggle for a living religion that must have
gone on in many another heart during the long milleniums of
Hindu history. In him we see Hindu bhakti as a religion of spirit
with marks of the flesh still clinging to it. That bhakti should have
blossomed at all in the soil of medieval Hinduism is proof of some
seeds of a«divine life within it, and the combination in Tukaram of
religious fervour and practical kindness establishes in a measure the
ethical value of his bhakti though it often took quixotic forms e, g.,
his attitude to wife and home. His religious life was thus full of
antinomies and incongruities and part of our task in this remaining
chapter is to discover whether these arise from merely tempera-
mental defects or whether they are the warp and woof of his bhakti
faith. In short, we are to try and get behind his heredity and
environment, his emotions and his moods, and see if his religion
can hope fully to satisfy the heart and reason of modern India.

We shall more fully appreciate the wonder of Tukaram's bhakti
religion if we frankly recognize the dark setting of its background.
His bhakti was never entirely free from coarse and gross elements,
for polytheism and pantheism were never far away. It was still
a bhakti devoted to an idol and in tracing out the pat^ he trod we
have to pass through many a jungle of popular mythology. Nor
did bis fellow bhaktas always worship the same God, Ramdas the
30

234 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

contemporary of Tukaram being as devoted to Rama as our poet is to
Vithoba, and in the surrounding society the superstitions of
animism were ail-too manifest. Oftentimes, indeed, our hhakta
himself is found worshipping more idols than one, and it has to be
admitted that irreconcilable inconsistencies concerning the nature
of true rehgion meet us in almost every one of Tukaram's hymns.
It is not surprising therefore that rapture and despair are strangely
mingled and that to the very end he appears to experience far more
yearnings than satisfactions. These and many other defective
elements pointed out in the preceding pages must be faithfully
recorded and they may appear of themselves to answer in the
negative the question at the head of this chapter. Despite,
however, the inevitable influence upon him of the conventional
Hinduism of the 17th century, what we see in Tukaram of Dehu is a
living religion asserting itself in face of the lifeless formalism or
world-illusion of his day. The cry of his heart reveals a deep and
real hunger of the soul. We believe every unbiassed student of
TiJcaram will be driven to conclude that in the religion of bhahii
he was treading the highest ' way of salvation ' of which he knew,
that amid a superstitious environment he somehow communed
with the Supreme Spirit Who as a Personal Being had won his
heart's devotion, and that he possessed that element of true
bhakti which consists in 'surrendering all actions to God', in

* feeling the greatest misery in forgetting God ', and in experiencing

* the enjoyment of bliss which the soul finds m God '. '

In seeking to evaluate, in this last chapter, the contents of
Tukaram's bhakti, and to measure its adequacy for the life of
present-day India, there is great advantage in concentrating our
attention upon an individual Hindu instead of roaming over a
system, for Hinduism is not one religion but many, and its
amorphous and encyclopedic character, which successfully defies
analysis in any single treatise, is not sufficiently recognized by
Western authorities. Seeing the term Hindu covers so great a
variety of religious beliefs and practices as to make it impossible to
point out any single one as all- essential, it is beneficial in every
way to limit our study to a single individual. Moreover, in
Tukaram we have an example of introspective piety of the very
highest type Hinduism can show, one to which increasing prominence
is being given in the writings of modern Hindus, a type indeed in
which the ideals of Christ and of a ' Christianized Hinduism ' are
more and more claimed as being found reflected. In our poet-

1 Hindu students of TukSrSm surmount this difficulty by poinHng to such
abhaAgs as 176 on p. 158 which teach the oneness of Vishnu and ^iva and by
taking a similar view to that of Sir R. G. Bhandiirkar on p. ISl {4th and 5th
lines from bottom of page) to the effect that all idols symbolize one God. R5m
Mohun Roy's ,view quoted on p. 148 and our views set forth in section 5 below
are a sufficient reply to these contentions.

5 makt( Sutras of Narada.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 235

saint we thus see Hindu hhakti at its highest, and as with persons
so with rehgions, we do not know them thoroughly until we see
them at their best. Moreover, in Tukaram we are able to judge
Hinduism by its aspirations, for all his ideals and longings are
claimed as having been thoroughly Hindu. And in our final
investigation we need to remind ourselves once more that Indian
bhaktt is largely emotional and liable to fluctuations, now exalted
m ecstasy, now following tbe philosophical path to impersonality
and uncertainty. This will help to save us from misunderstanding
and censoriousness. Tukaram is a rebel spirit inside Hinduism,
but, whether from want of conviction or of inspiration, he lacks the
courage to become a reformer, a consideration that will help us to
understand his instability, his ambiguities, his hesitations, help us
also to sympathize with his sense of desolation and weariness. An
additional attraction m favour of this individual method of studying
the chief religion of India is that in hundreds of Deccan villages
the beliefs of Tukaram matter ten thousand times more than do the
tenets of the Sanskrit Scriptures. For the problem is exactly this :
Are these beliefs adequate as a moral and religious force to-day for
the milhons in the Deccan, educated or illiterate ?

a. W. B. Patwardhan's Verdict : Tukaram ' One 'Sided '

Indian scholars have faced the problem and, despite their
veneration for Tukaram and his principles, have not been
unwilling to indicate what they feel to be his deficiencies.
Perhaps the best instance is supphed by a discriminating
essay of Principal W. B. Patwardhan's in The Indian Interpreter
on ' Tukaram's Doctrine of Bhakti '. The whole essay of
twelve pages is worthy of the closest study and though
compelled to abbreviate it, we give its substance as nearly as
possible in his own words.

First comes the important reminder that ' it is very difficult to
say what exactly Tukaram preached on any particular activity of
the human mind', chiefly because his poems 'often present a
conglomeration of contrary and contradictory statements, and there
is hardly any clue to lead to a decision'. Even the order of his
verses in the various editions varies in every case ; nor do the
manuscripts that have been preserved agree in the order of abhatigs.'
Moreover, there is 'no standard edition available*, and with 'hardly
any men among us who have made a close study of our literary
masters' and the needed research on ' the individual works of
Tukaram' still awaiting those who may undertake ir, ' it is very
difficult to say what exactly Tukaram was, what he felt and thought.'
Therefore the ' tentative character ' of all conclusions must never
be forgotten.

236 .LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Secondly, we have an excellent sketch of Tukaram's bhakti
experience, and of the conflict within when m ' disgust and despair '
he turned away from the world. ' Where was he to go ? He did
not know, he only felt he was a blind man groping iij the dark.'
Suddenly he falls in with the Wurkarts (on whom see pp. 170-2)
and following their advice he ' adored with his whole heart the idol'
at Pa^^harpur. ' Sing the name of Vitthal and you will be blessed ',
said they, and ' this counsel was like a straw at which the drowning
man clutched'. But ' soon the first fervour was over' and 'recitation
pf the name lost its novelty', so that ' he felt he was as far from his
destination as ever'. To make matters worse, ' he discovered he
had lacked the very first principle of hhakh ' which was * bhSva
(faith)'. Nothing^ could make up for this- ' All my days, O God,
have been wasted."' The question suggests itself : ' Was he an
atheist ? The fact remains that he often castigates himself for
want of bhSvd. He soon discovered ' it was not enough to believe
in God, but that he must also believe in the power of God '. And
after all, ' was not Vithoba— rcalled KrpasSgara (ocean of grace) —
as full of pity as the ocean is of water ? ' Moreover, ' the Lord of
the distressed is my Father'.'' And ' He was also the Mother. Ah !
the Divine Mother', and in this ' profound conception' Patwardhan
sees ' an explanation of the ardour and enthusiasm that has gathered
round Mary the Virgin Mother of Christ ', for * the conception of
the Motherhood of God is perhaps the greatest, the most inspiring
contribution that the Hindu theology, or rather the Vaishijava
school of bhaktt, has made to the religious thought of the world'.'
Nevertheless, Tukaram ' experienced a conflict between his faith
and the tendencies of his flesh . . . Anger and rage and cupidity —
all these passions were still tumultuous'. He therefore tried
' rigorous discipline', looking upon ' wife and children as entire
strangers with whom he had nothing to do ' and he sought ' to lose
his being in the service of Vitthal'. He resolved to ' attain to this
standard of bhakti — would, and perhaps did, live in God will m
will, thought in thought and heart in heart '. But ' the blessings
that result from bhakti. . . I do not propose to dwell upon, for
the fact IS that bhakti. . . . became perhaps an end in itself. . . .
What does life in this world signify when man can go through the
round of its routine without conscious participation therein, when
he can remain in entire aloofness therefrom '?

Thirdly, W. B. Patwardhan proceeds to 'examine Tuka's
Aocttin&oi bhaktt'. He willingly grants that 'it has been able to
superinduce in Tides the most ecstatic flight of devotional imagina-
tion ' and continues : ' But while admitting that, I cannot bring

1 F. and M. 1872.

2 LPs. 3839,

•• At this point come a few lines quoted in our section on 'Tukaram's
Idolatry', pp. 152-3.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 23

myself to be oblivious of the fact that all this is a superstructure
upon a view of life that was at best one-sided. The first turn of
feeling came on the heels of a series of severe afflictions and
bereavements. . . . Tuka's soul naturally under the severe condi-
tions was almost crushed, and unfortunately for us it received a
bent and bias that left much to be desired. His outlook upon
human life and its conditions was warped permanently. ... He
was driven to despair. It was the sense of his own utter helpless-
ness and a desire to get rid of this besetting evil that turned him
to bhakti. His end was individual, the peace and solace and
beatific rest of his own restless soul. . . . Such a view of life
appears to ignore more than half of our life. A view of life to be
a sound basis of our philosophy of life — to be the guiding force of
our life — ^needs to be many-sided. Our outlook on life in these days
has immensely changed. Life with us is infinitely fuller. The
fulness of life and its all-sidedness, as some of the gifted among us
can view it, leave no room for the one-sidedness of pessimism . . .
Tukaram was far in advance of his own time perhaps, but he was
withal a creature of his time. He just moved in the direction in
which his Vaishigiava predecessors had gone before him. In fact,
he walked m their footsteps. If, therefore, his view of life was in
a way narrow, he could not help it. Any view of life that looks at
only one side of it is narrow, be that side the pain or pleasure side.
. . The bhakti of the future, therefore, ought to be broader based,
fuller veined and larger souled. . . It ought to learn to reconcile
the apparent discord, and value both as two halves of one whole.
The diversity of life is perhaps as real as its unity. The bhakti ot
the past, as we have seen, would have very little to do with what
appeared to it of this earth earthy. The hhaktt of the future ought
to blend earth and heaven. It ought to be able to live this life asa
whole, wherein every power and faculty has full scope to grow to its
fullest stature, and is employed in an endless process of develop-
ment and adjustment of present ends to that vast infinitely distant
end. That is to me the sanest bhakti.'^

We have quoted Principal Patwardhan's view fairly fully because
it is not only the view of an Indian scholar of accepted repute but
as preparing the reader for our own conclusions m subsequent
sections.

3. N. V. Tilak's * Bridge to Christ'

With the above verdict agrees that of another great Indian, one
who was ' in the true succession of the Maratha bhaktas' and who
on the occasion of his public break with Hinduism showed in a

^ I.I. April 1912, Vol. VII, pp. 19-30.

238 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

hymn he composed that he was in no sense breaking with India but
was rededicatmg himself to her service :

My wealth, my thoughts, ay, venly,
My life Itself I give to thee,
My Hindistan so dear to me ! 1

We refer to the late Christian poet Narayan Vaman Tilak ' whose
glory,' says Sir Narayan Chandavarkar, ' rests in the fact that he
reminds us of the poets of the great Marathi bhakti school, . . .
not a poet lost to other-worldliness,' but one who * speaks to the
heart of India because he has upon him the stamp of Dnyaneshwar '
and who ' wished to dedicate himself to the service of his mother-
land by poetry, politics and social service.'' How this patriotic
poet of modern Marathas estimated Tukaram's religious value we
have already seen (pp. 165-6), the Christian bhakta pronouncing
those void of appreciation who do not find m Tukarara the very
soul of religious devotion. Tukaram's chief defect, in the eyes of
his Christian critic, is that he makes God conform to his own
changing ideas, thus making religion a sport of the human intelli-
gence, instead of allowing the conception of God to shape his ideas.
So changeful and inconsistent indeed is he that today's opinion is
just as true as tomorrow's opposite will be. Is it possible, asks the
Christian poet, to accept as final guide and helper one so fickle and
with a mind tossed to and fro so much by pros and cons ? Among
seekers he must be esteemed the prince, seekers after the true God,
seeking always, seeking to the end, but among those who have
'attained' he may not be numbered. Such is N. V. Tilak's verdict.
By the bhakii-mcirga was God's blessing sought by this prince of
bhaktas whose personal character must shame many of the great,
the most signal service he has rendered being that in his own land
he has spread rehgion from house to house, bringing spiritual vision
to the despised, leading them to aspire after knowledge and salva-
tion. Then comes the most striking tribute of all from the once
Chitpavan Brahman : ' As for myself, it was over the bridge of
Tukaram's verse that I came to Christ." "

It IS a great testimony, witnessmg on the one hand to Tuka-
ram's enriching ministry and on the other to his inadequacy as a
moderij religious guide, testifying also to the fact that since
Tukaram's day another name has begun to send forth its perfume
through the Deccan country. N. V. Tilak's words, our translation
of which fails to convey anything like the rich fullness of his
vigorous Marathi, are invested with the authority of one intimately
acquainted with Vedic and Hindu philosophical literature, of

1 1 I. July, 1919.
2 DnySnodaya, Sep. 11, 1912.

3Trs. from N V. Tilak's Marathi AbhaAgi, numbered •14-51 in Dnytittoilaya,
May 24, X917.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 239

whom a Calcutta weekly said ' it was of no account to him whether
God sent His light via Benares or Jerusalem or Medina'. His heart
and mind having been captivated by a copy of the New Testament
handed to him by a courteous European on a railway journey, on
three successive nights he had the same dream in which -he heard a
voice, 'Follow Him and fear nothing,' and in his introductory
' apologia ' to his poem, the ChristSyan, singing of his new Guru to
Whom he had been ' led across the Tukaram bridge', this loyal-
hearted Nationalist dedicates his motherland to that Guru in the
assurance that between serving Christ and serving India there is no
distinction.

Patwardhan and Tilak by different routes thus reach the same
conclusion, that Tukaram's bhakii faith is inadequate for modem
India, Tilak the poet adding a supplementary conclusion that
Tukaiam nevertheless supplies an ideal preparation for something
higher. See further his balanced view quoted towards the close
of the next section, pp. 244-5.

4, Indian Comparisons between Tukaram and Jesus

In 1903 an English essay of 55 pages entitled Two Masters :
Jesus and TukarSm, was published by Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar,
while on June 8, 1921, the Hon'ble Dr. Sir Narayan Chandavarkar,
President of the Bombay Legislative Council, stated in The Times
of India, that * the best minds of India ' were * striving to diffuse
among the masses the best that is in the Indian religions and to
show that the best is not different from but is the same as Christ's
teachings '. Since, therefore, on the one hand, our query regarding
the adequacy of Tukaram's religion has presented itself in this
comparative form to Indian thinkers of our time, and since on the
other hand there are students of Tukaram who for one reason or
another may feel the incongruity of such comparisons, the suggested
parallels and contrasts between the Mara^ha and the Nazarene call
for consideration. Moreover, since this opens up the question of
the ' comparative study of religion ' we may as well here state our
attitude to the ' comparative ' principle in its relation to Tukaram's
case. We regard it as an advantage every way to have a definite
criterion whereby to measure Tukaram's ideals, and that Indian
scholars have themselves adopted Jesus as their standard of com-
parison is matter for thankfulness, for it is against such a back-
ground that we are able more surely to discover the deficiencies of
Tukaram's position. We have striven throughout this work to
present Tukaram sympathetically and appreciatively, at each point
giving him the benefit of every doubt, and we believe him to be one of
the worthiest representatives of that Indian bhakti which is ' the
nearest approach to Christianity among India's many cults.' ^ So

; /./., October 1915, p. 131.

240 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH-

many, indeed, are the points of contact between Tukaram's writings
and the devotional terminology of the New Testament that the ques-
tion has been raised whether the Maratha bhahta may not in some
way have been indebted to Christian mfluence. See Appendices II.
III. Happily, educated Indians of all classes more and more
manifest a disposition to investigate the respective claims of the great
complex called Hinduism and of its greatest ' organized rival*. As
Narayan Vaman Tilak observed as far back as 1903, ' all modern
thought has been touched by Jesus with penetrating energy, and
Hinduism is by no means an exception." * If only we can ensure
that there is no mixing up of Christ and Krisna as by the Isamoshi-
panthis in South Behar, and no such unsclioiarly syncretism as that
of a Sanskrit pundit who told his class that the mystic syllable Om
was the equivalent of the Three Persons in the Christian Trinity,
then we may hope that the Indianizing of Christian theology, the
naturalizing of Christianity in India and the Christianizing of
India's bhakti poetry by the Indian Church will enable India
to make a contribution to world-religion of unique and enduring
value. While there can be no tampering with historic facts in the
praiseworthy effort to Indianize Christ's message, yet it is a great
gain that leaders in the Indian Church are seeking to produce a
true Indian bhakti with Indian methods of expression and a heart
wholly Christian.

It is in the spirit indicated above that we apply the aims and
methods of the comparative study of religion to Dr. P. R. Bhan-
darkar's detailed comparison between Tukaram and Jesus in his
English essay of 1903 and — in a later section of this chapter — to
his remarkable Marathi article of about 40 pages in the monthly
magazine Nava Ytiga for March 1921, when he administered a
public and, as we believe, a well-merited rebuke to Mr. L. R.
Pangarkar for his uncritical and fulsome panegyric of everything
pertaining to Tukaram m his ^ri Tuktlrilmace Garitra (Life of
Tukaram in Marathi). Dr. Prabhakarrao "^ is deeply impressed, in
Two Masters, by the great number of comcidences of teaching m
Tukaram's Gatha and the four Gospels, particularly by the ' great
resemblance between the strictures ' hurled against Pharisees on the
one hand and Brahman pundits on the other. ' Woe to you, you
impious scribes and Pharisees,' says Jesus " ; ' a Pundit by his fault-
finding leads others to ruin,' says Tukaram. ' They talk but do not
act,' says Jesus'; 'the Brahmans have worked their ruin by disputa-
tion,' says Tukaram. ' They make their phylacteries broad, they wear
large tassels,' says Jesus ' ; how can Hari be reached by rosaries and

' DnySnodayct, July 9, 1903.

2 He IS thus referred to by Marathi writers, partly to avoid confusion with
hia honoured father, Dr, Sir R. G. Bhandarkar.

3 Moffatt's translation St. Matthew xxui. 13,
' Ibid, xxiu. 3.

" Ibi4, xxiii. S.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 241

markings and such shams ? ' asks Tukaram. ' Irreligious Scribes
and Pharisees are hke tombs whitewashed,' says Jesus* ; ' Gosffvls^
profess that they beg no alms ; they brmg disgrace on their garb,
though they try to play the part,' says Tukaram." Other parallels
in expression between the Prophet of Nazareth and the poet of
Dehu will be found in Appendix II, the poet on occasion also
displaying remarkable similarity of disposition, so that the bitterest
of foes became the most ardent disciples, e.g., the case of
Rameshwar Bhatt m sections 29-30 and that of Mumbajl in
section 31 of our chapter 4. Calling attention to the invectives
employed both by Jesus and Tukaram against religious formalism
Dr. Prabhakarrao notes the price both had to pay. Not only did
both denounce ' those people whose sole religion consisted m strict
religious observances, in not eating or touching what in their view
was unclean, in avoiding contact with people whom they considered
to be low, etc., while great moral laxity prevailed below these
appearances'* but 'we know the outcome of this war with
prevalent religion. One Master was crucified by the hard Jews
and the other was persecuted by the mild Hindus '." The enquiry
IS concluded thus ; ' Who is the greater of the two Masters ? The
question is no sooner asked than answered. One is the Master of
almost the whole of the civilized world, . . . the other is hardly
known outside Maharashtra . . . We plainly see that it has pleased
God to glorify Jesus, and let no man attempt to take away
from the glory. But who was the better of the two Masters? It
is not possible for us to answer this question. . . There is
no room for such rivalry. And I have at times pictured to
myself the pair, Tukaram calling Jesus, " Rabbi, Rabbi ", and
Jesus declaring to the world, " 1 am in Tuka and Tuka is m
Me" . . . But if this essay of mine leads one Hindii to
read the Gospels with reverence, and one Christian to read
Tukaram with the same reverence I shall consider myself to be
amply compensated '.' As, however, Dr. Prabhakarrao takes
up some curious and untenable positions before reaching his
indeterminate conclusion it is obvious the matter cannot rest
here.

Discussing the * historical values ' of Gospels and Giltha, our
author takes up an attitude which would be sustained in no reliable
quarter concerning either set of documents. If Dr. Prabhakarrao
still believes that the Gospels are ' mixed up with legend ' we can
only refer him to a host of works disproving the contention,
the Roman historians themselves not being higher authorities
concerning the life of the first century A. D. than, for example,

1 Ibid, xxiii. 27.

2 See footnote 2, p. 6 for definition.
•! P. and M. 1205.

< Two Masters ; Jesus and Tukaram, p. 8,
"/did., pp. 52-5.

31

242 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

St. Luke's writings.^ Still more unfortunate is the Doctor's char-
acterization of the GsthS as being ' with very few exceptions a
faithful collection of the Tukaram's own sayings', for the answer to
which uncritical assertion we will simply refer to Patwardhan's
view m section 2 above (pp. 235-7) and to our discussion on
pp. 119-26 in chapter 5.

There can be no doubt what would have been the attitude
of our broken-hearted bhakta to any comparison between him
and the Man concerning whom even a Roman judge declared
after full investigation, ' I can find no fault in Him ' ' and
who on one occasion confronted hostile critics with the
question, ' Which of you convicteth Me of sin ? ' ". Contrast
with this consciousness of sinlessness, a consciousness unshaka-
ble to the end and accepted by the world's thinkers as in
no way inconsistent with matchless humility — contrast this with
what Tukaram says of himself. We have already quoted on
pages 50, 135-7 many abhaugs indicating his desolating sense
of sin. Here is one of Dr. Prabhakarrao's own renderings :
'Hear these words of mine, oh saints' I am a great sinner;
why do you love me with such tenderness ? My heart is
witness unto me that really I am not redeemed. People take
outward appearances for realities (P. and M., 126, translate : Men
look upon me with honour, because I follow a track that others
have laid down). Much was I vexed with family affairs. . . 1 cut
off connection with wife, sons and brother, and thus necessarily
became a dull, unlucky wretch. I could not show my face to the
public, and (therefore) sneaked into a corner. By the (cravmgs of
the) belly I was extremely tormented. My forefathers served God'
and hence I naturally worship Him ; let none take it for (my own)
faith, says Tuka.'" Is there a single living thinker, either in East
or West, who could for one moment imagine words coming from
the lips of Jesus expressive of such moral distress as the above ? Can
it therefore be a matter for surprise that many people in 1903 felt
' the incongruity of the comparison ' ° Dr. Prabhakarrao had drawn
between sin-stricken Tukaram and One accepted by millions as their
Sinless Redeemer ? This matter merits closer attention. ' Is there
anything in Tukaram's Gstha\ asks our author, 'which supplies
a want not satisfied by the Gospels ? Most assuredly yes . . .
Tukaram has left us for our guidance an invaluable record of his
doings— of /lis double strife with the world outside and his own mind
inside. He has shown us by his own example " that of ottr vtces

I See the works of Sir W. M. Ramsay, Dr. Hastings' Bible Dictioftary,
etc., where fuU bibliographies will be found
» St. Luke xxui. 14 , St. John xviii. 38
' St. John viii. 46.

* 'This God '—P. and M.. 126.

* Two Masters, p 5.

" Dnyanodaya, Oct 8, 1903.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 243

we can frame a ladder" ... as a pattern after which to
construct our own and scale the heights.' ' There is, however,
in all this not a word regarding the conviction of milhons of people
all over the world that in the Jesus here made the standard of
comparison there were no ' vices ' of any kind, nor any ' strife with
His own mmd inside '. Possibly Dr. Prabhakarrao would say that
this claim is part of the ' distorted image of Jesus presented by the
Gospels '.^ But such an evasion does not explain the fact that
millions of sin-laden souls affirm they have '^really been redeemed '
by this sinless Jesus. Since, however, the ' ladder ' of Tukaram's
lifelong conflict with 'his own mind inside '^is actually set forth as
the one point of superiority to Jesus and as 'a want not satisfied by
the Gospels', the question presses for an answer, which of the
' Two Masters ' is more likely to be of help, the Smless One who
says, ' I voluntarily lay down my life for my lost sheep *, or the
despairing bhakta who cries, ' I have sought thee because I am
fallen ' (i860) ; ' I am vicious, guilty, how guilty, how can I tell ? '
(1881) ; 'what shall I do with this mind of mine ? If I restrain it,
it chafes the more and leaps down into a wrong place ... It
likes not to worship God or to hear about Him, and runs at the
sight of sensual objects '.'

When we examine the Tukaram ' pattern after which ' we are
' to construct our own ' we find in it several aspects for which
Dr. Prabhakarrao honestly feels he must apologize, affecting both
Tukaram's life and teaching. We shall have to note in a later
section (see section 8), how he apologizes for Tukaram's 'far from
dignified * way of speaking of women, and indeed on this question
he knocks away the Tukaram ' ladder ' altogether, for in his
Marathi article in the Nava Yuga he states quite plainly
that Tukaram cannot be regarded as a ' pattern ' in any of
the problems affecting India's women. He further apologizes
for Tukaram's coquetting with the pantheism of his country,
for his inability completely to understand it, and for the in-
consistencies that mar his teachings at every stage. And, gravest
necessity of all, he has to apologize for Tukaram's idolatry, though
he minimizes its gravity by bringing forward the Prarthana
Samaj theory that it was only ' at an early stage (our italics)
of his religious life he was a pure idolater and a polytheist', on
which theory see our second paragraph, p. 150 above. It seems
tragic that there should be any need to ask the obvious question
whether Jesus was ever an idolater ? Dr. Prabhakarrao has unfortu-
nately defaced the pages of his book by the five words we italicize
at the end of the following sentence! ' It is true that Tukaram
never looked upon idolatry as an absolute sin — no Hindu would,
and perhaps no man should.' There is no need to answer this

' Ibid . pp, 50-2. our italics.
' Ibid., Foreword page.
3 Ibid., p. 19.

244 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH-

conclusion, unpardonable as coming from a Prarthana Samajist,
for Its author himself m his later article in the Nova Yuga wrote
burning words on idolatry, words which leave little to be desired.'
But we press one question arising : If Tukaram's bhaktt tolerated
idolatry, one of India's most degrading forces, is it possible for such
bhaktt to purify and uplift India's millions ? See further in our next
section, pp. 246-50 ; also our ' Additional Notes ' m Appendix IV,
where we reply to Dr. Prabhakarrao ; criticism (of the above
position) published in the Subodh Patrlka of Oct. 30, 1921.

Two other Indian scholars of deserved repute rejected Tukaram
as a religious guide largely on account of his attitude to idols.
Ganpatrao R. Navalkar, famous as grammarian of the Marathi
language, at the end of a dispassionate investigation concludes that
Tukaram 'was not repelled by the gross immoralities of the
AvatSraSt'^ while the Rev. Neheraiah Goreh, formerly known as the
Brahman Nilakanth Shastn Gore, in a treatise extremely, perhaps
unduly, unfavourable to our poet throughout, af35rms that Tukaram
'believes like other Hindus in Krisna's immoral acts'."

Where such extremes meet, with Pangarkar and Prabhakarrao
Bhandarkar on one side and Navalkar and Goreh on the other,
something has clearly gone wrong with the principles of interpreta-
tion. These conflicting views appear to be reconciled in the
reasoned conclusion of the late Narayan Vaman Tilak, in an
unpublished paper he handed to us when it seemed probable he
would be a collaborator in publishing this book. Of the poet
whose verse had been a 'bridge over which he came to Chr'st *
(see page, ?3% in this chapter), he observes : ' You can find much in
Tukaram's poetry that runs paiallel with the teachings of Christ,
save Its principles and spirit. These latter, eclectics such as the
Prarthana Samajists easily read into his words, and when they
cannot do so they put them there. Tukaram's poetry is based on
his own experience of life, which makes his poetry like a picture
gallery where his own life is exhibited in pictures, and since the
lives of Christ and Tukaram differ, their teachings must necessarily
differ. As a religious enquirer, I made a careful comparative study
of Jesus and Tukaram, because I first tried to follow Jesus without
being Ills, and I found out that, since merely ethical maxims and
sentiments are not enough to make a religion, Tukaram has nothing
m common with Jesus. But he was a saint. Of thesje Hmdfl
saints I have said in my Clirisftcyan: ' "They are far from Thee,
and yet they are Thy devotees — none need doubt this; they are
genuine saints who live for Thee." Tukaram was one of the

' See our p. 150,

^ Tukaniiii, MahanisMrian Poet and Sumt, p. 33.

'• Tanctbof Tiikaniiii, pp. 11-2.

* N. V Tilak's. posthumous M.Trathi poem of the Life of Christ in which
the poet bad nearly completed the Jncarnation iection when he passed awav,
May 8, 1919.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 245

greatest saints of India, and as such he has influenced and is still
influencing the devotional trend of his people. In the case of us
Christians, he is one of the most powerful of sidelights. Only a
a few weeks ago he threw me into the very arms of my Lord.'

Our own study of Tukaram's experience and autobiography
has convinced us that could the message of Christ have fallen
upon his ears it would have met with a favourable reception by
the Maratha saint. His heart was so utterly broken by his sense
of sin and of moral inability, his yearning after God was so
insatiable, his inward despair seemed so far from final satisfaction,
his rapture so ecstatic whenever he seemed to have a glimpse
of the distant goal, that we believe he would have felt every
problem of his soul had found solution had he heard of Him whom
the New Testament proclaims as the living Christ, God's Revealer
to men, man's Saviour from bin's guilt and power, and the Sender
of the indwelling Comforter as man's ' Friend-in-Need '. Could
the poel-saint of Dehu only have heard Christ presented as the
manifestation of God's redeeming love to a world of sinners, we
believe his despairing heart would have leaped for very joy. In
addition to what is stated in Appendix III regarding the improbabil-
ity oi Tukaram's ever having directly heard of Christ or of his
ever having come under definite Christian influence, we would
point out certain Christian fundamentals which are missing from
his pages, truths which would so completely have harmonized with
his deepest aspirations. The Resurrection has already been alluded
to m passing (see p. 213) a truth which we believe would have
assured Tukaram of the Living Divine Companion be so often
longed for in seasons of disappointment with his god. To this may
be added that other fundamental truth of the redemptive sacrifice,
which would have answered his haunting sense of guilt. The
all-enriching conception of the indwelling Spirit of God would have
satisfied his yearnings for union with the Unseen, supplying him
with a reforming, dynamical energy m place of the static, traditional
system of the surrounding Hinduism. And lastly the avatOra on
the brick at Paijdharpur meant so much to hira that could he have
known of the wondrous Incarnation ' beneath the Syrian blue * we
can easily believe it would have satisfied every longing of his
aching heart. As Ganpatrao Navalkar observes : ' The times in
which Tukaram lived and preached were characterized by an
intense nationalism, just as the present, and at such times what is
new and foreign does not command serious attention. Still we
may believe that one who had known so much of higher truth and
expressed it with extraordinary power might have been attracted
by the glorious embodiment of it in a living person and that he
would have offered Ilim his heartfelt homage. . . Tukaram
would not have approved a narrow patriotism, ... for he enjoins
the universal acceptance of the supreme claims of truth ', un-
influenced ' by considerations of the source from which it is derived',

246 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

teaching that ' when one stands in need of sugar, he should not
enquire into the caste and family of the grocer who sells it.' ^ See
further our paragraph in Appendix IV, ' Additional Notes,' relating
to Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar's attack on the 'child-like faith' of
the Dnyanodaya.

5. Has Tukaram a Soul -Sustaining View of God?

True religion, such as shall sustain the soul m all Jife's crises,
must be rooted and grounded in a worthy conception of God, As
an English thinker has put it : 'In religion we should take care of
the great things, and the trifles of life will take care of themselves.'
Probably all will agree that the greatest thing religion has to ' take
care of ' is its doctrine of God. We have already noted our saint's
profound religious aspiration, into what transports of ecstasy his
soul can soar, and as an American preacher states, 'in regard to all
religious feeling ^we mubt ask of its parentage and its oflfspring'.
Of what divine ' parentage ' is Tukarara's bhakti the offspring ?
When a man spends so much time in the company of his god as
does our bhakti devotee it means that that god is leaving an
ineffaceable impress for either good or evil. What then is the
character of Tukaram's deity ?

Rehgion, if it is to quicken conscience and sustain the soul,
must be unshakably founded on the Holiness of God, and Tukaram
has but a varying conception of this cardinal doctrine ; he certainly
does not realize that this truth ts cardinal. Many sections in this
book have pointed to this conclusion, especially such a section as
that on ' Tukaram's idolatry ' at the beginning of chapter 6, but to
see his experience of bhakti in its true perspective and to estimate
Its religious value for to day we need always to bear the matter m
mind. We may safely pass over unessential details marring
Tukaram's conception of the divine — for many such elements India's
educational advance will of itself sweep away — and concentrate on
the fundamental aspects. That God is eternal, true, illimitable,
ultimate is clear from Tukaram's verse. But what of the all-
essential Holiness? Here is an element on which we must
always insist. What sordid aspirations sometimes mar the
earnest longings of our hhakta is clear from an abhang like 539
in Fraser and Marathe on the unchastily of the cowherdesses :
'The wives of the cowherds became immoral and unchaste
and committed adultery with God : but what he gave to them he
gave to none other, for he became entirely one with them. Unholy
deeds we should commit, if they bring the possession of God.'
Such words as these, however interpreted, mean at least two
things: first, that the idea of God inspiring Tukaram's bhakti

' TukarStn, MaharSihtrian Poet and Saint, pp. 22, 33.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 247

needs much purifying before it can regulate man's wayward
conscience ; second, the bhakti itself needs to be ethicized if it is
not to degenerate into moral turpitude. Both needs are clear also
from Tukaram's lines numbered 25-30 on page 667, vol. 2 of
the Indti-Prakash edition, lines not translated by Eraser and
Marathe : ' By the touch of Hari they became Han themselves and
were unable to express their joy. While following the traditions
of their families they enjoyed the Endless One by adultery. Hari
enters their hearts, refusing his presence to all others, and blessed
are they who live in him. He never permits them to lack anything
and he keeps them safe everywhere. The ways of God are mys-
terious even to Brahma and others. Such a God the GopTs made
their own (or, God is what His devotees make Him, i.e,, He does
things to satisfy His devotees). Blessed is their adultery, says
Tuka, for they have secured unbounded bhss.' We have already
explained on pages 31-33 why the allegorical interpretation of
such things cannot be accepted as worthy of religion and we will
only add that even if such a line of interpretation were eventually
established it would still remain true that such expressions are the
wrong way of conveying truth. Similar deflections concerning the
divine character are found in the ' complaints ' of Radha, Satya-
bhama and Sita in Eraser and Marathe (1301-5), while abhang 53
has the pernicious notion that the utterance of a mere mantra with
the name of God in it will palliate sin, and 24-95 encourages the
dangerous doctrine that God may sin through human agency :
' Narayan compelled Dharmaraja to utter a falsehood '. Since our
enquiry in this section is entirely concerned with the doctrine of
God m its bearing on Tukaram's adequacy as a religious guide
to-day, it would not be allowable, in extenuation, to trace these
things back to his ancient teachers or recognized scriptures, for that
would necessitate an enquiry into the teaching of the two foundation
scriptures of Maharashtra, one of which, the BhSgwat PurSiia,
among other grave aberrations on the part of the gods, in X. 33,
30-35 says : ' The transgression of virtue and the daring acts which
are witnessed in gods {ISvaranSm) must not be charged as faults
to these glorious persons . . . Let no one other than a god even
in thought practice the same . , . The word of gods is true, and
so also their conduct is sometimes correct." Where there are such
aberrations m conceptions of the divme character itself, it means
that the polestar of true religion has become a shifting factor, for
what is not good can never be divine, and where ' adultery with
God ' is pronounced ' blessed', even though it be by way of allegory,
the inevitable result will be that man must ' relax into an adultery
of the soul', which is exactly what we find in the idolatrous condi-
tions of Tukaram's land,

I Our italics, ref. from Crown of Hinduism; see also pp. 398-99
for similar teaching by Ramannja, the greatest of bhakti theologians, by Tulsl
Das (pp, 395-434) and by Govindacharya (p, 320).

248 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

Multiplicity, as well as immorality, has deformed the idea of
God m Tukaram's pages, and this robs God of His supremacy, just
as the other factor robs Him of His purity. But the Living God
must not only be pure, He must be One and Alone. Wherever
there is a host of gods and demons, as there is in well-nigh every
village in the Deccan, wild confusion is introduced into man's
conceptions of the Universal Ruler. The bewilderment of
polytheism is always closely linked with the absence of a supreme
Holiness, as the bewildering and immoral stories of the PwrCcnas
show. Let men go wrong in their view either of the divme unity
or of the divme purity, they will go wrong on all else besides.
Tolerance of evil or of disunity in God will mean confusion m the
whole of man's religious ideas. Hence the belief that the agelong
proximity of Muhammadanism, with its stern view of the oneness
of God, to polytheistic Hinduism may be part of India's Providential
preparation for a purer faith. Tukaram it is true sometimes
condemns the gods m the village pantheon, as for example,

A stone with red lead painted o'er,
Brats and women bow before , *

but It is mere denunciation and is only occasional, for in other
places he can say that where 'village gods' are neglected it is a sure
sign of the Kah Yuga or dark age. It is therefore quite gratuitous
for Dr P. R. Bhandarkar to pronounce as ' perverse ' those who
cannot agree with him when he affirms that ' even a cursory
reading of Tukaram's works will show that he uses these words
(Pandurang, Ke^av, Vithoba, etc,) merely as synonyms for God '.''
The mass of evidence, some of which we have given m the section
on ' Tukaram's idolatry ' in chapter 6, cannot be so evaded. Dr.
P. R. Bhandarkar must surely know that these and many other
deities are so consistently viewed by the people as living beings
that the god Vithoba is regarded as going and staying permanently in
several places at the same time, a place like Vitihalwadct, 20 miles
from Poena, for instance, to receive the worship of a particular
bhakta. Are such deities to be viewed ' merely as synonyms for
God.' If so, then the unity of God is reduced to a mere phrase,
and confusion of a perilous kind is introduced into man's whole
conception of the Divine Being. Not by such ambiguous methods
did the monotheistic prophets of Israel overcome the idolatrous
tendencies of their people. Neither is it in this way that Deccan
idolatry will be extirpated. ' In every age,' says a Basel com-
mentator. Dr. C. Von Orelli, * ambiguous language has helped to
distort religion.' Hence the uncompromisingly clear message
through the prophet : ' I will take away the names of the Baalim
out of her (Israel's) mouth' (Hosea. li. lS-9). By 'the Baalim'

1 P.MS p 23.

8 Two Masters, p, 34t

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 249

were meant the different varieties of the one national deity wor-
shipped m different places, and as Dr. Cheyne says on the passage,
the danger to the religious purity of Israel is viewed as being so
grave that, ' tenacious as the popular memory is, the unholy names
shall be expunged from it', A later prophet declares on Jehovah's
behalf: ' I will cut off the (very) names of the idols out of the land'
(Zechanah. xui. 2). And as with the Israel of the 8th century B. C,
so with the Deccan of the 20th century A. D., the only possible
antidote to idolatry is its utter abolition and the complete removal
of all possibility of such compromise and ambiguity as may arise
from identifying idols with the Living God.

When an educated Hindu brushes aside this question of idolatry
with the remark that an idol is a mere symbol reminding the wor-
shipper of the Living God, he is able to refer to some of Tukaram's
abhai'igs which look in this direction. See p. 152. But this
attractive theory is completely negatived by the ' hfe-implanting '
ceremony called prtftiapratisthci — see p. 148; it concedes a great
deal too much to the ' spiritually lame ' who thereby become ' con-
firmed invalids' (see p. 150), for the masses of the people can
hardly be expected to draw the fine distinction between a symbol
which IS not to be worshipped and the Living God said to be
symbolized; besides which, it overlooks the terrible results of
religious ambiguity as seen m the widespread character of Deccan
idolatry — see p. 153. Behind the first and second commandments
given to Israel on Smai there lies a religious philosophy infinitely
wise and far- seeing. Just as the first commandment, 'Thou sbalt
have no other gods in front of Me ' ', has m view the sin against
God's unique Personality, so the second commandment, * Thou
shalt not make unto thee a graven image ', has m view the grave
offence of sinning against the spirituality of God's Nature, seeing
it is impossible to represent His spiritual Being by any material
likeness. When Israel ' heard the Voice ' of God they ' saw no
form', and therefore to *no form' or image must they yield
homage, ' lest they corrupt themselves ' (see Deuteronomy iv. 12-6).
Hence the sternness of the second commandment against image-
worship with its terrible words about the ' jealousy ' of God lest
any image, even of Himself, should be worshipped. In its last
resort, the sin of worshipping idols as mere symbols of God — were
such worship possible, which is doubtful — is the sin of misrepre-
senting the Supreme Being, for God is Spirit, and no symbol or
ideahzation or personification can ever * photograph ' Him to the
human mind, since the loveliest of external images is inferior to the
lowest of spiritual ideas. Therefore, to seek to satisfy our concep-
tion of God by localizing Him is to limit and fetter our thought of
Deity, so that the ' great fathomless, shoreless Ocean of the Divine

1 The rendering of the Hebrew in Exodus xx. 3 by Dr. Driver, whose note
on the phrase ' in front of Me is, ' obliging Me (uriwilUngly) to behold them .'

32

250 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH

Nature ' becomes a ' closed sea '. To change the figure, idols or
images inevitably mean a petrifying of those spiritual ideas which
should ever be expanding, and substitute a visible fellowship for
spiritual communion with the ' Father of our spirits ' (Hebrews
xii. 9). Nor does it mean only limitation and petrifying of our ideas
about God, for degradation soon sets in. The Brahmo Pandit
Sitanath Tattvabhushan has shown that the degradation of Vaish-
ijava worship 'from spiritual contemplation resulting in exalted
feeling, to the worship of images with material offerings ' is to be
clearly traced to the fact that ' the Supreme Being was represented
as of the human form with a female consort, both having human
passions and appetites', as set forth in the Brahma-vaivarta-
Purat'ia. * All these implications lay behind St. Paul's argument
against idolatry before Athenian philosophers (see especially Acts
xvii. 29) and behind his scathing exposure of idolatrous conditions
in the Roman world when he denounced ' the folly of misrepresent-
ing the majesty of the immortal God by making images of mortal
men , . . and calling them representations of Him' (Romans
i. 23, A. S. Way's translation). On this matter of such fundamental
importance Tukaram must therefore be pronounced an unsafe
guide and our conclusion is that, if Tukaram 's people are to
receive the needed conception of God as far as His unchallengeable
Superiority and Holiness are concerned, then Tukaram as a teacher
for to-day must be deemed insufficient.

This is not a treatise on Hinduism in general, but it must be
pointed out that Tukaram's •^lew of God is further hampered by
the presuppositions of all Hindu thought, such as Pantheism,
Karma and Transmigration, by his coquetting with them much
too often, and by his halting between two opinions regarding them.
We only need refer to the relevant sections in our previous chap-
ters, and point out the bearing of his ambiguities and contradictions
upon his working conception of God. ' India is radically pan-
theistic from its cradle onward ' says Barth, and Tukaram dallies
with the idea sufficient to make impossible a religion of assurance
and trustful certainty — hence his many cries of despair. The
Pantheistic idea of God is a total denial of divine freedom, robs
life of the comfort arising from Providential control, and takes from
prayer its nerve and soul. Not for ever will educated India be put
off with this time-worn philosophy — for it cannot be called religion
— which holds no comfort for life's lonely crises. ' Can't you tell
me somethtfig which will comfort me '? was the touching appeal of
a Bombay Indian lady who had lost her only daughter. As sure as
the stars move in their courses, India will refuse to he comforted by
a philosophy which robs God of all power to help the broken-
hearted or to heal the sin-stricken spirit. Pantheism, Karma and
Transmigration are a poor substitute for the Living Father. They

' Indian Messenger, October 23, 1921,

X IS TUKARAM*S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 251

crush hope out of man's soul, so that the music of God's forgiving
love cannot be heard within. We would not deny to our lonely
bhakta the one crumb of comfort which according to W. B. Patwar-
dhan he enjoyed : ' The infinite round of reincarnation itself loses
all its terrors before the prospect of the continuance of the
privilege of association with God m hhakti. If Tuka could keep
on serving his Lord, if he could practise bhaktt as he finally came
to conceive it, he would not mind, yea, he would even pray for, a
return again and again into this world '. ' Of this morsel of comfort
we would not rob the despairing samt, though W. B. Palwardhan him-
self admits it was but an anodyne, deadening the effect of the fanciful
reincarnation 'terrors' and the bhakti which could do no more
than this was indeed ' an end m itself ', much too ' individual ' m its
goal, with no assurance of immortality for Tukaram's many friends
»snatched from him by death's cruel hand (see pages 83-4, 138-9)
or for himself when his own turn came. As one thinks of the oft-
bereaved bhakta in the quiet town of Dehu he finds himself longing
that the sorrowing man might have been supported by the soul-
sustaining truth set forth in St. John's Gospel, chapter xi, and in
chapter xv of St. Paul's first letter to the Corinthians.

6. Can Tukaram's ' Avataras ' Assure Salvation ?

Tukaram's religious life, or the greater part of it, is wrapped up
with Vithoba's ' incarnation ' {avatara) of Vishnu, the latter being
regarded as existing in five forms — as absolute, by emanations,
' mcarnations ', saints, and images. We have already seen on
pages 26-33 how great a place the whole idea of ' incarnation '
\aoatSra) has m India, one of the strongest possible testimonies to
India's innate religiousness and its agelong passion for salvation,
the latter term in this section meaning not release from rebirth but
deliverance from sin. Incarnation, if it is to assure salvation to
men, must be supported by two kinds of evidence, the first histori-
cal, the second ethical and spiritual. There must be historical
certainty, and there must be the moral and religious assurance of
lives transformed and of hearts and consciences set at rest.

Does the ' incarnation ' worshipped by Tukarara, and implored
by him for salvation, stand the historic test? Is there historical
certainty regarding the Krisija 'incarnation' who stands on the brick
at Pa^dharpqr ? Since God is separated from man and must choose
some means of spanning the dark ocean that lies between Himself
and man's despairing heart, what kind of historical proof is there
that He has spoken to man in Kpisija ? Since Tukaram's intense
bhakti must be regarded as that cry of the human heart for com-
munion with God which He must answer, have we reasonable

1 /. I., April. 1912, p. 28.

252 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH

assurance, nay unbreakable certainty, that He has manifested
Himself through Kpis^ja — the Krisj^a about whom we have some
thirty pages of poems from Tukaram in F. and M's translations ?
And since the comparison with Christ has been brought in by Indian
thinkers (see section 4 above), and since for His Incarnation there
is the twofold assurance required (see below), can it be said that
Kps^a's claims as an ' incarnation' are in any sense comparable
with His ? The historic spirit is so much at work to-day in India,
producing innumerable modifications m the whole idea of incarna-
tion, a process intensified by Christianinfluence, that many thought-
ful minds are asking the question : What if, after all, the avaiaras
are shown to be mythical ? A sample of this process is given on
pages 30-3 and in view of the considerations there set forth it is
surprising to read in a journal like The Indian Social Re/ormer
for August 28, 1921 that, although, as is admitted, 'there is no
reference to Krisjja in contemporary foreign literature,' yet ' to the
Hindu there can be no doubt about ' his historicity, no grounds of
any kind being assigned for this wholesale swallowing of a difficulty
which constitutes to-day probably one of the most haunting problems
m thousands of Indian minds. Such haunting doubt is m accord
with the protestantism of Kabir who plainly declares the ten
avaiaras to be ' dead', a point our Tukaram never seems to reach.
The bhakti theory being that God's manifestation and man's salva-
tion are both to be accomplished through the medium of avatSras,
it becomes a matter of the highest importance that each avatara
must bear the closest possible historical scrutiny, for if it appears
that the avatSra is but ' a cosmic legend,' then the solid usefulness
of bhakti as satisfying either heart ot intellect will be gravely
diminished. For the veiy essence of Tukaram's bhaktt is in its
being lavished on the idol supposed to embody the ' incarnation ',
and if this latter will not bear the searchlight of ordinary historical
investigation, it means the bhaktt is misplaced and misdirected.
Hence the ever-recurring unsatisfiedness of heart and mind in our
earnest bhakta, such as none but the Living God, manifested in a
Supreme Person, can ever appease. The great initial advantage
yielded by the historicity of the Incarnation of God in Christ does
not depend on the ' few and vague references ' to Ilira * by contem-
porary Roman writers,' ^ but on the fact that the historic reality of
Jesus has withstood the most seaiching investigation in the history
of mankind, and on the further /<tc^ that the purifying power of I lis
personality has become a historic factor testified to by millions oi
witnesses representing every race.

But what of the actuality and personahty of those ' incaniationt, '
{avatSras) of Vishpu to which Tukaram pinned his faith ? The
Brahmo Pundit SUanath Tattvabhushan of Calcutta affirms : ' The
Vishnu of the Purciftas is the universe conceived as a person. . .

'Tfte Indian Social Reformer, August 28. 1921.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 255

The PurSAas represent what is only a figure of speech as a person
in flesh and blood moving about and conversing with his creatures.
The Ignorant and thoughtless reader of the Purcii'ias does not see
that their authors are indulging in poetic fancy and takes them as
stating facts. . . But the writers of the Purafias can hardly be
blamed for this. They make no secret of the fact that the repre-
sentation of Vishiju as an embodied person with limbs and organs
like those of a man is purely metaphorical." * In face of these
withering words, can the historic reality of Vishjju's ' incarnation '
at Pagdharpur be regarded as tenable ?

If, then, the historic test fails when applied to Vishiju's ' in-
carnation ' worshipped by Tukaram, what of the ethical and spiritual
test ? Is there evidence that man's insatiable craving is satisfied
by the avatderas of Tukaram's belief, a craving for communion with
the Unseen, all barriers of sin removed ? Since Deity transcends
human apprehension, the bhakh theologians hold that only by a
mediating incarnation ' can God speak with man or act on him, or
man worship God and be saved from sin, hence Tukaram's astonish-
ing devotion to what he deems such a manifestation. Is there
convincing evidence that by the particular ' manifestation ' in
Vithoba the sickness has been cured which another Hindu bhakta
diagnoses as ' the pain of separation from God '? For though, says
this same bhakta, ' a man should have thousands of devices, even
one would not assist him in obtaining God.'" Does the device of
avatSms avail to * obtain God '? Here we are confronted with the
perplexing paradox that while the avatSras and their images are in
theory supposed to * symbolize ' the divme presence, hey have in point
of fact been the most degrading force m India's history, leading to
religious confusion, barrenness and formalism as anyone may
discover by trying to count and characterize the deities in nearly
every Deccan village. When we ask why these * incarnations ' have
exercized a degrading, rather than a saving, influence we fiijd the
Vaishijtavite bhakta, despite his longing for purity, has either to
allegorize, or apologize for, the impurities attributed to the god he
worships, and stamped on the scriptures he reads. Fraser and
Marathe's thirty pages in volume 2 of their Tukaram translations
quite suffice for the purpose, though the matter is made much more
luminous when reference is made to some of the scriptures on which
Tukaram sought to nurture his soul. Not only is 'incarnate'
Kpisija viewed in Tukaram's favourite Bhagwat Purafia merely 'as
a partial incarnation of God ' but the same scripture sets forth
Kfisna as bearing grave ' moral stigma,' bis character being sorely
marred by ' illicit love '. When we go to others of the eighteen
PiirSiias at whose sullied fount Tukaram drank, some of them are

* Itidian Messengar,]Viaa 26, 1921.

ziNiinak, Japi I quoted in Indiccti Theism from Macauhffe's Sikh Religion,
I, p. 196.

254 LltE Al^D TEACHmG OF TUKARAM ch.

popular only because of their 'outrageously indecent descriptions
of the Recsallla and the loose ideas of morals permeating ' * them.
This is sorry stuff on which to build a hope of salvation, for it
brings in moral confusion of all kinds instead of assurance of
pardon for man's soul. It would have been a surprising thing if
assurance of salvation from sin could have reached Tukaram
through such channels.

Disillusionment and bitterness of soul were thus often the lot of
our bhakti poet, as of one Akho in Gujerat who 'compared his guru
to an old bullock yoked to a cart he could not draw, a useless
expense to hts owner, and to a stone in the embrace of a drowning
man which sinks where it is expected to save.''' Takaram's
unsystematic utterances on the one hand reveal his many disappoint-
ments with the god whom he roundly abuses. On the other hand
they represent a religious revival m Maharashtra which expressed
the deep cry of men's hearts for true salvation and a revolt from
pantheistic formalism. It was, however, a revival with but little
ethical content, consisting as it did so largely of ecstasy in the
idolatrous atmosphere of the avatSras; and as Narayan Vaman
Tilak has told us, ecstasy is not devotion, still less is it salvation
from moral despair as Tukaram's dark moods too plainly show.
N. V. Tilak tells of an acquaintance really devoted to God, but
who thought he had not felt such devotion as Hindus feel, the
reason being that ' he mistook the Hindu idea of ecstasy for
devotion ; Hindus,' continues the Christian bhakta, * whether
followers of the knowledge theory or the devotion theory, whether
holding the pantheistic idea of liberation, or the dualistic principle
of assimilation, aspire to lose the very consciousness of self, and
there to stand still in a state of ecstasy,' this being regarded as
' the summum bonum of all knowledge, of all devotion.' " Hence
we read that Gora the potter, not a Bramhavad'ui but a bhakta, i.e.,
a believer in a personal God, one day forgot himself and the world
around him so much as to tread on his own child and crush it
while singing and dancing in the ecstasy of what he and others
called devotion. Similarily, Tukaram's bhakti is too deeply rooted
in the emotions to set at rest a troubled conscience, or soothe a
broken heart or satisfy an enquiring intellect. That this is still the
case with bhakti inspired by Vithoba we have already seen on
page 62 where a Bombay Prarthana Samajist says of his visit
to Pa^dharpur's chief religious season in 1920 : ' People do not gel
true spiritual benefit'. From all this it is clear that Ongen's
point m the third century slill holds good for India in the twentieth,
that transfigured lives are far superior to images for setting forth
God's love and purity and spirituality.

1 Pundit SUanath Tattvabhubhan, Indian Messongcr, Sept. U 1921.
" Indian Theism, p. 129.
' Dnydnadaya, July 9, 1903.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE? 2S5

Still the longing for salvation by Tukaram's modern devotees
must somehow be met. ' Had I not been a sinner, how could there
have been a Saviour ? So my name is the source, and hence, O
Sea of mercy, comes thy purifying power, . . Tuka says, through
the petitioner's faith comes the honour of the tree of wishes.' '
The very despair in Tukaram's sin-laden soul assures him there
must be relief somehow, somewhere — some Saviour, some way of
true salvation. The Christian position is that his yearning hope
has been filled with historic content by means of the Cross and
Resurrection of Christ and by the resultant Pentecost when the
Incarnate One sent the Incarnating Spirit of His Own Personality
to apply redeeming love to men's hearts and assure them of their
place in it. Tukaram's way of salvation is much too subjective
either to give solid assurance or to be 'ethically enduring '. ' Where
faith is, there is God' is the fundamental principle of his bhakfi,
which means that faith has to create its own object, shaping that
object according to the bhakta's own imperfect longings and
shifting ideas. This is to rob inward religion of all guarantee of
steadfastness, besides being unsatisfying to the mind. For the
object of such faith being self-created, the whole tenor of the
religion must su£fer in consequence. In place of this subjectivism
and emotionalism the Christian message substitutes an ever-present
Supreme Person as faith's object, One Whose actual example
quickens conscience, and Whose tender love provides a personal
motive for daily conduct — * for My sake '. Only on such definite
concrete lines can the soul hope to receive an answer to its prayer :

Dwell further in that doubt than go.
And make ' I hope ' become ' I know '.

Who can listen to Tukaram's oft-repeated cry for full satisfaction
without being deeply moved ? His uncertainties and ambiguities
on well-nigh every subject are an index to his mental and spiritual
conflict. His disillusionments with his god, his deep and constant
discontent, drove him to the anodyne of quietism to deaden the
effect of his wearisome struggle. Despite occasional ecstasy, the
note of sustained joy is conspicuous by its absence, and his ex.<-
perience is mostly that of ' the dark night of the soul '.' If he did
obtain any blessing he certainly shows but little concern that others
should get it, and intercession or prayer for others is entirely absent
from his pages.

If 'the universe conceived as a person ' be the highest position
modern Indian thought can yield to Visbijiu, the source of India's
' incarnations ', if one in the great Triad thus fails to minister
salvation, if ' erotic ' Vaish^avas are ' evidently conscious ' of
, narrating deeds worthy of condemnation '*, what shall be said of the

1 P. and M. 213.

2 See sect. 3 above, also pp. 13S-8.

? Paodit Sitan^th Tattvabbushan, Indian Messenger, August 28, 1921,

256 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

particular ' incarnation ' on which Tukaram lavished his love ?
The narrative in section 14 of chapter III on the calamity to Vithoba
in 1873 IS left to make its own impression, but nearly thirty years
later, in 1902, a serious quarrel between the Badvas (or Brahman
trustees of Vithoba's temijle) and the piijaris who perform the menial
offices of bathing and dressing the idol, regarding certain gifts offered
by worshippers, went to such lengths that for eight days the god
Vithoba had no bath, no ofTerings, no flowers, no food. From the
statements made m the Bombay High Court it appeared that many
of Vithoba's worshippers were unable to take their own food or
bath in consequencet with possible risks to health, besides which,
the public peace was in risk of being endangered owing to the
irritation of disappointed pilgrims at the approaching festival. '
The whole story illustrates a truth driven home by the monotheistic
prophets of Israel — the contrast between idols which have them-
selves to be ' carried ' and the Living God Who is the Burden-bearer
of His children. Instead of being a help to his devotees, Vithoba
had been to them the occasion of trouble, loss and anxiety, a con-
trast similar to that between ' the dead- weight of the idols ' in Isaiah's
day and ' the living and lifting God ' Who in the Person of His
Incarnate Son ' bears our griefs and carries our sorrow '. '

Indian bhakti's dream has, however, been more than realijied.
' He, the jewel from eternal ages incorrupt, has come ' and every long-
ing bhakta may pray : ' Grant grace to me to find the path that leads
unto Thy feet.' ^ ' God is love ' and He ' so loved that He gave His
Son ', the true ' image of God ', the one and only ' image ' it is safe
for man to worship, for in worshipping Him they ' will be like
Him '. Worthy indeed is the Incarnation seen in Him, for He is
veritably ' the image of the invisible God ', being ' stamped with
God's own cbarcter ', * the image that bodies out for us the essen-
tial Being of God ', ' the expression of His Essence ', ' the outfiash-
ing of God's glory, the perfect expression of His Personality'.*
Any other ' image ' leaves room for the bewildering multiplicity of
polytheism, but this true * Image of God ' is unique and apart. This
Incarnation, Who offered Himself for man's sin, meets the aspira-
tions alike of those noble Samajists who long for a true Theism
and of the illiterate mutitudes given up to idols. Bhakti of
any other type than that must be pronounced inadequate for India's
needs.

Assurance of salvation is the topic of this section, for India's
quest has ever been after certitude in the things of religion, and
despite much that is excellent in Tukaram's poems, there is no
abiding certitude. ' I see no sign of assurance in him who stands
hand on hip * (3010) is one of his most characteristic lines. So

* Dnyelnodaya, September 11, 1902.
' See Isaiah 4C, 3-7 and 53. 4.

3 Manikka Vasahar in Hymns of the Tamil Sawaitc Saints, pp. 97, 107.
Colossians 1. 15 and Hebrews i. 3 trs. by Moffatt.Way, Westcotl, Weymouth,

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 257

often do we seem to hear from his lips the ' orphaned cry '
of the Psalmist : ' My soul crieth out for God, for the living God ',
and so often do we find him unsatisfied, 'leaning on a wreath
of mist '. Hence his constant wavering between Yes and No on
almost every fundamental of religion. But the conception
referred to m our preceding paragraph, that Christ is ' the visible
Representation of the invisible God,' ' ' the exact Representation
of His Being," conveys the heart-assurance that every such
' orphaned cry ' has been answered,^ for 'in Christ' the unknow-
able God becomes knowable and 'm Him' men gam spiritual
vision of 'the King Invisible and goon unflinching' (Hebrews
XI. 27). Dwelling for ever in the 'glorious privacy of light'
with the Eternal, Christ Jesus 'shines within the heart to
illumine men with the knowledge of God's glory ' (2 Cor. iv. 6).
Invincible certainty is the hall-mark of iJns Image, for the
ambiguity, uncertainty and hesitation which so often tantaliae
the reader of Tukaram have no place here. St. Paul has a
fine passage where he affirms that 'Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
did not show Himself a waverer between Yes and No, but it
was and always is Fes with Him; the Divine Yes has at last
sounded in Him, for m Him is the Yes that affirms all the
promises of God ; m the proclamation of God's Son Jesus there
was never any wavering affirmation and negation ; no ' by the
inspiration of God it was ever one consistent affirmative.' " In
Christ Jesus, Revealer of God and Saviour of men, ' an Eternal
Yea has come into being ', a sure antidote to the doubtfulness
and vacillation of Tukaram and to the waywardness of Hindi!
speculation.

7. Does Tukaram's Religion Supply Dynamic Power ?

Any true pathological analysis of India's condition — her
society petrified by caste, her very air vitiated by idolatry and its
infamies — leads to the conclusion that the only remedy is a ' divine
energy, exhaustless vigour, and resistless power ' such as never
meet us in Tukaram's pages. Our bhakti poet has a lofty ideal
of character before him, but nowhere does he indicate by what
power his readers may achieve it. What could be nobler than the
following abhang, a ' song of songs which has passed into the mouth
of every man in the street m Maharashtra,' and which Sir Narayan
Chandavarkar paraphrases as follows ? ' I bow down before him
who lives up to what he utters in words ; 1 bow down to him whose
life is a continuous movement forward to the goal he sees ; I would,
like a menial, sweep clean the courtyard of his house ; so low

» Lightfoot and Weymouth's rendering in Colossians i. 15.

^ 'Weymouth m Hebrews i. 3.

» 2 Cor. 1. 19 as rendered by Weymouth, Moffatt and A. S. Way.

33

258 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM ? CH.

would I humble myself before him. I would be his loyal disciple,
entirely at his service in thought, word and deed. Whosoever has
God truly enshrined m his heart, him will I imphcitly obey.
To him I offer my faith, my allegiance.''' Nothing could be more
beautiful as an ideal and Tukaram shows that the only secret of its
achievement is inward. But all depends on what is truly ' en-
shrined in his heart ', seeing it is not impossible for the two
Maralh! words that yield this fine phrase to mean that the man is
mentally occupied with the Pa^dharpur deity, though this inter-
pretation Sir Narayan and every other Samajist would probably
repudiate. Even assuming that the term refers to the True and
Living God, still the question remains: How shall man attain the
experience of that Indwelling Presence — a question to which
Tukaram gives no satisfactory answer. Could he have known of
the ' radical supernaturalism ' assured by that other Gum Who
always 'acted as he spoke', we believe Tukaram would indeed
have offered Him his 'faith* and 'allegiance'. That he often
sinks into wild despair, becoming a victim to the pessimism
of the Deccan,' means that he knows nothing of that divine
dynamic which assures ' not only inward deliverance from
the power of sin, but ultimate deliverance from everything that
cripples and depresses the entire life of man.' " That the bhakti
of Tukaram fails to stand the test laid down by the anthropologist
who says that ' the function of religion is to restore men's confidence
when it IS shaken by a crisis ', is clear from our biographical and
autobiographical chapters.

By way of contrast, turn to one of the most fascinating figures
in the Christian history of the early first century, one called
Hermas, just such another man as our own poet. He followed the
same trade of shopkeeper, was unhappy at home, lost all his
property, occasionally gave himself up to fasting and trances, and
had the same temperamental weakness, ' the hesitating, wavering
spirit of timidity that destroys faith and depresses the spiritual
life.' He wrote a book called The Shepherd of Hermas whose
message shows that Hermas had discovered the antidote to both
doubt and' gloom : ' The Spirit of God endureth not sadness, neither
constraint; therefore clothe thyself m cheerfulness'." Another
book which serves as a window through which we can clearly see
Christian hhakti at work in men's hearts, sustaining them in those
dark days, is one called The Odes o/ Solomon, probably .several
decades earlier than The Shepherd. Every sentence ends with a
Hallelujah, with ' never a trace of that pathetic occasional reaction
from faith to uncertainty, from ecstasy to despair ' so familiar to

' Suhodh Patrika, Jan. 23, 1921 . see P. and M. 3339 for another rendering.
9 See sect, on ' Tukfirfim and Indian Pessimism ', pp. 174-5 above.

3 Tho Misiionary Mcssa^r in Relation to Non-Ohristian Religion!,,
Vol. IV World Missionary Conference, 1910 Report, p. 2S0.

4 The Ancient Church and Modern India, pp. 90-1.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE? 259

the student of Tukaram. How that ' reaction ' was prevented is
indicated by such words as these : ' As the wings of doves over
their nesthngs, and the mouth of their nesthngs towards their
mouths, so also are the wmgs of the Spirit over my heart; my
heart is dehghted and exuTts ; ... for faithful is He in whom I
beheved . . . Thou hast given us Thy followship ; it was not that
Thou wast in need of us, but that we are in need of Thee."
This last phrase shows how different is the spirit of true Christian
bhaktt from that of Tukaram who can say : ' How happy we are
that such a God make-; himself our debtor.'^

Doubtless many of Tukaram's present-day followers are ready
to admit into their secret pantheon the true Source of this dynamic
energy, just as Tukaram was willing to let other gods into
Vilhoba's shrine, and as Vishiju and Siva are side by side m
almost every Deccan village. But we believe the dynamic
Spirit of God IS narrowing down the solemn issue in many Indian
hearts to that confronting a modern poet : ' the light hath flashed
from heaven and I must follow it." India's cardinal religious
defect is clearly her lack of a moral dynamic. Her aching heart,
at the end of her long history of renunciation, sacrifices and
pilgrimages, argues the absence of a satisfying power. ' Disputa-
tion has tu»ned to waste the places of Brahmindom ' says Tukaram.
But let religion be viewed as a matter of dynamics, let it be
experienced as an enabling force, then there must be an effectual
closing up of India's ' great gulf between assent and conviction,
and of the still greater gulf between conviction and action '. Let
the whole rehgious issue m India be regarded as a dynamical one —
and any other is a mockery of needy men — then teachers of religion
everywhere will realize their chief responsibility to be one of giving
to India such a dynamical faith as transforms and uplifts. For
such a task the enunciation of mere ethics will be utterly inadequate ;
the ethic must be endynamited. The one Divine Spirit in place
of popular idolatry, the Personal Spirit of God in place of the
impersonal essence of the Vedanta, the rich dynamic or motive
power of the mdwellng, all-enabling Spirit of Christ instead of the
mere ideals, however lofty, of the bhakti movement — this is surely
the message to meet India's needs. Upon the leaders of the bhakti
movement a heavy weight of responsibility devolves, for if India is
to advance to the light of the truest bhakti, thai centred in Christ,
it will be as the devotees of the purer bhakti of Tukaram and
Tulsidas lead the way.

In the constancy of that indwelling presence of God's Spirit
set. forth by Christian bhaktt there is more than compensation

^ Ibid , pp 84-5.

2 See P. and M. 13S9, also P. M.S., pp. 27, 82.

2 From this point to the end of thib section 7, we slightly modify one of
two paragraphs from our chap 1 in Thu Holy Spirit, The Chnstian Dynamic,
on ' India'? Need of the Dynamic of the Spirit.'

260 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

for 'the innumerable incarnations* of Hindu bhakti, for there

IS thereby assured a power not ourselves, working in us

and through us for righteousness, always present and always

within, which is surely more satisfactory than innumerable

interventions on our behalf. This is the power Tukaram needed,

though he knew it not, and must be regarded as his bhakti' s missing

link, a driving force enabling every bhakta to realize bhakti s

highest ideals. One branch of the bhakti school does indeed

conceive God as pervading all things as i]^e.\t^ antaryamln' or

inward Restramer, but man needs a mighty Constrainer also.

Duty is a great word m the bhakti movement, but ' duty is a

grievous burden and a hard yoke unless there is the sense of power

abundant to discharge it'. Here is the grand question by which

every system must be tested. How is the power to be appropriated?

Christian bhakti's answer is that ' in the communion of the Holy

Spirit is an exhanetless source of abundant power'. Such religion

IS dynamical, while every other religion is static. With all its

excellencies, and it has many, Hindu bhakti is utterly unable to

rid Itself of its intimate connexion with a static religion, hence its

inadequacy for this age of progress. Only by Divine Power

dwelling tn man may the bhakti ideal be realized. This indwelling

Energizer alone can empower the soul to a daily realization of that

still loftier ideal of bhakti, namely, love. For, inevitably, the

question arises— How is this loving and dutiful devotion to be

inspired in man's unresting soul ? To this question of questions in

religion Tukaram gives no satisfactory reply. ' Where pity,

pardon, peace abide, there God dwells ', says our poet, but how

man's sin-stamed soul shall receive that Holy Guest we are not

told. Tukaram's bhakti here, as often, sets up an ideal without

showing what will empower men to achieve it. But the clear

answer of New Testament bhakti is that ' the harvest of the Spirit's

sowing IS love, joy, peace '}

Will Tukaram's Bhakti Build an Enduring
Social Order

A religion that has to satisfy the needs of modern India will
need to be intensly democratic, meeting the desperate case alike of
India's sixty million out-castes and its down-trodden women. How
does Tukaram's bhakti stand this test? On both subjects he
halls and wobbles, for, though the ' social ' principleh ol his bhakti
were far superior to the orlbodo.< Hinduism of his time, Tukaram
was never able to say with the much earlier Christian leader
Tertullian : ' Heie 1 stand, this truth I will never forsake ; you

' Gal. V. 22 A. S, Way'b translation.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE? 261

may disgrace me, make me poor, kill rae, but you cannot make me
conceal my faith'. There is no sub]ect on which Tukaram's
ambiguities and compromises are so fatal as in this matter of a
healthy social order for his country. In order to be concrete, we
confine ourselves to three questions: caste, woman and world-
outlook.

(1) Caste

Tukaram's social ideals as represented by his potition on the
caste question have already been left far behind by Indian thought.
India's educational aspirations, its growing passion for nationalism,
along with widespread Christian influence, have combined to
initiate one of the most tremendous social reform movements
ever seen in any land, a campaign for the abolition of ' untouchabi-
hty'. This campaign is in the very teeth of Tukaram's own
easy-going tolerance. We have already seen on pp. 54-55 and 162-5
that three centuries before his day a poor Mahar was thrown out of
Vithoba's temple at Pa^dharpur simply because he was an
' untouchable ' and that at his monument on the other side of the
street to that leading into the great temple, the ' out-castes ' of the
Deccan, excluded from Vithoba's presence, have worshipped ever
since. It was a wrong against which Tukaram should have
protested with all his might, but since his bhakti tolerated it, the
wrong has been perpetuated to this hour. Shortly after the High
Court case reported on page 256 when the idol was neglected for
days together on account of squabbles over temple dues, a Cbambhar
woman went regularly into the Pa^dharpur temple for a fortnight
giving out that she was a pure Maratha. When it was discovered
that she was a despised Chambhar, there was a great hue and cry
that Vithoba had been defiled. She was arrested and placed before
the magistrate who very properly, according to the laws in British
India, dismissed the case. It was not stated whether the cause of
offence was that the idol, or his worshippers, observed caste nor why
anyone must worship at a side shrine. It is not surprising therefore
thatDr.RabindranathTagoredeclares 'theregenerationof the Indian
people, to my mind, directly and solely depends upon the removal
of this condition of caste '. Probably Maharashtra is freer from
caste-prejudice than any other part of India (see close of first
chapter), but the struggle going on all over the Deccan, as we write,
between Brahmin and Non-Biahniin, throws a lurid light on
the caste question even in our comparatively 'cos-ntopolitan'
Maharashtra.

How deeply Tukaram's modern disciples are concerned over
this problem and yet with what ' distressing timidity * they approach
it have often been illustrated at Social Reform conferences in
recent years. We have more than once in this book referred to
Dr. Sir Ramkrishna Gopal Bhandarkar as being one of the greatest

262 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

of Tukaratn's followers both m point of learning and of true bhaktt
spirit. Yet m his presidential address at the Provincial Social
Conference held at Sholapur in 1902, after stating that, to eradicate
the germs of caste was ' perhaps as hopeless as drying up the
Indian Ocean ', and that Europe had ' destroyed those germs in
their infancy by using rhe antidote of the spirit of nationality ',
Sir Ramknshna went on to say that his view of his people was
that ' the great Shastra or spiritual adviser whom they obey is
custom ', and that ' the only eflScacious way is to devise a radical
course of reform based upon the reform of the Hindu religion ',
though, he concluded, ' for obvious reasons I must not go into the
question further.' ' In both their nobility and their insufBciency
those words were characteristic of a great disciple of Tukaram, and
we believe Indian reformers are increasingly realizingthat they must
' go into the question further ', that Sir Ramkrishna's remedy of a
mere ' reform of the Hindu religion ' will not suffice, and that caste
and orthodox Hinduism are largely synonymous. That the doubt
he expressed on that occasion concerning ' forming a nation with
caste ' was well-grounded has since then been conclusively shown
all too often. During a debate m the Bombay Legislative Council,
July 1919, the Hon. Sir George Curtis showed how caste defies
even the force of nationality and obstructs the benign process of
self-government. Sir George told of a Mabar whose bravery had
been recognized by the title of Sirdar Bahadur but whose presence
had been objected to as a representative on a Municipality, his
fellow-memberfa sending in ' a representation to the Collector that
all the business should be conducted by correspondence so that
members might be saved the disgrace of sitting with a Mabar.' "
In the same debate, the Director of Public Instruction had to
report concerning the Deccan that ' many of the Primary Schools
m villages were held in temples, which prevented the depressed
classes from availing themselves ot these schools '. In the same
session a simple proposal to make wells available for ' the untouch-
able classes ' was lost by vote, the Hon. Mr. Paranjpe plainly
telling the high caste members that 'it was inconsistent to ask for
rights from Government' when they themselves were refusing to
their own lower classes the ' most up-to-date democratic right ' of
drinking-water. Such plain speaking by Indian statesmen- is a
welcome sign of progress, for several years ago a Mahar at Jamkhed
in the Deccan was convicted by a Brahman magistrate and fined
eight rupees or in default a fortnight's imprisonment for having
gone to a public spring built with public money, on the ostensible
ground of having polluted the water thereby. The British Magis-
trate of Ahmednagar referring this decision to the Bombay High
Court, the conviction was tjuashed and the fine ordered to be
refunded.

1 Dnyanodaya, Nov li. 1902.

2 Bombay Govarnmant Girsxitc, July, 1919.

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 263

Indian leaders are openly acknowledging that India will never
attain to any true nationhood apart from the emancipation of the
' untouchables ' and that this emancipation can be affected only by
religious reform. Take the following, which illustrates the force
of Mr. Gandhi's public statement that the New Testament has
been one of the greatest influences on his life and ideals. Speaking
at Ghatkopar near Bombay on June 15, 1921 he stated, with
reference to 'several threatening letters he had received from
Vaishijavas because of ' his campaign for the recognition of * un-
touchables ' as common citizens, that ' if Vaish^avas did not want
to have anything to do with the untouchables, then they were not
real Vaishnavas but only godless and sinful people . . . If Vaish^a-
vism taught them to despise their fellow-creatures, then he for one
could not call it a religion but a monstrous perversion of religion. . .
For what was religion without love for the oppressed and the
depressed ? ' * There is true Christian teaching in this, but a
campaign for ' untouchables ' is certainly not Vaishriavism, else
that greatest of all Maratha Vaishnavas, our own Tukaram,
would have passionately denounced the necessity for ' untouchables '
in Pandharpur and every other place having to worship across the
street.

To the same effect, the words carrying us a stage nearer our
goal, are the words, spoken the very same day as the above, by
Mr. K. Natarajan, editor of The Indian Social Ref armor, that most
fearless of journals. Presidmg over the Mysore Economic Confer-
ence, Mr. Natarajan said : ' So far as I know there is no word in
our vernaculars conveying the precise idea of what is connoted by
" neighbourliness ". There is plenty of the thing itself but that is
mostly in places where neighbours are generally also people of the
same caste . . . " Love thy neighbour as thyself ". To the extent
that we succeed in inculcating this idea in the minds of the people
... to that extent we, shall lay truly and 6rmly the foundation of
the quality on which alone can be raised a superstructure of high
public spirit and patriotism.'' This is clearly stated and our one
criticism is that it does not take us far enough. How is the
' neighbourliness ' to be acquired ? What power is to breathe
within India's millions of hearts the spirit of ' love to one's
neighbour ' though that neighbour be of a different caste ? Is there
any power other than the Spirit of Christ, that divine dynamic
power which alone can overcome all such obstacles ? This is the
Christian message to such noble movements as the Depressed
Classes Mission and a hundred others all over the land, which,
against the agelong prejudice of two hundred millions of
Hmdiis, are working m a truly Christian spirit for India's
uplift.

1 Bombay Chronicle, June 16, 1921.

2 Times of India, June 17, 1921.

264 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH

Unprejudiced observers of India's progress are more and more
ready to admit that Christ has proved to be the greatest solvent of
caste prejudice not only in Tukaram's country but all 'over India
and that the only principle on which any lasting social fabric can be
built in India is that expressed by Lactantius in the fourth
century : ' Slaves are not slaves to us ; we deem and term them
brothers after the spirit '. The essential principles on this matter
were fought out once for all m the early Church on the basis of
complete equality in Christ ' and in so far as the Indian Church, be
it Roman Catholic or Protestant, departs from those essential
principles, the Church will lose her power and will discover what
one of her truest leaders means when he warns her of the grave
danger of ' elephantiasis ' m the Church's feet, this elephantiasis
being the spirit of caste ." Exclusiveness in the Church, be it in
India, Europe or America, is utterly un-Christian.

(2) Woman

That no society can ever rise above the level of its women is
axiomatic, and Tukaram writes about woman as if she must for ever
occupy the narrow and confined sphere allotted to her in the
Hinduism of his day. His poems have no recognition of her true
place in society and of her needed restoration to her proper position
m the world. In view of the fact that women are numbered among
bhakti saints and poets before Tukaram's day it is all the more
surprising that ' Tukaram speaks of women in a manner that is far
from dignified '. Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar, who makes this last state-
ment, urges in palliation : ' We must make special allowance in
Tukaram's case, seeing how unfortunate he was in having a wife
who could not understand him or give him sympathy. When all
this is taken into consideration we can hardly wonder at Tukaram's
attitude towards women '." He urges the still more extenuating
circumstance that in the Hinduism of Tukaram's environment the
relation between men and women was so narrow and constrained.
Such were the considerations advanced in 1903.

In this connection it is well to remember that everywhere in the
Roman Empire of the first century woman was equally despised.
'The radical disease, of which, more than of anything else, ancient
civilization perished ' was ' an imperfect ideal of woman ' says one
historian. A different method of treatment, however, inspired bv a
worthier ideal, has enabled woman to fulfil her mission as the
ministering angel of the race.

1 See a helpful discussion on ' the caste question ' by G. E. Phtlhps, The
Ancient Church and Modem India, pp. 28-31.

2 Sadhu Sundar Singh in The SadUu, chap on 'Indian Christianity'
pp. 230-1. ...

3 Two Masters . Jesus and Tukaram, p. 14

X IS TUKARAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 265

Students urge as a further palliative that Tukaram was concerned
only with his own religious life, but m his much later Nava Yuga
article of March, 1921, Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar frankly confessed
Tukaratn's attitude towards women to be one of his chief defects.
Quoting the poet's prayer in abhang 121 to be saved from
' the fellowship of women ', following on the incident referred
to on page 98 (last paragraph), and his resolve m 122 now
' to look on other women like Rakhumal ', two conclusions
are drawn: first, that his minute self- introspection revealed a
self -honesty and self -triumph rare among men ; and second, that his
withdrawal from feminine society was a course impossible to-day
and thus the example of Tukaram could not be followed by his
modern disciples in this important matter. The same article
forcibly set forth that since Tukaram believed a man should treat
his wife with no more affection than his maidservant, the women
of modern India will never attain to sell-reahzation or to their
destined ministry .for mankind on the lines indicated by the saint
of Dehu.'

If there is any Indian question to-day requiring the ' inherent
vital energies' of the gospel of woman's greatest Guru, it is this.
Whether as seed or as leaven, Christian principle is prevailing in
India to such an extent that thousands of India's best men and
women are seeking to extirpate some of the most blazing wrongs
against women that ever spoiled the fair fame of any country —
enforced widowhood, child- marriage, the sale of girls for infamous
purposes in temples, and other crimes. The same Christian
dynamic, working unconsciously m many places but no less surely,
is transforming woman's position to-day m India as it did in the
Roman Empire of the first century. ' Woman never did have a
Vedic value' says Cornelia Sorabji ; she certainly never has such
value in Tukaram's eyes. Contrast with this the view of Augustine
who says : ' The Saviour gives abundant proof of the dignity of
woman m being born of a woman'; and that of Chrysostom : 'They
surpass us in love to the Saviour, in chastity, in compassion for the
miserable'. How noble woman can be is shown by her place in
' the noble army of martyrs' ; how truly wonderful Indian women
can be is shown by such Indian "Christian women as Pundita
Ramabai, rescuer of thousands of helpless widows among Tukaram's
own people.

(3) World-Omiook

In the new era upon which mankind has entered since the
world-war, no race of people can expect to build an enduring social
order save as part of an international society enriched by the ideals
of other lands. We have already seen that no true nationality

' Nava Yuga, March 1921, pp 164-5
34

266 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM CH.

can be created unless every class is included, be it the despised
out-caste or despised woman. Similanly, so absorbingly individual'
is Tukaram's whole idea of God m all his poems, so entirely is his
bhakti 'an end m itself, that he is utterly unconscious of the big
throbbing world outside his own little Dehu or Pa^dharpur, save
as once and again he thinks of bathing m the distant Ganges or
other holy rivers. It is no fault of Tukaram that he cannot
help us here, for he was the child of his age and of a faith in no
sense universal m its scope or sweep. His limitation of outlook so
much affects hira that he never appears to consider the case even of
the Muhammadans of his day whom he knew so well. It did not
strike bim that his teaching might interest, or possibly help, them.
If he gave the matter a thought he no doulst rested vaguely content
with the idea that Islam was sufficient for the Moslem, just as for
the Hindu there was the worship of Vithoba. He has none of the
broad horizons of the prophets in Old Testament page who address
their message of righteousness to surrounding nations, nor of the
New Testament apostles whose hearts are so moved with pity that
they are equally concerned for the needs of far-off races as for
their own kith and km. It required the sovereign conceptions of
God's impartial righteousness and universal love to give to these
inspired teachers, though they lived millenniums before Tukaram's
day, such national and international ideals that the world is still
striving after their attainment. If we would realize the full force
of this factor, then, over against Tukaiam's religious exclusiveness
whereby India's sixty million ' untqnchables' are denied their rights,
should be set the universal outlook of Biblical prophets and
apostles whose large-heartedness leads them to see the whole world
as a unit under One Control and to treat humanity as one vast
whole, subject to the same imperial laws of righteousness and love.
That Tukaram's moral world is bounded by the confines of Maha-
rashtra IS due to the fact that his god Vithoba is limited to the
same territory, authority over which is shared by a multitude of
deities of doubtful character. Not on such an unstable foundation
can a successful theodicy be worked out or an enduring social
order be constructed. What is needed is a God, supreme m right-
eousness, belief in whose over-ruling Providence is the inspiring
factor towards world-unity and world-progress, a Providence m
whose hands nations are employed as divinely appointed agents for
the overthrow of the tyrants of mankind. Such a faith i.s the only
possible basis for a stable nationalism as it is the only guarantee
for that world-democracy which means liberty, equality, fraternity
for all classes and conditions. To 'make the world safe for democ-
racy' something far superior to Tukaram's bhakti is required, for he
did not ensure true democracy even for his own Maharashtra. This
can be secured only by faith in the One Supreme God, who as
' infinitely High ' treats all men with equal justice and as ' infinitely
Near ' helps the very lowest of the low in all life's detailed needs.

Q

w

X
u

a

V.

V.

<

X IS TUKAKAM'S RELIGION ADEQUATE ? 26V

By whatever test, then, it is measured, whether by the caste
problem, or the needs of woman, or by its hmited world-outlook,
Tukaram's hhaktt is found to be insufficient to build up a stable
India. Bhaktt principles are far and away the loftiest m Indian
religion, but they fail to follow out their implications, probably
because bhakti has seen no Supreme Person embodying them in
sinless form and because it is without the dynamic energy to carry
itb ideals into practice. But whatever the reason, we have such a
bhakta as Tulsidas offending every ethical and democratic principle
by affirmmg that ' a Brahmin must be honoured though devoid of
every Virtue ', a sentiment like that of our own hhakta when he
says ' a Brahman is superior in the three worlds though he fail in
duty '.^ On such lines no true democracy can ever be founded.
For an increasing number of Indian reformers the two regnant prin-
ciples are the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man,
and on these two bedrock Christian principles a new India is being
built. Reformers of every school, those who call themselves Chris-
tians included, must now go on to recognize that apart from daily
imitation of the burden-bearing Saviou*-, of the example of social
faervice in the Pentecostal Church, and of the social service of Spirit-
filled men and women m every age, India's problem will remain
unsolved. None but the indwelling Spirit of Christ can supply the
supernatural motive of benevolence or inspire a worthy cosmopoli-
tan benignity. It is by the welding together of dynamical religion
and social reform that India will enter upon her greatest eia

There is a final lesson for every Christian student of Tukaram's
bhakti. One of its chief methods is that of song, and one of
Tukaram's greatest contributions to the Indian Church may
prove to be that of Klrtans. At the same time, the Christian
Church may well take warning from the fact that Tukaratn must
often have spent himself on KTHans when he should have been
exerting himself on behalf of his out-caste brethren and sisters,
kept outside Vilhoba's temple while he inside was singing and
dancing to his god. This is still one of the perils of the Vaisb^a-
vism of Pa^dharpur. It was an unforgettable sight when in October
1920 we gazed down from the famous roof of Vithoba's temple on
the singers below who for full three hours had been shouting and
dancing in their rapture, at the close the leader reverently flinging
himself prostrate before the idol. It was a moving spectacle as we
gazed upon it, though as N. V Tilak reminds us, ' ecstasy is not
devotion '. In this connection we may add that it is not service.
For as we went back through the alleys of Pan(Jharpur — not before
we had visited the Prarthana Samaj Orphanage there and had
seen the Mission Dispensary workers — and as we came back
through the needy Deccan we wondered what value to the
struggling millions in Tukaram's land was that rapturous bliss. It

F. aftaM.,3i5Zb.

268 LIFE AMD fEACHING OF TUKARAM cll. x.

is a lesson we all need to learn, that to sing ourselves away,
whether m Christian Church or Hindu temple, is not enough.
India's poverty is almost unparalleled on earth, and the economic
condition of the Indian Christian community itself is probably
lower than that of any other Christian community m the world.
India's supreme need therefore is a practical religion, for econo-
mists tell us India's resources are quite sufficient to maintain her
mighty millions if only those resources are distributed on Christian
principles. Happily Tukaram's modern disciples are taking a
worthy lead m Indian reform of every kind, and the benevolent
activities alike of the Prarthana Samaj and of the Poona and
Indian Village Mission in Tukaram's sacred city are an illustration
of that work of social uplift which is uniting all races and creeds
in India.

Appendix I
Bindo AvaiSms and The Christian Incarnation

The fundamental distinction between the Hindu theory of
avataras and the Christian doctrine of the Incarnation, which has
not always been sufficiently recognized, is worthy of exhaustive
treatment based on such an investigation of the two religious systems
as cannot possibly be attempted here. All we can do i& to call
attention to a few scattered articles on what is a vast subject,
illustrating the wide distinction between the Hindu and Christian
conceptions.

India's yearning after avataras or ' incarnations ' -which shall
bring God near to man must be regarded as a God-given instinct.
In the famous text of the BhagvadgU^, expounded in the repeated
teachings of Tukaram himself, the aim of an avatHra is thus
defined : ' Whenever, O descendant of Bharata, there is a decay of
righteousness and an ascendancy of unrighteousness, then I create
myself ; for the protection of the good, for the destruction of evil-
doers and for the establishment of righteousness, I am born in
every age.' Hence the innumerable avataras in Hinduism (see
pp. 27-30 of this book). As the Bhaktakalpadruma states:
* When He seeth His servants m sorrow He tarneth not but Him-
self cometh as an incarnate Deity to save them.' The loftiness of
this conception has been universally recognized by Christians and
Hindus alike. In The Catholic Herald of India for April 7, 1920,
the Hindu standpoint was sympathetically expressed by the Rev.
W. Wallace, S. J., m. a., in his article entitled ' From Evangelical
to Catholic by Way of the East': ' The Hindu doctrine of numer-
ous incarnations seemed in some way superior to our doctrine of a
unique descent of the supreme. Their God had come down time
after time, when dhartna was neglected, when the good needed
support, and the wicked repression. Our God had only spent
thirty-three years on earth, and then had left mankind to its fate
without voice to speak from on high, without divine presence in its
midst, without guide, without consoler.'

Under the title of Vatshnava and Christian Doctrines of In-
carnation there appeared m the Indian Messenger for March 20,
1921, organ of the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj in Calcutta, the
substance of a deeply interesting lecture in Bengal by the Brabmo
Pundit Sitanath Tattvabhushan. ' The popular Vaishnava theory
of Incarnation,' said the learned pundit, ' is a theory of special,
occasional incarnation.' Since ' the immanence of God, in man and
nature, which seems to be ignored ' in the above oft-quoted GltS
text, IS a prominent feature of the philosophy of the Gltci, this text

270 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

IS given more in concession to popular opinion than as a part of its
serious teaching. The basis of the philosophical doctrine of incar-
nation taught m the GitS, the Bhagavata Purilna and other later
sacred books of the country, is to be found in a text of the Kaushi-
taki Upanishad where Indra teaches Pratardana that man's highest
good is to know hira, ' the Infinite One who is manifest in every
person as his true self'. The Vaishnava Pttrcfiias * pander ever and
anon to the popular view that particular persons are incarnations of
God in a special sense'. Careful examination lends to the conclu-
sion that ' neither the old nor the new exponents of Vaishiiavism
have any definite theory of the distinction of God and man on which
alone a ttue doctrine of bhakti can be based', it being clear that to
the author of the Bhagavata Purdija more than anyone else, the
personality of God is ' purely imaginary but nevertheless necessary
for cultivating bhakti religion.' On June 26, 1921 the above-
mentioned journal had a paper on ' The Bhagavata Dharma ' by the
same Brahmo scholar who observed that what the PttrCinas set forth
* as a person in flesh and blood ' is really ' only a figure of speech',
their authors merely ' indulging in poetic fancy', for their ' represent-
ation of Vishiju as an embodied person is purelv metaphorical',
(see p. 252 for fuller quotation). On August 2.S, lyjl, writing on
' the Old and New Schools of Vaishnavism,' he pointed out that the
' manifestation of God ' which constitutes an ' incarnation ' is seen
to be ' conscious only in rare individuals ' and even in these it comes
only 'in rare moments and disappears', Krisija being made to say
in the Anugitam reply to Arjuna's request to repeat his teachings
that he had 'lost the state of Yoga in which he had given out those
utterances and therefore could not repeat them', while the old
Piinl/.tas, including the Bhagavata, speak of KriKija 'a=i a partial
incarnation of God', and 'only a particle of the Supreme IJeing', an
idea which ' must have humbled all thoughtful Vaishijavas ' as must
also the 'neweiotic Vaishijavism' of Piirilnas like the Brahmavai-
varta where, in the Kriaiiajanma Khanda even Radha says to
Krisija, ' O licentious person, your conduct is always like that of
men ; so be born as a man. . . and go to India.' We have seen
no reply to this series of expositions.

Pundit Tattvabhushan then turns to ' the Christian theory of
incarnation ' which he characterizes as one which is ' even more
dualistic than the popular Vaishijava theory, and totally ignores the
immanence of God m man and nature.' We are not concerned
here to rebut the charge of ' dualism ', for Christian teaching has
always insisted on the reality and distinctness of Divme and human
personality and so has rejected the opposite of ' dualism ' which is
pantheism. The Christian view is that the ' immanence of God m
man and nature ' is fully upheld in the Christian doctrine of the
Holy Spirit, a truth which is held to ensure in actual experience
the fullest possible realization of the Divine Immanence and of the
untold rvches which such a truth brings to men. The Pundit goes

APPENDIX I 271

on to observe that the Christian ' recognition of the presence of
divine power m man is based on the doctrine of miracles — occasional
interferences with the established order of nature.' With the first
part of this sentence Christians would have no quarrel, for the
elimination of the miraculous is held to be tantamount to eliminating
God. Similarly, when the Pundit defines ' miracle ' as he does he
would appear to be assuming that man knows what that * established
order of nature ' is which meets with the ' occasional interferences '.
After all, may not God have under His control a ' law of miracles '
just as He has many other laws? Then comes an irradiating
expression of the Christian doctrine of Incarnation in both its
* popular' and ' philosophical ' aspects, both of which, in general.
Christians would accept, despite the Pundit's statement that ' we
in this country never or scarcely ever hear anything about the latter,
' either because the generality of Christian missionaries sent to this
country do not know it or choose to hide it from us,' the said view
being that Christ's unity with the Father ' could be communicated
to other men if they observed the eternal laws of the spiritual
world'. Then comes the observation that ' philosophical' Christi-
anity teaches a more exact method than is taught in ' the higher
Hindu Scriptures ', and the ' popular ' is distinguished from
' philosophical ' Christian teaching on the Incarnation as follows :
' The prophets prove themselves as agents of God by their power
over nature and by the foietelling of events in human history. But
these manifestations of divme power are not instances of incarna-
tion. Christianity recognizes only one incarnation of God, and
that IS Jesus Christ, the evidences of whose divinity are both m his
supernatural power and his moral perfection. His unity with the
Father as His " only begotten Son " \<^ unique, and cannot be shared
in by any other man. . . • Side by side with this popular view
there has always been in Christian history a philosophical theory of
divine incarnation which has commended itself to the greatest
Christian intellects. . . . This philosophical view cites several
passages of the New Testament m its support, for instance, the
prologue to the fourth gospel and the long prayer of Jesus in chapter
xvii. of the same gospel. . . . Our ethical experience — our sense of
sin, our moral struggles, our aspirations after perfection — all reveal
the presence of the perfectly Good and Holy in us as our Higher
Self. The whole of Reality, comprehending everything and every
self, is the Father. The manifestation of God as the finite self of
man is the Son. The Son's consciousness — awakened through the
grace of God — of his unity with the Father is the Holy Spirit.
The last is the highest and most concrete manifestation of God. . .
The everlasting existence of the Son in conscious unity-in-difFerence
with the Father is the most important lesson taught by philoso-
phical Christianity.' Pundit Tattvabhushan has succeeded in
making a clear philosophical statement of a profound Christian
truth-

272 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

A Marathi Note by the late Narayan Vaman Tilak in the
Dnyanodaya, April 8, 1915, may be summan/.ed in English as
follows : The differing conceptions of Hindus and Christians con-
cerning ' incarnation ' affect the form it may assume, the number
possible, and its mission. Hindus are believers in the idea that an
avatara or ' incarnation ' may be in part only, in the sense that any
particular ' incarnation ' may be described as a portion of God Him-
self. Christians hold that an ' incarnation ' of only a part of the
Almighty must be regarded as an impossibility, for if God incarnates
Himself at all. His Incarnation must be in itself complete and
perfect. Hindus cling to the belief that by their faith they can
bring gods into being, so that they are able to accept and worship
any number of gods which their faith may create. ' 1 1 is our faith
that makes thee a God ' says Tukaram (1795 F. and M.). All else
naturally follows. This being a mark of the Hindu religion, it
comes to pass that m case of need, besides the avatitras or ' in-
carnations ' made famous in the Purttitas, even King Sivaji can be
made an avatara os ' incarnation ' of Shankar. Christianity holds
tenaciously the opposite view, viz., that none but God creates or
inspires faith, that just as the mother necessarily precedes the
mother's love, so God comes first, faith second (reversing the
Hindij order), and, therefore, that to forsake the One Living God
by conceiving other gods must be held to be sin. Of necessity
therefore Christians hold the very idea of a multitude of ' incarna-
tions' to be an impossible one. Moreover, the workoi the number-
less avatSras or 'incarnations' m Hinduism is usually the same:
entering the family hneof someone who has acquired the fruit of
some penance or merit, their work is that of slaying demons, acting
in defence of gods, cows and Brahraans, or, in the language of
the BhagvadgTta, to protect those esteemed as saints and destroy
those believed to be sinners. The mission of the Incarnation of God
in Christ, on the other hand, is holely to seek the lost, welcome the
despised, save the fallen, and establish the kingdom of God among
men. In short, the fundamental differences (concerning the ideas
of 'incarnation' arise entirely from fundamentally difTeront con-
ceptions regarding God.

In addition to the foregoing the Christian answer usually takes
the following line. The difference between the Hindu and Chris-
tian conceptions is indicated by the difierent terms employed,
' avatara ' and ' incarnation ' not only being different words but
connoting different ideas. By avatara is meant ' descent ', but it is
a descent which may be followed, and is followed, by a withdrawal,
this being again followed by other descents. But incarnation
means humanity being laid hold of by God, and entered by God,
who thus manifests Himself m and through man. This divine act
effects such wonders that no repetition of it is required. ' Once
done it is done forever.' * A new power is poured into the very

> Dr. Macmcol, Dwyanodaya, March 4, 1915.

APPENDIX I 273

heart of the race and a wholly new relation between man and God
is thereby manifested, mediated and assured. On this account the
Incarnation of Christ is viewed not as a mere incident in history
but as initiatmg a new moral and spiritual development in the
human race of which Jesus Christ is the most distinguished member,
while He is at the same time God Incarnate in human form. As
Mr. Manilal Parekh stated the case in the letter referred to on page
29 : ' The Christian conception of avaiara is altogether qualitative.
The Christian can say, however, that God, though He incarnates
Himself in Jesus Christ alone, did speak * by divers portions and
divers manners" not only in the Jewish prophets, but in the
teachers of other nations as well.' The true Christian view there-
fore' IS that the Incarnation m Christ is unique as the grand
climacteric manifestation of God in human history, a manifestation
that creates a new humanity and leaves behind as a moral dynamic
for the whole race the Incarnating Spirit of God who effected the
manifestation. According to this view, the lack of the innumerable
' incarnations ' of Vaishpava JBiinduism is more than compensated
for by the constant indwelling Presence of God's Spirit, imparted
to the soul as the result of the work of the Incarnate Saviour ;
that IS to say, a Power not ourselves, making for righteousness in us
and through us, always present and always withm us — this is the
distinctive Christian conception and it is held to be worth incom-
parably more to feeble humanity than innumerable interventions
on man's behalf.

Contrast this lofty conception of the supremacy and sufficiency
of the Divine Spirit in the life of man, with the deifying of the
lover of Radha, the displacing of the spiritual by the sensuous,
and the degrading of the whole idea of ' incarnation ' (see also
p. 250) as seen in the Radha- Krisna cult, with whose ' promulga-
tion ', said Pundit Sitanath Tattvabhushan in The Indian
Messenger for November 20, 1921, ' the worship of God, the
Absolute Spirit, practically ceased in Vaishnavism, and the imagin-
ative and sensuous worship of Krishna, conceived as a hero,
specially as the lover of Radha, became the predominant, almost
the sole, element m the spiritual excercises, if they can be so
called, of the new schools. Krishna indeed was believed to be
the incarnation of the Supreme Being, or else he would not be
worshipped, but his attributes as the upholding and guiding Spirit
of nature and immanent in it and as the Inner Self of man, ceased
to have any attraction for the Krishna-worshipper, and his whole
attention was absorbed,by Krishna's Brindaban-lila, specially his
amorous dealing with the Gopis. In short, it is not as God, but as a
man, in his bodily form and human dealings, that Krishna now began
to receive worship. To those unfamiliar with latterday Vaishnava
literature this may seem an over- statement, but a close study of
Vaishnava works on devotions following the writing of the Brahma-
vmvarta Purana leaves no doubt of the truth of our statement.'

' We here adapt a sentence or two from our book. The Holy Spirit the
Christtan Dynamtc, p. US,

Appendix II

Verbal Parallels Between Tnkaram and
The New Testament

No one can read Tukaram without being struck by the many
turns of thought and speech which recall the New Testament In
the following list will be found a number of the closer parallels ;
we refrain, however, from drawing any specific inferences. For
one thing, there is no authoritative text and it is not impossible
that some passages are the result of interpolation. In each parallel
the reference to Tukaram in this list comes first, the numbers
referring to Eraser and Marathe's three-volume translation of
Tukaram's poems.

1656: We know the fact, God, that thy illusive ways cannot
be fathomed.

Romans xi. 33 : How unsearchable are his judgments and his
ways past finding out.

17 : It is worship that Narayan desires: God is a spirit.
John IV. 14 : God is a Spirit and they that worship Him must
worship Him in spirit and m truth.

545 : It is something the spirit finds in itself.

Luke xvii. 21 : The Kingdom of God is within you.

1713 : He gave his life as sacrifice : he saved all feeble folk.
John X. 15 : I have laid down my hfe for my sheep.

2041 : The soul has first to perish and then to live.
Matthew x. 39: He that loseth his life for my sake shall
find It.

355 : Thou knowest the inward parts.

Acts i. 24 : Thou, Lord, knowest the inward parts of men.

1755: God is a timid creature.

James iv. 6: God giveth grace to the humble.

1769 : Who shall slay the man whom God protects ?
Romans viii. throughout, ending: Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ ?

/ 495: Though you perform the austerities carefully yet one
mistake annuls them : you must observe your duties strictly or all
your labour will be wasted.

James ii. 10: Whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet
offend in one point he is guilty of all.

APPENDIX II 275

3465 : Worldly life and life with the highest— he who acts both
parts together, in the end he achieves neither. If a man seeks to
lay his hands on two grain-pits at once, he will end by destroying
himself.

Matthew vi. 24 : No man can serve two masters : for either he
will hate the one, and love the other ; or else he will hold to one,
and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.

2588 • Where now shall I set my foot ? What stone shall I
trust to? My spirit is at peace, because I see thee in every
quarry. There is nothing that I need ; thou art all to me every-
where.

Psalm cxxxix. 7 : Whither shall I go from thy Spirit ? Or
whither shall I flee from thy presence ?

1187 and 1189: When the preacher is fond of money, the
listeners are alarmed. They say, he knows not what he sings, he
opens his mouth to get something given him. If the preacher is
fettered by desire of money and the listeners fearful of expense,
the worship is all m vain.

1 Peter v. 2 : Tend the flock of God which is among you,
exercizing the oversight, not of constraint, but willingly, according
unto God ; nor yet for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.

1042 : A. hypocrite is smooth-tongued, but his inner purpose is
different.

Romans iii. 13: Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their
tongues they have used deceit.

812 : The great precept of religion is to hear God in the

Romans ii. 29. But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly ; and
circumcision is that of the heart.

1417 : Who cares for a letter ? What men respect is the seal
on it, and that is what makes the bearer respected.

2 Tim. n. 19 : Howbeit the firm foundation of God standeth
sure,' having this seal : The Lord knoweth them that are His.

1866 : Why should I enquire into the virtues and faults of
others— what lack of faith is there in me ?

Matthew v. 3 : Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy
brother's eye ?

933 : Amid a pile of pots one is used for cooking, another to
hold filth : such are the different lota of men.

Romans ix. 21 : Hath not the potter power over the same clay
to make one vessel to honour and another to dishonour ?

3369 : If a blind man grasps a blind man's stick both leader
and follower will come to gnef at once.

Luke vi. 39: Can the blind lead the blind ?

276 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

2507 : You may <?ear rosaries and tnaduras, but how can you
reach God by appearances?

Matthew xxiii. 5 : But all their works they do for to be seen of
men : for they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the
borders of their garments.

1093 : He who is void of moral conduct and of faith ; who
brings evil on others or cavils at them with superior wit ; he, like
a dog, pollutes sweet food when he touches it.

Matthew xxiii. 13: But woe unto you, scribes and pharisees,
hypocrites ! because ye shut the kingdom of heaven against men :
for ye enter not in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are
entering in to enter.

1205: Our Gosavis profess that they beg no alms ; they set
their disciples to preach. They bring disgrace on their garb,
though they try to play the part.

Matthew xv. 14: Let them alone: they are blind guides-
And if the blind guide the blind, both shall fall into a pit.

976 : Listen to this easy secret. 966 : Receive God without
price,

Matthew xi. 30: My yoke is easy and my burden is light.

1813: Every drop that is saved from the thief (time and death)
must be accounted gain.

Eph. v. 16: Redeeming the time.

501 : Whatever keeps you froai God, be it your father or
mother, give it up.

Matthew x. 37 : He that loveth father or mother more than me
IS not worthy of me.

Blessed are they who came hither for doing good, but whose
abode is in heaven. Also 713 : their true home is Vaikuntha,^
Phil. lii. 21 : Our citizenship is m heaven.

3530 : The birds and wild creatures that live on the earth,
Han never forgets them. 909 : Birds and beasts gather up no
store yet the Infinite One protects them. 1653: God is bound to
feed all animals ; we need not trouble ourselves what we shall get
to eat ; the tall trees throw out shoots in the hot weather, who
supplies them with water ? 1777: My poor weak mind, why are
you always dejected ' Your only solicitude is about your food ;
better than you are the blessed birds. Mark certain animalt. in
flood and field : what food do they find ?

Matthew VI. 26-28: Behold the fowls of the air; . . . your
heavenly Father teedeth them. . . . Consider the lilies of the
field.

2US2 • He dearly loves the ignorant if they have simple-
minded faith in him.

' p. R. Bhandarkar . Two Masters.

APPENDEX II 277

1 Cor. i. 27 : God hath chosen the foolish things of the world
to confound the wise.

894 , Blessed are the pious for their heart is pure.
Matthew v. 8 : Blessed are the pure m heart.

I am a depraved sinner, O God, and I have come to seek
thy mercy : put me not to shame. I do not know how many
men thou hast saved, but this I know that I am the worst of
them all. Tuka says, I am a supplicant for Thy mercy : cleanse
thou me completely from my sin, O God.'

1 Tim. 1. 15 : Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all
acceptation, that Chriht Jesus came into the world to save
sinners ; of whom I am chief.

It is essential to have a spiritual guide ; we must submit to
him. He at once changes men into his character ; none need
wait for experiencing the transformation."

2 Cor. 111. IS: But we ail, with unveiled face reflecting as a
mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same
image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord the Spirit.

Tuka says, he who will lay his, burden on the Friend of
the poor, will not fail to experience His mercy.*

1 Peter v. 7 : Casting all your anxiety upon Him, because He
careth for you.

Faith is the source of everything ; it is the realization of
salvation ; it accomplishes the final complete redemption. It is
impossiblei says Tuka, to obtain grace by works that are destitute
of faith.'

Romans ui. 28: We reckon therefore that a man is justified
by faith apart from the woiks of the law.

See many passages in the sections on The Samts ' m F. and
M ; also on pp. 206-8.

Romans xii. 13 : Communicating to the necessities of the
saints.

See 'the stories of Rameshwar Bhatt and Mumbaji (pp. 95-9).
Romans xu. 21 : Overcome evil with good.

705 : Mercy, forgiveness, and peace — where these are, there
is the dwelling-place of God.

Romans xiv. 1 7 : The Kingdom of God is righteousness and
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

In many places the much-vaunted knowledge of the Vedas,
according to Tukaram's view, is superfluous as compared with the
practical experience of religion.

1 Cor. viii. 1 : Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth.

' G. R. Navalkar, TitkarSm, the Maharanhtuan Poet and Saint, p. 23.
» Hid., p. 24. 8 Ibtd., p. 25. * Ibtd., p. 72.

278 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

Tukaram : The antithesis of the letter and the spirit is implicit
in Tukaram but not explicit.

2 Cor. in. 6 : The letter killeth but the spirit giveth life.

Tukaram: The idea of man's weakness and God's power is
very characteristic of Tukaram.

2 Cor. iv. 7 . We have this treasure in earthen vessels that the
excellency of the power may be of God.

549. Verbosity has ruined crowds of Brahmans; or as Sir
Narayan Chandavarkar translates this, ' Disputation has turned to
waste the place of Brahmmdom.' {Speeches and Writings, p. 598)

Col. II. 8 : Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy
and vain deceit. Also Rom. xiv. 1 ■ Not to doubtful disputations.
Also 1 Tim. i. and vi., about strifes of words.

67: To each has been shown a path according to his own
capacity ; he will learn to know it as he follows it.

John vii 17: If any man willeth to do His will he shall know of
the teaching.

This list might be extended if we sought parallels from the
Old Testament, e.g.,

, What hast thou done by bathing in the sacred river ? Thou
hast only washed clean thy skm. Thou hast not cleansed
thy heart. '

Micah vi. 7 : Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of
rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil ? Shall I give my
firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin
of my soul ?

Tuka says, God's treasury is full ; it is never exhausted. "
Psalm Ixv. 9 • The river of God is full of water.

952 :■ A meal is delightful if it be eaten in peace, be the food
rich or poor.

Prov. xvi. 1: Better is a dry morsel with quietness than a house
full of sacrifices with strife.

1805 : In thee I am placed on a firm base.

Ps. Ixi. 2: Lead me to the rock that is higher than I.

1 Ibid., p. 25, " Ihid^ p. 36.

Appendix III

Tnkaram*s Alleged Indebtedness to Christianity.

As explained on pp. 240-1 the striking analogy between Tuka-
ram and the New Testament has attracted the attention of widely
divergent schools of thought. We may at once dismiss from our
present consideration ' the wonderful acts ascribed to Tukaram '
and considered by Dr. J. Murray Mitchell* to be ' coincidences ' with
scriptural miracles which 'appear too numerous and too marked to
be merely accidental'. We may dismiss them for three reasons :
first, because these miraculous 'acts' are presumed to have been
the invention of Tukaram's biographer Mahipati : ' tradition has
credited Tukaram with having performed many miracles,' says
Prof. P. R. Bhandarkar,^ ' but he personally does not lay claim to
any ;' second, because Mahipati invented them, so Dr. Murray
Mitchell suggests, ' to glorify his Vaish^avite hero by mvestmg him
with attributes and honour rivalling in Hindu estimation those of
Jesus Christ Himself '; although, thirdly, it is not proved that
Mahipati himself had ever heard of Jesus Christ (see below).
Moreover, the crowning ' miracle ' of Tukaram's career was that
which Marathi legend gives as the manner of its close, that ' Tuka-
ram ascended to heaven without dying,* but this supposed ' coincid-
ence ' with the ascension of Jesus disappears, Dr Murray Mitchell
himself pointing out that the story ' approximates rather to the
ascent of Elijah than to that of Christ.' For these and other
reasons therefore all supposedly miraculous * coincidences^ may be
left out of our reckoning.

When we come to consider the * verbal parallels ' given in
Appendix II, it is to be borne in mind that 'many of Tukaram's
ideas are certainly not Brahmanical', that much of his * moral tone
differs from that of genuine Hinduism ' and ' frequently approxi-
mates to that of the Christian system'. The question comes to be
therefore whether the cumulative weight of these and other facts
make the conclusion tenable that in Tukaram's writings we see
Christian ideas leavening ' a non-Christian system, as Dr. Murray
Mitchell suggested in 1849. It is evident that the whole subject
demands close investigation, based upon an amassing of facts not
yet available. When that investigation is entered upon, Dr Murray
Mitchell's essay will have to be carefully considered. That the
investigation remains practically where it was over seventy years
ago shows, how much lee- way has to be made up in the study of

lJ.R.A.8. Bo, vol. HI, psrt 1, 1849. pp. 1-29.
2 Two Masters : Jesus and TuhSram p,29.

280 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

comparative religion in the Maratha country-a challenge to Indian
and foreign scholars alike. The following points merit attention.

Are we to pre-suppose such an ' intermixture of Christian ideas
with the Marathi legends ' as Dr. Murray Mitchell suggests, and if
there be such ' intermixture', can it be ' easily explained ' by the
facts he sets forth ? From the early part of the sixteenth century,
Portuguese missionaries were actively, even fanatically, endeavour-
ing to extend the Christian faith, particularly in Western India. In
the Maratha country Portuguese settlements sprang up at Goa,
Bassein, Revadanda and Bombay, numbers of ' conversions ' taking
place. Looked at in the dry light of history there are some shame-
ful aspects to the religious part of the story. ' The Portuguese
dominion,' says an Oxford scholar m The Cambridge Modern
History ' ' was at once impecunious and corrupt, and was rendered
intolerable to th-i native mind by its close connexion with the
aggressive methods of the Catholic Church. . . The ruthless
propagation of the Gospel by means of the power of the State was
m the long run as much against the spiritual interest of the Church
as It was against the political interests of the Portuguese." Such is
the historian's verdict concerning ' the first western nation to appear
in Hindustan,' a verdict covering the firsthalf of the seventeenth cen-
tury, the period covered by Tukaram's own life. ' From 1650 ', the
period of Tukaram's death, ' Portuguese annals form a dreajry record
of degeneration. The Portuguese were absorbed and degraded by the
conquered, for the Portuguese. . . intermarried with native races '
(Cambridge Modern Htstory, vol. v, p, 695). In the absence of all
evidence up to the present, can we at all regard it as possible or
probable that TukSram came in contact with either the Portuguese
or any of their * converts '? From the last of the settlements men-
tioned above, Bombay, Tukaram's birth place was about 100 miles
distant and he is said to have descended the Ghats for business
m the Konkan (see page 81).

The very violence of the Portuguese m propagating their
religious views must have ' conspired ', says Dr. Murray Mitchell, ' to
direct the attention of the Marathas to the Christian religion.
It is hardly conceivable that Tukaram should not have heard of the
religion of the war-like, energetic and proselytizing foreigners who
had been in the neighbourhood for 150 years. The biographer of
TukarSm, who wrote 125 years later still, cannot surely with any
shadow of reason be imagined ignorant of an event so vitally
affecting the destinies of his own nation and religion, as the
extension of the Portuguese dominion and the Christian faith.' '
Should the objection be raised that over against the suggested
approximation of .some of Tukaram's ideas to Christian teaching
there is yet too great and essential a duTerence to allow the

> Vol. IV. chap. XXV. (p,743), by Hugh E. Egerton, M.A.. Beit Professor of
Colonial History, Oxford, 1906.

3 /. R.A.8. Bo., vol. Ill, part I (1849), pp. 9-10,

APPENDIX III 281

theory of 'Christian leavening' to stand, Dr. Murray Mitchell
replies : ' Every day's experience proves that when Christian ideas
are inculcated on those who are familiar only with Hinduism, they
are seldom at first rightly apprehended ; the shape, the colour they
assume are so far changed that a careful scrutiny is required
before the parentage is detected ... It may be observed that if the
view now supported ... be correct, one might expect that the
influence of Romanism . . . might be pretty distinctly marked . . .
and such would seem in fact to be the case. The reader who is
acquainted with the Acta Banctorum or books of a similar
character will occasionally fancy he hears m the history of Tukaram
the echo of monkish legends and the achievements of "saints" of
the middle ages.' *

Skilful as IS the above reasoning, we are bound to say the
case for Christian influence on Tukaram must be regarded
as non-proven. The 100 miles that separated Bombay and
the area of Roman Catholic influence from Tukaram's country
region included a range of hills two thousand feet high, a
barrier quite sufficient m those days to prevent much intercourse.
History is not without parallels of peoples equally near to
one another yet with equal dissimilarity m religious faith and
practice, the nations that surrounded ancient Israel being
an example. Moreover, the Portuguese incursion and intoler-
ance were a part of ' the medieval struggle between Christendom
and Islam ', aflfectmg the fortunes oi the Muhammadan faith more
than the Hindu and there is little or no evidence in Tukaram's life
and writings of any contact between him and the Moslems. Our
own view is rather of the nature of an argumentum stlentto, perilous
in some circumstances we know, but Tukaram's seemingly com-
plete Ignorance of the name of Jesus Christ and of the fundamental
facts and doctrines of the Christian faith (see page 24-5) is to us an
insuperable difficulty in the present state of information. We
would prefer to say that any supposed ' coincidences ' are illustra-
tions of the principle, so happily phrased by Dr, Murray Mitchell,
that ' the human mind amid endless variety of outward circumstan-
ces, remains true to certain grand original laws impressed upon it
by the Author of our being.' ' Professor W. B. Patwardhan, who
admit^ the coincidences but no more, states : ' That there is some-
thing in common between the love as preached by Christ and that
inspired by the saints of Maharashtra is beyond question. It is,
however, equally beyond question that the Mabarastra school of
devotion owed nothing to Christianity.' ^ Dr. Macnicol's conclusion
is that 'either Tukaram was actually in contact with Christian
teaching, which is by no means improbable, or he was a remarkable

1 J.R.A.S. Bo., vol. [II, part I (1849), pp. 10-13. 2 Ibid., p. 1] ,

3 /. I, October 1910, pp. 113-4.

282 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

instance of a mens naturaller Christiana.^ * Our conclusion
inclines in the latter direction, Tukaram thus affoiding ii remark-
able illustration of the striking saying of the second century Ter-
tullian, the Vahil (lawyer) who became a Christian apologist and
who speaks of the testimoiimm Aniinac nafurahtcr C/insfiaiiac
(the testimony of the soul naturally Christian). In the same class
are probably to be placed Guru Nanak, Tulsi Das and Kabir.

Our conclusion is m no way invalidated by any considerations
arising from the Marathl ' Christian Piiraiia ', brouRht to lij'ht af;suu
in the first decade of the present century, ' the only sout«; of Christ
written in Marathi by an Englishman '. ' l''athor EstPvam,' or
Thomas Stephens, was a Jesuit father who died in l(>iy (Tuka-
ram being perhaps 11 years old) after forty stroniiouR years of
Christian activity among ' Brahman Roman Catholics ' of tho (Joa
territory, at least 250 miles from Dehu and 150 from Pandharpfir.
He IS ch,iefly known by his Maralb! Christian iiocni, published in
Goa, probably m 1616, intended to become 'to the Christians what
their Piirciuas were to the Hindus ', a work containing Old Testa-
ment history and the life of Jesus Christ with which nuich legendary
matter was mixed up. Written for the middlo and lowfi t-lasscs, its
Marathl, given in the manuscript m a Roman tianslitoration, is
that spoken south of Ratnagin, modified hy the Koiikani dialect
and a sprinkling of Kanarese words. Its teaching is sull'ii.scd with
Roman Catholic theories and 'converted' Ihndii« hav« left on it
their stamp, 'in the two centuries that jwecedod lh(i ariival of
Protestant missionaries and before the J iihle canui into the hands
of the people, this " P»«7yff " was m Western India a light that
burnt brilliantly,' says Canon D. L. loshi, who a<ids a sciitenco we
may adopt as our own : ' How far its contents ailecttid the thouglits
of some of the Maralha poets like 'i'ukarani wo have no
evidence.' '^

Possibly the partial resemblances between TuKaram's u'lorined
Hinduism and the Romish Christianity of Wcstctn India in the
seventeenth century is capable of another explanation, tlu'.se parti-
cular elements in bis teaching not impossibly beiiin tii<! result of a
probable Christian influence on that Vai.slinava HinduiHni which he
had received as a heritage from the past. How iar this might
carry us in a scientific enquiry of Tukaiiliii's teachinK it is im-
possible to say. The G7/£7, a product of Vaislinava Hinduism, is
held by some to ' betray Christian infiucnco, but it si-cins rather
more probable that the poem is purely of Indian oriKia.'' Other
passages there are in Vaishnava theology in wliiih 'a number of
scholais have beheved they detected distinct tiaccsol Cliiistiaiiity,'

' Indian Theism, p. 279.

2 Canon Joshi's paper, 'The Christian Piiniiia', in/. /., vol. VI, part 4,
pp 166-75, and that by T)r.J. E. Abbott in the IhiyfiiiocUiriu May 1 !, I'i'll, arc
both worthy of c^ireful .study.

" Dr. Farquhar. O. R. L. I., p. 03.

APPENDIX m 283

but the discussion so far has yielded * rather doubtful results.' ' The
Christian reader, however, so often finds the New Testament recalled
by Tukaram as to make easily believable a theory that Christianity,
or an imperfect form of it, may have entered India in certain indirect
ways extremely early. It is sometimes overlooked that among
the many facts of Indian history which we cannot explain is
that of an early Indian Christian Church m Malabar whose
existence and hoary antiquity historians such as Mr. Vincent
A. Smith accept as undeniable. Even if the legend of the Indian
activity of St. Thomas must be given up, as scholars like Garbe
and Keith afifirm it must, ^ there still remain the following facts : the
well-attested visit to India, probably Malabar, about A.l). 185, of
Pantaenus, head of the catechetical school at Alexandria, who
IS said to have been invited by ' an Indian Christian embassy ' sent
from an already existing Indian Christian community ; that John
the Persian, was present at the Church Council of Nicea in A.D. 325
as ' Bishop of Great India ' ; that the great Sankaracharya and the
chief (Vaishnavite) Alvars (see p. 36) of Malabar were born and
brought up amid these Syrian Christians, resulting as some believe
in a Christian substratum to Tamil philosophy; that there were
other early Christian communities m Mylapore near Madras, Ceylon
and the Konkan, the first-named being near the birthplace of that
great bhakti theologian, Ramanuja (see pp. 36-7) who initiated
what is called ' the first great theistic movement of India ', leading
not a few scholars to the conclusion that Christian influence on
Indian bhakti is ' possible and even probable ' (A. B. Keith, J.R.A.S.
Oct. 1915) ; and that the vigorous Graeco* Roman commercial inter-
course with India, via Alexandria, as far back as three centuries
before Christ and up to A.D. 215, may have resulted in India
receiving certain Christian ideas of an Alexandrian stamp , " The
Catholic Herald of India during August and September, 1921
had a thoughtful series of papers on ' St. Thomas and San Thome,
Mylapore ', showing that Alexandria gave to India St. Pantaenus
in A.D. 185 and St. Frunientius ■ m A.D. 327, the latter being
identified by Mgr. Zaleski m his Saints of India (1915) with
a certain Thomas of Cana to whom Portuguese historians and
Malabar ballads at times attribute things ' which, it would seem,
happened to St. Thomas the Apostle and vice versa,' a confusion
which may have had serious consequences both for ' Malabar
Traditions ' and historians of the Indian Church.

Pointing in the bame direction are some curious coincidences m
the birth stones of Kns^ja and of Christ regarding which Dr. Sir
R. G. Bhandarkar makes an interesting suggestion not accepted by
all, that the Abhiras, who according to his theory conveyed the

10 R.L.l,i> 99 ^ SeeJ.fi A.t>. October 1915.

3 ' Christian influence in Indian Culture.' The Madras Christian College
Magazine, 1920, pp 168-77.

284 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

Krisjja legend, 'possibly brought with them the name of
Christ also. . . The Goanese and the Bengahs often pronounce
the name Krisija as Kusto or Kristo, and so the Christ of the
Abhiras was recognized as the Sanskrit Krisna.' ' Dr. Gnerson
goes so far as to say that it is ' perhaps probable that the worship
of the infant Kris^a was a local adaptation of the worship of the
infant Christ introduced to India from the North- West, and the
ritual of Knsna's birth-festival has certainly borrowed from
Christian authorities. But it was in Southern India that Christianity,
as a doctrine, exercised the greatest influence on Hinduism general-
ly .. , In this reformation India rediscovered faith and love.'
Gnerson even quotes Hopkins statement with approval: ' In all
probability the Hindus of this cult . . . have in reality, though
unwittingly, been worshipping the Christ-child for fully a thousand
years.' '' Dr. Sir K. G. Bhandarkar agrees that ' some of the finer
points ' in bhftkti ' may be traced to the influence of Christianity.' "'
If this partial Christianizing of Indian bhakti can be fully esta-
blished it may solve many problems affecting Vaishijava Hinduism,
Tukaram included. Historial investigation* would appear to have
demonstrated on the one hand that the bhakti professed by
150 million Indians is ' native to India ' and on the other hand that
Christianity has left a deep maik on the later development of the
idea. That the threefold conception of a God of Grace, of
personal faith m Him, and of belief in the soul's immortality
IS indigenous to India, being directly traceable to the Bhag-
vadglts, certain sections of the Mahabhctrata, the Bhagavata
Puraiia, the Bhakti Milla, and other works constituting ' the New
Testament of the Bhagavata rehgion,' is fairly well established
by that trio of scholars. Dr. Bhandarkar, Dr. Garbo, and Dr.
Gnerson — an Indian, a German and a Briton. The Indian origin
of bhakti and the partial Christianizing of its later stages appear
thus to be equally indubitable conclusions. We can therefore adopt
the following statemenl on this subject: 'With both these creeds
(Christianity and Buddhism) Hinduism m the days of its greatest
plasticity and receptiveness was m long and intimate contact ; . . .
but sufficient evidence is not available to indicate with certainty the
doclrineb or elements of belief derived from a foreign source. The
fundamental thought of bhakti, ... is certainly of Indian origin,
and served as a religious motive in India long before Christianity
entered the country. In its development and progress it may have
owed much to Chribtian teaching and example. I'-roni the (Irbt,
however, Lalvatiun through bhakti hau laid greater 'Mouu upon

I V.SM.li.S , p. J«.

■» E.R.E,, vol. II, Art. Bhahii Matga, pp. 548-50.

3 V.SM.R.S , p. 57.

' The next thiee beatenceb are from our o^n book The Holy Spirit the
Chrisnan Dynamic, p. 19-20.

APPENDIX m 285

emotion, upon feeling, and the play of the affections, than Chris-
tianity. . . has done.' ^

No more can probably be said at present than this : // ' Chris-
tian elements have been mcorporated with the story of Tukaram'
then they have probably come through the indirect channels indi-
cated in the last paragraph. In that case, Principal Patwardhans'
phrase about Tukaram's bhakU * owing nothing to Christianity ' is
too sweeping.

It would take us beyond the scope of our present note to enquire
how far Christian teaching has influenced the interpretation of
Tukaram. It is our conviction, however, that just as all modern
reform movements m India — Brahmo Samaj, Sadharan Samaj,
Prarthana Samaj and others — have come under Christian influence,''
so most if not all of Tukaram's modern interpreters have come so
definitely under the influence of the New Testament that many of
their expositions of Tukaram are 'hardly distinguishable from
Christian formulas'. This may be said of many of the weekly
sermons preached in the Bombay Prarthana Samaj Mandir and
published m the Subodh Pairika, and of the published writings of
Sir Ramknshna Bhandarkar and Sir Narayan ChandSvarkar.

1 Dr. Geden E.R.E., vol XI p. 136.

^ See 0r. Farquhar's Modern Rchgiom Movcincitti in India, paa-itn,
aud Dr. Geden, B. R. E., vol. x.i p. 136.

Appendix IV
Additional Notes

{The figures in brackets refer to the pages of the present worlt)

Maharashtnan or Maralhcis (pp. 2-3)

While this book was in the press there appeared a discussion on
' The Origin of the Marathas ' by Mr S. M. Edwardes, G.t, i., g.v.o.
in the ' Introduction ' to his new edition of Grant Duffs History
of the Mahrattas (l921) pp.xhrlix, embodying a valuable ethno-
graphical note from Mr. K. E. Enthoven, c.i.K., for many years
in charge of the Ethnographical Survey of the Bombay Presidency.
In addition to the considerations we have set forth on p. J, and in
development of our line of argument, it is pointed out that a cave
inscription of the first century a.d. at Bodha, Poona District,
applies the term ' MaharaLhini to a princesy, while the term
' Maharathi ' has been found m a cave al Nauiigbat, Poona District,
'Maha' probably being an honorific affix. This would negative
the sugge.stion made in the Census of Indue, 1911, vol. vti,
Bombay, Part I, Report, p. -^89, that the word 'Mui.llha' comes
from maha meaning 'great' and ruthJ, warrior', lu A.u. blC
the Chinese pilgtim Hiuen Tsiang referred to the Deccan
as Mo-ho-lo-cha, the Chinese equivalent of Ma-hS-rS'thiu From
A.D. 753 Riishtrakutas or Rattas ruled for two and a half centuries
and again from the eleventh to the thirteenth century. Whether,
however, the Maratha people derive their name from the country
Mahffr&shtra or whether the latter geographical name sjjnngs
from the tribes inhabiting the land, is still matter lor conjecture.
There is much to show that the term ' Marat hii' has been loosely
used and that it may have ' meant originally nothing more than a
person dwelling in Maharashtra or using Marat hi as his home-
tongue,' the term being found with such varying meanings, home-
times as describing 'a member of the !)Uperior Maratha land-
owning or fighting ciasw,' sometimes as ' a member ot the ordinary
cultivating cabte' or Kuiibi, the latter term signifying a
'cultivator ' of ' inferior 'jocial status', while it appears ' a Kunbl
may, if successful, rise to the superior MaraLhiL status ', the facts
even showmg that there is by no means an insuperable barrier
between Kunbis and the tribe of Kolis, an undoubtedly aboriginal
tribe'. We have therefore Maratha Sutars (carpenters), Maratha
KumbharS (potters), Maratha Lohiirs (blacksmiths), Maratha
Partis (washermen or dhobis). Higher class Marathas are held to

APPENDIX IV 287

be of identical origin with the agricultural Kunbl tribe, these two
being differentiated only by social status, and 'in both the
Maratha and the Kuijbi there is a disfnct aboriginal strain ', from
which It IS to be inferred that Marathas are descendants of Deccan
primeval tribes The ' spurious distinction drawn between the
upper-class Maratha and the lowly Kunbl cultivator ' was protested
against by the AU-India Maratha League in its Memorandum of
July 31) 1919, submitted to the Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Indian Constitutional Reforms Bill of 1919 when they stated :
' There is no difference whatsoever' between a Mahratla and a
Ku^bi . . . Since long days ago m the antiquarian history of this
country they are related by blood to each other. . . . The terms
" Mahratta " and "Kunbl" are synonymous; the educated and
well-to-do portion of the community "Styles itself (as) Mahrattas,
while the ignorant and the rural passes under the name Kunbi,
though the former is akin to the latter as members of the same
caste.' This was also the weighty verdict of Mountstuart Elphin-
stone, statesman and historian, a century ago, the ' Mahratta chiefs,'
he says, being ' all Sudras, of the same caste with their people,
though some tried to raise their consequence by claiming an
infusion of Rajput blood.'

The Marathl Language (pp. 3-4)

Almost simultaneously with the above ' Introduction ' by S. M.
Edwardes which contained 16 useful pages on ' Marathi Litera-
ture ' prefaced by a brief note on the language, there appeared an
able Marathl essay by Rao Bahadur P B. Joshi, F. R. G. S., in
the second volume (pp. 241-258) of the VivtdJia DnySna VtsfSr
Jubilee Memorial publication (1921). Both these support the,
considerations set forth in our first chapter (pp. 3-4) and help
forward the discussion. The MahilrashtrX language from which
Marathi has sprung was a Prakrit, meaning a vernacular dialect,
natural and unartificial, m contrast with the purified and literary
Sanskrit language. As a dialect under the name of Saurashtri it
was connected with another Prakrit, Magadhi, and as Maharashtri
it was the language of ' charming lyrics ' and ' epic poetry ,'
while 'the popular vernaculais whjch formed the original basis
of these polished literary dialects were styled Apabkramsa, i.e.,
corrupt, decayed ; these Apabhramsas, used by the lowest classes
of the people, m time, like the Prakrits, receiving polish and
being put to literary use. Marathi, the home language of the
Maratha people, is the direct descendant of the Apabhramsa of
Maharashtri '. [Impertal Gazetteer, 1908.) Exactly when Marathi
took its present form is an unsolved problem, but it is known
that literature flourished from the sixth to the tenth century, that
at the beginning of the eleventh century the country suffered
frightfully from invasion during which thousands of libraries
and temples were destroyed, and that intellectual darkness settled

288 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

on the people until the thirteenth century when literature revived
under the Yadava dynasty, one of whose kings, Ramachandra or
Ramdev (a.d. 1271-1309), appears at the end of the Dnycfnesh-
warT as a sort of royal patron of Dnyaneshwar, ' the father of
Marathi poetry', whose moving story and that of his successors is
referred to in our second chapter (pp. 38-40).

The Andhra Kings (pp. 3-5)

See further an article, ' On the Home of the So-called Andhra
Kings' in the Annals of tha Bhandarkar Institute, vol. i, part 1,
pp. 20-42.

Gosavi (p. 6, footnote 2).

The 1911 census reported 678 GosclvJs in Bombay Presidency.
A corruption of the Sanskrit GosvclmT, ^the term means one who
has mastered his passions. GosiivTs are i^aivites, just as BcJvcis are
Vaishnavas, both terms describing religious mendicants who as
vagrants go about in the name of religion. Most GoscivJs are
celibates, but have mistresses whose children they recognise as
their own, some being rich money-lenders, traders, husbandmen and
even writers. See above-mentioned Cc«sms o/ /«rf»ff, 1911 vol. p.
260.

Importance of Deccan Villages (pp. 7-8).

Eighty-two per cent of the population m Bombay Presidency
resides la villages of less than 5,000 inhabitants {Census report
p. 15.)

Domestic Religious Rites (pp. 8-9).

The Census volume for 1911 has an interesting section on
'daily worship' (p. 61), pointing out that ' Marathas, Rajputs,
Ku^bis and the artisan castes are expected to worship the house
gods after the morning bath before eatmg, or to visit temples. . . .
The worship of the house gods should be performed by the head or
other elder of the family ; but it is generally entrusted to the drone
of the family, if there be one. It is often delegated to boys, and
even to women as a last resort. . . . Castes below the Kunbls and
the impure castes have generally no house gods.'

See also illuminating paragraphs on ceremonies connected
with agriculture ', setting forth ' the field rites of the Maratha
Ku^bis' (p. 64 of 1911 Census Report).

Bhajans and Kirians (p. 10).

In recent years a well-organized school has been formed in
Bombay for giving a systematic training to would-be Kirtankdrs,
and a monthly periodical bearing the title of Klrian has also been
started for their training. There are now professional KTrtankiirs
who charge fees for their services, their fees varying in proportion
to their attainments and popularity.

APPENDIX IV 289

Pover of the BrShwani (pp. 14, 35).

' Brahman" are not always the priests of the important temples
m rhp Dercan. . . Some of the ofliciatmg priests at Papdharpur ate
RJiilf^'atx, Ihat m, worshippers of both Vishnu and Siva.' [Censiis
of India vol. .ibove-mentioned, p. 68), See further the paragraph
below on ' Bliugvaia Dcx'oiion.'

Dcmocrahntiig Infhtenca of the Rhaldi Poets (pp. 19-22).

In his 'Introduction' to the new edition of Grant Duff's
History of the Mahrattas, (pp. Ixxiii. iv.) S. M. Edwardes calls
into question the democratizing influence of the hhakti poets. He
obser\es: "There is a tendency among some writers to over-esti-
mate the influence upon the public mind of Maharashtra of the
message of the MarathI poets of the hhakti school. They
would have us believe that these poets welded the different and
often mutually hostile groups composing the population of Maba-
rfishtra into one people, that they made the Marathas a nation . . .
It cannot be gainsaid that the remarkable literary movement which
centres so largely about the god Vithoba and Pa^t^l^a-rpur. . . .
embraced persons of various castes, and elevated to sainthood re-
presentatives of even the lowest classes m Maharashtra. . . Yet
it is doubtful whether the poetry of the saints and writers of the
bhaktt school ever reached, or made such impression upon, the
general mass of the people. . . Far more eflficacious than the devo-
tional teaching of the poets in suppressing caste- exclusiveness, and
fostering a sense of " nationhood " was the rise to power of the
^udra, Sivaji, and his constant association with himself
in the task of political and military administration of men, who, m
many instances, were not Brahmans'. Unfortunately for the
objection raised, no explanation is offered as to why Maharashtra
accepted the leadership and even kingship of a 6udra, and why the
' administration of men who were not Brahmans ' was tolerated.
But surely such a remarkable phenomenon calls for some explana-
tion and until an alternative one is forthcoming it is safe to hold
the view that ' the devotional teaching of the poets m suppressing
caste-exclusiveness ' exercized a sufficiently democratizing influence
to weld the people into one under a Sudra king with his non-
Brahman ministers. That this democratizing influence was but
partial we have shown on pp. 55, 163-5, 261-4, and we can
therefore agree with the observation that ' when Sivaji's descend-
ants degenerated into a line of royal phantoms and the Peshwas
usurped all power, the ancient spirit of caste-exclusiveness reassert-
ed itself with redoubled force, and the passionate cry of the
MaraLhI poet, " Find, O find, some means or other, To bring God
and man together," was forgotten amid the caste disputes and the
rlasR-intnguoR of that era of Chitpavan predominance.'
37

290 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

Indian Scholars (pp. 25-6).

In his Inaugural Address at the opening of the Bhandarkar
Institute, (see Annals of the Bhandarkar Institute, July 1919,
pp. 2-5), Dr. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar remarked that ' the peculiar
temptation of an Indian scholar ' is that ' he is prone to see good
in everything old '.

The ' Histortctty' of Krisna, (pp. 30-2). '

In the same Inaugural Address (p. 5) Sir R. G. Bhandarkar
referring to the Mahabharata (and Rclmciyaija), the fountam-head
of mformation concerning Kiisna, said : ' The occurrences reported
in them cannot be regarded as strictly hi.storical '. See also our pp.
252-3.

After pointing out that various names of Abhiras 'are all
synonyms of the god 6iva', Tribes and Castes of Bombay,
pp. 17-34, goes on to say : * Hence the conclusion may be safely
drawn that the Abhiras were by no means connected with Krisria
and his cowherds .... Only one conclusion is possible, viz.,
that the Abhiras did not originally represent the gopas of Krisija.
. . , The traditions which are now current among the Ahirs and
which connect them with Knsna, Mathura and the gopas are only
later inventions . . . The influence of fiction on the disintegra-
tion of a formerly uniform conmmunity or on the amalgamation of
difTerent tribes need not be dwelt upon.'

DnyctnesJiwar's Prayer (p. 38).

For a translation of this wonderful prayer a little more m
detail than we have given in chapter II, and based on a critical
text, see an article by Dr. J. E. Abbott, ' Dnyanpshwar's Prayer ',
in the DnySnodaya, May 5, 1921.

Modern Hindus and the Krisna Legend (pp. 31-3).

In the last of the series of articles on The Bhiigavai Dhartna
to which we have already referred, Pandit Sitanfith Tattvabhushan
in The Indian Messenger for Nov. 27, 1921, quotes a pa.ssage on
Chaitanva's bhahti, giving asteri&ks in place of ' a passage which
would oiTend not only the taste, but even the moral sense of the
reader ', and he asks : ' Can such an " idea of God "... ever save
any church from moral corruption ? ' In working up to this, the
final conclusion of sixteen articles, extonding over nearly eighteen
months, he points out . ' The Kris^ia legend continually grew at
the hands of successive Vaishnava poets, the later ones making
fresh additions to what they had received from their predecissors.
Poets know what poetry is and evenwhat it is not. Minute details
of sayings and doings ascribed to individuals, such as we find in
the Puranas belong not to history, but to poetry and fiction. But
the age which followed that of the creative Vaishi?ava poets seems

APPENDIX IV 291

to have been singularly credulous and unimaginative. It took all
poetry as history. It regarded every detail of the epic and Purmtic
account of Kris^a as true and based its religious life on them as on
a system of theology. Half a century of liberal education, largely
scientific, teaching at any rate how to distinguish between dogma
and reasoned truth, between fact and fancy, between history and
poetry, has effected a revolution in the religious attitude of those
who have received the blessings of such an education. They see
that they must reject the old theology as based on mere poetry, or
if they are to retain it m any shape, they must interpret the legends
invented by the poets as allegorical representations of spiritual
truths. Gravely questioning whether the story of an unholy love
can be thus interpreted with any show of reason and without serious
injury to the moral life of those who would accept such an inter-
pretation, . . , one thing we are most anxious to emphasise, and
that is that neither the authors of the PurSnas nor their latter-day
exponents and followers, including Chaitanya and his disciples,
offer even the slightest clue to such an interpretation.''

Vithoba's Name (pp. 42-3).

In a critical review of Mr. L. R. Pangarkar's Sri TukSramaoe
Caritra Dr. Prabhakar R. Bhandarkar, m the Nava Yuga for
March, 1921, affirmed that the reading VicS kelS thoba given by
Tukaram himself suggests a derivation that is imaginary (see our
pp. 42-3), and he himself would suggest a different meaning for
the words, so as to yield the sense — rebirth was stopped '. No
reason, however, is assigned for so attractive an interpretation.

Impossibility of defining the Term 'Hindu' (p. 25).

The Census of 1911 (pp. 55-6) shows that 91 per cent of the
people in the Konkan and Deccan are HindQs. Referring to ' the
impossibility of framing a comprehensive definition of Hinduism
intelligible to the average enumerator and of drawing a hard and
fast line between Hinduism and other religions, Jainism, Islam,
Animism and Sikhism ', there being in Bombay Presidency ' 35,000
Hindu- Mohamedans whose creed and customs partake of both
religions ', 'the Report states: ' Various tests have been suggested
to fix what constitutes a Hindu, but finally it was decided to treat
all who call themselves Hindu as Hindus.'

The God Khan4obS (pp, 47, 132).

In his 'introduction' to the new edition of Grant Duffs
History of the Mahrattas, published while the present volume
was in the press, S- M. Edwardes gathers together much useful
information concerning Khan^oba, 'the tutelary deity of the
Deccan ' as well as a popular household god, whose name is

292 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

derived from Khande-'aba, ' sword»father '. Besides iti, f.hief

temples at Jejuri, Poona District and P?l1, Satara District, it has

many other temples, the officiating priests often being non-

Brahmans, the officiants in Khandoba's three Bombay temples being

a Brahman a-Kamatht and a Murall (on which word see pp. 47, 132)

respectively. Besides being ' absorbed into the neo-Brabniauic

pantheon' as an avatSra of Siva under the names Malh.in or

Marland, Khandoba is a vegetable deity, turmeric powder being

applied to his devotees and carried in tiger-skin bags by the males

( WclghySs) dedicated to him. He is also an animal god, always

accompanied by a black dog, and is the god of the Ramosh'i

(watchman) caste and of Dhangan (shepherds), lobbers often

making vows to Khancloba when starting on robbing expeditions,

their war-cry of old being Bl-kot, El-kot, referring lo the

'70 million' demons slam by him in conflict. It is, howevei, in

his connection with ' religious prostitution or sanctified harlotry '

that Khan(Joba exercizes his most widespread influence, even

married women becoming Muralis sometimes, forsaking hu&bandh

and children. As the result largely of missionary eflort it hah

become an offence under the Indian Penal Code to dedicate a giil

to Khandoba, though there are still women who 'serve as the

brides of Khandoba and the niibtresbes of men'.

In view, however, of the fact that the Bombay Giis:,elteer
(vol. xviii, part i, pp. 476-7) in 1885 reported only five \Vai>!tySs
and sixteen Muralis in Poona District, within whoso buuniianes
Jeiuri, their centre, is situated, the question calls for furthei
investigation, though missionaries at work among the people
would probably doubt the accuracy of the Gazetteer lifiutcb in tliiii
particular.

Caste and Untouchables (pp. 5^-3, lbJ-5).

'The touch of the Bhangi, ChamSr, Dhed, Iloliya, Mhar, Maug
and Mochi is unclean, and none of these cartes are allowed within
the interior of the ordinary Hindu temples' (CcHSi<s vol. referred
to above, p. 56. See also the excellent note on ' Mahurs ', p, 287).

' In Bombay Presidency alone,' said The Times of India Decern
ber 1, iy21, 'there are somewhere about a niillioii people who
by the rest of the population are regarded on religious grounds
as pariahs and outcastea, whose touch is legarded as a dotilenicnt,
who are not allowed to draw water from the village well, whose
children are not allowed oven to culor tin; ouliiiuiy m liuoh'..
The^e di!.abiIilKiii are in fcjrc u altogether apMil lioiii llii; iK.iKiiiiil
duaiilinub!<or jioiiitiou oi lliu individiiul uiiti <iii: iioiciv li.u.id iiiiuii
cai)U'.'

Idolttiorii and Moiiutheti.ts iti ii:i, Uci^cu, i (.) Ij.-)

' The bulk of the people are polytheit.t,not nau/ arc u-.onotuuibta
pure and simple.' (Census 1077 Report, 'i. fi7)

APPENDIX IV 293

Bhdgavata Devotion to Vishnu andStva (pp. 156-8, and 27).

' If a coolie or a cartman were asked if he were a Vaish^ava or a
Saiva he would not understand the question. . . . The inhabitants
contribute to the local festivals of both religions alike, there is no
conception of the idea that the two religions are mutually exclusive.
The Brahman recognizes differences of sect and would be able to
say whether he was a follower of Vishiju or Siva, but the ordinary
villager ... is content to worship the village godlmgs to whom
he looks for rain, etc. . . . There are, as it were, two religions ; a
work-a-day religion to meet the requirements of everyday existence
and a higher religion, known only to the Brahman who is called m
to officiate on great occasions, which the average man does not
attempt to understand. . . . Their death-bed mantras would be
invocations to Siva and Vishnu respectively. A curious instance
of a death-bed mantra which combines the names of both deities
is to be found amgng the BhSgvat sub-sect of the Shenvi Brahmans,
who say " Siva, Siva, Narayan " when they are about to die. . . .
Some of the officiating priests at Pa^dharpur are Bhagvatas that is,
worshippers of both Vishnu and Siva. They may owe their
standing in a Vaish^ava temple to the legend that the founder of
the Vithoba shrine housed his idol in a disused temple of Mahadev '
{Ibid. pp. 66-8).

On the problem of how Vishnu and Siva became one in worship,
S. M. Edwardes believes that foreign invaders led to ' a reconcilia-
tion between the two warring sects of Saivas and Vaishnavas,
which is symbolized in the installation of an image of Vithoba
(Vishiju) in the temple of Paijdhari . . . and its association with
the liilga of Siva ' (' Introduction ' to new edition of Grant DufTs
History of the Mahrattas, p. Ixv).

TukSrSin No Reformer (pp. 160-5.)

S. M. Edwardes {Ibid, p. 68) has fallen into the error of M. M.
Kunte when the latter described Tukaram as a ' revolutionist ', the
former speaking of Tukaram's 'crusade' against Brahman ritual,
ceremonial and priestcraft, but if our argument holds good Tukaram
was no ' crusader '. »

N. V. Tilak as a poet (pp. 165, 23ii)

In liii, I'rebidenlial address to the Conference ot Marathi
vmters held at Baroda, November 26, 1921, Mr. N. C. Kelkar,
editor of the Kesarl, said that among present-day Marathi poets
NarEyan Vaman Tilak, ' received and deserved the honour of
elder.' See Kesarr, Nov. 0.9, 1921.

294 LIFE AND TEACHING OFTUKARAM

Th& Upanishads on Inward Religion (p. 226)

In his Thirteen Principal Upanishads {p. 405, Dr. R. E. Hume
of Union Theological Seminary, New York, gives the subject-title
' The Saving Knowledge of One, Kind, Immanent Supreme God of
the Universe' to the stanzas IV. 11-20 of the ^vetaivatara
Upanishad, translating stanza 20 thus :

His form is not to be beheld.

No one soever sees Him with the eye,

They who thus know Him with heart and mmd.

As abiding in the heart, become immortal.

Similarly, on p. 396, he gives the subject-title ' The All-Pervad
ing Soul ', to stanzas 1. 15-16 of the same Upanishad, and trans-
lates 15 :

As oil in the sesame seeds, as butter m cream,
As water in river-beds, and as fire in the friction-sticks
So is the Soul (Atinan) apprehended in one's own soul,
If one looks for Him with true austerity (tapat,).

To stanzas IV 22-13 m the Katha Upanishad he gives the
title, ' The Eternal Lord Abiding m one's self ', with the twelfth
stan/sa thus translated :

A Person of the measure of a thumb
Stands in the midst of one's self (atman).
Lord of what has been and of what is to be.
Ono does not shrink away from Ilim.'

See also his translations of ^vetaivatara Upanishad, III. 13
and Katha Upanishad, VI. 18, on his pp. 401, 361, Dr. P. K. Bhan-
darkar and the present writer p. 246.

' As for the argument with Dr. Prabhakarrao, who m the
Subodh Pafnka had observed that the present writer was ' child-
like (I had almost used an allied word) in his faith,' and ' blinded
by gross prejudice,' we assured him of two things, first, that
our faith was every bit as ' child-hke ' as he had suggested, and
secondly, we pointed out that in repudiating the distinction we had
drawn between sin-stricken Tukaram and the sinless Redeemer
he had taken up an attitude to Jesus which no school of Christian
thought would support and which our accepted principles of

scientific interpretation could only pronounce a.s untenable

Our position, in conversation with our critic, was that the lifelong
miracle of Christ 't. character was of far deeper signiiicance an a
miracle than either the miraculous birth or the miraculous resur-
rection : grant the sinle&sness, then every other miracle was
possible. The striking fact, as we pointed out, is that all schools of
Christian interpretation accept whole-heartedly the !,in!es.«!ne!)s of
Jesus, so that our friend Dr. [■'tabbakarrao could not pit any libera!
or modernist school against the orthodox editor who had so dis-
turbed his peace We concluded by urging that the record.

APPENDIX IV 295

in .the four Gospels themselves be carefully studied to see if a view
so universally accepted by millions of thinking people the world over
could be so wide of the mark as our learned friend had suggested.
And this is our plea with every thinking Indian who has difficulty
about the Lord Jesus Christ. Study methodically the record of
His life with an open mind, pray (in your own way) for light as you
read, and resolve by God's help to follow whatever light comes.'

[Dnyanodaya Nov. 24, 1921, from an account of an interview
between Dr. P. R. Bhandarkar and the present writer).

Appendix V

Bibliography

A selection of the relevant literature on the subject is indicated
in the footnotes throughout this book and the aim of the present
bibliography is merely to bring together the chief authorities and
so guide the student of Tukaram as to what are likely to be the
most helpful aids to further study. In the following list, which in
no way claims to be exhaustive, the bracketed letters (E) and (M)
signify that the book or article is m English or Maralhi respect-
ively. See page of ' abbreviations ' for explanation of those letters
not given in full.

I. Historical and Philological

Bombay Gazetteer (1885) vol. xx. (E), the section on Pandhar-
pur ; full oi information unobtainable elsewhere.

V. L. Bhave's (M) History of MarSfhl Lzteratma up to 1819
(1919) is far and away the best work dealing with the wonderful
literature of the Marathas.

Grant Duffs (E) History of the Mahrattas in 2 vols, newly
edited by Mr. S. M. Edwardes, g.s.i.,g.v.o., withan ' introduction '
(l92l) on Maratha ' origins ' and ' literature ' etc., and annotations
throughout. The only authoritative complete work covering the
whole Maratha period, though some of the author's views are
contested by Indian scholars.

' C. A. Kmcaid and D. B. Parasnis ' (E) History of the Maratha
People (1918). Only vol. I is thus far published, dealing with the
period to the death of Sivaji ; the forthcoming second volume is to
bring the story up to a.d. 1750, and the 3rd to A.n. 1818, with short
appendices on the Mariithfi States between 1818 and now. Com-
parisons with Grant Duff's work impossible until completed.

C. A. Kmcaid's (E) Tales of the Saints of Pandharpiir (1919).
Traditions of Maratha Saints translated into English.

Molesworth's Marutht and English Dictionaty (1857). Must
be reckoned one of the finest dictionaries m India, but needs bring-
ing up to date in certain parts.

W. B. Patwardhan's (E) Wilson Philological Lectures (1917)
on 'The influence of the Saints of the BhaJdi School in tlio
Formation and Growth oi Prakrit Literature', published in the
F. C. M., Dec. 1917 to July 1919. The most useful accounli
from the popular standpoint, of the history and influence of the
Maratha saints and their books.

M. G. Ranade's (E) Rise of the Maratlul Power (1900).
A brilliant fragment.

APPENDIX V 297

N. B. Ranade's Twentieth Century English MarSthX Dic-
tionary (1916). Embodies conclusions as to Marathi renderings
of modern English words up to 1916.

II Biographical

MahipAtx s {m) Bhakia LllSmnta (1774), chaps. 25-40, and
Bhakta VijSya (1762-3), chaps. 48-52, are the foundation of
everything both in Marathi and English. See our pp, 69-77 and
20-21 for estimates of the value of Mahipati's works.

Dr, Murray Mitchell's (E) translation of part of the Bhakta
Lilctmnta m J R.A.S So., Jan 18-19, is the only one we know and
has supplied three or four pages in our chapter IV (see p. 109,
footnotes; p 114, footnote 3; p. 117, footnote. See further
Appendix III)

Several Matathi 'Lives' have been published, the latest by Mr.
L. R. Pangarkar (M), $rl TukSrclincice Caritra (1920) probably
being the best, though the work must be pronounced deficient,
first from the standpoint of the inadequate biographical material
included and second because Mr. Pangarkar ' has unfortunately
accepted all the traditions regarding Tukaram without any critical
examination of any kind. There are other useful Marathi 'Lives,'
among them being those by K. A. Keluskar and V. Madgaokar.

Ill Editions of Tukaram's Poems

See the list given on page 120 with the discussion on their
respective merits.

The (M) Indu Pntkcish (1869) still retains the premier po^iition
and It has also a brief biography both m English and Marathi.

On Mr. V. N. Joga's edition with its commentary, see under
' interpretation.'

V. L. Bhave's (M) Tukaramaci Assal Gstha (1920) emhodies
the latest findings. See our pi^. 121-2 and since then an article
by H. A. Bhide in Vividha DnySna VtstHni.

Eraser and Matathe's (E) The Poems o/ TnkarSm m 3 vols.
Prose translations (1909-15) of 3721 of Tukaram's ahhafigs,
arranged under order of topics with notes and appendices. Though
not a ' complete Enghsh translation ' as erroneously stated by Dr.
Farquhar (O. R. L I. p. 374) and though some renderings are
disputed by Marathi scholars this still remains the only English
work giving anything like an ade:iuate idea of the number and
variety of Tukaram's verses.

IV Interpretation of Tukaram

Dr. Sir R G. Bhandarkar's (li) V.S.M.R.S. (1913), chapters
xxv-vi, pp. 92-101. An authoritative statement of Tukaram's

38

^^'H LIKK AND TliACJIING OK TUKARAM

/tiT )" '^*'' ^*'"^*" ^"''i""' of Vaishijavism. The same' uuthoi's
(M) UV/f««^<s ,i„d Lectures (1<)1<J) on rfligious sul)je.cts, with 101)
panes of a (M) biography ot this great l>/uiktt scholar by Sir
N. G. Chamlavarkar. A unique volume of oxposuions of Marathi
bluikii.

^ Dr. riahh.ik.'ir K. Dhandfukar's (K) Ttt'O Masters . Jesus and
TiiUanlm (I'HX). Sh« chaptHr x, SBCiion 4. The samti author's
(MJ auide in iVimr Yiinti, March, 19.^1, ably ciiticizing Mr. Pan-
tidtkai's bot.k r.'t«rre<i to above. This ciuicistu lias .since been
be<!n ifptinU'd in pamphlet iorni.

H.'v. Neheiniah r.oieh's (M) Tenets oj Tukaiam (1892). Too
unsynipathetic, thouj-h oorieclon soitie points.

I<"or a svsluinatu; hliuiy of Tukfuam's poems, the i vols fM)
by the latp Mr. Vishi.tuboa N. JoRa, hii edition ot II I') ^ibhauiis
(I'M)')), IS far the best. See p. 121 in our rlMptet v \ niimiiif?
piti'aphiase umavels many hard knots, though H line of iiitcipiola
tion IS often aduplcd which other schools lejfct.

Dr. HastiiiRs* E.R.B. Kn«lish articles on Honihav, vol. I
(Crooke), Bhtikti Mctrjia, \o\. A (Giiersoii), Mvs/icisiit {Iiuluiii),
vol. <) (Miu-nicol), Pi-'lrlliinul ScundJ, vol. 9 (Faicpihar), Tiikdiiiiii,
vol. 12 (iCd wards).

Dr. Macnicol'a (E) Pi^ahuH of flic Maraihu Sarins (I'M'J).
Thu best presfiU.Uion by a luissiDiiarv, (roin the, appie(.iative
standpoint, of the whoJH spirit ot MiuiiWn hliakfi, ;iiid showing Us
appioximation to Chnstian tiuih, with 7.5 ol riik.liiim's <//)/;</hj[<,s-
translated into felicitous I'CnKlish pootry, tliouHh somu Matal'ii
interprt'teis would not accept ail tho tondciiUKs kivimi.

Di. Mar.n tool's (ICJ Iwiian Tlwinm (191.^) \ii illunuiiatinK
hook, pp. I iO-8 prirtiriilarly uselul on pie.sent sul))iM;t Sen al.so
its iiidi'X «//(/(■/" Tuk,'ir;uii.

Rev. (i. H. Mfivalkai's (H) TiikaiaDU MahCin'fililniui Pod
an,l Siimt (I'lO.S) \ ii.-aiis" tail ol ttuc. disi ui niiient and
eiiiboJyiiif; the '.'hii.strin point "I view.

IV.iiodicals :

t^ithoifli P.t/rh^il (]'" &' M), wi'i'klv ortian ol the liouibav
i'r.iitliaiiil S.iin.i): Dmaiunliiyii (ICi'v M), woi'klv otu.iii ol seven
Mission'*; Vivn/li-hiiViiitti-Vf^luur, (M), iiioiilhlv; Iiiifi in I/i/vi'-
prjti'i', OC) ipiuU'tlv; all biui h,iv<! oi'.'asi )ii.il aiticlcs on siiiiiccts
rokih'il to Piik.'i'iin.

rill' (punlijily pn'ilx alioii of the liharata Uthu-itt Sonshndhak
ManJdht, fill iiisiiiiUion oi whu li cvimv siiidciit <il ruKiiiain should
be a iniiiiibi't ; oflii i! , .•ill, S.ukishiv I'rtli, I'ooiia. Also The
A!ti!<ils of I lie Hill iuhnkitr ()iieiil il Reseimii Iiislilnle, I'ooiin,

Th.' ,/. A'. 1. S. />Vi., (>spc( i.illv an ailidf (I'HD, vol \>A,
Ni> >)) l)v I.. ). Si'd!4\viik, I. (". S. \ notable e\p<isition oi
M.u AWnldiakti.

INDEX OF 'ABHANGS'

Since this book has mainly English readers in view the following list of
Tukariim's abhangs has reference to the only Bnslish edition approxiraatrng
to anything like completeness, viz , Fraser and Marathe's prose translations
of 37^1 abhangn out ol the 4621 in the— so far— standard Marathi edition,
published by the Iiidii Pnikitsli pres.s As the corresponding numbeis in the
Litter edition are given at the end of vols II and III of F and M theie is
no need to repe.it them here, save m a tew cases where special leterence has
been made, which cases are dealt with bv the letter 'I' Similarly with
Di Maoniools poetical translations of 76 ot Tuka.ram's abhangx in his
Pt,aliiit, of Maiiitliii tHciuiis (numbeied xxxiu to cvlii ) , out ot these the
present work baa i elerred to 37, which will l)e tound indexed m the following
columns b.^ the letter 'S' after the number letenmg to i?" and M'h prose
numbers To suminarizo, lett-hand figuies in the columns holow refer to the
order of i/W/a;;i7.s' in Fraser and Marathe's Pueinn of Tukiiium, leleried to
throughout the prr-sent woik under the abbreviation F and M , rifiht-hand
hgures refer to the pages ol the present book, the letter 'I ' to the Jnifu
PrakJuli edition; and the Iptter 'S' to Dr Matnicol's Pmh/i.i of Maiiit/id
i^a/iitn. A sep.irute list is added of a tew abhungx not translated by
F and M.

F. & M. Page F & M Page F. & M. Page

398
325
1^5
187
197

50
335
2^0
135
141
135
275

66
136
138
135
203

50
136
13b
136
187

n%

213

m

118
199
141

2(K)
196
196
196

3011
^74

19

137

213

190, 255

327

49 S

186

217

199

334

5^&

146

221

187

336

53

218, 247

222

200

338

70

143

234

152

339

92 S

118

327

191

3431

92

228

228

194

347

lOJ I

90

231 S

146

347 S

1

127

231

195

,228

348

101

135, 229

232

207

351

103 -4 I

90

233

196

353-4

106

206

236

208

355

113

83 f, 138

338

210

353 S

121-2

205

343

201

356

126 1

49

245

148

358

126

135,137.242

247

194

361

136

149

348

211, 224

363

147

149

363

J 59

3631

150

210

365

159, 196, 198

364

151

185, 280

206

163

365

154

155

373

1«5

373

157, 159

156

277

200

406

176

158, 234

381

160

436

183

200

383

151

, 190

439

184

152

28fi

190,

,201

443

193

200

2S7

152

,198

448 S

200 *

189

288

151

463

201

189, 206

294-6

196

,232

476

204

195

304

197

460

207

190

307

191

486

208

209

318

310

487

210

190

320

311

489

211

190, 195

322

199

494

2 IS

217

324

J. 97,

199

496

300 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

F & M Page F & M. Page F &. M. Page

501 276 836 gno 1195 ' 144

505 S 168 841 199 1196 144

505 196 842 200 1199 144

509 199 846 199 3205 341,276

510 199 850 ]99 1209-80 31,252
513 116 876 209 1281-1305 149
518 188 879 U\ 1301-5 218, 247
524 197 885 ui 1344-1354 132-3
•525 s 168 888 199,303,21)7 1369 323
5^7 159 889 J96 i389 H5
532 194 894 185, 207, 225, 'J77 1389 S 259

539 218,246 895 229 1417 275

540 195 8% 207 1420 143
543 201 897 307 14a2 lil
545 274 907 151 UiUS 66
549 196,199,201,278 9 LI 2O8 113i 231
551 199 917 208 1 1-4 '3 P 66
554 201 926 152,208 3444 1459 105,126
556 199 g'iO 208 1462 114,149
558 226 931 208 1463 114

560 201 933 375 14«(i 98

561 144,301 936 3U 146« 1474 100, J23tf
566 141 937 208 1491) 1500 45
57S 141, 198 942 162, 207-8 1503 223
584 201 944 308 1512-14 45
686 190 945 ]{53 1533 45
587 115 946 208 1530 39 45
615 154 948 208 1549-1573 96
615 S 214 953 278 157.) .1 1573 k 92
651 S 168 953 ]50 1573 1 1573 p 93f
690 141 958 212 1578 139,220
702 203 972 211 1586 S 115
706 185, 207. 228, 277 976 276 1589 S 186

709 142 984 203 1609 136

710 142 994 305 16-J7 156

711 143 996 210 1634 1155
713 143 1007 15,| 1653 201. 204
713 143 1029 213 1656 274
715 143 1033 212 1057 191
717 143 1042 275 1663 220
720 143 1043 154 1665 187
722 l.H 1054 154 1670 230
731 154 1066 159 1679 389
747 329 1070 13! 1685 217
749 229 1093 276 1686 217
763 B, I, 195 U26 306 1692 194
768 2'U 3130 191 1095 217
771 185,202,230 1134 143 1608 191
776 S 214 1144 151,158 1707 199,328
812 225,226,375 1153 351 1713 ' 374
8'iO 200 1163 160 1714 154
822 200 3169 353 1727 159 (oorrigcndii),
825 300 3172 ]60 195

828 200 1177 188 1730 198,211

829 200 1185S 146 1740 m
832 162 1187 210,375 1744 162
834 200 1189 375 1753 191

INDEX OF 'ABHANGS' 301

F.&M Page F.ScM. Page F.ScM. Paga

1755

222, 274

2232

154

2790

139

1756

191

2238

304

2813 S

186

1757

191

2242

205

2826

157

1769

274

2246

305

2827

156

1777

276

2247

205

3838

43

1782

210

2254

159

2836

156

1787

190

2259

162

2866

189

1795

190, 272

2273

301

2968

224

1798

200

2398

300

3009

136

1802

191, 200

2802

213

3010

224, 256

1805

278

2304

211

3026

136

1813

276

2305

199

3030 S

136

1817

201

2309

225

3036

224

1831

197

2311

140

3117

152

1842

198

2313

159

3134

194, 211

1858 8

224

2316

300

3135

312

X860

136, 243

2322

213

3143

151

1862

222

2336

213

3165

154

1866

275

2328

200

3183

198

1870

136

2329

200

3188

200

1872

236

2345

138

3189

200

1879

136

2375

207

3195

154

1881

136, 243

2394

2U

3199

200

1886

138

2395

163

3203

151

1891

136

2396

313

3207

198

1924

190

2398

144

3213

191

1938 ■

222

3400

200

3230-1

202

1963

223

3422

310

3233

203

2028

144

2455

205

3333

301

2034

196

2484

157

3335

194, 211

2035

224

2495 305,

, 218, 247

3339

258

2036

151

2507

276

3346

303

2041

374

2533

209

3352 b

159,267

2052

276

2535

144

3354

203

2059

306

2531

154

3362

203

2064 J

227

3536

303

3369

275

2077

162

3538

196

3370

203

2081

201

3542

199

3372

205

2089

202

2543

193 ,

. 3373

303

2138

222

2544

193

3380

206

2143

210

' 2561

192

3403

203

2144 S

44

2572

210

3407

142

2144

309

2588

152, 275

3414

200

2146

211

2597 152,

, 197, 326

3437

188

2147

220

3598

153

3434

203

3148 S

214

35991

50

3451

141

2149

231

2599 S

146

3465

300. 275

2164

191

3601

192

3466

201

2187

225

2603

151

3474 S

230

2189

228

2605

151

3476 a

197

2194

305

3606

152

3477

201, 203

2196

203

3620

159

3530

276

2200

143

3631

158

3537

212

2218

325

2632

325

3566

160

2219

203

S707-2722

210

3592

205

2224

159

2755

139, 220

3605

159

2230

154
?q

2773

139, 225

3671

225

302 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

' Abhangs ' not translated in F. and M.

From Indu Prakash Edition Page

(1) 8-11 ... ... . ... ... ... 116

28 116

1579 157

2306 211

2488 164

236

4297 162

4420 118

Lines 25-30, p. 667 vol. II, 318, 218, 247

(2) From Psalms of MarSthe Smnts

Liv (p. 67) ... ... ... ... 118

(3) From V. N. Joga

1728 ... ... ... ... .. ... 164

(4) From Tukaram Tatya's Edition

4733 {vol, I. p. 684) ... ... ... ... 154f

INDEX OF AUTHORS

Abbott, 70 ff, 75, 122, 189, 283, 291

Acwortb, 13, 19

Ajyar, 12

Akho, 354

Apparswami, 223

Appdsamy, 217

Apte, Hari Narayan, 121

Apte, V, G., 9

Augustine, 233

Awte, Trimbak Han, 74

Sana Bhatta, 158

Bdrth, 250

Bell, 22

Bhandarkar P. R., 69, 76 f, 84, 88,
90, 92, 94, 97, 99, 105, 149 f, 156 f,
163, 170, 173, 188 ff, 220, 232, 239 ff
248, 264 f, 276, 279, 291, 295 f, 298.

Bhandarkar, B. G , 3, 25 f. 30, 32 ff,
40, 50, 67, 72, 121. 125, 151, 155,
175 ff, 184, 215, 220, and chap, ix
passim, 234, 240, 261 f, 285, 290,
299

Bhandarkar, V G., 232

Bhate, G., 18, 176

Bhave, V. L. 3f, 12, 18, 46, 52, 67, 70,
72ff, 76f, 82 f, 91, 98f, 102, 105, 116,
119, 122, 124 f, 134, 142, 155, 297 f

Bhide. B.A..76f. 298

Bhide, V. W , Corrigenda

Bruce, A. B., 222

Cive, 184

Chandavarkar, Sir N. G, 177,

219 ff, 224, 238, 239, 257 f, 298
Chandorkar, G. R., 18
Cheyne, 249
Ohirol, 35
Ohrysostoin, 265
Cokhamels, 164
Crooke, 41, 46, 298

Driver, 249

Duff, Grant, 287, 296 £

Parquhar, 25, 27 f, 30, 33 ff, 55, 142.

153, 158, 175, 189, 247, 282, 285.

297 f
Fleet. 3
Fraser and Marathe,i3assini

Gadgil, Jan3rdhan Sakharam, 68

Gadre, 76 f

Gandhi, K., 32, 192

Garbe, 284 f

Geden, 46, 216, 285

Glover, 183

Goreh, Nehemiah, 104, 176, 189,

344, 298 b
Grant, Sir Alexander, 165, 185, 190
Grierson, 215, 284, 298
Griswold, 175

Eastings, E.R.B, Edited by, 3,
14, 29, 38, 56, 183, 194, 196, 215 f,
242, 298

Hegel, 192

Hermas, 258

Hume, 294

Indrgji, Pandit Bhagwaulal, 41

Jaoobi.29f

Joga, V. N , 42, 133, 227, 230, 297

Joshi, D. L., 282

Joshi, P. B , 41, 287

Kabir, 196
Keith, 223 ff, 283
Kelkar, N. , 165
Eeluskar,K. A., 18,125, 297
Xinoaid, Iff, 4, 11, 16, 18 f, 47 f, 70f,

83, 164, 296
Kunte, M. M., 165

Edwards, 164, 175, 259, 273, 285, 299
Edwardes, 286 ff
Egerton, 280
Eknath, 217
Enthoven, 14, 209,286 f

39A

Laotantius, 264
Lawrence, Brother, 90
Lightfoot, 257
Limaye, H. G., 19 f
Lyall, 35

i04 LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

MacauliSe, 253

Mackiehaii,67f,m

Macniool, 7, 9, 37, 129, 137, 142,', 153,

177, 184, 190, 217, 221, 272,281, 298
Mahipati, 52 and passim
Msnikka Vasaliar, 223, 256
Manwaring, 9

Marathe. fraaer and, passim
Mitchell, Murray, 49, 54, 61 f, 81,

100,109,Ui, 117, 190,280. 297
Moffatt, 180, 256 f
Molesworth, 2, 6, 132, 296, 230
Muzumdar, A„ 73, 92

Kair, Sir Sankaran, 22

Nanak, 253

Narada, 234

Natarajan, 263

Navalkur, Gt. B., 40, 42, 105. 136,

151, 176, 179, 244 f, 277, 298
Nivrittmath, 53, 157

Oman, 46
Orelli, 248

PSngarkar. L. E., 67, 73f, 76f, 82,
87, 90, 102, 116, 125, 127 f, 143,
150f, 157, 160, 170 ff. 189, 240,
244, 291, 297

Parasnis, D. B, and Kmoaid, Iff, 4,
ll,18f,47f, 83, 296

Parekh Manilal, 29

Patwardlidn, W. B., 4, 20f, 67f, 82,
136. 138ff, 152. 161 £f. 235 ff, 239,
253.281,285,296

PhilUps, 258, 264

Fotdar, B., 18

Ra3wado,2f,76t
Ramohandra, Jarardan, 76
Ramdas, 53, 157
Rara Mobun Roy, 148
Rimsay, W. M, 242

Banade, M.G., 9ft, 12, 15 f, 20 f,

40, 232, 296
Banade, N. B., 297
Bawlmson, 104, 135, 174
Bees, 22

Sadhu Sundar Singh, 364
Sarkar, Jadunath, 17, 20 f
Sastri, Pandit Sivanath, 29
Scott, E. F , 183
Sedgwick, 13, 20, 41, 54, 70, 128, 216,

229, 298
Sederblora, 29

Stevenson. Mrs,, 6, 9, 60, 148, 216
Streeter, 217
Smith. Vincent A„ 284
Sorabji, Cornelia, 265

Tagore, Maharshi Debendranath,

129
Tagore, Babindraoath, 19, 261
Takakhav, N. S., 125
Tattvabhushan, Pandit Sitanath,

30,250ff.269tf.273f
Telang, 20, 33
Tertullian, 260, 282
Tilak, N. V., 69, 125. 133 1, 141, 161,

165, 237, 240, 344, 354, 267, 272,

293
TulsiDas,315f,247

Umarkhane. £>. V., 73
Underbill, Miss, 54, 179

Wallace, 269
Way.250, 256f. 260
Wcstcotfc. B, b\, 180. 356
Weymouth. 356 f
Wilson, 230

Zaioski, 381

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

Abhangs, defined :i.xiii ; as hymns,
21, 176, at festivals, 13, literary
merit of, 20f , democratizing
influence of, 21 f; Dny.\neshwar's,
157, 171 . Eknath's, 24, 171, 201 ,
Janabai's, 24, Kanfaoba's, 71;
Muktabai's, 44 ; Namdev's, 20, 44,
90, 171, Ntloba's, 71ff; Nivritti-
nath's. 53, 157, RSmdSs', 20,
Rameshwar Bhatt's, 71ff , Tuka-
ram's 20, 116ff, 176 and passim

Abhiras, 284, 290

Absorption in Supreme Spirit, 230

Acta Sanotomm, 281

Adequacy of Tukaram's religion,
chap \. passim

' Adultery with God,' 246f

Advaita, 33ff, 92, 126, 166, 174,
188f, 199, 217

Adversities of Tukaram, SO, 83, 108f,
138f

Affection for animals, TukarSm's,
209

Afflatus, Divine, 73

' Agitated,' Tukaram, 231

Agricultural ceremonies, 288

Ahalyabai, 51

Ahtmsa, 172, 309

Ahiis, 30

Ahmcdabad, 95

Ahmednagar, 262

Ajmer Chohans, 63

Akaimukhm, 46

Akbar, 17

Afcbo, 254

Alandl, 27, 48. 63, 94, 97, 169, 171ff

Alexandna,283

Alleged debt to Christianity, Tuka-
ram's, Appendix III

Allegory in Hinduism, 3-'. 247

Almanacs, Hindii, 116

Alvars, 36f

Amabal, 78

Amanuensis, Tukaram's, 120f

Amba, 51

AmbabaT,5\

Ambijipant, 102

Ambiguity, TukarSm'b 153, 1^5f
iy4f, 238, ?56f.

Ambile, Tukaram's. family surname,
07

Ambulance, St. John's, 03

American scholarship, 70

Amorousness, 149

Amraoti, 63
Amntamibhav, 171
Anagadashah, 96
Anagod, 163

Ancestors, Sraddh to, 58 , of Tuka-
ram, 77f '
Andhras, 2 f, 2K8
Angels at Mens, 104
Anglican Piayer Book, 33
Anhilvad Chaulukyas, 63
Animals, Affection of Tukartm for,

209 , teaching on duty to, 209 ff ,

metaphors from, 130
Anodyne, Tukaram's, 251
Anxiety deprecated by Tukaram,

201 , his ' unsatisfied religious a.',

229 f
Aniarydmm, 260
Apabhramsa, 287
Apocryphal verses, 123 ff
Apology to Vithoba, 112
Appaji Gulvi, 82
Apparswami, 223

Approximation to Chnstian truth,
_ Tukaram's. 177 ff
Apte and Dravid's edition, 120 f
Arcana, 172
Archdeacon Dennis' M.S. recovered

from the sea, 98
Argumeittuin Silenito, 281
Army, MarStha, 15
Art m Hinduism, 12, 53 f
Arunodaya, 60 f
Arya Samaj, 49
Aryan, 3f, 35
Asakl, 114
'Ascension' of Tukaram, 6, 71, 105,

115 f. 126, 279
Asceticism, 45 ff
Js/i^<i/i,47ff,54, 170ff
is/itr(V/iI, 48ff, 62f
Aitadandvata, 46
Asiatic literature, 1 28
Aspirations of Hindius 235
Asoka. 2 f

Ass, Punishment of ridmg an, 114
Assassination of a Brahman m

Pandharpfir, 6f
Assaye, Battle of, 15
Aiuras (demons), 156
Aimccniveitcrna, 172
Attack on Vithoba, 56, 60 f
Attendance at Pandharpfir festivals,

171
Afyapatya 131
Aurangzib, 15, 17 f, 95

306

I,IFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

Austenties, 4S ff, 85, 94, 146, 195,
228

Authentic'ty of Tukaratn's poems,
122 ff, 219

Autobiography, of Bahniabal, 73,
92, 99, 102, 117 , of Tukaram, 72.
chap. V , passim

Avadhuta, 114

Avallbai (or Jijabal), second wife of
Tukaram, 6, 76, chap, iv, part II
passim

Avataras, of Vishnu 27 ff ; a
Vaisbnavite idea, 27ff, place in
Hinduism, 28 ff, definition and
number 28 ; differing from Christian
incarnation, 28 ff, appendix 1 ; of
§iva, 114 ; TukSrilm and A., 251 ff .
sect. 6 , salvation and A., 21 ff ; 5
VithobaandA.,sc<!Vithoba, Lord
ot AvaiSras,' 107

B

Baalim, 248 f

Babajl, 39, 73, 91 f

Bacivas, 55 ff, 60, 256

Bahlnabai, woman disciple of Tuka-
ram, 73, 92, 99 n, 102, 117

Bairagya Krisnajl, 73

Bajirao, 64

Bakhars, 20, 125

Balajl, 10

Balbodh letters., 90

Baleghat, 82

Bana Bhatta, 158

Banaji, 134

Banki uptcy of Tukaram. 75, 84

Barber poet and bhakti, 31, 146

Barsi, 46, 49

Baroda, 64

BassQin, 280

Bathing, 61 f

Bivas, 288

Beads (necklace or garland) of
flowers m marriage, 87

Bedba, 2R6

Bees, Tukaram and the, S<) t

Beggars, 47

Beliefs of Warkarls. 171 f

Kelgola, Sravana, 135

Benares (or Kail), 37, 49. J 14, 127,
15t, 159, 104, 172

Benevolence, The WdrkarVi,, 172

Bengal, 35. 37

Berur, 48

Berdr Smmaduti', 61

Bereavements of Tukaram, 84

Bhagavadgtiic . Krisna m, 30 ff ,
M. K. Gandhi on, 32 , a com-
promise, 33 ; text-book of bhaHi,

33 ; Telang and BhandSrkar on
date of, 33 ; layman's Upanishad,
34 ; popularity of 34 , piinciples,
39, moksham, 45 f; read whilst
rolling, 45, Tukaram's study of,
86, a chief scripture of Maha-
rashtra, 128, 189 , in every War
karl monastery, 171 , an advaita
book. 189

Bhagwan, 27, 46

Bhagirathi a tributary of Ganges,

114, 149; Tukaram s daughter,
90, 102

Bhairava, 53

Bhandarkar, (Sir R.G.) as a bhakta,

177. See Authot "s Index
Bhandarkar Institute, 288, 298
Rhagavafa (or Bhiigwat): the

meaning of the word, 27; the B.

community, 27 , B. Maratba

cenires, 27; Maratha B., 27;

relation to Vaisbnavas, 27 . B.

religion, 27, 30, 36; 55, 128, 149,

150 ff, 171 ff. 247, 253, 269, 293
Bhdgwat (Bhagavataj Purthia, 29,

36. 247, 253 ; origin of, 31 ;

Krisna in, 32 ; reading from, 114 n,

115, an advaita book, 189, 128,
117

Bhagavaia-iasira , 27
Bhaians, 10, 173,288
Bhakia (s&e Bhakti)
Bhaktakalpadrtima, 209
Bhaktakathilmnta, 74
Bkaktainala, 21. 74
Bhakta Raj, 172
Bhakti; mklitaiu,, 10; movement,

20 ff; 39 ff ; literature, 20 ff, 21,
75, 81 n, 87 n, 127, 143,215; and
BrahmanR,21. 34 , H and barbers,

21 ; B. and Mah.nrs, 21 ; among
ihc Bhagvatas, 27; devotees., 31;
Vaishnavite!,, ii(i, text-book ot,
3?ff; enthusiastic and emotional,
H\ 215, 219; sect in, 36; theolo-
gians, J7, Maratbl, 2Sff;!n the
iJuccan, 39; among l^apcll^arpfir
pilgrims, ()2 ; I'atwardhan on, 101 ;
and caste, 162 ff; paradox of,
165; liberation and ]94f ; inward
nature of. 215 ; moral strain in,
215; importance of, 215; inward
and widespread character of, 215;
democratizing inflnence ot, 21f,
215, use of vernaculars lo, 215;
defined, 216; power of adaptation,
216 ; and Vo^a differentiated, 216 f,
229; pure and impute, 218; the
essential element in religion, JIS;
poetry and termmology of, 218;

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

307

sense of sin m, 223 it; steep road
to summit of, 227 ; emotional, 36,
219 , moods of, 231 , a religion of
spirit, 233 f; dark background of,
233 f; and idolatry, 233 f; eva-
luation of Tukaram's, chap, x,
passitni Christian B. chap. x.
sects., 5-8; and reincarnation,
211, 251; and salvation, chap, x,
sec. 6; Christianizing of, 258 ff,
267 f

Bhaktl Vijaya, 21, 69, 71 ff, 74 f,
87

Bhaktl. Lttamrita, 21, 75, 81, 87,

Bhakii KathSmrtta, 74

Bhambanath Hill, 76, 84, 108

Bhandara Hill, 84, 86

Bhang, 144

Bhangls, 63

BhSraia Itihds Sanshodhak Man-
4al, 92, 119, 299

Bhatt, Rameshwar, see Ramesh-
war

Bhdva (faith). 143, 168, 196, 197,
225 f , 255

Bhdvartfi Ramayan, 171

Bhave, V. L., edition, 120, see
Author's Index

Bhima -river, 15, 51 ff; 56ff; 61 f,
108, 155. 163, 173, 175

Bhima^ankar, 102

Bhil, 112

Bhosles, 16,

Bhumimubhifi, 46

Bhut (ghost), 110

Biblical idea of sin, Tukaram's com-
pared, 137

Birds and TukSrSm, 85, 104

Birth, date of Tukaram'?, 67 ff, 76 f

Kirth and naming of Tukaram. 78 f

Bistu (Bittu), 41

Blessing longed for, 225;

Bolhaba (or Bolhapi) father of Tukt-
rim, 76, 79, 107

Boar, 28

Boat, as a metaphor, 129

Bombay, 22, 38, 48, 62, 262

Bombay Chronicle, 263; chap. II
passim, 170, 208

Brahma, 6, 42, 52, 102, 116, 171

Brahmanand, 105

Brahmaoharya, 172 n

Brahmavaivarta Purana, 250

Brabmans adaptibiluy of 35 ,
MarStha-speaking, 2, 13 f ; place in
idol worship, 8, 148; asceijdency
of, 25; a&cetics, 46; m klrtans,
10; interceding with Government,
12; accept penance 12 offences,
of, 12; power and limitations.

13, 289 ; priests, 13, 56 ff; low-caste
view of, 14, 35; wife of a, 57;
Gujarati, Telang, Carnatic, and
Saraswat, 14; N. Indian, 14;
fish-eating, 14, 209 ; as priests, 14,
35 ; Desbastha, 55; widow's gift,
52; m military life, 15; family
life among, 16 ; greeting, 19 ;
bhaktl and, 21, 34 ; ascendancy of,
25 ; in Vaishnava sbrmes, 35 ;
feeding of, 59; murder of a, 64;
B. attitude to caste, 14, 72, 85;
debtors of Tukaram, 83; Tuka-
ram's relation to, 83, 85 ff, 89,
92 ff, 96, 101, 110. 112 f, 158 f;
the B. at Chinchwad, 93 f ; naked,
114; and Tukaram's poems, 165 ;
domineering, 170; veneration by
Hindus, 172; admirers of Tuka-
ram, 174; and non-Brahmans, 261 ;
Tulsidas, on 267; and Roman
Catholics, 283 ; Shenvi Brabmans,
293

Brahmaism reviving of, 31, re-
jected by Vaishnavism, 34

Brahmo, 62

Brabmo Samaj, Sadbaran, 30,

Bracelets bought by TukarSm, 82,
130 ff

Brevity of Tukaram, 128 ,

Brick at Pandharpur, 40 ffj 48

British, 5, 22,' 261 f

Broken idol of Vithoba, 60

Brotherhood of man, 267

Browning, 128

Buddha, 2 ff, 28 f, 107

Buddhism, 31, 34, 47

Buffalo of Tukaram's home, 99, 10 ,
115

Bunyan and TukarSm compared,
John, 135

Business experience of Tukaram,
79ff, 88, lOSf

Byzantine crucifix, compared with
idols, 54

Calcutta, 38

Call of Tukaram to poetry, 73, 76,
90, 97.

Car of Vi$hnu, i05

Carnatic Brabmans, 14

Caste m Maharashtia, 12 ; 261 ;
and Maratha disruption, 19f; in
Vaishnavism, 34; at PandbarpCr,
42; and Vithoba, 54ff , Dr. Murray
Mitchell on, 54 ; Brahman attitade
to, 14, 72 ; Eknath and, 39, 162 ;
and bhaktt, 162 ff ; breaking rules,

m LIFE ANQ TEACHING OF TUKABAM

of casto ft «>in, V)i\ in TukirSm
and ('hrihtmnity, chap, x, 361 «,
Kuropc aud, ^6i ; nationnUty and,
.ih'it; muniuipahtioii and, 262;
water supply and, aOiS. Hon. Mr.
K. V. I'aranjape on, 262; Christ
and, i64

('.aKuUtry, J21

CaihoHa Hi'ralii of Iniiia, 269

Caution in Tukaram t>tudy, 160

Cavalry, Maratha, 13

Census of India, 289 f f

Ceremomea, 8C, 56, 160, 223, 225,
202

Chaittanya, 37££,73,91

Chaitra, a Hindu montli, 111

Chakan, 103

Chamar, 292

Chambhar, 19, 42, 72, 261

Chandavarkar, SirNarayan on Tuka-
rSm's hymns, 177 ; on Hinduism
and Christianity, 239

Chandra, 52

Chandrabhaga, 52, 56£f, 62, 155, 172

Chataka bird, 209

Chatrapati, a royal title, 125

Chefrfulnesi, 203

Children of Tukaram, 94

Chilly trade, Tukaram in the, 81 f

Chimnajl, Appa, 16

Chinchwad, Tukaram and Urahmans
at, 93 f, 99

Chmtamani Deva, 93, 102

Child and parents, Tukaram's meta-
phor on, 191 f, 205

Chitpavan, 238, 281

Cholera, 61 f

Chophala temple, 51

Christ Hindu appreciation of, 29,
in what sense an uvatitm, 2y,
Hmduised mKrisna, 32, TnkSrani
compared with, 239 ; would Tuka-
ram have accepted, 245 f ; and caste,
261 £f ; and woman, 264 1

Christayana, 239, 244

Christian bhakti , chap. x. spcts 5-8 ;
interpretation of Tukaram, 219;
Missions and Tulaiara, t77 it;
Chmch, 267; Irutlis not found in,
Tukaram, 245 ; leaveninj^ in Tuka-
ram, 281; the Marathi Christian
Pitrana 2S2, scij Christ

Chrhtian Patriot, 50

Christians and Tukaram, 177ff

Christianity • popular and philosophi-
cal, 271 alleged debt of Tukaram to
Appendix in ; comparison between
Tukaram and C. in general, 219,
chap. X. parts 4-S ; afa to incar-
nation, 28 ff, App. i; God, 153,

1«1, 240 ff ; morality, 181 ; spiritual
experience, 160, 181 ; walohfulness,
181 ; sin, faith, Divme Presence,
personal religion, 185, chap, x,
parts 6-7; repentance. 196; prayer
and trouble, 202 f ; future life, 213 ;
Holy Spint, 221 ; Social life, 260 ff
Chnatianuod Hinduism, 234 ff :

bhaktt, 240 ff
Chronological order m Tukaram's

writings, No 125f,219
Church, The Unitarian, 184
Classifying TukarSm, impossibility

of, 179
Cocoanut, 95

' Coals to Newcastle, Taking', 81
Coarseness in Tukaram, 142. 155
Coincidences, 2«1
Coins, 114. 159

Cokbamela, 51, 54 ff. 162 f, 261 f

Comparisons betweep Tukaram and

Christ, chap, x, sect. 4 ; St. Paul,

136 f, Walt Whitman, 138, Madame

Guyon, 183, Jeremiah, 221

Comparative study of religion,

239
Confederation, Maratha, 20, 22
Conjeeveram, 36

Constitutional Reform, Indian, 2.S7
Contemporary data for Tukarfim's

life, 73
Contemporary Revtczc, 9, 47
Coppersmith story, 109
Cornfield, Tukjr,lm watching the

85 f
Coronation of Sivajl, 125
C^osmogony, 190
Cosmogony, I'JO; Hindu fondness

for, ilJ
OosnopohUuisin, 51ft, ir.2ff, 169 f,

2G1
tlowlieids, Krisna and. 31, 59
Cows halo piohibited to butchers,
12 ; Mohammedans and, 12; vonfr-
atuii by Hindus, 125,159, 172; of
Krisna, 52 , dung of, 57, 159 ; as a
gift, 58 f
Cradle sonn of Tuknrdm\ mother,

78 f
(.'.riterion applied lo Tnkaiiim, 2.W
Critical odition of TuLanim'i. poeiiii.,

Need of, 1S4
Critical problem of Tuk.lrani'spoem-,

119 ff, 242
Crusader, Ttik.ir.lra no, 2'H
Cultivator, 2S7
Curtis, the Hon. Sir G , 26^!.
Customs in India, 'ifi2
CymbAl of Tukaiam, 103, 116,
C. player, 102

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

309

Dadojl Kondadev, 124

Dadn Kond Dev, U3

Dakshina, 59

Daman, 4

Damajanti, 222

Dan, Daman, Dharina, the practi-
cal basis of faith, 226

Dancing, see Ecstacy

Dand (wand), 46

Da>i'ilavai, 49

Daiidakaranya, 2

Dandi Sanyas.1, 46

Dai-shan. 6, 48, 58f£

Dasopant, 134 n

Dasya, 172

Dates in Tultaram's life, 67 ff, 123 ff

Dattatreya, 10, 52, 114

Daughters of Tukaram, 94, 102, 163

Death, State after death, chap vui,
part X

Death-bed mantras, 293

Debasement of hhakU, 218

Debt of Tukaram to Christianity,
Alleged, App. ui

Debtors, 83, 109

Ueccan chap, i, passim: sec
Maharashtra, Maratha, etc. ' in-
fidels' land ,' 17; military strength,
18; Bhaktas of, 39 ff ; reforma-
tion in, 40; Its temples, 9f ; Poets
honoured in, 13

Dedication, 188

Dehu, 1, 5f, 27, 48, 53,76ff, 83 ff.
86, 94. 102. 105. 108, 116, 169.
172

DehflMS., 120ff

Democracy : under Sivaji, 18 ff ;
inspired by Maratha poet:,, 21 f,
55 , of the Bhukti School 21 f ;
caste and, 103 f; Tukaram and,
260 ff

Denglia Trimbakji, 64

Denni'i, Archdeacon, 98

Devfiratiakhhi ncr , 59

Depressed Clashes Mission, 263

Dc Profundis of Tukaram, 137

Desastha Brahmant, 55

DcshX, 4

Despair and ecstacy, 137 ff, 141, 152,
175, 202, 205 f, 2J1, 231, 235, 254,
358, 207 f

Deshpande, Mahadajlpant, M6

Deshpande, The Biflhman, 94 f

Z)ef(r(i.),28, 156

Devgirl (Doulatabad), 134

Devi, 10

Deva, Chintaman!, 93 f

40

Devotional use of TukarSm, 175 ff

Dhangar, 292

Dhartnaraja, 247

Dhed, 292

DhoU, 286

Dhul-darshan, 59

DsMdZ, 139

Dining, with Ganpati, 93

Dwarka, 164. 172

Dissenters in Hinduism, 35

Disciples, List of Tukaram's, 101 f

Disputation a hindrance to salva-
tion, 199

Dissatisfaction, Tukaram's condition
one of, 231

Dnydndev's Origin, 71

Dnyaneshwar, (Dnyandev),6,26, 38,
44, 48, 53, 63, 69, 71. 86, 94 ff, 98,
105, 109 f, 127 f, 157, 160, 170 ff ,
238, 288, 290

DnyancshwatT , 171, 288

Dnyanoba, 38

Dnyanodaya, 16, 61, 73, 122, 148,
153 f, 165, 189, 238, 240, 242, 254,
256, 262, 272, 282. 290, 295

Dogs in Tukaram's life, 102, 209 f

Domestic religious rites, 288, 291 f

Domestic worship. 8

Doubtful religious characters in
Tukaram, 132 f

Doulatabad (Devgirl), 134

Dravid and Apte, (edition), 120 f

Dreams, 59, 90

Drowninf; men, 146

Drowning of idols, 12

Drowning theory of Tukaram's end,
105

Dualism {Dvaiiism), 33 f, 166, 189 f

Dudhahdri, 46.

Dung . of cows, 57, 159 ; of horses,
104

Duty to animals, 209 ff

Dvaitum (duality), 33 1, 156. 189

Dwarf, 28

Dynamic power m religion, chap, x,
sects 7-8

Ecstacy and despair, see Despair
Ecstacy not devotion, 254, 267
Editions of Tukaram's poems, llQff
Ekadashi 48, 56,99f, 154, 170. 173
Ekeswarts, 176

Eknath, poetic power, 20 ; ,date 24 ;
life and teaching, 39; studied by
Tnl>aram, 86; Jalasatn^dht of,
105; Tukaram's debt to, 127;
metaphors, of 128; Bh^wat of,

310

LIFE AND TEACHING 01? TUKARAM

134 ; attitude to caste, 39, 162; the
caste of, 162 ; works of 171 ; as a

BliHgavaia sa.mt,l7Z; on visiting
holy places, 201 ; on difference
between yoga and bhakti, 217

Elephantiasis, 264

Bl-kot, 292

Ellipses in Mara{hS poetry, 128

Elphmstone, Mountstuart, 287

Emotionalism of bhakU, 219

Emancipation, 45

Encyclopedia Britannwa, 3

End of Tukaram, 104 f, 126

Enghsh-Ibo language, 98

Enthusiasm of bhakti, 36

Environment on Tukaram, Influence
of, 231

Equality among Warkar'is, 159 ff

Eroticism in Hinduism, 32, 35, 218

Eschatology, Hindu dislike of, 213

Essentials and Non-essentials of
Tukarfim's message, 180 f

Estevan, Father, 282

Estimates of TukarSm by R. O
Bhandarkar, ISO f, Farquhar, 142,
Goreh, 189 f, 244, Sir Alex.
Grant 165, 185; Mackichan, 67,
Macnicol, 137, 142, Mitchell, 190,
Navalkar, 151, 244f, Patwardhan,
67, 136 f, N. V. Tilak, 133 f. 165,
238, 244, Mi&s Underbill, 179,
Prartbaaa Samaj, 150

European misconceptions, 130

Evidence assuring of salvation,
251ft

Evil age, J 50

Evildoers, Penalty of, 211 f

Evil spirits, 11

Examining oneself a duty, 205

Excommunication, Formalities of,
14

Excreta of cows, 159

Experience, Religion an, 201

Extempore, Tukaram's verie, 127

Extremity, Man's, 214

Fact and fiction in Mahlpati, 71 ff
Faith {bhava). 143, 168, 190, 196,

219,225f. 236, 252. 255, 272
Fakir, 96 ff

False scents in Tukaiam study, 170.
Family life, MarStha, 16
Famine, 12, 76, 83 ff
Fast, 56

Fatherhood of God, ?67
Fault-finding, 205
Fear of ridicule, 198.

Fellowship of the ' saints', 208, Wi
Fergusson College MagazitU., 20 1

82,137ff, 161fT
Ferryman as a metaphor, 129
Festivals, Indian, 48 ff
Fish, 28 ; fish-eating Brshmans, 14
Five fires, 45 f, 228; nectars, 59
Fortntghtly Review, 22, 165
Fortune-teller, 102, 113
Four stages of Brahman's life, 172
Future life, 213.

Gaikwar of Baroda, 64

Gajendra, 28, 210

Gambling, 205

Game metaphors, 131

GsLndhi, M. K., on Hindil sciiptuies,
192 ; on untouchability, 263

Gangs bhai, 56

Gangabal, daughter of Tukaram, 94,
98

Gangadhar, disciple of Tukaram,
117

Gangadhar Sastri't. assasination, 64

Gangaji Mavala Kadu'.kai, 91, 101,
120 f

Ganges, 56, 129, 149, 15 1 f, 172, 266

Ganpati (Ganesh) the god. fi, 10, 51,
53, 93, 149

Gardis, 15

Garnd,6, 112. 172

GffWia of Tukaram, 71, 73,90, 12J,
241

Gavarset, the Lingiyat dibciple of
Tukaram, 102

Gaya, 58, 114 f. 164

Gentile, Tukfiram as a, 180

Genuineness of Tukaram 's autobio-
graphy, 126 ff

German Mibmanne story, 98

Ghats. 1, 11

Ghatkopar, 21

Ghosts, 11, nof

Gifts by pilgrims, 57ff

Gyandev, 3S

GttS, 8«e BhagavadgUU

Glta, Other, JO

Goa, 280, 282

God; personality "f, 37, 4J, 151 I,
249; motherhood of, 12'J, 1521,
182, 192, 23f), approhcudt d by
love, 140 ; idols in relation to, I4« ;
a.t, MdbAp, IdC, Ilia, or fMslcncc
of, 187 £ ; relation to I Ik. worship-
pers, 190 , m.'m'h unity with, i<)I ,
accessibility and conduscension ol,
191 f ; the grace of, l'^7 ; picsence
and leading of, 214, 220 , spiritual

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

?11

character of, 219; Tukaram's un-
worthy ideas of, 222; mail's
personality lost m God, ^30;
Fatherhood of, 267 ; holiness of,
246f; spirituality of, 249 f, the
Spint of, 249, 259 f

Gods, Aboriginal, 10

Godavari, 3, 39, 47, 128, 172

Godbole's Edition of V. N., 120

Golewadi, 47

Good man, Tukaram's picture of a,
302

Goodwill to all creatures, 196

Gopal Boa, grandson of TdiSram,
73,77

Gopalpur, 52, 59

Gopis, 253, 273. 290

Gora Kumbhar, Life of 72, 254

Gosdvr,^ 6, 60, 114, 139, 150,288

Gosvanir, 288

Gospels, 241

Gourds, Stories of, 103

Government, 48, 62 ff, 69, 86, 119

Govardban Math, 192

Govind, 93, 146

Gravity of Tukaram, 130 f

Greek heroes emd gods, 28, 54

Greeting: Hindu; Maratha, 18;
Mahar, 19, 132; ChambhSr, 19.
BrSbman, 19

Gnhasthasram, 172

Grocer, TukSram the, 102, 116. 129,
246.

Growth, Tukaram's spiritual, 139

Guests, 172

Gujerati Brabmans, 14 ; women, 226

Gulve's edition. Jog and, 120

Gunadhya, 4 f

Guru of Tukaram, 193

Ouru-mantra, 73 ff, 76, 90 ff, 124,
188

Guyon, Madame, 183

Haidarabad, 49
Happiness, 207
HanumSn (MSruti), 6, 8, 149, 155,

172
Han, 78 ff, parts ii, m, chap, iv,

paisim
Hart-Hara (Visbnu-Siva), 157 ff,

172
Haribchandra, 222
Hcrn-Klrtan, 175
Hasham infantry, 15
Hastatnalak, I'll
Head-dress of Sivaji, 100
Healing of Tukaram's son, 91

Heart-religion longed for, 226

Heralekar's edition, K., 120

Heroes and heroic age, Maratha, 17

Hitkans, 15

Hiaen Tsiang, 286

Historical values of Gathd and
Gospel, 241

' Historicity ' of Christ, 252 ; of
Kpsna, 30, 252; of ^ivajl's
request and visit to Tukaram,
123 ff

HoU, the Hindu festival, 115, 129

Holiya, a Hindu caste, 292

Holy Places, rivers, seasons, 154 f

Holy Spirit, The, 249. 258 f

Home influences of Tukaram, 79

Honesty of Mablpati, 70 ff

Horse-dung. 104

Hostility to saints, 205

Hubli. 49

Humility and unselfishness, 202.
207

Humour among Hindus, 17 ; in
Tukaram, 130

Hymn-book, Tukaram's poems as a,
176

Hypocrisy, 205

Hindi literature, 20

Hibbert Journal, 137, 153, 184

Hemadpanti architecture, 53

Himalayas, 116

Hindu documents. 3 ; temples — how
to visit tbem, 3f; festivals 6
family religious life, 8f, 16 f;
brSddh ceremony, 9; deities 9,
temples, 9 ; superstitions, 11 f ;
social life and culture, 12 ; humour,
17, 130 f , greetings, 18 ; revival,
22 ; term defined, 25, 234 ; research,
25 , idea of avatara, 27 ff ; appre-
ciation of Christ, 29; reformers,
29,37, 161,267; Theism, 31, 34;
habits of thought, 3i ; conventional
H ideas, chap, vi, passim ;
parallel to Christian 'grace before
meat ', 90 ; peurallel to Quakers at
meal.s,94; altniinacs, 116; saints'
death, 126; barbers, 146; view of
idols, 147ff; attitude to cows,
Vedas, etc., 159; 'the mild H.
164, observances, 172; pessimism,
174; religious life of individual
H., 178 f; idea of God and
scripture'., 187, 192 ; idea of prayer
contrasted with the Christian idea,
202; toleration, 203 ff ; speculation,
214; teaching on sin, 223; ideas
of bhakti, see under Bhakti;
doctrine of God, see God 5 ' H.
Muhammedans', 291 ; advantages

3ia UFE ANP TEACHING OP XUKARAM

of studying an mdividual H^ 334 }
ptesuppositioa3, 250
Hinduism: tolerant spint of, 26,
puzzling problems of, 26; Bhaga-
vata school of, 27 ; saints in, 30 ;
monotheism in,30, 184, 248ff ; alle-
aorv in, 32 ; nobler spirits of, 32, 36 ;
eroticism in, 32, 35; reforrnation
of, 33; pantheism in, 34; orthodox
and Vaishnava, 34 ; revolts in, 34 ;
dissenters m, 35; sects in, 35 f;
song and singers, w. 35 ft, 48,
polytheism in, ^3 36; divme
Dersonality as viewed by, 37, ^^y ,
protestantism m, 40 ; democratiz-
ing of, 21 f, 40; sense of sm in,
47 ff, 50 ff, 57 ff; Kanna m, 50,
113, 132, 194 f, 212; Siva in 51 ,
inconsistency of. 55; "lual in,
36 ff; initiation into, 73; cliiet
delight of v»omen in, 79; place of
Uuru in, 12*; coventional H.,
chap VI, passim, mutually con-
tradictory beliefs in. 146; idols in.
147 ff. 248 ff; s«'» and sakfa in,
158 ; reform in, 161, 261 f , 2G7 ; caste
m, 162 ff, 261 f, no living centre
in' 192; reincarnation in, 210fl;
deepest secret of, 215 ; democratic
type of, 215 ; revolt against, 233 f ;
amorphous and encyclopedic clia-
ractcr of, 234 ; Christianized H.,
•M4 . aspirations of, 235 ; avntaras
;nd salvation in, 251 ff; salva'io"
a, viewed by, 194 ff, 219, 251 ff;
domestic religious ritesin, 291 1, sec
iiva, Vaishnavism, Vithobn, etc.

Ibo lansuiM,'e. 08
Iconoclasm at rantllimp.ir, 01
Idols or images: in U.nclu linint".
«; of cholera orpla(!no spirits 1,
thoir placp in Uindmsra, '■■>, 1 »/'■'
of ilK- Mvais i(.; Tiikiuams
veneiation for, 40ff; l''lKf""«f;;
to 46 , gf Vithobd. ili'scribod, 5< fl ,
arlistic aspect of, 5U, atlarh ou
Vithob,!, 60; biokon, OO; fuka
lam's attitude to and tea( liin« »"•
147ff; in the Ueccan, ii7ti;
odut-ated and uncilucated view of,
147£f ; cotiseuatioiiof, llh; I t'lf
tl.anaSamajaml,15J£;Tnk;ir.im
as an, 109 I , viewed a'* i,ymboU~>mfi
the Divine presence. 181, 220, 249 ;
and bhakh, 218- ,^34; Dr. V K
Bhandirkar on, 150, 243, -IS,
synonyms for God, 248.

Images, s«s IdoU
Immorality among the gods, 34fi{
Impersonal worship unsatisfying, 213
Incarnation: actuality and 'histori*
city ' of the Hindfl, 30 ff| 251. If,
291 ; wherein different from \^ivA'^
avatSrM, 28 ff, 252 If, A.pp. i.
See avaiClra
Inconsistencies of TukarSm, ISI,

165 f
Inscriptions, 4, 6, 41 f , 156
Indebtedness of TukarSm to the New

Testament, AJleged, App. ui
India (n) : villages, 5 ff , 132 ; long
rehgtous history, 9, caste, 20;
conservatism ni rural parts, 22;
reseaich,25; historical spirit lack-
ing m, 23, 70; faults of scholars,
26, 290 ; pilgrimage, chap, m,
passim ; Asceticism, 45 f f ; Siidhus
and SudhvJi.. 45 ff; repulsive
worship in, 47 , sacred rivers, 47 ;
beggars, 47 ; festivals, 48 ff ; art in,
12, 53; debtors, 83; literature,
129; wells and springb, in, 129;
European misconceptions of, 130 f ;
renunciation, 1 34 f ; pessimism, 174 ;
reasons for studying us literature,
178 f, Church and Tukaram, 179 ;
rediscovered faith and love in
bhakti, 215 ; the deepest secret of
I.'s Religion, 215, mysticism in,
216; customs, 202; women and
widows, 2fitf ; poverty, 208
Indian Aitticjiuny, 1, -19, 54 f, 63
Indian Intci prater. IS, 67 ff, 72, 127,
153, 165, 181,237ff, 251, 2.S),2y,S
Indian Messenger, MS, 250, 253 ff,

273, 290
Indian Social Ke/oniicr, 12, 20, 22,

20, J2ff, 17, 176, 2SJ, :'(.3,
Individual Uuidiis, Ui'ligioui, life ol,

1 7,S, 234
hidra, 270
Indrtiyaiii uvti, '' f, 78, MO, »/ 1, 'Hi f,

lO'i, 115
liidulKonto of du.siu'. I'*.'-.
Imlii rritlianh, cdiUon, ii.S, '<0, 'i7,

105. 115f, ll'Tf, Wh i.fti, M7
hula Priikai>h ncwspaptir, (>l
Uifantrv, Mariilh.!, 15
Intercession absent from Huuhusni,

202
Inliiriialioiial irlcals, ".tfi If
International Ucvuui' <if flfi'..'.'(i»(.,

r>, l.W, 17'l. 1H4. 202
lateipolations in Till .ir.im's pi win s,
184 ,,

[nterpietation of 'rnl.u.im, 14(iif.

21'i

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

313

Introspection, TukarSm's honest, 224 ,

231,
Intuition, Mystic, 195 f
Invective in Tukaram, 241
Inwardness of TukarSm, 186, Ishtt,

41
Israel, Saints, of, 137; livaranam,

247

Jagannath, 38, 172

Jahaglr {dar), 11, 18, 59

JalaiaytX, 46

Jainism, 34, 47, 134 f

falsamadhl, 105

Jalgaon, 63

Jamkhed, 262

Janabai, 24

Janals, 209

Jaranda, 19

Jejurl 47, 292

Jeremiah and TukSram compared,

221 f
Jesus and Takaram compared, chap

X, sects. 4-8, passim
Jlur, 49

JijSbal, mother of SivSjI, 202, 124 f
Jijabai (Avallbai) wife of Tukaram,

chap, iv, parts u, in, passiin
Jog and Gnlve's edition, 120.
Joga Paramanand, 46
Joga edition, V. N , 120 f, 133, 171
Johar, 19. 132
Jomt-family system, 17
Joshi, 73, 113
Joshi Math, 192
Journal of Royal Astatic Society,

Bombay Branch, 20, 41f, 54, 71.

81, 100, 109, 114, 117, 128, 216,

229
Jumna, 172

Kabir, 86, 127, 129, 143. 195 f. 218,
223, 252

Kaceswar, Brahman disciple of Tuka-
ram, 102

Kadamban. 159

Kadusa, MS., 120ff

Kailasa, 111, 114

Kela-hhairSva, 51,

Kali, 37

KaU Yuga, 107, 248

Kalkl, 28

Kalyan,2, 11, 15

Kan abhuti, 4 f

Kanakai, mother of Tukaram, 78,
107

Kamalhi, 292

41

Kamavisdar, 12

Kanare&e, 156 f

KAuhaya, ancestor of Tukaram, 78

Kanhoba, brother of Tukaram, 71,
79, 84. 108.

Karma, S. S , 98

Karma, 50, 113, 142, 194, 212, 218,
223, 227, 250

Kaitrk. 47, 54, 170 ff

Karvir Math, 192

Karwar, 1

Kasar (coppersmith), 101, 109 £

KasTr (Benares), 114, See Benares

Kaslhai, dant[hter of TwkarSm, 85

Katha, 10, 70, 173

Katha Sarffmj'ita, 70

Kaushitaki Upanishad, 270

Kuustubh, Jewel, 81

Keluskar's JalasamadhT, Mr. and
Mrs.. 105

Kesan, 18

Kesarinath, 134

Keiav (Krisna), 146, 176

Keshav Chaitanva, 39, 73, 91 f

Khande-aha, 292

Khandl, an Indian measure, 86

Khandoba the god, 47, 51, 132, 291 f

Kindness, 203

Kirkee, Battle of, 64

Ktrfan 10, 49, 53, 73 f, 76, 86, 95 f,
98 ff, lOlff, 113, 124f, 155, 172 if,
267, 288

Klriankar, 10, see Klrtan

Knowledge, Mere, 228

Koh(s), 286

Kondoba the Brahman disciple of
Tukaram, 95, 101, 114 f

Konkan, 1 ff, 13, 81, '80
Kothaleswar, 111

Krapasagara, 236

Krisna: temples of, 10; in klrtans,
10; avatara of, 28 ff; place in
Bhagavadglta, 30; 'historicity'
of, 30ff; worship of, 31; the cow-
herd. 31 ; sexual inieicourse of,
32; Christ 'Hmduised' in, 32,
popularity of, 37 ; at Pan4harpnr,
48; the Buddha form 'of, 107;
sports of , 111; dirty fare of, 111 ;
TukarSm's devotion to. 148 f; in
form of a child, 97, 149; 'incar-
nation' claimsof, 251 ff; Vai&hna-
vism and, 252 , in Annglta, 270
Krisb^aji Bairagya, 73

Krishnaji's edition. G„ 120

Krishnajatuna Khanda, ...

Kshattriva, Duiiesoi'a, 101
Kumbhar, 21, 72. 286
KulkarnI 69. 73, 102
Knnbi 110, 286 f£

314

LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

Kunikslietnr, 210
KiitHinb-kavT , SS

Lakshman, 51

language, MarSthI, See MarSthI

Lawrence, Bi other, 90 • •

leavening" m Tukaratn, Christian,
281

Learning an obstacle to salvation,
199

Legend!.- Kanabhuti, 4f; origin of
Ram, Ram, 19; of gods and
nshts, 30 ; of Knsna, 31 ff, 290 ;
(?f Namdev, 39 ; of Tukaram, 6tf f f ,
104, ch-jp. IV, part ni, pasbtm ; of
medieval 67iaWas, 70; of Cliristian-
ily, J41 ; ' cosmic legends ' of the

. avatcTnts, 252; of the Puranat,.
160; of St Thomas, 283

Liberation, 471 107, 156, 194 f, 211 f

Linga Qi Siva, 27. 51,53, 157, 293

Lingayat(s), 35, 102, 110

Literary characteristics of TukfirSm,
chap, V, pan ii, pasum

Literiiuire, MarathI, 4 f . 13, 20 ff,
sec AbhiTjig, Mahlpati, Namdev,
Eknath, Dnyaneshwar, Ramdas ;
Hmdi, 20

Lohadand, 57

LoJiar, 286

Lohogaon 05, 100, 102 ff, 111 ff, IH

fMk Saiignthcr, IS

London, 9S

f.ove in hhaliti, 146, 186, 207

Low castes and I5r5hmans, 14 ;
metaphors, 132

Lunatic, Takiliam viewed as a, 83

Lust denounced, 205

Lying. 205

M

MiThdp, God as, 166

Madame On von, 183

Madgaokar's edition, G , 120

Madhav, 37

Madras, 58,

Madrtf, Christian ColU'j>e Mafiu-

zinc, 2S3
Mag.dhi, 2S7
Magir in TukHrgm, 100
Mahahharata, 27, 30ft, 51, 281
Mahabalesliwar, 24
MAhad5]fpaiit ijespande, 86, 102
Mahadev (Siva), 10, 41, 51, HI,

son of Tukaiam, 91, 120 f
MuhiTmantliil Magazine, 192
Milhap id, 59

Mahrir(s)- a caste, 2; greeting, 19;
and 6^a*/j,21; EknSth's kindness
to, 39, CokhSmela, 51, 54 f, 162 ff ;
Xvall's diess given to |a, 92; fed
by Tukaram's wife, 109; occu-
pation, 132, 163 f; bravery. 262;
rights as to drinking-water, 262 ;
Christianity and, 264

Maharashtra: the country, chap, i
pavsitn; superstitions, 11; social
life and culture, 12 f; women's
dress, 12 ; political revolution, 4'0 ;
pilgrim centres, 47 ff ; the religion
of, 170 ff

Mah.lrashtri, 4, 287

Mahiirasthriyans, 2 ff

Maharathi, 286

Maharathini, 280

Malia-sivrdira, 172

Mahdtinya Panthirang, 52

Mahlpati encouraged by Peshwas,
12 ; place as a poet, 20 f ; Patujti-
laitg Mahdtmya by, 52; Bhakli
Vijdva, 21, 69. 71 ff, 74 f, 87;
Bhakti Ltlamnta, 21,75,81,87,
127, 143, Tukfiram dates by, 07 ff ;
chiel source of information about
Tukaram, 08 ff; histoiical and
legendaiy elements in, 68 ff, 104,
chap. IV, parts ii, in, passim ;
Patw,irdhan on biogiaphical value
of, 69, miraclfs in records bv, 69,
279 , life of, (.9 , N. V. Tilak on
wri.tings of, 09 ; chief works bv,
70; Santa Lildmrita, 70; Katha
SaniHinta 70 , Santa Vi/iiya, 70;
psiimates of by L. J. Si'dgwick,
20 f, J. !■: AbbotI, 70, C. A Kincaul,
70 ; Honesty of, 70 ff ; MSS
used by, 71 ff ; fact and fiction m.
71 ff; authors cjiioted by, 71 ff;
farts cxpandud by, 72; oandonrof,
72 ; caste of, 72 ; souices for Tiik.i-
i3m e.irlier than, 72 ff ; literary
methods of, 72, 74 ; order and
details of Tukaram narrative by,
75 ff. 87, 90, 97, 99, 109; views
Tukaiam as a dualist, 188

Mahisdsura-Mardinl hi

MalajiGad<>, TukSrSm's disciple and
soii-in-law, 101 f '

Malharpant, Tnk.iram'.s disciple, JOS

Malabar, 283 ff

MalhaiT, 2'>2

Mam'aldar on pilgrimage, 49

Mandair, Tukaram, 15, 119

Mang, 79, 292

Man-lion, 28

Mannikar Vasahar, 223

Manoboilh of Ramdits,

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

315

Mantra, 91, 172, 228, 293, see guru-
mantra

Manuscripts thrown m the nver,
TukSram's, 96 f

Maratha(s.) villages, 7f; religious
life, 8 , domestic religious rites, 8 ;
proverbs, 9, 62 ; art, 12, 53 , super-
stitions, II ; government and rulers,
11, 20 ff; women, 12, 17; poets,
12 ff; literary tastes, 13 , army, 13,
15 f ; Brahmans, 13 f ; character,
15, Tennyson on, 15; at battlp
of Assaye, 15 ; soldiery, 15 ; military
prowess, 15, nationahty, 15, 19;
mercenaries, 15 f ; militia, 16 ;
gallantry, 16; family life, 16;
heroes and heroic age, 17f ; greet-
ing, 18, moral force, 19; ryots,
19; caste among, 19 f ; confederacy,
20, 22; democracy, 21 f, 55; and
British, 22, Bhagavata religion
amoftg, 27, 170 ff; sacred books of,
1 71 f; origin of, 286; tolerant spirit
of, 161 ; use of anipaal food among,
209 ; League, 287

Marathi language, 2ff, 287 ; htera-
. tur^. 4, 13, 20 ff, 26, 74, 120 ff;
poetry, 13

Marga Dnyan, 217 , Karma, 217 ,
Bhakti, 217

Marriage: seamy side of, 131; of
Tukaram's daughters, 163

Martand, 292

Maruti (Hanumto), 6, 8 f, 52 f , 149

Mass movements : Neglect of Tuka-
ram's type by, 180

Maund, an Indian measure, 85

Mavales, 15 f

Meanness and stinginess, 205

Meditation, Personal, 227

Merit, 155, 197 ff

Medifator, 107

Mendicants, 45 ff, 60

Mercenaries, 16

Message of the samts, 208

Metaphors of Tukaram, 128 ff, 191 f

Middle Ages, 215

Mild Hindu. 164

Mihtia, 16

Milton, contemporary of TukSrSm,
67, 164

Mmd-ntes, 58

Ministers of Sivajl, 124

Mlpana. 193, 198, 202

Mira Bai, 38, 72

Miraculous element in Tukaram
record, 69, chap, iv, part iii, App
111

Mirage, Life a, 129

Missionaries, 179, 267, 271, 282

Misi,ionary Message m Relation to

Non-Christian Rehgtons, 258 ff
Moguls, See Muhammadan
Moholecha, 286
Moksha or MukH, 45 ff, 94 f, 397,

216
Monotheiim, 30, 33, 1 50, 176 f, 184 f
Moni'jm, 189
Mens, Angels at, 104
Moods, of Tukaram, 141 f
Moral' impotence of Tukaram, 137;

ideal of man, 202 ff
Moi f, the family lineage of Tukaram,

67
Motherhood of God, 129. 152 f
Mntynhar, 2

MSS. of Tukaram's poems, 120 ff ,
Muhammadan(s) 10. 12, 14 f, 17, 19,
' 39, 51, 69, 95. 103 f, 124, 157, 266,

286
Muktabaf, 44, 48, 172
Mickii or tnoksha. See Moksha
Mukiinda, 78k
Mukuiid Raja, 10*2
Multiplicity of gods, 248 ff
Muniba]!, 73, 99 f, 109f, 241
Murall, 132, 292
Murder at Panii.dharpur, 64
Murlttt^r, 52
Mylapore, 283
Mysore, 263
Mystic'intmtion, 195f
Mystical conflict of TukJliam, 182
Mysticism, Indian, 216
Mythology in Tukaram, 149

N

Nabajl, 21

Nabhaji, 71, 74

Nagarpradakshina, 59

Nagpfir, 1, 49

Nakhin, 46

Nala, 222

NamaskSr, 19

Nan-dev: poetic poweir, 20; poem
by his domestic servant, 24 ; date,
26, 39 ; Tukaram an avatara of,
28; life and teaching of, 38 f;
attitude to idolatry, 38f, 150 f ; his
poetry, 44; N. gate at Pandharput,
53, 55, 164 ; Patwardhan on bio-
graphical material concerning, 69;
writings of, 71 f ; studied by Tuka-
ram, 96 , place m Tukaram's call
to poetry, 90; his short name
Nama, 107; Tukaram's debt to.

316

LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

127; practical benevolence of, Hi ,

a. BhSgavata saint, 172 ; on the

toints, 229
Names of Vishnu, 27, 57
Karad and Prathad, 172
Narahan M51u, 74
NarSyana, 57, 93, 114, US, liS, 176,

M7
NarSyanrao, TakSTam'& posthumous

son, C, 67, 94, 150
NwSik. 1, 47, 50. 58, 63,67, 172
NktioAality: and caste, 262; Maril-

tha, 15
ASvaji, TuktrSra's disciple, 101
Nava Yuga, 67, 97, 149 f, 157, 103,

170, 173,240, 243 f, 265
Nectars, The five, 59
Need of critical edition of TukiS-

ram''.s poenns, 1H4
Naighbourbness, 263
New Testament parallels to Tuka-

ram, App. u
New Testament, Tukaratn's alleged

debt to, App. in •
NhSvis, 40
Niger Mission, 98
Niganand, 105

Niloba of Pimpalner, 71, 73, 117
Nfranjan, 12, 73
Nivpttinath, 53, 63, 157
Non-Brahraans, Brfihrnans and, 201
Non-plussed bhakta, Tukaram the.

221
Non-resistance, 32

Obscene element m Tukaram'.',

poems, 128
Obscure night of the soul, Tukrt-

ram'% 183
Observances, Hindfi, 172
Odes of Solomon, The, 25H
Om, the mystic syllable, m'40
Omens, 11 f

One-iidedness of Tukanim, MS
Order of TukJlrSm narativp, 75 ff,

67;90,S7, 99, 109; of the poems, 1 25
Organization of the sain is, No, 208
Onental Conference, 1(5
Origen, 254,

Original GMia or verse, TukSram's,
, 122, J'27
Otherworldliness, Tukarilm's,, 104,

■•20f7
Dur-caste(s), 55, 85, 261 ff
Outsider, Tukaram a religious, 1.S0
Ovr metre, The 20 f

Padaj!, Tukarfim's ancentor, 78

Pailasevana, 172

Padmavati, 37

Paduka. 8

I'adwal's edition, R. T., 120

PSdyapufa, 5!)

Pttik. 133

Paithan, J, 128, 172

Palkhl (palanqnm), 48, 63

Panchadhnni, 45 f

PanohSmfita, 78

PanohStapas, 45 i

PanchSyai, 85

PanohSyatan, 51

PandarSga, 41

Pandarge, 41

Pa^dhari, See Pa^dharpOr

Pandharpfir; lizard on idol at, 12.
^Bhagavata cct[tTe,27 \ $iv« at.
27. 51 ff ; NSmdev sent to, 3" ;
'incarnation' at. 40 ff; Tukaram
and, chap. iii. passim ; location,
trade and population, 51 ; templch,
51 ff; rivei Hhima or Chaiidta-
bhaga at, 52 ; "iiiiiliiraiifi Miihaf-
mya bv Malilpili, duscnptivo of,
52; Pandn-kihcira, 5i; icono-
clasroat. 51; IJr Murray Mitchell
on bathing at, 01 f ; festivals at,
62 ff; sanitary !i.rran}>«monts. 63;
antiquity. 03 ; ass,wsination, 04 ;
records, 76 ; Tukarain's ancestral
relation. 77f ; ' I" MS. of Tuka-
ram's poems,, 120 ff; i^ivMi, and,
124f ; Tiik.-itfim's attitude tfK,li55f ;
old name of Paundnrika Ksi etra
or Pandiirangpur, ISO; casio" >t,
.54 f, 102 ff. 201 ff ; (;iinml)h.lrs a.
261 ; Mahars at, .14 f, 102 ff, 201 ff {
untouchables .it, 54 f; J02 ff,
201 ff; V.iishnavism at, 149 ff,
261 ff, missionaries and reformer^,
at, 61 ff. 207 f

Pamlurai'ig, 41. Sue Vijhoba

Pantaenns, 283

Pantheism, 23 f. 33, <)2, 102, 21«,
233

Pantheist, Was Tiikariim a' 168f

Paradox of bhakti, l(i5

Parallels botween Tukanim and N«w
Testament, App. ii, 240

l'aram.inand, Joga, 40

I'aramham.sa, 29

ParSnjpye, oncaslcsThe Hon. K. 1'.,
202

Parekh, Mr. Manilal, on mcanuition,
29

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

317

Panab classes, 153

Pansa, 109

Parlts^, 286

Parshuram, 28

Parsis, 33

ParvatI, 116

Pas, '110

Patala, 212

Pathaas, 103 £

Pathological analysis of India, 257

AffW, 73f. %, 112 f

Paul and TukarSm compared, St ,

136 f
Pausikar's edition, V. L., 120
Peace, The secret of, 214
I*eaceableness, 203, 208
Pearls presented iti a coconut, 95
Penalty of evildoers, 211 f
Penance, 45 ff
Penitential Psalms, 136
Pepper [mirl) confused with chillies

(mirchr), 81
Personality of God, 37, 43. 151,

24'9 ; destruction of human, 230
Personal experience needed, 226,
meditation, 227 ; self-examination,
iZi; self-surrender to God, 227;
religion helped by TukarSm, ISO
Pendharls, 15

Peshwa{s) ; diaries of, 9, 15 :
government of, 11, 14, 20; their
encouragement of learning, 12;
the last, 63 f
Pessimism, 174. 198, 237
Petition and intercession absent
. from Tukaram and other Hindfls.
. 202

Paiahan, 40
Phalgun, 6, 110
Pharibees and Pandits, 240
Philosophical and popular Christian-
ity, 271
Phugun (swollen), 98
Picture of himself, TukSram's, chap.

V, part HI, passtm
Pilgrimage and Pilgrims in India,
47 ff; and sense of sm, 50 ff;
Brahmans on, 57 ff ; gifts on, 57 ff ;
0r. Murray Mitchell concerning,
61 f; mental state of those on,
61 f , government and, 62 ff , last
' Peshwa's, 63 f, chap ui, passim ,

in TukarSm's teaching, 154 f
Pipal tree, 57
Pitamber. 81
Places, Holy, 47 f. 154
Pleasures and duties, 201
Plough round debtor's neck, 83
Plurality of god*-, 149
Poems of TukarSra, chap, v, passtm

42

Poets ; place' among Marathas, 12 ;
democratizing influence of, 21 f,
289 . habits of Indian, 70 f

Poetry among MarSthas, 13, 20

Poona, 13, 15, 20, 82, 96, 104, 113 f,

. 124 f , 224, 286 ; and Indian Village
Mission, 208

Polytheism, 33, 36

Popularity of Tukarim, 133, chap.
VII, part 1, passtm

Portuguese, 280

Posthumous son Narayanrao, Tuka-
ram's 6, 67, 94, 125

Poioba, 9

Pothl, 13

Pradakshina, 59

Prakrit, 9^ i,2S7

PralSya, 213

Prarathana SamSj, 48 f, 62 f, 121,
147, 150, 153 f, 163, 175 ff, 179 f,
184 f, 189 f, 224 f, 243 f, 258, 268

Pralhad and Nafrad, 172

Pratardan, 270

Pranpratisiha,-7S, 86, 148,249

Prati'than, 3

Prayaga, 159

Prayascit, 14, 50, 223

Prayer m Tukaram and New Testa-
ment contrasted, 202

Priests: among Marathas, 14, 55 ,
Brahman, 35 , ParsI, 35 , dissen-
sions among, 59 f

Preacher : Tnkaram as, 143 f ; who
smokes bhaHg, 144

Predecessors. TukarSm's debt to, 127

Presuppositions. Hindu, 250

Prohibitions, WSrkSrl, 172

Protestaiitism, 40

Proverbs in Maratbi, 9, 62

Pundallka, 41 ff, 48, 51, 108, 156 f, 172

Puja, 8, 46, 56, 59, 69

Pujdru, 36, 47, 53, 256

Pundita Ramabal, 265

Pundits, Pharisees, and ^astrls 14,
240 f

Publishers of TukarSm's poems, 120

Piirdnds, 32, 94, 101, 162, 173, 230,

253, 270; Tukaram's attitude to,

. 159, 196, 210, 253; Christian P",

282 ; Bhagavafa P. see
Pun, 38
Funfloation, 14
Purity, Quest for inward, 225
Poverty, India's, 267 f

Quakers at meal, Hindu parallel to,

94
Quarrelsomeness, 205

318

LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

tjuest for inward purity, 225
Quietism, 183

Racial unity. How lo promote,

177
Radha, 32, 37

Raghava Chaitanya, 39,73. 91 f
Kajputana, 36
Rajputs, 2, 19, 63, 287
Raklia'tiilbai, TulcSram's first wife»

76, 82 ff
Ralcbumai. See Rukhmii^t
Ram Rem, 18 f
Rama, 6, 9U 10, 21, 28,37,51,53,

149,171,234
RamSbat, Pundita, 265
Ramcliandra, 19, 31
RSmadSsls 173
RSmananda, 37
Ramabalabhdas, 134
RSmdySna, 27
RSmanuja, 36f f, 247
Ramdas: date, 18, and Xukaram.
18 , and SivSjI, 18 ; poetic power,
20 ; worshipper of Riiraa, 21 ;
Manobodh of, 53, 157 ; bakhar of,
67 ; gam of SivfijI, IJi ff
Ramdev or RSmchandra, 288
Rameshwar Bliatt, 71, 77, 95, 99.

109, 111, U*!, 121,241
Ram-Kpsija-Han, 91 172
Ram Molinn Roy, 148
Ramoshi, 292
Ranganath 105
Rapture, see ecstasy
Rara Avis among Tulcdram editions,

120
UasalTla, 254
Rastraltuta'., 2 f, 286
Ra<htnk, 2 f
Ratnaglil, 282
Rebirth, 25,211
Records kept by priests, 56
Reforms in Hinduism, 29, 37, 40,

161, 176, 262. 267
Reincarnation, 210 ff
Relea&e, 34

Religion of Mara{has,8; TukarSm's

ideas on, chap, in, pasbim, an

experience, 201 : Sec Bhakti,

Christianity, Hinduism

Religions, Nobler elements m non-

Christian, 177
Religious anxiety, Unsatisfied, 229 ff
Renunciation, 134 ; and trust, 199 f
Repentance in Tukaram's teaching,

196
Research, Indian, 25

Revadanda, 280 ; Revolts in Hindu-

if.m, 54, 149
Revolutionist, Xukaram no, 165
RisM, 30

Kitual, Hmdu, 56 ff, 101
Rivers, Sacred, 103, 154
River metaphor in Indian literature,

129
Robe of Avail ^iven away, 87
Rolling on pilgrimage, 49
Roman Catholic Church, 264, 281 ff
Roman Empire, 264 I
Rosary, 171

Royal title given to Sivaji, 124
Rudra, 58. 116
Rukhrainl, 48, 52 ff, 56, 58, 71, 78,

92. 112, 149, 156f, 223, 255
Rukhtntnl SvSyatnvar, 171
Ryots, 19

S

Sacred books of Mahrirfishtra. 172:
days, rivers and places, 56, 103,
154 f

ScTdharan Brahmo Samaj, 30, 148

SctdhHs, 45 ff, 74, 186

SaclltvJs. 45 ff

Saints ; m Hinduism, 30 ; instructors
of the people, 130 ; company satis-
fying, 135 ; influence on TakarSm,
138, 167; Providential boons, 166;
m the BhSgavata religion, 172;
salvation through remembrance
of, 172 ; hostility towards S. a sin,
205 ; (heir call and character 206 f ;
service to men, 207 ; attitude to
caste, 208 ; democratizing influence
of, 21 ff, 208; no definite organi-
zation of, 208 , Saivite, 223 ; Tuka-
, ram's debt to, 229

Saiviles, 56

Saka era, 3, 116

$akn worship, 158

Sakhya, 1 72

Salokatil, 216

Salt-trade, TukarSm's, 82

Salvation ; by faith, 97 ; by sacred
observances, 103 ; by remember-
ing the saints, 172; Tukiiram's
teaching on, 194 f(; Hindu
methods of S. rejected, 195 ; Tuka-
ram's way of. 190 f ; obstacles to,
198 ; meaning of the tei in in Xuka-
ram, 219 ; sec chap, x, sect. f>

Salutation Sao Greeting

Samadhl, 48, 53, 105, 171

Same to all men,' ' Xhe, 203 ff

SofnJpata, 216

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

319

Sanad (grant), 92, 124 f, 150

Sankar, ancestor of TnkarSm, 78

SankarachSrya, 192,

Sangam, 1 13

Sanitary arrangements at festivals,

63
SannyasTs, 46. 76, 83, 113 f, 172
Sanskrit. 95, 128. 158
Santaji Tell JaganSde, 91,101, 116,

121 f
Santa Lllamrita, 70 ff
Santa VtjSya, 70
Saptashringi Hill, 12
Sarada Matb, 192
Saraswat Brahmans, 14
Sarupata, 216

^astri, Murder of Gangadhar, 64
Sastri, Pandit SlvanStb, 29
$a$trts and Pandits, 14, 140
Sasvad, 172
SaiT, 158
Satyabhama, 149
Savajl, Tukaram s eldest brother,

76, 79 f, 83
SayujyatS, 216
Schools absent from Tukaram 's

poems, 205
Scnbe, Story of a. Ill
Scriptural authority, 192
Scythians, 3
Seasons, Holy, 154 f
Sects among Hmdfis, 33 ff
Self absorbed m Supreme Spirit,

230
Self-oentredness, 193 f
Self-comparison with imperfect

standards, 231
Self-examination, 227
Self-surrender to God, 227

t elf -torture, 46
erpent of Siva, 108; of a thousand

tongues, 186
Sesa, 186
Service to men, Tukaram and, 142,

205
Sexual intercourse : Kpsna and, 32 ,

desire m Tukiiram, 149"
ShakambarT, 51
Shayista, Khan, 104
Shaligram stone, 58
Shahvahan, 3 ff

Shankar Pandurang. editor, 120
Sholarvadi, 5
Shendi, 88

Shenvi Brahmans, 293
Shepherd of Hermas, 258
Shilledars, 16

Shimga, a Hindu festival, 115
Shimpts and bhakti, 20
Sholapur, 47, 63, 262

Shop metaphors in Tukaram, 130

Shrewdness of Tukaram, 203

Shrldhar, Maratha poet, 13, 133

Sickness of Tukaram, 112

Simplicity and sincerity, TukarSm's
142, 203

Sm, Sense of ; 47 ff , 50 ff. 5? ff, 135,
154, 223 , Tukaram on, 193, 242

Singers and song m Hinduism, S,
48

Smhasth, 47 f, 50, 146

Sirnr, Poona distnct, 7S

Sita, 51, 149

Siva, temples of, 8, 10; place in
Hinduism, 25 ; $. Linga at Pan-
dharpfir, 27, 51, 53 ff, 157 {;
Namdev and, 39; family of, 47;
prayer to, 57 ; Rameshwar Bhatf
and, 96 ;serpent of, 108; miraculous
visit of, HI; avafarcs of, I14j
ascetics of 107 ; relation to VifhobS
(Vishnu), 156 ff, 172 ; Sankar as
another name of, . 172 ; Saivjt©

_ saints, 223

Sivaba Kasar, Tukaram's disciple*

, 101.

^ivaji: army of, 15; date of birtb,
17; character, 17, 47; birthplace,
18 , a Hindu, 18 ; early years, 18;
democratic spirit, 18; relation to
Tukaram, 18, 99 ff, 103 f, 123 ff;
the king and his kingdom, 18 ff,
123 ff ; wandeungs, 47; relation to
Vithoba, 123; boyhood, 124;
mariiage, 124; and the Muham-
madans, 124 f ; captures forts, 124;
royal title of, 124, ministers of,
124; golden age of MarathSs,
169 f; descendants of, 289

Six rites of Brahman, 101

Slavery, 264

Sloka, 46

Slothfulness, 205

Smarana, nz

Smoke bhang. Preachers who, 144

Social Order, Tukaram and Christia-
nity on, 260 ff

Social Reform, Need of 260 ff; con-
ferences on, 261 ff

Soldiers, Maratha, IS

Solomon, The Odes of, 258

Sons of Tukaram, 91, 94, 120 f

Sopan, 172

Sorcerers, 111

Spirit of God, The Holy Spirit or,
178, 259

Sources of Tukaram's information,
68 ff, 72 ff

Spiritual growth of TukarSm, 139

Springs and wells in India, 129 v

328

LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

SradJh, % 52, 58, XIS

Sravana, 172

Sravana. jjelgota, X35

$rT Tuhixtmaoo Cltaritra by L. R.

'Pansarkar.see Authors' Index
SorabjT, on women m India, Miss C,

1205 '.
^^■1' VMnKiva sect, 3C
Srwgerl Math, 192
Staying m the world preferred, 200
Steadfastness, 168
Sthal uimSdhl, 6, 105
Stigma on Kpsna, Moral, 253
Stinginess and meanness, ^05
Subbdh Pafrika, 49, 62, 119, 134,

■177,232,258
Sudra caste. 6, 21, 36, 93, 96, 109,

Supreme Spirit, 195, 22G; Person,
,•230,234
Suraiuri, 37

Sarname of TukarSm's family, 67
Surya, 31
. Sutaf'i, 286
SvctSivatara llpanishad, 226
Swar^a,Q.ni
Swaraj, 20
Swaynmbhu, 54, 61 f
Sun, Prayer to the, 57

Tkgoie on Caste, Dr. Rabindranath,

19 f, 261
Taharabiid, 69
y(J/i/>i.fj!« Vithoba, 52
TSl, 139

Talegoan MS , 120 £f
Tumbara, 116
Tamilb, 36 f
Tapasaoharya, 45 ff
Taftvamasi, 92

Tfitva's edition, TukarSm, 120 ff
Teaching, TnkarSm's practical, 187
Telang on Bhaiiavttdfftd, ii
Telang Brahmans, 14
TelQKU country. 58
Tenets of the Wdrkans, 171 ff
Tennyson on the Maiathas, IS
Tertnllian, 260, 282
Theism, Vcdic, 31 ; m BhagavadglU!

3}, Tukaram, 184
Theistic interpretation ofTukarJm,

177
Theologian, Tukar.lm no, V}3.
Tliiff, Vithobaasa. 131
Tliievps, Story of, 109
Tltohii, 43
TImhiIm, H

Tilak. Mr B. G.. 14

TUak, on Mahlpati, Rev N. V„ 6')

Times of India, ,\<i5

Tipatx, 132

TlrthA (Holy places), 201

Tolerant sprit of Hinduism, 26

Toleration, 203

Torna fort, 124

Tortoise, 28 .

Tradesman, Tnkaram as, 79 ff. 108 ff ,
!30ff, 134ff

Tramps, 143

T ransmigration ,. 250

Triad, The Hindu, 255

Tribes and Castes of Bombay, 14,
209

Tridtent, Holder of the, 115

Trimbakji Denglia, 64

Trimbakeshwar, 172

Trinity, The, 240

Trio of graces, ^25

Trust and Renunciation, 199 f

Truthfulness, 203

Tuljapur, 123 ff

Tuhx plant, 56, 59, 81, 100, 171 f

Tulsl Diis. 37, 178, 215, 247

Tukaratn, Tuka, Tukobri birthplace,
5_i, worshipped, (.>, 169; and
Sivaji, 19, and Muhammadans,
IS; domocratically inclined, 6,
wifejijabal.d, chap, iv., parts u, ni,
passim ; youngest (and posthum-
ous) son Nai.lyanrao, (>, f)7, ')4,
150, 'ascension,' 6, 71, 105, 115 f,
120, 279; abliunii>„iO, 119ff, 176
and pashun; liter.iry powtr, 20,
uvaltTra of N.lmduv, 28; attitude
toKiisna, 31, 148; veneraiiou for
Vilhoba, 40 If, M9; pootry, 44;
full name, (>7; oontempor.ary ol
Milton, 67, two dillicultKss m
btogiaphy, 07 f ; family surname
and lineage, 67 ; sources of mfor-
maiion, 68 ff, 72 ff ; Janardaii
Sakhaifim (iadgil on life of, 68 ;
supposed miracles, 69, 279, and
1' K. Wiandarkar on thci.c, (i'»,
btogiapher of, 69 ff; autobio-
graphy, 72 ; contemporary data,
7<; grand&on, Cop.il Ho.i, 73;
HahlniSbSI, woman diw.iph', 73 ;
call ol, 73 ; i>unt miinlm, 73, 7(i ,
truslviorthiness of biography, 7'1 ft;
chief ovcnth with dalus, 7() f ;
business, 70, 79 ff. 108, li'); two
marriages, 7(i, 82 , bere.iveminits,
76, eldest brother S.av,'ni, 7i);
b.inkruptcy, 7(). (irst wifis and
eldest son die, '/d; famine, ',(>;
r'.'tirosto IJh.inibanath lIiU, 7i»,81.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

321

108 ; repairs Debu temple, 76, 86 ;
attendance at KTrtans, 76, 86 ;
call to become a poet, 76. 90, 97 ,
Kameshwar Bhatt's attitude, 77;
* ascension ' or end, 77, 105, 115,
126; probable facts distinguished
from legends, 77 ; ancestry of 77,
89 ; birth and infancy, 7Sf ; home
influences, 79; sorrows, 80, S3 f,
108 ff, 138 f ; deceived by rogues,
81 ff ; attitude to, and teaching on,
Brahmans, 83, 85 ff, 89, 92 ff , 96,
99 f, 101 f. llOf, 112 f, 158 f; viewed
as a lunatic, S3 ; leaves business,

84 , watches the cornfield and birds,

85, 104 ; his daughter KaSi, 85 ;
study of earlier poets, 86; a
Vaistanavite saint, 88 ; shendi, SB ;
oil commission, 8S ; his sons,
Mahadev, Vithoba. NarSyanrao,
91 ; disciple Santajl, 91 ; his si-<
children, 94, 163 ; at Lohogaon,
95 ; throws poems m the river, 96 ;
tempted to sin, 98 , meekness, 99 ,
relation to SivajJ, 99 ff, 103 ff;
hst of disciples, 101 f; attitude to
dogs, 102; to pantheism {advatttr),
102 f ; otherworldlmess, 104 ; his
blanket and cymbal found after
departure, 105 f, 116; supposed
influence after death, 106, 116 f;
sickness of, 113; supposed mira-
cles, 69, chap. IV, part iii passim ;
critical problem of his poetry,
119 ff; self-revelation, 126, chap.
V, part lu; Sanskrit, 128; rallies
Vithoba, 131, 222; popularity,
133 ; estimates by F. G Bhan-
darkar, 150 f ; Farquhar, 142 ;
Goreb, 189 f, 244; Sir Alex. Grant,
165, 185; Maokichan, 67; Mac-
nicol, 137, 142: Mitchell, 190;
Navalkar, 151, 244; Patwardhan,
67. 136 f; N. V. Tilak, 133 f, 165,
238, 244, Miss Underbill, 179;
Prarthana Samaj, 150; picture of
himself, 134 ff; tradesman, 79 ff,
108 ff, 134 ff; compared with St.
Paul, 136 f; with Walt Whitman,
138, Madame Guyon, 183, with
Jeremiah, 221 ; with Jesus, chap.
X, part IV ; moral impotence, 137 ;
as a preacher, 143 ; interpretation
of him, 146 ff ; a life long idolator,
150; a.GosiFvl, 150; teaching on
idolatry. 151 ; inconsistence., 151 ;
ecstacy and despair, 141. 152;
ambiguity, 153, 165 f ; attitude to
Pandharpur, 155 ; coarseness, 142,
155; on Siva, 158; on iakta a.nd

43

satx, 158; cows, Vedas, Puranas
and ceremonies, 159 f ; not a re-
former, 160 ff, 293; toleration
and compromise, 161, attitude to
caste, 161 ff ; place and influence,
169 ff , devotional usefulness,
175 ff; claim on Christian Mis-
sions, 177 ff; approximation to
Christian truth, 177ff; his mysti-
cal conflict, 182 f; place in
Theism, 184 f; teaching on God,
worship, sin, salvation, religious
life, moral ideal, saints, animals,
reincarnation, death, future life,
death, hereafter, 187 ff, and chap,
viii passim , no theologian, 192 ;
exp.irience of bhakti, 215 ff, and
chap. IX passim ; sense of sm,
47 ff, 50 ff, 57 ff, 135, 154 f, 223 ff ;
honest introspection, 224, 231 ,
God his Guide, 226 ; non-plusitd,
227 f ; quest aher inward purity,
275 f ; faith the road, 225 f ; change
of heart dfesired, 226 f; bhakH's
summit, 227 f; fellowship of the
saints, 229; unsatisfied religious
anxiety, 229 ff ; self-dissatisfaction,
231 ; living religion, 233 ; bis
bhakti evaluated, chap, x.^assmi ;
one-sidedness, 235ff ; a 'bridge to
Chiist', 237 ff; Christianity com-
pared with, 239 ff ; Jesus and
Tukaram, 239 ff; teaching on God,
salvation, incarnation, moral and
spiritual power, social responsi-
bility eximmed, chap x, parti
v-viii ; attitude to women, 264
his limited world-outlook, 265 ff

i;

Udaipur, 38

Udhavchidghan, 71

Unsatisfied religious ani.iety, 229 ff

Upanishads, 221, 226, 254

Utpai (pnest) 56

Untouchables, 54 f, 163 ff, 159, 173.

261. 292
Unworldlmess of Tnk§ram, 233
Urdhvabahu, 46
Vrdhvamukhm, 46

Vaikuntha, 6, 104 ff, 107. 115 f;

126, 143, 211 ff
Vairagya, 201
Vaishnavism defined, 24, 26 ; a

sect, 27, 33 ff; theism in, 27;

place of Bhaactvatas, 27; chief

MarStha centres, 27; origin, 31;

322

LIFE AND TEACHING OF TUKARAM

schools, 32 ; spiritual religion and
34; caste m, 34, 162; rejects
Brahman ascendancy, 34; verna-
cular literature, 34; place of
Brahmans 35 ; its bliaktt, 35, 251 ;
eroticism, 35; South India V.,
36 f; m N. India, 37 f; revival,
40; genuine religions aspect of,
48; Tukaram a V. samt, 88; V.
saints' company satisfying, 135;
at Pa^jdharpur, 149 ff, 251 ; attitude
to untoucbabihty, 263; incarnation
in, 28ff, App. i; Christian in-
fluence on, 282

Valiabha, 37 f

Vanaprastha, 172 f

Vararuchi, 4

Variant editions of Tukaram, 119 ff

Vans. 171

Vasudeva, 30, 36

Vedanlic conceptions, 216

Vedantists and TukSiam, 179, 216

Vedas- Kig Veda, 3; venerated bv
Hindils, 25; tho)smin,jl; hymns
of, 57; Tukaram's idea of, 143,
and attitude to, 159 f, 19:^

Vogetauan ha.bita^Cii'WafkaKii, 200

Veneration, Hmdii o6jects of, 172;

VonTdSn (women's hair-otfenng),
58 ..

Villages in India, IrapSftaiiie''of, 7 f ,
288

Venkoba, 143

Verbal parallells between Tukaram
and the New Testament, App. ii

Veta} the demon, 11

Vices censured by Tukarfitn, 205

ViianiJ, 158

Vimiln, 126

Vindhya Hills, 3

Virodhi, a Hindu year, 110

Vishijn ■ temples. 10; m kirtans,
10 ; place in Hinduism, 25 ff ; in
the Vedas, 26 f; and Krahma,
27; and Krisna, 27; thousand
names, 27; aj Rhagwan, 27;
equality wiih Siva, 27; place in
Bhiigtnata communitv, 27 ; rela-
tion to Vithoba (Vitlhal). 27,41 ff ;
ffi'<7Mr«(s) of, 251 ff; five images
of, 51 , emblems of, 53; twenty
four names, 57; child-form, 97;
vimi!n{csx) oi, 105 ; a stone vot
not a stone, 151 ; paradise of, 213;
five form^ of, 251 ; merely meta-
phoiica), 253

Vis/ii7i(-das,22S

Vishnupada, 52, ll*!

Vi&hnnpati, 41

Vishtrashrtivas, 41

ViSvambhara, 77, 107

Vistara, 41

Vital (pollution), 42

Vitthal. See Vithoba

Vitthalwada, 248

Vithoba : ancestor of Tukaram, 78 ;
the idol-god: at Dehfi, 5f; and
Potoba, a MarSthl proverb, 9;
temples of 10, at Panijharpfir, 52 ;
as inspiring bkakii, 20 ; the name.
Its origin and significance, 26, 41 ff ;
Tukaram's veneration for, 40 (f ;
avatam of, 40 ff ; Takpithya V.,
52, details of V. temple at
Paijdharpur, 52 ff ; and caste, 54 ff ,
162 ff ; popularity, 55 ; attack on,
56, 60 f{; days sacred to, 56;
defilement of, 56, 60 ff, 256, 261 ;
antiquity, 03 ; Mahlpati's devotion
to, 69; temple service of, 55 ff;
intervention of Tukaram's, behalf,
SO ff, 84, 109 f; Tukaram's. apology
to, 112; relation to Sivajl, 123 I,
156 ff ; rallied by Tukaram, 131,
222; as a thief, 131 ; bondsman
of, 138; as an 'incarnation', 156;
graciousness of, 175; central to
Tukatam's religion, 18] ; worship
not erotic, 184; religious value
exairined, chap, x, parts v-x

ViUhu See Vithoba

Vivekanand, SwamI, 29

Vlvck Simlliu by Mukundraj, 102

Vividh Dnyiiita Vlstiira, 67 1, 287

Vows, 46

Vrandavana fruit, 155

Vyasa, 52

W

Wagholi, 0'^

W(Tiihya,li?.,2')2

\V.ii, 47, 70

Wttndana, 1 72

lV5nT, 116 f, 138

WdrkarTs, 42, 53, 61, 73, 7(>, 121,

139, 16-1, 169 ff, 236
Walt Whitman, 138
Water supply, Caste and, 262
Wells m India, 120
Western India, sec Maharfishtra and

ManTfhtT
Westfrners and Indian studies, 123 fi
Wc^tfmnstcr Gazettp, 54
Widow's gift, A Br<tliraan, 52
Wife of a l-!rahman,57; of Tukarfim

sec Avajibal and Kakhmabal

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

323

Wilson Philological Lectures, sec
Patwardhan in Authors' Index

Witches, H

Women: among the MarSthas, 12;
enfranchisement of, 22 ; hair offer-
ring by, 58 ; chief delight of Hindi!
w., 79; and sail, 158; Christ and
Tukaram on, 264 f; wrongs against
Indian, 264 f; Tukaram's teaching
on, 264 f

World Missionary Conference ques-
tionnaire, 178

World-outlook of Tukaram, 265 ff

Worship: repulsive forms of, 47;
and worshippers, Tukaram's
teaching on, 206

Yadav inscriptions, 41

Yogis and bhaktas distinguished,

216 f, 229
Yama, 212
Yashoda, 52

Yoga, 146; 216 f. 228; a.-aAhhakti,
..21&i

Works by Prof. A. FORKE on Chijia and
Chinese Philosophy.

Bltithen chinesischer Dichtung^.

Alls dei Zeit der Han-uncl Sechs Dynastien, 2. Jaliiliundert v Ohi.
Itis Kum 6. Jahihundert n Chr

Magdebuig 1899, A. u. E. Fabers Verlag.

Schih-ko chi-chin.

Chinose text of the above Peking 1899 {out of print).

Lun Hfing,

Part I, Philosophical Essays of Wang Ch'ung.

Berlin 1907, Georg Eeimer, Veilag.
{Out of pint, appeiiied fiist in three paits m tlie " Mitteilungen
dea Seramars fur Onentaliselie Spraehen," Berlin).

Part n, Miscellaneous Essays of Wang Ch'ung-

Beilm 1911, G-eoig Beimei, Veilag.

Yang Chu's Garden of Pleasure (Tlie Wisdom of the

]<jast Series) London 1912, John Murray.

MS Ti des 5oziaIethikers und seiner Schiller philo-
sophische Werke.

Berlin 1922, Veieinigung wissensoliafthcher Verleger

Yamen und Presse.

Ilandbuob der chinesischen Schiiftspiache, 2 vols

Berlm 1911, Georg Eeimer, Verlag.

Katalog des Pekinger Tripitaka der Kdniglichen
Bibliothek zu Berlin. Beihn 1916, Behrend & Co.

Die V61ker Chinas. Berlm 1907, Karl Curtms Verlag.

Indische Mlirchen und ihre Bedeutung fiir die vergei-
chende MSrchenforschung.

Bcilm 1911, Karl Curtius Verlag.

Chinesische Mystik. Berlm 1922, Karl Curaus Verlag

Der Ursprung der Chinesen auf Orund ihrer alten
Bilderschrift. Hambuig 1925, L. Pucdeuchsen & Co. Veilag

i


