Totemism and Exogamy, Vol. 4 (James George Frazer, 1910)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/india.history.resource.91352). Vol. 4 of Frazer's four-volume treatise - the theory of totemism and its relation to religion.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

WW Pn 

A. i” (a 

TA AMA “op s< (A Ser Wie lees RL AI i AP. 
1c NOs 

00083142 

ae een wae 

~ 

A 
PAGO ACO nc! 
DRAGS KARA 

oe iB) bal @ uy " nt a 24 P oe 

ara t 

om 

UV UNALCYAY AIDE UL 
00083142 

ala Ai dalaasietiasdi as Dian adiadindieaien hii aabedinaniianaail 

Digitized with financial assistance from 

An Initiati ve by 

FOUNDATION 

WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUG! 

on 28 December, 2018 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

VOL, IV B 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

§ 1. Totemism and Exogamy 

THE main facts of totemism, so far as they have been 
reported on trustworthy authority and are known to me, 
have now been laid before the reader.’ It remains briefly 
to review them and to consider the general conclusions to 
which they point. 

No one who has followed the preceding survey attentively General 
can fail to be struck by the general similarity of the beliefs peice am 
and customs which it has revealed in tribe after tribe of all over the 
men belonging to different races and speaking different “°" 
languages in many widely distant parts of the world. 
Differences, sometimes considerable differences, of detail do 
certainly occur, but on the whole the resemblances decidedly 
preponderate and are so many and so close that they deserve 
to be classed together under a common name. The name 
which students of the subject have bestowed on these beliefs 
and customs is totemism, a word borrowed from the language 
of ene of the tribes which practises the institution; and 
while the introduction of new words from barbarous languages 
is in general to be deprecated, there is some excuse for 
designating by a barbarous name a barbarous institution to 
which the institutions of civilised nations offer no analogy. 

If now, reviewing all the facts, we attempt to frame a general Totemism 
definition of totemism, we may perhaps say that totemism is 4™¢¢ 
an intimate relation which is supposed to exist between a i" 
group of kindred people on the one side and a species of 

1 Some facts which came to my _ corded in the ‘‘Notes and Corrections” 

knowledge too late to be inserted in at the end of this volume. 
their proper places will be found re- 
. - 

Totemism 
a crude 
supersti- 
tion, not 
a philo- 
sophical 
system. 

4 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

natural or artificial objects on the other side, which objects 
are called the totems of the human group. To this general 
definition, which probably applies to all purely totemic 
peoples, it should be added that the species of things which 
constitutes a totem is far oftener natural than artificial, and 
that amongst the natural species which are reckoned totems 
the great majority are either animals or plants. 

To define exactly the relation in which totemic people 
stand to their totems is hardly possible ; for exact definitions 
imply exact thoughts, and the thoughts of savages in the 
totemic stage are essentially vague, confused, and contradictory. 
As soon therefore as we attempt to give a precise and detailed 
account of totemism we almost inevitably fall into contradic- 
tions, since what we may say of the totemic system of one 

tribe may not apply without serious modifications and re- . 

strictions to the totemic system of another. We must con- 
stantly bear in mind that totemism is not a consistent 
philosophical system, the product of exact knowledge and 

‘high intelligence, rigorous in its definitions and logical in its 

The 
relation 

of a man 
to his totem 
is one of 
friendship 
and 
kinship ; 
as far as 
possible he 
identifies 
himself 
with his 
totem. 

deductions from them. On the contrary it is a crude super- 
stition, the offspring of undeveloped minds, indefinite, illogical, 
inconsistent. Remembering this, and renouncing any attempt 
to give logical precision to a subject which does not admit of 
it, we may say that on the whole the relation in which a 
man stands to his totem appears to be one of friendship and 

. kinship. He regards the animals or plants or whatever the 

totems may be as his friends and relations, his fathers, his 
brothers, and so forth. He puts them as far as he can on 
a footing of equality with himself and with his fellows, the 
members of the same totemic clan. He considers them as 
essentially his peers, as beings of the same sort as himself 
and his human kinsmen. In short, so far as it is possible to 
do so, he identifies himself and his fellow-clansmen with his 
totem. Accordingly, if the totem is a species of animals he 
looks upon himself and his fellows as animals of the same 
species ; and on the other hand he regards the animals as in 
a sense human. Speaking of the Central Australian tribes 
Messrs. Spencer and Gillen observe: “The totem of any man 
is regarded, just as it is elsewhere, as the same thing as him- 
self; as a native once said to us when we were discussing 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 5 

the matter with him, ‘that one,’ pointing to his photograph 
which we had taken, ‘is just the same as me; so is a 
kangaroo’ (his totem).”! In these brief sentences the whole 
essence of totemism is summed up: totemism is an identifica- \| 
tion of a man with his totem, whether his totem be an animal, 

a plant, or what not. : 

Thus it is a serious, though apparently a common, It isa 
mistake to speak of a totem as a god and to say that it is poet 
worshipped by the clan. In pure totemism, such as we find totem as 
it among the Australian aborigines, the totem is never ie avi 
god and is never worshipped. A man no more worships ism asa 
his totem and regards it as his god than he worships his aero 
father and mother, his brother and his sister, and regards 
them as his gods. He certainly respects his totem and treats » 
it with consideration, but the respect and consideration which 
he pays to it are the same that he pays to his friends and 
relations ; hence when his totem is an edible animal or 
plant, he commonly, but not always, abstains from killing 
and eating it, just as he commonly, but not always, abstains 
from killing and eating his friends and relations. But to 
call this decent respect for his equals the worship of a god 
is entirely to misapprehend and misrepresent the essence of 
totemism. If religion implies, as it seems to do, an acknow- 
ledgment on the part of the worshipper that the object of 
his worship is superior to himself, then pure totemism can- 
not properly be called a religion at all, since a man looks 
upon his totem as his equal and friend, not at all as his 
superior, still less as his god. The system is thoroughly 
democratic; it is simply an imaginary brotherhood estab- 
lished on a footing of perfect equality between a group of 
people on the one side and a group of things (generally a 
species of animals and plants) on the other side. No doubt 
it may under favourable circumstances develop into a 
worship of animals or plants, of the sun or the moon, of the 
sea or the rivers, or whatever the particular totem may have 
been ; but such worship is never found amongst the lowest 
savages, who have totemism in its purest form; it occurs 
only among peoples who have made a considerable advance 
in culture, and accordingly we are justified in considering it 

1 Spencer and Gillen, ative Tribes of Central Australia, p. 202. - 

Therespect 
which a 
man owes 
to his 
totem asa 
kinsman 
and friend 
usually 
prevents 
him from 
killing and 
eating it, 
when it is 
an edible 
animal or 
plant; but 
sometimes 
he kills 
and eats 

it for the 
purpose of 
identifying 
himself 
with it 
more com- 
pletely. 

6 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION sect. 

as a later phase of religious evolution, as a product of the 
disruption and decay of totemism proper.’ Hence it is an 
error to speak of true totemism as a religion. As I fell inte 
that error when I first wrote on the subject,? and as I fear 
that my example may have drawn many others after me 
into the same error, it is incumbent on me to confess my 
mistake, and to warn my readers against repeating it. 

The respect which a man owes to his totem as a kinsman 
and friend usually prevents him from killing and eating it, 
whenever the totem is an edible animal or plant. But the 
rule is by no means invariable. Indeed the identification 
of a man with his totem, which appears to be the essence of 
totemism, may lead the savage to adopt a precisely opposite 
line of conduct towards his totemic animal or plant. He 
may kill and eat the animal or plant for the very purpose of 
identifying himself with it more completely. For the savage 
thinks, not without some show of reason, that his bodily 
substance partakes of the nature of the food that he eats, 
and that accordingly he becomes in a very real sense the 
animal whose flesh he consumes or the plant whose roots or 
fruits: he masticates and swallows. Hence if his totem is, 
let us say, a kangaroo, it may become his bounden duty to 
eat kangaroo flesh in order to identify himself physically 
with the animal. This obligation is recognised and carried 
out in practice by the natives of Central Australia; for they 
think that unless they thus convert themselves into their 
totems by occasionally eating a little of them, they will be 
unable magically to multiply the totemic animals and plants 
for the benefit of the rest of the community.2 Further, their 
traditions point back to a time when their ancestors ate their 
totems, not only in small quantities and on rare occ&sions 
for the sake of acquiring magical power over them, but freely 
and habitually as if it were the most natural thing in the 
world for them to do so.* Such a custom differs from the 

1 At the same time even in Australia, _ restrictions in particular cases. 
the classical land of totemism, some 2In my Totemism, published in 
germs of a totemic religion may be 1887. See above, vol. i. pp. 4 sgg. 
detected. See above, vol. i. pp. 141- A a 
153. So difficult is it to lay down 3 See above, vol. i. pp. 109 s79., 
any general propositions as to totemism 230 599. 
which are not liable to exceptions and 4 See above, vol. i, pp. 238 599. 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 7 

normal practice of totemic tribes, which is to abstain from 
killing and eating their totems ; and we have geen reason to 
believe that among the Australian aborigines it was the older 
custom, since it has been partially retained by the more 
primitive tribes in the centre of the continent, while it has 
been completely abandoned by the more advanced tribes 
nearer to the sea, who strictly abstain from eating their 
totems.! 

These differences of custom in regard to eating the Perhaps 
totem exemplify the inconsistencies of totemism. Which of eee 
the two customs is absolutely the more primitive, it might to eat the 
be difficult to determine. One tribe may have adopted the totem and 
one practice and another tribe: the other. Some people,custom was 
thinking chiefly of their corporeal relationship to their totems, ;°7°S"" 

» from it. 
may have deemed it necessary to eat the totemic animals or Similarly 
plants in order to maintain and strengthen the physical tie ee rete 
between them, just as many people eat their dead human ee se 
relations for a similar purpose. This was perhaps the mark of 
original theory and practice of the Australian aborigines, elena 
and the inference is confirmed by the observation that in but in later 
Australia the custom of eating the bodies of dead rela- apres 
tions as a mark of respect and affection seems to have do so. 
been very widely spread.?, On this view a tribe originally} 

ate its totemic animals and its human dead from precisely 

the same motive, namely, from a wish to absorb the life of 

the animals or of the men, and so to identify the eater either 

with his totem or with his kinsfolk, between whom indeed 

he did not clearly distinguish. Other totemic peoples, 
however, fixing their attention rather on their, social than 

on their corporeal relation to their totems, may from the first 
have*refused to kill and eat the totemic animals, just as many 

savages refuse to kill and eat their relations. In Australia 

this custom of abstaining from the totem is common, but 

for the reasons I have given we may infer that it is more 

recent than the custom of freely eating the totem. They 
motive which led people to abandon the older practice was 
probably a growing regard for the social, and a growing 
disregard for the corporeal, side of the totemic bond. They, 
thought less of themselves as animals and more of the 

1 See above, vol. i. pp.°230 sg¢. 2 See below, pp. 260 sgq. 

Differences 
between 
totemic 
peoples in 
respect of 
marriage ; 
in most 
tribes the 
totemic 
clans are 
exogamous, 
but in some 
they are 
not so. 

8 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

animals as men. The result was a more humane and 
considerate treatment of their totems, which manifested 
itself chiefly in the refusal to kill and eat the totemic 
animals or plants. On the whole the new attitude to the 
totem is kindlier, less crude and savage, than the old one; 
it shews some consideration for the feelings, or supposed 
feelings, of others, and such consideration is invariably a 
mark of a certain refinement of nature. So far, therefore, 
the adoption of the rule that a man may not kill, eat, or 
otherwise injure his totem probably indicates an advance 
in culture; it is a step towards civilisation and religion. 
Similarly the abandonment of the old custom of devouring 
dead relations is unquestionably a change for the better. 
In some communities the two changes may have proceeded 
side by side. 

Among the differences which exist between the totemic 
systems of different tribes one of the most important is 
that which concerns the custom of marriage. It is a 
common, indeed general, rule that members of a totemic 
clan may not marry each other but are bound to seek their 
wives and husbands in another clan. This rule is called 
exogamy, and the proposition which has just been stated 
may be put in a brieter form by saying that a totemic clan 
is_usually also exogamous. But to this rule there are very 
considerable exceptions. Among the tribes in the heart_of 
Australia, sacieedy the Arunta, Unmatjera, Ipirra, and 
[liaura, the totemic clans are not exogamous ; in other words, 
a man is free to marry a woman who has the same totem as 
himself? The same holds true of the Kworafi tribe in British 
New Guinea,’ of the Kacharis in Assam,* and of some African 
tribes, such as the Wahehe, Taveta, and Nandi;° and in regard 
to the numerous nation of the Bechuanas, who are subdivided 
into many totemic clans, there is, so far as I am aware, 
no clear evidence that these totemic clans are exogamous.° 
However, in such matters little reliance can be placed on 
merely negative evidence, since our information as to most 
totemic’ tribes is miserably defective. A people whose 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 121-123. 5 See above, vol. ii, pp. 404 59., 
2 See above, vol. i. pp. 242 sg. 418 sg., 433. 
3 See above, vol. ii. p. 55. 8 See above, vol. ii. p. 378, and 

4 See below, p. 297. ‘ below, p. 304. 

- 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 9 

totemic clans, if we may call them so, were certainly not 
exogamous are the Samoans. Their families or clans 
revered each its own species of things, generaliy a species 

of animals or of plants, which the clan carefully abstained 

from killing and eating. Such a practice falls strictly under 

the general definition of totemism which I have given above, 

but it differs from the common variety of totemism in not 

being exogamous. Further, the traditions of the Central 
Australian tribes, which I have shewn reasons for regarding 

as on the whole the most primitive of all_the Australian 
aborigines,’ represent their ancestors _as habitually 1 marrying 
women of their_own totems; in other words, they point 

back to a time when eoteniishs: existed but exogamy of 

the totemic groups as yet did not.? Indeed, the tradition 

of another of these Central Australian tribes, the Dieri, 
relates that the rule of exogamy was introduced for the 
express purpose of preventing men from marrying women 

of their own totems, as they had done before.’ Taking the Totemism 
practice and the traditions of the Central Australian tribes @istinct | 
together we may with some probability conclude that the older than 
institution of exogamy _is_distinct_in kind and in _ origin 8" 
from’ the institution of totemism, and that among the 

Most primitive totemic tribes totemism preceded exogamy. 
Accordingly the totemic system of tribes which do not 
practise exogamy may be called pure totemism, and the 
totemic system of tribes which practise exogamy may be 

called exogamous totemism. 

Another people who possess totemism in a pure form The Banks’ 
without the admixture of exogamy are the Melanesians of renee 
the Banks’ Islands, and their case is particularly instructive totemism 
becafise it presents an almost exact parallel to that of the Seas 
Arunta and other kindred tribes of Central Australia. These in their’ 
islanders practise both totemism and exogamy in their purest *°4 most 

and most primitive forms, but like the Arunta and their con- Primitive 
‘orms, but 
geners in Central Australia they keep the two institutions like the 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 242 sg., and the Rev. Otto Siebert respectively, 

251 59., 337 S99. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 251 5g. 

3 See above, vol. ii. pp. 350-352. 
Of the two versions of this tradition 
which have been récorded by S. Gason 

the version of Mr. Siebert is to be pre- 
ferred, because he is a better authority 
than Gason, whose error on an im- 
portant point he corrected. See above, 
vol. i. p. 148. 

Io SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

Arunta and perfectly distinct from each other. Their totemism is of the 
omer wibes most primitive pattern, because their totems are not hereditary 
Australia but are determined for each individual simply and solely by 
ihe wee the fancy of his or her mother during pregnancy: their 
institu: exogamy is of the most primitive pattern, because the com- 
tutne. Munity is bisected into two and only two exogamous classes, 
from each which we have good reason to believe to be the original and 
eee primary type of exogamy, the mother of all other exogamous 
systems.’ But while the Banks’ Islanders have pure totemism 
1,4. and pure exogamy, they do not mix the two institutions 
- \ together ; in other words, their exogamous classes are not 
totemic, and on the other hand their totemic clans, if we 
ive) may so designate the groups of persons who have the same 
eal conceptional totem, are not exogamous, that is to say, a | 
man is quite free to marry a woman who has the same con- 
ceptional totem as himself? In their general principles, 
therefore, the totemic and exogamous systems of the Banks’ 
Islanders and of the Central Australian aborigines are in 
fundamental agreement ; and taken together they strongly 
confirm the view that totemism and exogamy, even when 
they are both practised by the same people, are nevertheless 
institutions wholly distinct from and independent of each 
other, though in many tribes they have crossed and blended. 
How the fusion has apparently been effected, in other words, 
how totemic clans have so often come to be exogamous, will 
be shewn in the sequel.’ 
Another Another reason for inferring the radical distinction of 
teas: totemism and exogamy is that, just as totemism may exist 
the radical Without exogamy, so on the other hand exogamy may exist 
distinction without totemism. For example, a number of tribes in 
of totem- 7 ‘ 
ism and Sumatra and other parts of the Indian Archipelago? the 
pacaa Todas of India, and the Masai of Africa, are divided 
peoples are into exogamous clans which are not, so far as appears, 
cxozamous totemic. In India especially the institution of exogamy 
being _— disjoined from the institution of totemism appears to be 
totemic, s 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 272 sgg., 85-101) had been printed off. The 
and below, pp. 105 599. new information entirely confirms my 
2 This very important information conjecture on the subject. See also 
was obtained by Dr. W. H. R. Rivers below, pp. 286 sg. 
after my account of his discoveries in 
the Banks’ Islands (above, vol. ii. pp. 3 See below, pp. 127 579: 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY it 

very widespread and is shared even by the pure Aryan 
peoples, including the Brahmans, Rajputs, and other high 
castes. As the primary subject of the present investigation 
is totemism, and I am concerned with exogamy only so far 
as it is bound up with totemism, I havé made no attempt 
to enumerate all the peoples of the world who practise exo- 
gamy apart from totemism, although I have not abstained 
from noticing a few such peoples who happen to be asso- 
ciated, whether by racial affinity or geographical situation, 
with totemic tribes. But pure exogamy, that is, exogamy 
unaccompanied by totemism, might furnish a theme for a 
separate treatise. 

If now we turn to the geographical diffusion of totemism, Geo- 
whether in its pure or its exogamous form, we may observe S*aphical 
that the institution appears to occur universally among the totemism. 
aborigines of Australia, the western islanders of Torres Cm" 
Straits, and the coast tribes of British New Guinea. It is tralia, New 
common in one shape or another among the Melanesians yen sia, 
from the Admiralty Islands on the north-west to Fiji on Polynesia, 

the south-east. In Polynesia it occurs among the Pelew ay7csi® 
Islanders and in a developed or decayed form among the 
Samoans, and indications of it have been recorded in Rotuma, 
Tikopia, and other islands of the vast archipelago or rather 
cluster of archipelagoes which stud the Pacific. It is 
found in a typical form among the Battas of Sumatra and 
less clearly defined among other tribes of Indonesia. Iny Tt : 
India it is widespread, and may well have been at one time _ 
universal, among the Dravidian races who probably form the 
aboriginal population of Hindoostan ; and it appears to be 
shared by some of the Mongoloid tribes of Assam.’ But on 
the ffontiers of British India the institution, or at all events 
the record of it, stops abruptly. In Africa it has been found Totemism 
among so many Bantu tribes both of the south and of the ® Attica. 
centre that we may reasonably suppose it to be a characteristic 
institution of the Bantu stock. Beyond the vast region occu- 
pied by the pure Bantus totemism has been discovered among 
those tribes of mixed Hamitic blood, as well as among some 
of those tribes of Nilotic negroes, who border on the Bantu 

1 For the evidence of totemism in Assam, see above. vol, ii. pp. 318 sgg., and 
below, pp. 295-300. 

. 

12 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

peoples in Eastern and Central Africa. Among the pure 
negroes of Western Africa the totemic system is practised 
in more or less normal forms by many tribes of the Slave 
Coast, the Gold Coast, the Ivory Coast, and Senegambia, 
as well as by some scattered communities of heathen 
Hausas, which still appear like islets above the rising flood 
of Mohammedanism which threatens to swamp the whole 
Totemism of aboriginal Africa. In North America totemism seems to 
Lash have been universal among the settled and agricultural tribes 
America. of the East and South; to have occurred among some of 
the hunting tribes of the great central prairies ; and to have 
been wholly unknown to the much ruder savages who 
occupied the rich and beautiful country, the garden of the 
United States, which stretches from the Rocky Mountains 
to the waters of the Pacific. Further to the north totemism 
reappears among some of the fishing and hunting tribes of 
British Columbia and Alaska, who are either hemmed in 
between the rainy, densely wooded mountains and the sea 
or roam the dreary steppes of the interior. But it vanishes 
again among their neighbours, the Eskimo, on the icy shores 
of the Arctic Ocean. In tropical South America totemism 
has been detected among the Goajiros of Colombia and the 
Arawaks of Guiana; and perhaps it exists among the 
Araucanians or Moluches of Southern Chili. Judging by 
the analogy of their kinsmen in North America we may 
surmise that the institution is or has been practised by 
many more tribes of South America, though the traces of it 
among them are few and faint. 
Totemism On the other hand, totemism has not been found as a 
has not wa living institution in any part of Northern Africa, Europe, or 
inEurope Asia, with the single exception of India; in other words, it 
attice nor appears to be absent, either wholly or for the most part, 
in Asia, from two of the three continents which together make up 
ial. nor the land surface of the Old World, as well as from the 
has it been adjacent portion of the third. Nor has it been demonstrated 
baleen beyond the reach of reasonable doubt that the institution 
gered ever obtained among any of the three great families of 
Semiticand Mankind which have played the most conspicuous parts in 
pwaman history—the Aryan, the Semitic, and the Turanian. It is 

families of : 
mankind. true that learned and able writers have sought to prove the 

* 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

13 

former existence of totemism both among the Semites! and 
among the Aryans, notably among the ancient Greeks and 
Celts ;? but so far as I have studied the evidence adduced 
to support these conclusions I have to confess that it 
leaves me doubtful or unconvinced. To a great extent it 
consists of myths, legends, and superstitions about plants 
and animals which, though they bear a certain resemblance 
to totemism, may have originated quite independently of 
it. Accordingly I have preferred not to discuss the difficult 
and intricate question of Semitic and Aryan totemism. 
In the body of facts which I have collected and presented 
to the reader future enquirers may find materials for institut- 
ing a comparison between the actual totemism of savages 
and the supposed vestiges of it among the civilised races of 
ancient or modern times. It is possible that their researches 
may yet shed light on this obscure problem and perhaps 
finally solve it. I shall be content if I have helped to 
smooth the way towards a solution. 

At the same time I am bound to point out a serious Thesystem 
obstacle which the theory of Semitic and Aryan totemism heal 
has to encounter, and with which its advocates appear not eoelyee 
to have reckoned. That obstacle is the classificatory system totemic 
of relationship. So far as the systems of relationship suas & 
employed by totemic peoples are known to us, they appear be classifi. 
to be without a single exception classificatory, not descriptive ; poutine 
and accordingly we may reasonably infer that wherever the of reiation- 
classificatory system of relationship is absent, as it is among pe ante 
the Semites and the Aryans, there totemism is absent also. Semitic 
It is true that the classificatory system has apparently in Bcoples is 

3 : descriptive, 
itself no necessary connection with totemism, and that the 
° 

1 The case for totemism among the 
Semites has been argued with his 
usual acumen and learning by W. 
Robertson Smith, in his book A?aship 
and Marriage in Early Arabia (Cam- 
bridge, 1885 ; Second Edition, London, 
1903). 

2 Among the advocates of Greek 
and Celtic totemism is my learned and 
ingenious friend M. Solomon Reinach. 
See his Cultes, Alythes, et Religtons, i. 
(Paris, £905) pp. 9 s¢7., 30 sgg- Mr. 
G. L. Gomme has collected what he 

believes to be relics of totemism in the 
British Islands. See his articles ‘‘ Tot- 
emism in Britain,” Ze Archeological 
Review, iii. (1889) pp. 217-242, 350- 
3753 w., Folklore as an Historical 
Sctence (London, 1908), pp. 276 sq. 
Mr. N. W. Thomas has done the 
same for Wales. See his article ‘‘ La 
Survivance du culte totémique des 
animaux et les rites agraires dans le 
pays de Galles,” Revue de 1’ Histoire 
des Religions, xxxviii. (1898) pp. 295- 
347+ 

14 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, I 

two things might, so far as we see, quite well exist apart. 
The necessary connection. of the classificatory system, as 
I shall point out presently, is not with totemism but with 
exogamy. But to say this is only to raise the difficulty 
of Aryan and Semitic totemism in another form. For no 
_Semitic people and no Aryan people, except the Hindoos, 
is known for certain to have been exogamous. Thus if the 
theory of Aryan and Semitic totemism is to be established, 
its advocates must shew, not only how the Aryans and the 
Semites have lost that institution, but how they have lost 
the institutions of exogamy and the classificatory system of 
relationship as well. 

Totemism If we exclude hypotheses and confine ourselves to facts, 

1s peculiar we may say broadly that totemism is practised by many 

to the dark- 
skinned savage and barbarous peoples, the lower races as we call 

ancn@st them, who occupy the continents and islands of the tropics 
racesof and the Southern Hemisphere, together with a large part of 
mankind, North Anterica, and whose complexion shades off from coal 

ea ia black through dark brown to red. With the somewhat 
the. doubtful exception of a few Mongoloid tribes in Assam, no 
coe yellow and no white race is totemic. Thus if civilisation 
sphere and Varies on the whole, as it seems to do, directly with com- 
Naeem plexion, increasing or diminishing with the blanching or 
darkening of the skin, we may lay it down as a general) 
proposition that totemism is an institution peculiar to the 
dark-complexioned and least civilised races of mankind 
who are spread over the Tropics and the Southern Hemi- 
sphere, but have also overflowed into North America. ; 
Totemism The question naturally suggests itself, How has totemism 
aprave been diffused through so large a part of the human race and 
originated Over so vast an area of the world? ‘Two answers at feast 
ai are possible. On the one hand, it may have originated in 
several a single centre and spread thence either through peaceful 
centres. intercourse between neighbouring peoples or through the 
migrations and conquests of the people with whom the 
institution took its rise. Or, on the other hand, it may 
have sprung up independently in many different tribes as 
a product of certain general laws of intellectual and social 
development common to all races of men who are descended - 

from the same stock. However, these two solutions of the 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 15 

problem are not mutually exclusive; for totemism may 
have arisen independently in a number of tribes and have 
spread from them to others. There is some indication of 
such a diffusion of totemism from tribe to tribe on the 
North-West coast of America. But a glance at a totemic 

map of the world may convince us of the difficulty of 
accounting for the spread of totemism on the theory of a 
single origin. Such a theory might have been plausible 
enough if the totemic peoples had been congregated together 

. in the huge compact mass of land which under the names 

of Europe, Asia, and Africa makes up the greater part 

of the habitable globe. But on the contrary the tribes 
which practise totemism are scattered far apart from each 
other over that portion of the world in which the ocean 
greatly predominates in area over the land. Seas which to 

the savage might well seem boundless and impassable roll 
between the totemic peoples of Australia, India, Africa, and 
America. What communication was possible, for instance, 
between the savage aborigines of Southern India and the 
savage aborigines of North-Eastern America, between the 
Dravidians and the Iroquois? or again between the tribes 

of New South Wales and the tribes of Southern Africa, 
between the Kamilaroi and the Herero? So far as the 
systems of totemism and kinship among these widely 
sundered peoples agree with each other, it seems easier to 
explain their agreement, on the theory of independent origin, 

as the result of similar minds acting alike to meet the 
‘pressure of similar needs. And the immense seas which why 
divide the totemic tribes from each other may suggest a )7y 8° 
reason why savagery in general and totemism in particular lingered 
have lingered so long in this portion of the world. The "8° 
physical barriers which divide mankind, by preventing the Oceanic 
free interchange of ideas, are so many impediments to ie 
intellectual and moral progress, so many clogs on the world. 
advance of civilisation. We need not wonder, therefore, 

that savagery has kept its seat longest in the Southern Heni- 
sphere and in the New World, which may be called the 
Oceanic regions of the globe; while on the contrary 
civilisation had its earliest homes in the great continental 

area of Europe, Asia, and North Africa, where primitive 

The 
history of 
totemism is 
unknown ; 
but though 
it has only 
been 
discovered 
in modern 
times it is 
probably 
very 
ancient. 

Yet ancient 
as totemism 
appears 

to be, 

there is no 
reason to 

16 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

men, as yet unable to battle with the ocean, could com- 
municate freely with each other by land. 

The history of totemism is unknown. Our earliest 
notices of it date only from the seventeenth century and 
consist of a few scanty references in the reports written from 
North America by Jesuit missionaries among the Indians. 
The eighteenth century added but little to our information 
on the subject. It was not until the great scientific Renais- 
sance of the nineteenth century that men awoke to the need 

— 

of studying savagery, and among the additions which the . 

new study made to knowledge not the least important were 
the discoveries of totemism, exogamy, and the classificatory 
system of relationship. The discoveries of totemism and 
exogamy were the work above all of the Scotchman 
J. F. McLennan ; the discovery of the classificatory system 
of relationship was due to the American L. H. Morgan 
alone. Unfortunately neither ofthese great students appreci- 
ated the work of the other, and they engaged in bitter and 
barren controversy over it. We who profit by their genius 
and labours can now sce how the work of each fits into and 
supplements that of the other. The history of the classifi- 
catory system, like that of totemism, is quite unknown ; 
civilised men seem to have had no inkling of its existence 
till the nineteenth century.' Yet we cannot doubt that 
despite the shortness of their historical record both totemism 
and the classificatory system of relationship are exceedingly 

ancient. Of the two it is probable that totemism is much 
the older. For the classificatory system, as we shall see 
presently, 

is founded_on exogamy, and there are good 
grounds for thinking that exogamy is later than totemism? 

A strong argument in favour of the antiquity both of 

totemism and of the classificatory system is their occurrence. 

among some of the most savage and least progressive races 
of men; for as these rude tribes cannot have borrowed the 

1 The earliest notice of it appears to 
be the one which the Indian agent, 
Major John Dougherty, supplied to 
Major Long’s exploring expedition in 
1819 or 1820. See above, vol. iii. 
pp. 11459. But this account was re- 
stricted to the Omaha form of the 
system ; Dougherty apparently did not 

* 

suspect that the system was widely 
spread among the Indian tribes, much 
less that it is diffused over a great part 
of the world. That discovery was re- 
served for L. H. Morgan. 

2 See above. pp. 8-10, and below, 
pp. 112 sq." 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 17 

institutions from more civilised peoples, we are obliged: to suppose 
conclude that they evolved them at a level jof culture even ‘tits 
lower than that at which we find them. Yet it would absolutely 
doubtless" be a mistake to imagine that even totemism is PumNY’ 
a product of absolutely primitive man. As I have pointed 

out elsewhere,’ all existing savages are probably far indeed 
removed from the condition in which our remote ancestors 

were when they ceased to be bestial and began to be human. 

The: embryonic age of humanity lies many thousands, 
perhaps millions, of years behind us, and no means of 
research at present known to us hold out the least prospect 

that we shall ever be able to fill up this enormous gap in 

the historical record. It is, therefore, only in a relative 

" sense, by comparison with civilised men, that we may 
legitimately describe any living race of ‘savages as primitive. 

If we could compare these primitive savages with their 
-oldest human ancestors we should find no doubt that in 

the interval the progress of intelligence, morality, and the 

arts of life has been prodigious ; indeed in all these respects 

the chasm which divides the modern from the ancient savage 

may very well be much deeper and wider than that which 
divides the lowest modern savage from a Shakespeare or a 
Newton. Hence, even if we could carry ourselves back in 

time to the very beginnings of totemism, there is no reason 

to suppose that we should find its authors to be truly 
primaeval men. The cradle of totemism_was not, so far as 

we can conjecture, the cradle of humanity, 

At the present time the institution of totemism exists at the 
and flourishes among races at very different levels of culture. Fresent 
In Australia it is practised by the rudest of savages, who totemism 
subsist *purely by hunting and by the wild fruits of the bese 
earth, and who have never learned to till the ground or to races 
domesticate any animal but the dog. In Torres Straits, 5.0°%, 

» different 

New Guinea, Melanesia, and Polynesia the totemic tribes eS of 
live chiefly by agriculture or horticulture. In North America ree 

some maintained themselves almost wholly by the chase bunting 
> * * and fishing 
or by fishing; many others eked out their subsistence by tribes up 
cultivating the soil; and some, such as the Pueblo Indians, pees 
were and are husbandmen pure and simple. In Africa commercial, 
1 The Scope of Social Anthropology (London, 1908), pp. 7 599. 
VOL. IV Cc 

18 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

and in- certain totemic tribes, such as the Herero, the Bahima, and 
paid some of the Banyoro, are purely pastoral, living on the 
products of their flocks and herds with very little admixture 
of vegetable food. Others unite the occupations of the 
herdsman and the farmer, or live chiefly, like the Baganda, 
on the fruits of the ground which they cultivate. In India 
the range of occupations followed by totemic tribes or castes 
is still greater ; for it extends from hunting and the herding 
of cattle to agriculture, commerce, and the mechanical arts, 
such as weaving, leather-making, stone-cutting, and so forth. 
From this we may gather that, while totemism no doubt 
» originated in the purely hunting Stage of society, there is 
nothing in the institution itself incompatible with the 
pastoral, agricultural, even the commercial and industrial 
modes of life, since in point of fact it remains to this day 
in vogue among hunters, fishers, farmers, traders, weavers, 
leather-makers, and stone-masons, not to mention the less 
reputable professions of quackery, fortune-telling, and robbery. 
In some A remarkable feature in the social system of some totemic | 
tee tribes is an elementary division of labour between the clans 
there is which together compose the tribe. Each clan is believed 
ay avon to possess a magical control over its totem, and this magical 
of labour power it is bound to exercise for the good of the community. 
ie ee As totems most commonly consist of edible animals and 
ie plants, the ceremonies performed by the totemic clans often, 
being | if not generally, aim at multiplying these animals and plants 
maser in order that they may be eaten by the people; in other 
economic. words, the purpose of the ceremonies is to ensure a supply 
ally barren. of food for the tribe. Not, however, that they are limited 
to this function. Other ceremonies are performed to make 
the rain to fall, the sun to shine, and the wind to blow. 
In short the various totemic clans perform their magical 
rites and chant their spells for the purpose of regulat- 
ing the course of nature and accommodating it to the 
needs of man. Thus a totemic tribe organised on these \f 
principles may be described as a co-operative supply associa- 
tion composed of groups of magicians, each group charged 
with the management of a particular department of nature. 
Communities of this sort are best known to us among the 
tribes of Central Australia, but they have probably existed 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 19 

in a more or less developed form wherever totemism has 
flourished.!. The principle on which they dre implicitly based 
is the division of labour, a sound economic principle which 
properly applied cannot fail to be fruitful of good results ; 
but misapplied by totemism to magic it is necessarily barren. 
It is true that in Uganda, that remarkable African kingdom 
where the Bantu race has touched its high-water level of 
culture, the totemic clans have made some progress towards 
a system of hereditary professional castes or occupations 
based on a division of economic and fruitful labour between 
them.? But we have only to examine the tasks assigned to 
the various Baganda clans to perceive that these tasks 
have nothing to do with their totems. For example, the 
members of one clan have been from time immemorial 
hunters of elephants, But their totem is not the elephant, 
it is the reed-buck.2 The members of another clan have 
been, father and son, smiths and workers of iron for genera- 
tions. But their totem is not iron, it is a tailless cow. The 
hereditary duty of another clan is to make bark-cloths for 
the king. But their totem is not bark-cloth, it is the otter.’ 
And so with the rest. Thus the superficial resemblance 
which the totemic system of the Baganda presents to a true 
economic division of labour is in fact deceptive ; the division 
of labour indeed exists but it is not totemic. 

But if totemism as such has not fostered economic Theory 
progress directly, it may have done so indirectly. In fact ae 
it might perhaps be argued that accidentally totemism has have led 
led the way to agriculture and the domestication of animals, paris % 
possibly even to the use of the metals. Its claims to these ture, the 
great discoveries and inventions are indeed very slender, (ome! 
but perhaps they are not quite beneath notice. In regard animals, 
to agriculture I have already pointed out how the magical nae 

ceremonies performed by. the Grass-seed clan of the Kaitish to the use 
. : . . . 6 of the 
might easily lead to a rational cultivation of grass.° The metals. 

Kaitish, like all the aborigines of Australia, are in their 4 rational 

native state totally ignorant of the simple truth that a seed System of 
.. agriculture 

planted in the ground will grow and multiply. Hence it may pos- 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 104-138. * Above, vol. ii. p. 497. 
2 See above, vol. ii. p. 505. 5 Above, vol. ii. p. 481. 
3 Above, vol. ii, p. 496. 6 See above, vol. i: pp, 214-218. 

sibly have 
originated 
in magical 
ceremonies 
intended 
to make 
seeds grow. 

Totemism 
may per- 
haps have 
led men to 
tame and 
breed their 
totemic 
animals, 
and so 

20 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

has never occurred to them to sow seed in order to obtain 
acrop. But though they do not adopt this rational mode 
of accomplishing their end, they have recourse to many 
irrational and absurd ceremonies for making the grass to 
grow and bear seed. Amongst other things the headman of 
the Grass-seed clan takes a quantity of grass-seed in his 
mouth and blows the seeds about in all directions. So far 
as the Grass-seed man’s mind is concerned, this ceremony of 
blowing seeds about is precisely on a level with the ceremony 
of pouring his own blood on stones, which a man of the 
kangaroo totem performs with great solemnity for the 
purpose of multiplying kangaroos. But in the eyes of 
nature and in our eyes the two ceremonies have very 
different values. We know that we may pour our blood on 
stones till we die without producing a single kangaroo from 
the stones; but we also know that if we blow seeds about 
in the air some of them are very likely to sink into the 
ground, germinate, and bear fruit after their kind. Even 
the savage might in time learn to perceive that though 
grass certainly springs from the ground where the Grass- 
seed man blew the seed about, no kangaroos ever spring 
from the stones which have been fertilised with the blood 
of a Kangaroo man; and if this simple truth had once 
firmly impressed itself on a blank page of his mind, the 
Grass-seed man might continue to scatter grass-seed with 
very good effect long after the Kangaroo man had ceased to 
bedabble rocks with his gore in the vain expectation of 
producing a crop of kangaroos. Thus with the advance of 
knowledge the magic of the Grass-seed man would rise in 
public esteem, while that of the Kangaroo man would fall into 
disrepute. ! From such humble beginnings a rational system 
of agriculture might in the course of ages be developed. 

On the other hand it is possible that people who have 
animals for their totems may sometimes accidentally resort 
to more. effective modes of multiplying them than pouring 
blood on stones. They may in fact capture and tame the 
animals and breed them in captivity. Totemism may thus 
have led to the domestication of cattle.’ Unfortunately 

1 The suggestion that totemism may of animals and plants was fist, so far. 
perhaps have led to the domestication as I know, put forward by me in 

SECT, I 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 21 

some of the principal totemic areas of the world, such as may have 
Australia, Melanesia, and North America, have been very pai 
scantily furnished by nature with useful animals which are domestica. 
capable of domestication. In Australia the only animal (7% 
which the aborigines commonly succeeded in domesticating Tame 
was the dog, and the wild dog is a totem in many tribes.’ ih “er 
But there is nothing to shew or to suggest that the cea Tomes 
domestication of the dog is due to the exertions of Wild Sits. 
Dog men. It is true that ceremonies for the multiplication 

of wild dogs were performed by people who had wild dogs 

for their totems, but these ceremonies appear to have been 

but little calculated to produce the desired result: at the 

best they were characterised by absurdity and at the worst 

by obscenity.” Similarly in the western islands of Torres 

Straits there was a Dog clan, the members of which were 
supposed to understand the habits of dogs and to exercise 

special control over them ;* but in what these endowments 
consisted does not appear, and there is nothing to indicate 

that they included the art of taming and breeding the 
animals. 

Again, we hear of an Australian medicine-man who Tame 
had lace-lizards for his personal totem or guardian spirit makesand 
and who accordingly kept a tame lizard; and we read of Australia. 
another medicine-man who had a tame brown snake for his 
familiar.* Both snakes and lizards of many kinds are 
common totems of Australian clans;° both animals are 
eaten, and ceremonies are performed for the multiplication 
of snakes ;° but the natives seem never to have thought of 
keeping and breeding them for food. One cause which may 
have operated to prevent such an idea from crossing their 
mind? might be sheer ignorance of the way in which 

animals are propagated; for ignorant as many of the 

Totemism (see above, vol. i. p. 87). 
It has since been developed by Dr. F. 
B. Jevons (Jntroduction to the History of 
Religion, London, 1896, pp. 113 s9q., 
210 sgg.) and M. Salomon Reinach 
(Cultes, Mythes et Religion, i. Paris, 
1905, pp. 86 599.). 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Northern 
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 768. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 209, 359 57. 
That the obscene ceremony was in- 

tended to multiply dogs is expressly 
affirmed ; that the absurd one was so 
designed is not expressly affirmed but 
is highly probable. 

3 See above, vol. ii. p. 9. 

4 Above, vol. i. p. 497. 

5 Spencer and Gillen, Vorthern 
Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 77° sq. 

6 See above, vol. i. pp. 222 sgq.» 
359 59. 

Tame 
dogs in 
North 
America. 

Tame 
cattle in 
Africa, 
especially 
among the 
Bantu 
peoples. 

22 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

Australian tribes are of the mechanism of propagation in 
the human species they could hardly understand it better 
in the lower animals. But the childish improvidence of 
these low savages might suffice, without any deeper cause, 
to exclude from their thoughts the notion of rearing animals 
and cultivating plants for food. A race which has never, so 
far as appears, laid up stores of food in a time of plenty to 
serve as a resource in a time of dearth was not likely to 
provide for a comparatively distant future by the domestica- 
tion of animals and the cultivation of plants, two processes , 
which require not only foresight but self-abnegation in those 
who practise them, since it is necessary to sacrifice an 
immediate gain, whether in the shape of seed or of breeding 
animals, for the sake of a remoter profit in the future. Of 
that foresight and that self-abnegation savages at the level 
of the Australian aborigines appear to be incapable. 

In North America, as in Australia, the only animal 
which the aborigines before the coming of the whites 
regularly tamed was the dog. The animal was occasionally 
one of their totems; and the annual burnt-sacrifice of 
a white dog at the New Year was the most solemn 
religious rite of the Iroquois.?_ But the sacrifice had nothing 
to do with totemism, for the dog was not an Iroquois 
totem, and the animal appears to have played but an 
insignificant part in the life and religious beliefs of the 
American Indians. They sometimes ate dog’s flesh at a 
banquet, but they reared the animals only for the purpose 
of the chase.® The enormous herds of buffaloes which 
roamed the great prairies furnished the wandering Indian 
tribes with a great part of their subsistence, but the animal 
was never tathed by them. . 

In Africa nature was far more bounteous to man than 
in the arid steppes of Australia or even in the plains and 
forests of North America. Besides the profusion of vege- 
table food with which she spread a table for him in the 
wilderness, she provided him with an abundant supply of 

1 For some examples see vol. iii. 3 Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle 
Pp. 44, 78, 79. France, v. 1763 Th. Waitz, Anthro- 
2L. H. Morgan, League of the pologie der Naturvilker, iii, (Leipsic, 

Jroguois (Rochester, 1851), pp. 207 1862) p. 87. 
5g., 215 599. 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 23 

animals capable of being broken in to his service, nor did he 
fail to take advantage of his opportunities. The Bantu 
peoples are pre-eminently breeders of cattle; with many 
of them the care of their herds is an absorbing pursuit and 
they lavish their affection on the animals, Accordingly 
some totemic tribes in Africa, such as the Herero, Wahehe, 
Bahima, and Banyoro, are mainly or exclusively herdsmen, 
and their totemic taboos refer in great measure to the 
different kinds or the different parts of their cattle! But 
these pastoral peoples appear to have owned their herds from 
time immemorial, and the mode in which their forefathers 
acquired them is totally forgotten. At least I do not 
remember to have met with any tradition to the effect that 
a totemic regard for wild cattle was the motive which led 
them to capture and domesticate the ancestors of their 
present herds. Be that as it may, we can hardly doubt that 
the extraordinary richness of the African fauna and flora, 
as contrasted with the comparative meagreness of animal and 
plant life in Australia and North America, has been one 
of the chief factors in raising some of the totemic tribes 
of Africa to a higher level of culture, both material and 
political, than was ever reached by the Australian aborigines 
or the North American Indians. In these respects totemic 
society touched its highest points in the despotic kingdoms 
of Ashantee, Dahomey, and Uganda. 

When we turn to the useful metals the advantage is The 
again found to be with the natives of Africa as compared ™™'* 
with their totemic brethren of Australia and North America. 
The Australian aborigines knew nothing of. the metals; the Copper 
North American Indians were indeed acquainted with ee 
coppet, which occurs abundantly in a virgin state about 
Lake Superior and in some parts of North-West America, 
but they made little use of it except for ornament, unless 
we reckon among its uses the employment of large copper 
plates or shields as a species ofecurrency.? In Africa on 
the other hand iron has been worked by the natives both 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 358, 362 d¢opper in Alaska compare W. H. 
5g.) 404 59., 516 599., 536. Dall, Alaska and its Resources 
2 See above, vol. iii. pp. 48, 262, (London, 1870), p. 477- 
with the note on p, 263. As to 

Tron in 
Africa and 
India. 

Gold and 
silver in 

India. 

If totemism 
bas done 
little 

to foster 
economic 
progress, 
it has done 
something 
to stimu- 
late art. 

24 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

cf the negro and of the Bantu stock time out of mind ;? 
indeed a competent authority has lately argued that tropical 
Africa is the land trom which the art of working the metal 
spread in the course of ages to Egypt, Western Asia, and 
Europe.” Iron is the totem of a Bechuana tribe; but far 
from being smiths by profession the members of the 
tribe are actually forbidden to work the metal.* Further, 
we have seen that among the Baganda the hereditary 
smiths belong to a clan which has for its totem not iron 
but a tailless cow,’ an animal of which the relation to 
smithcraft is far from obvious. In India iron is a totem of 
an Oraon clan, and members of the clan may never touch 
iron with their tongue or lips.© Again, gold and silver 
are common totems in India; members of a Gold 
clan are sometimes forbidden to wear certain golden 
ornaments, and similarly members of a Silver clan are 
sometimes forbidden to, wear certain silver ornaments. 
These things do not suggest that mankind is in any way 
indebted to totemism for the discovery either of the 
useful or of the precious metals. Indeed they rather 
indicate a religious awe, approaching to positive aversion, 
for iron, gold, and silver; and such a feeling is hardly 
compatible with the business of an ironsmith, a goldsmith, 
or a silversmith. 

On the whole, then, there is little to shew that totemism 
has contributed anything to the economic progress of man- 
kind. Still from the nature of the case evidence would be 
hard to obtain, and from its absence we cannot safely con- 
clude that the institution has been as economically barren as 
it seems to be. With the possible exception of the Battas 
of Sumatra, no totemic people has ever independently 
invented a system of writing,’ and without written documents 

1 Th. Waitz, Anthropologie der 245, 270, 271, 272, 277) 280, 295, 

Naturvélker, ii. (Leipsic, 1860) pp. 
97 599-5 385 sq. 

2 F. von Luschan, ‘ Eisentechnik 
in Afrika,” Zectschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
xli, (1909) pp. 22 sgq. 

3 See above, vol. ii. p. 374. 

# See above, vol. ii. p. 497. 

5 See above, vol. ii. p. 289. 

§ See above, vol. ii. pp. 231, 232, 

296. 

7 It is true that a Cherokee Indian 
invented an alphabet or syllabary of 
his native language, but he naturally 
borrowed the idea of it from the whites, 
See above, vol. iii. p. 184. As to the 
written language of the Battas, see 
above, vol. ii. p. 185. The origin of 
their alphabet appears to be unknown, 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 25 

what accurate records could there be of events so remote in 

the past as the discovery of the metals, the domestication of 
animals, and the invention of agriculture? But while totem- 

ism has not demonstrably enlarged the material resources 

or increased the wealth of its votaries, it seems unquestion- 

ably to have done something to stir in them a sense of art 

and to improve the manual dexterity which is requisite to 
embody artistic ideals. If it was not the mother, it has been 

the foster-mother of painting and sculpture. The rude draw- The 
ings on the ground, in which the natives of Central Australia eae 
depict with a few simple colours their totems and the scenes drawings 
of their native land,’ may be said to represent the germ of eee 
that long development which under happier skies blossomed Australians, 
out into the frescoes of. Michael Angelo, the cartoons of 
Raphael, the glowing canvasses of Titian, and the unearthly 
splendours of Turner’s divine creations. And among these 

same primitive savages totemism has suggested a beginning 

of plastic as well as of pictorial art ; for in the magical cere- 
monies which they perform for the multiplication or the 
control of their totems they occasionally fashion great images 

of the totemic animals, sometimes constructing out of boughs 

the effigy of a witchetty grub in its chrysalis state, sometimes 
moulding a long tortuous mound of wet sand into the like- 

ness of a wriggling water-snake.? Now it is to be observed 

that the motive ‘which leads the Australian aborigines to 
represent their totems in pictorial or in plastic forms is not a 
purely aesthetic one; it is not a delight in art for art’s sake. 

Their aim is thoroughly practical; it is either to multiply 
magically the creatures that they may be eaten, or to repress 

them magically that they may not harm their votaries. In 
short®in all such cases art is merely the handmaid of 
magic; it is employed as an instrument by the totemic 
magicians to ensure a supply of food or to accomplish some 

other desirable object. Thus in Australia as in many other Magic the 

parts of the world magic may with some show of reason bias 
be called the nursing mother of art. of art. 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 106, 223. Afpthes, et Religions, i. (Paris, 1905) 
On the relation of such magical pictures pp. 125 sgg. 
to the origin of art, see M. Salomon 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 106, 
Reinach, “ L’Art et la Magie,” Cudtes, 144 sg. 

The 
Hebrew 
prohibition 
of images 
was 
probably 
directed 
against 
their use 
in magic. 

Totemic 
art reached 
its highest 
develop- 
ment 
among the 
Indians 

26 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

We may suspect that the use which magicians make 
of images in order to compel the beings represented by 
them, whether animals, or men, or gods, to work their 
will, was the real practice which the Hebrew legislator 
had in view when he penned the commandment: “ Thou 
shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any 
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is 
in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the 
earth: thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor 
serve them.”! The theory of Renan, that this command- 
ment had no deeper foundation than the reluctance which a 
tribe of nomadic herdsmen would naturally feel to encumber 
themselves and their beasts with a useless load of images on 
their wanderings,? seems scarcely a sufficient explanation. 
Why solemnly forbid men to do what a simple regard for 
their own personal comfort and ¢onvenience would of itself 
prevent them from doing? On the other hand magicians 
of old really believed that by their magical images, their 
ceremonies and incantations, they could compel the gods 
to obey them; and in ancient Egypt, for example, this 
belief did not remain a mere theological dogma, it was 
logically carried out in practice for the purpose of wringing 
from a deity boons which he would only stand and deliver 
on compulsion.® These black arts of their powerful 
neighbours were doubtless familiar to the Hebrews, and 
may have found many imitators among them. But to 
deeply religious minds, imbued with a profound sense of 
the divine majesty and goodness, these attempts to take 
heaven by storm must have appeared the rankest blasphemy 
and impiety ; we need not wonder therefore that a severe 
prohibition of all such nefarious practices should have found 
a prominent place in the earliest Hebrew code. 

If totemic art exists at its lowest stage among the 
aborigines of Australia it may be said to have attained 
its highest development among the Indians of North-West 
America, notably in the gigantic carved and painted totem- 
posts, of which specimens may be seen in our museums and 

1 Exodus, xx. 4 5g. 3 For some evidence, see The Golden 
2 E. Renan, Héstotre du peuple Bough, Second Edition, i, 16 sg., 66 
a@’[sraél, i. 45 59. 59-1 443-446. 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 27 

private collections. Among these Indian¢ the Haidas of of North. 
the Queen Charlotte Islands appear to hav¢ surpassed their eee 
fellows both in the profusion and in the skill with which especially 
they depicted their totems on their houses and furniture, their 777078, ""* 
tools and wearing apparel, as well as on their own persons.* 

No noble family of the Middle Ages perhaps ever blazoned 

its crest more freely on its castles, its equipages, and its 
liveries than these savages blazoned their totemic animals 

in crude colours and grotesque forms on their multifarious 
belongings. Yet for all this gay fantastic display it would 

seem that the spirit which first animated totemic art was 

dead among the Haidas. There is no hint that their 
blazonry served any other purpose than that of decoration, 

or at most of family or legendary history. So far as we 

know, these Indians never turned totemic art to the account 

of totemic magic, never carved or painted images of their 
totems for the purpose of multiplying or controlling the 
creatures in the interest of man. 

On the growth of religion the influence exercised by Influenceof 
totemism appears in some societies to have been consider- oe 
able, but in others, perhaps in most, to have been insignificant. growth of 
In the first place, as I have already observed, pure totemism "!8!o"- 
is not in itself a religion at all; for the totems as such are not totemism 
worshipped, they are in no sense deities, they are not pro- is nota 

eae “ * religion ; 
pitiated with prayer and sacrifice. To speak therefore of a in its 
worship of totems pure and simple, as some writers do, is to feat is 
betray a serious misapprehension of the facts. Amongst the being ae 
aborigines of Australia, who have totemism in its oldest and neuen 
purest form, there are indeed some faint approaches to a and ‘i 
propitiation, and hence to a worship of the totems.? But eal 
the précess of evolution has been cut short by the advent of terms 
the whites, and the tendency towards a totemic religion in de 4 
Australia accordingly remains abortive. Religion always 4 species 
implies an inequality between the worshippers and the xe hice 
worshipped ; it involves an acknowledgment, whether tacit or 
express, of inferiority on the part of the worshippers ; they 
look up to the objects of their worship as to a superior order 
of beings, whose favour they woo and whose anger they 
deprecate. But in pure totemism, as I have already pointed 

1 See above, vol. iii, pp. 288 sg. 2 See above, vol. i, pp. 144 5g. 

28 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

out, no such inequality exists. On the whole the attitude 
of a man to his totem is that of a man to his peers; the 
relationship between them is one of brotherhood rather than 
of homage on the man’s side and of suzerainty on the 
side of the totem. In short, pure totemism is essentially 
democratic ; it is, so to say, a treaty of alliance and friend- 
ship concluded on equal terms between a clan and a species 
of animals or things; the allies respect but do not adore each 
other. Accordingly the institution flourishes best in demo- 
_ cratic communities, where the attitude of men to their 
totems reflects that of men to their fellows. It may survive, 
indeed, even under despotic governments, such as Ashantee, 
Dahomey, and Uganda, but it is not at home under them. 

“It breathes freely, so to say, only in the desert. 
In practice, And as in practice the institution of totemism is most 
rotemism compatible with democracy, not despotism, so in theory it is 

allied with most compatible with magic, not religion; since the mental 
demorracy> attitude of the magician towards the natural and super- 
theory with natural beings about him is that of a freeman to his equals, 
magi: not that of a subject or a slave to his lords and masters. 
Hence three characteristic institutions of totemic society, of 
which aboriginal Australian society may be taken as a type, 
are totemism, democracy, and magic. The decay of any 
one of these three institutions seems to involve the decay of 
Primitive, the other two. Primitive society advances simultaneously 
sevarees from democracy and magic towards despotism and religion, 
simultane- and just in proportion as despotism and religion wax, so 
pac eta totemism wanes. Though to many civilised men the 

od ate personal and intellectual freedom implied by democracy 
ismand and magic may seem preferable to the personal and in- 

Sa tars tellectual subordination implied by despotism and religion, 
advantages and though they may accordingly incline to regard the 
. ‘Gespot- exchange of the former for the latter as rather a retro- 
discipline gression than an advance, yet a broad view of history will 
yee probably satisfy us that both despotism and religion have 
tion, been necessary stages in the education of humanity and that 
for analogous reasons. Men are not born equal and never 
can be made so; a political constitition which professes 
their natural equality is a sham. Subordination of some 

kind is essential to the very existence of society; there 

oa 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 29 

must be a government of some kind, the inferior must obey 
the superior; and the best form of goverhment is that in 
which folly and weakness are subordinated to wisdom and 
strength. Despotism seldom or never fully satisfies these 
conditions and therefore it is seldom or never a really good 
government. But it fosters the essential habit of subordina- 
tion to authority, of obedience to the laws ; the laws may be 
bad, but any law is better than none, the worst government 
is infinitely preferable to anarchy. Thus at an early period 
of social evolution a certain measure of despotism may serve 
as a wholesome discipline by training men to submit their 
personal passions and interests to those of another, even 
though that other be a tyrant; for a habit of submission and 
of self-sacrifice, once formed, may more easily be diverted 
from an ignoble to a noble object than a nature un- 
accustomed to brook restraints of any kind can be broken 
in to make those concessions without which human society 
cannot hold together. Reluctant submission to a bad 
government will readily be exchanged for willing submission 
to a good’ one; but he who cannot subordinate his own 
wishes to the wishes of his fellows cannot live either under a 
good government or under a bad: he is an enemy to society 
and deserves to be exterminated by it. 

Reasons like those which justify the existence of despot- Temporary 
ism at a certain point in the history of man’s relations to his ice 
fellows may be adduced to justify the existence of religion ' asa recog- 
at a certain point in the history of man’s relations to the Mon 
world at large. The imperious attitude of the magician insignif- 
towards nature is merely a result of his gross ignorance Sees 
both of it and of himself; he knows neither the immeasur- 
able power of nature nor his own relative weakness. When 
at last he gets an inkling of the truth, his attitude necessarily 
changes ; his crest droops, he ceases to be a magician and 
becomes a priest. Magic has given place to religion. The 
change marks a real intellectual and moral advance, since it 
rests on a recognition, tardy and incomplete though it be, 
of a great truth, to wit, the insignificance of man’s place in 
the universe. The mighty beings whom the magician had 

1 By religion I here mean not an the abstract, but merely religion as it 
ideal religion as it may be conceived in _ has actually existed in history. 

Develop- 
ment of 
totemism 
into re- 
ligion in 
Melanesia 
and 
Polynesia. 

30 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT: I 

treated with lordly disdain the priest adores with the deepest 
humiliation. Thus the intellectual attitude fostered by 
religion is one of submission to higher powers and is 
analogous to the political attitude of obedience to an absolute 
ruler which is fostered by despotism. The two great changes, 
therefore, from democracy to despotism and from magic to 
religion, naturally proceed side by side in the same society. 
The conclusions thus reached on general grounds are 
confirmed by an examination of totemic society in different 
parts of the world. At its lowest level in Australia totemic 
society is democratical and magical. At higher levels in 
Melanesia, Polynesia, America, and Africa it becomes more 
and more monarchical and religious, till it culminates in the 
absolute monarchies and bloody religious ritual of Ashantee, 
Dahomey, and Uganda. In India its natural development 
has been in large measure checked and obscured by contact 
with races which are not totemic; hence it is hardly safe to 
take Dravidian totemism into account in an attempt to 
arrange the totemic societies of the world in a series 
corresponding to their natural order of evolution. If now 
we look about for a stage of religion which may reasonably 
be regarded as evolved from totemism we shall perhaps find 
it most clearly marked in Melanesia and Polynesia, where 
answering to the religious evolution of gods there has been 
a political evolution of chiefs. The family and village gods 
of Samoa embodied in the shape of animals, plants, and 
other species of natural objects are most probably nothing 
but somewhat developed totems, which are on the point of 
sloughing off their old shapes and developing into anthro- 
pomorphic deities... A more advanced phase of the same 
metamorphosis is exhibited by the village gods of Rewa in 
Fiji, who have definitely slipped off their animal envelopes 
but still possess the power of resuming them at pleasure, in 
other words, of transforming themselves back into the birds 
or beasts out of which they have been evolved.? Similarly 
in the island of Yam, between Australia and New Guinea, 
two totemic animals, the hammer-headed shark and the 
crocodile, had blossomed out into heroes named Sigai and 
Maiau, and their animal origin was kept a profound secret 
1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 166 sg. 2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 139 59. 

SECT. I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 31 

from women and uninitiated men, though in their sacred 
shrines the two worshipful beings were still represented by 
the images of a hammer-headed shark and a crocodile 
respectively. To these heroes prayers were put up and 
offerings of food were made, dances were danced, and songs 
sung in their honour. In short, in the island of Yam 
totemism had definitely passed into a rudimentary religion.’ 

In other parts of the world the evolution of religion on In North 
totemic lines is less apparent ; indeed for the most part the ae 
evidence of such an evolution is almost wholly wanting. In very little 
North-West America the Raven hero, who plays a great part Aaa 
in the mythology of the Indian tribes, may very well have ism has 
been originally a raven totem, since the bird is certainly one as ae 
of the chief totems of this region. But apart from this religion. 
instance it might be hard to mention a single North 
American Indian god or hero for whom a totemic pedigree 
could be made out with any high degree of probability. 
Indeed if we except the disputable and disputed figure of 
the Great Spirit, the theology of the American Indians north 
of Mexico is almost as meagre as that of the Australian 
aborigines or, at a higher level of culture, the nomadic 
Semites,? Yet to this general rule there is a significant 
exception. The Pueblo Indians, who unlike all other 
Indian tribes of North America subsist exclusively by 
agriculture and dwell in what may be called fortified towns, 
possess a copious mythology and an elaborate ritual. Thus 
they used to be to the wild Apaches and Navahoes who 
prowled in their neighbourhood what the agricultural 
Semites of the Babylonian cities were to their wandering 
kinsmen the Bedouins of the desert. In both cases we see, 
on the one side the godly well-to-do denizens of walled 
towns leading a settled comfortable life through the cultivation 
of the soil, with a comparatively developed art,.a good 
larder, a well-stocked pantheon, and a regular cycle of 
religious ceremonies ; and on the other side, roving bands of 
lean, hungry, empty-handed barbarians, with little art and 
less religion, who look up from afar with mixed feelings of 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 18-21. Histoire du peuple d’Israél, i. 30 599-5 

2 On the poverty of the theology of 43 sg. 
the nomadic Semites, see E, Renan, 

In Africa 
also 

the links 
between a 
radiment- 
ary totem- 
ism and a 
developed 
pantheon 
are almost 
wholly 
wanting. 
Among 
the Bantu 
tribes the 
principal 
element of 
religion 
appears 

to be the 
worship of 
the dead. 

. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 1 

32° 

disgust, wonder, and envy, at the high-piled masonry of the 
fortresses and at the well-fed burghers pacing the ramparts, 
their portly figures sharply cut against the sky. A vagrant 
life seems to be very unfavourable to the creation of deities, 
But while the Pueblo Indians believe in many gods and 
goddesses and celebrate their pompous rites in harlequin: 
masquerades and solemn processions, there is little evidence 
that these tribal deities and their rituals have been 
evolved out of the totems and totemic ceremonies of the 
clans. 

In Africa also the links which might connect a developed 
pantheon with a rudimentary totemism are almost wholly 
wanting. The theology of the Bantu tribes, especially of 
such of them as have remained in the purely pastoral stage, 
appears generally to be of the most meagre nature; its 
principal element, so far as we can judge from the scanty 
accounts of it which we possess, is the fear or worship 
of dead ancestors, and though these ancestral spirits 
are commonly supposed to manifest themselves to their 
descendants in the shape of snakes of various kinds,’ there 
is no sufficient ground for assuming these snakes to have 
been originally totems.* Of all Bantu tribes the Baganda of 
Central Africa have made the greatest progress in material 
and mental culture, and fortunately we possess a full account 

1 See above, vol. iii. pp. 227 sgg. 
It is true that the Navahoes now have 
a somewhat elaborate religion with 
gods and ceremonies resembling in 
some respects those of the Pueblo 
Indians. But good authorities are of 
opinion that the worship has been at 
least partly borrowed by them from 
more civi ised and settled tribes, See 
Washington Matthews, Mavaho Legends 
(Boston an® Né@w York, 1897), pp. 
33 sgqg. Amongst the Navahoes, as 
amongst so many peoples, religion is 
a reflection of social life, the gods are 
the gigantic shadows cast by men. 
On this subject the observations of 
Dr. Washington Matthews (Navaho 
Legends, p. 33) may be quoted. He 
says: ‘‘The religion of this people 
reflects their social condition. Their 
government is democratic. There is 
no highest chief of the tribe, and all 

their chiefs are men of temporary and 
ill-defined authority, whose power 
depends largely on their personal in- 
fluence, their oratory, and their reputa- 
tion for wisdom. It is difficult for such 
a people to conceive of a Supreme 
God. Their gods, like their men, 
stand much on a level of equality.” 

2 One of the chief documents on 
this subject is Dr. Henry Callaway’s 
Religious System of the Amazulu, Part 
LL., Amatongo, or Ancestor Worship 
as existing among the Amazulu (Natal, 
Capetown, and London, 1869). See 
also J. Shooter, Zhe Aafirs of Natal 
and the Zulu Country (London, 1857), 
pp. 161 sgg.; G. M‘Call Theal, 
Records of South-Eastern Africa, vii. 
(London, 1901) pp. 399 599.3 
Dudley Kidd, 7he Essential Kafir 
(London, 1904), pp. 85-95. 

3 See above, vol. ii. pp. 388 sgq. 

~~ ae co. 

sec FOTEMISM ‘AND EXOGAMY'* +" °33 

both of their totemism and ot their theology derived frém - 
the lips of the best-informed natives by a highly competent 
scientific investigator. Now it is highly significant that not Noneofthe 
one .of the numerous gods and goddesses of the Baganda ey 
pantheon appears to have been developed out of a totem. tohavebeen 
Almost all the Baganda totems are animals or plants, but SvSoPe¢ 
chiefly animals.” But the national Baganda gods (da/ubare) totems. 
are not animals or plants, nor do they exhibit any affinity 

with animals or plants in myth and ritual. The legends 

told of these divine beings represent them as human in 
character ; they marry wives and beget children and act in 

other ways like men and women, though they are supposed 

to be endowed with superhuman powers, One of them, for 
example, named Musoke is the god of the rainbow, thunder, 
lightning, and rain. Another, named Dungu, is the god of 

the chase and aids the huntsman who worships him. 
Another, called Kaumpuli, is the god of plague; and 
‘another, named Kawari, is the god of small-pox. The 
goddess Nagawonya, wife of Musoke, has power over the 

grain and the crops ; and the god Kagera bestows offspring 

on women. Ali the national gods and goddesses had their 
temples, where they received offerings and gave oracles by the 

mouth of inspired mediums, who in their fine frenzy were 
believed to be actually possessed by the deities and to speak 

with their voices. In like manner the spirits of all the dead Baganda 
kings of Uganda were worshipped at their tombs. Each Youn 
king in his lifetime prepared a stately house in which kings. 
his spirit was to reside eternally after death. The house 

was larger and more commodious than any which he 
occupied in life; for what after all are the few short years 
which ke might pass, a living man among the living, to the 
eternity which he must spend among the dead ? Accordingly,” 

like many other people in many countries and in many ages 

of the world, the kings of Uganda took more thought for 

1 The detailed accourt of Baganda a preliminary notice of them, sec his 
totemism which we owe to the re- ‘Further Notes on the Manners and 
searches of the Rev. John Roscoe has Customs of the Baganda,” Journal of 
already been laid before the reader. ‘the Anthropological Institute, xxxii. 
See above, vol. ii. pp. 472 sgg. His (1902) pp. 74 s9¢. 
account of the gods (4a/ubare) of the 
Baganda remains in manuscript. For 2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 477 59. 

VOL. IV D 

The 
Baganda 
worship of 
dead kings 
seems to 
have grown 
out of the 
worship of 
dead com- 
moners, 

It is 
probable 
that many, 
if not all, 
of the great 
national 
Baganda 
gods are 
merely 
dead men 
deified. 

we 

34 SUMMARY ANR CONCLUSION - SECT. I 

the long, long to-morrow than for the brief and fléeting” 
to-day. If they did not lay up for themselves treasure in 
heaven, at least they laid it up in places where they thought 
it would be reasonably safe upon earth, and where they 
hoped to benefit by it when they had shuffled off the burden 
of the body. In the temple-tomb of a Baganda king were 
regularly deposited, not indeed his body, but his lower jaw- 
bong and his navel-string ; and there on a throne, screened 
by a canopy and fenced off from the approach of the vulgar 
by arailing of glittering spears, these mortal relics were laid 
in state, whenever his subjects came to hold an audience with 
their departed monarch. There he communed with them 
through his inspired medium, the priest; and there, sur- 
rounded by his wives and nobles, who dwelt either in the 
tomb or in adjoining houses, he maintained a shadowy court, 
a faint reflection of the regal pomp which had surrounded 
him in life. When his widows died they were replaced by 
women from the same clans, and thus the dead king con- 
tinued to be ministered to and to be consulted as an oracle 
at his tomb from generation to generation.’ 

Now these temple-tombs of the kings of Uganda appear 
to be nothing more than greatly enlarged and glorified 
examples of the! little huts (sasabo) which the Baganda 
regularly erect near the graves of their relatives for the 
accommodation of the ghosts. At these small shrines, some 
two or three feet high by two feet wide, offerings of food, 
clothing, and firewood are made by the survivors, and beer 
is poured on the ground to slake the thirst of the poor souls 
in the grave.” But if the temple-tombs of Baganda kings 
are merely enlarged editions of the ghost-huts of Baganda 
commoners, is it not possible that the temples of some of 
the national Baganda gods (al/ubare) have the same origin? 
in other words, may not some of these national gods be, like 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 469 sgg. 
I have also drawn on the manuscript 
materials of the Rev. J. Roscoe, which 
he has placed at my disposal. Fora 
similar worship of dead kings among 
another Bantu people, the Barotse, see 
below, pp. 306 sg. 

2 From the Rev. J. Roscoe’s papers. 

Compare his article, ‘‘ Further Notes 

on the Manners and Customs of the 
Baganda,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxxii. (1902) p. 76. 
These masabo curiously remind us of 
the mastaba of the ancient Egyptians, 
which were sepulchral chambers built in 
graveyards for the service of the dead. 
See A. Erman, Acoypien und Aegyp- 
tisches Leben im Altertum, pp. 419 599 

sEcT. 1° TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 35 

. the worshipful spirits of departed kings, hothing but dead 
men deified? In point of fact we have the best of evidence 
‘that the great war-god Kibuka, one of the chief deities of 
the Baganda, was once a man of flesh and blood; for his 
mortal remains, consisting of his jawbone, his navel-string, 
and his genital organs, were obtained a few years ago from 
the priest who had carefully buried them when the god’s 
temple was burned by the Mohammedans, and they are now 
preserved in the Ethnological Museum at Cambridge.’ 
When this instance is considered along with the worship 
of the deceased kings, about whose humanity there can be 
no doubt, it becomes highly probable that many, if not all, of 
the great national gods of the Baganda are simply men who 
have been raised to the rank of deities after their death or 
possibly even in their life. The inference is confirmed by 
the tradition that the greatest of all the Baganda gods, 
- Mukasa, was a brother of the war-god Kibuka, and that 
two other powerful deities, Nende and Musoke, were sons of 
Mukasa; for if one of the divine brothers, Mukasa and 
Kibuka, was once a man, as we know him for certain to 
have been, a presumption is raised that the other brother 
and his two sons were originally men also.” In short, it 
would seem that the principal element in the religion of the 
Baganda, as perhaps of all other Bantu tribes, is not 
totemism but the worship of the dead. At the same time 
it is to be remembered that besides the gods of the Baganda 
nation there are gods of the clans, and it is possible that 
some of these clan gods may once have been totems. Yet 
no positive evidence of their totemic origin appears to be 
forthcoming. For example, there is a python god, but he 
is worshipped, not by members of the Python clan, but by 
members of the Heart clan ; which seems to shew that the 
worship of the serpent has originated quite independently of 

1 Rev. J. Roscoe, ‘Kibuka, the 
War God of the Baganda,” A/a, vii. 
(1907) pp. 161-166. Compare above, 
vol. ii. p. 487. 

2 For the relationship of Mukasa 
and Musoke, see the Rev. J. Roscoe, 
‘“*Kibuka, the War God of the 
Baganda,” Jfan, vii. (1907) p. 161, 

where we are told that ‘‘ Kibuka and 
his brother Mukasa are the two priucipal 
gods of the Baganda ; their home was 
on one of the islands of the Lake 
Victoria.” That the two national 
deities Nende and Musoke are tradi- 
tionally said to have been sons of 
Mukasa, I learn from Mr. Roscoe’s 
unpublished papers. 

Again, 
among the 
totemic 
tribes of 
Guinea 
there is 
little to 
shew that 
the gods 
have grown 
out of 
totems. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

36 

totemism.! Hence, as I have. already pointed out,’ the 
example of the Baganda should warn us against the 
assumption that totemism normally and almost necessarily 
develops into a worship of anthropomorphic deities with 
sacred animals and plants for their attributes. In Uganda 
we find both totems and anthropomorphic deities ; but the 
anthropomorphic deities have not, apparently, grown out of 
the totems, they are simply deified dead men. At least, this 
is quite certain for the kings and equally certain for one of 
the greatest of the national gods. 

The true negroes of the coast of Guinea have in like 
manner a system of totemism and a highly developed 
pantheon ; but there is little to shew that the deities of the 
pantheon have been evolved out of totems. Thus among 
the Tshi-speaking negroes of the Gold Coast each town,. 
village, or district has its local spirits or gods, generally 
malignant in character, who appear to be personifications of 
the chief natural features of the neighbourhood, especially 
such as excite the curiosity or awe of man, impress his 
imagination, and threaten his existence. Such are the rivers 
and streams, the hills and valleys, the rocks and the forests, 
the giant trees which fall and crush the passer-by, and not 
least of all the roaring surf and the stormy sea, which 
swamp the frail canoe of the mariner and drown him in the 
depths. The deities of these natural objects are ordinarily 
conceived in human shape, some male, some female, some 
black, some white, and many of gigantic size. Offerings of 
food and drink are made to them; priests and priestesses 
have charge of their worship and sometimes profess to have 
seen the divine beings in person.* Besides these local 
deities, who may be numbered by tens of thousands,’ a few 
general deities are worshipped by whole tribes or groups of 
tribes in common; but they also are imagined to be of 
human shape, and there is nothing to indicate that they 
were formerly totems.’ It is true that some of these Tshi 

4A. B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast (London, 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 500 syg. 

2 Above, vol. ii. p. 504. 

3 A. B. Ellis, Zhe Tsht-speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast (London, 
1887), Pp. 12, 17, 34 599-, 39-78. 

1890), p. 25. 
5 A. B. Ellis, The Tshi-speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 17; 

22-33. 

SECT, I TOTEMISM AND EXOGAM Y 37 

gods and goddesses, whether local or general, have certain 
species of sacred animals or birds associated with them. 
Thus crocodiles are sacred to the river gods Prah and Ahah 
and to the river goddess Katarwiri.! Driver ants, which 
march in armies, are sacred to Tando, the chief god of the 
Ashantees and of the northern Tshi-speaking tribes; and 
these insects may not be molested by their worshippers.’ 
Water-wagtails are sacred to the god Adzi-anim and point 
out to his adorers where to dig in order to find good water, 
of which the deity himself is the local provider* And 
antelopes are sacred to Brahfo, a popular god who dweils in 
a gloomy hollow of the forest near the town of Mankassim ; 
hence no worshipper of Brahfo may harm an antelope or 
eat its flesh* But none of these sacred animals appear 
to be totems. On the other hand it might plausibly be 
held that among the Ewe-speaking tribes of the adjoining 
Slave Coast the local worship of leopards, crocodiles, and 
pythons has been evolved out of totemism, since all three 
of these animals are totems of Ewe clans.> However, it 
is quite possible that the worship has had an independent 
origin. For the most part the gods of the Ewe-speaking 
peoples appear to be either local deities like those of the 
Tshi-speaking tribes, that is, personifications of particular 
natural features of the country, or else general deities, that 
is, personifications of certain great aspects or forces of 
nature, such as the sky, the lightning, the rainbow, the 
sun, the ocean, smail-pox, and the reproductive principle 
in mankind.’ But these deities are to all appearance 
independent of totemism. ; 
On the whole, if we may judge by the accounts which Thus in 

we possess of totemic tribes in Africa and America, we can “iric® and 

America 
hardly help concluding that their religion or at least their totemism 

1A, B. Ellis, Zhe Tsht- speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, pp. 33 65; 
67. 

2 A. B. Ellis, of. cdf. p. 32. 

3 A. B, Ellis, of, cit. p- 40. 

4 A. B. Ellis, of. cit. pp. 55 57-, 64. 

5 See above, vol. ii. pp. 583-587. 

6 A, B. Ellis, Zhe Zwe-speaking 
Peoples of the Slave Coast (London, 

1890), pp. 32 sgy., 63 syg.s 77 Syy- 
Much valuable information as to the 
religion of the Ewe tribes is contained 
in the work of the German missiouary 
J. Spieth, Die Hwe-Stémme (Berlin, 
1906), but totems and totemism are 
not so much as mentioned in it, a 
significant omission which shews how 
small a part the institution plays in the 
religious life of the people. 

38 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

seemsto theology has been little affected by their totemism ; totemic 
pave had animals and plants shew few signs of blossoming out into 

peaprta gods and goddesses; in short, totemism in these regions |' 
on e . . 
growth of has been nearly as barren theologically as economically. 

religion. This conclusion agrees with the result of our study of the 
Australian aborigines, who along with the most fully developed 
system of totemism known to us exhibit only.a few rudi- 
mentary germs of a theology.t 

But if If totemism has apparently done little to foster the y 

yorems™ growth of higher forms of religion, it has probably done 

has done 
litleto much to strengthen the social ties and thereby to serve 

foster thi sore gs 7 
growth of the cause of civilisation, which depends for its progress on 

elginns the cordial co-operation of men in society, on their mutual 
it ha : : , : 
preeus trust and good-will,.and on their readiness to subordinate 

aaiaerenes their personal interests to the interests of the community. A 
co) it men . ° ° . . . 
topether in SOCiety thus united in itself is strong arid may survive; a 

ee society rent by discord and dissension is weak and likely to 
thus served perish either through internal disruption or by the impact of 

hniaey other societies, themselves perhaps individually weaker, yet 
since in the Collectively stronger, because they act as one. The tendency of 

se a totemism to knit men together in social groups is noticed again 
union is and again by the writers who have described the institution 
pee from personal observation. They tell us that persons who have 
disunion is the same totem regard each other as kinsmen and are ready 
weakoss,, to. befriend and stand by one another in difficulty and 

Totemism danger. Indeed the totemic tie is sometimes deemed more \\ 

hte binding than that of blood. A sense of common obligations 
principle of and common responsibility pervades the totem clan. Each 

collective igo a . < 2 

responsi: Member of it is answerable even with his life for the deeds 
kane of every other member; each of them resents and is prompt 
wnic. 

though to avenge a wrong done to his fellows as a wrong déne to 

ab aa himself. In nothing does this solidarity of the clan come 
has been Ut more strikingly than in the law of the blood feud. The 

eater, common rule is that the whole of a clan is responsible for a 
homicide committed by any of its members, and that if the 
manslayer himself is for any reason beyond the reach of 

1 See above, vol. i, pp. 141-153. his article, ‘* Remarks on Totemism,” q 
Professor E, B. Tylor protested long Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
ago against the exaggerated estimate xxviii. (1899) p. 144. With that 

which some writers have formed of the _ protest I entirely agree. 
religious importance of totemism. See 

SECT. I -TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 39 

vengeance, his crime may and should be visited by the clan 
of his victim on any member of the murderer’s clan, even 
though the person to be punished may have had no hand 
whatever in the murder.’ To civilised men it seems unjust 
that the innocent should thus be made to suffer for the 
guilty, and no doubt, if we regard the matter from a purely 
abstract point of view, we must affirm that the infliction of 
vicarious suffering is morally wrong and indefensible; no 
man, we say, and say rightly, ought to be punished except 
for his own act and deed. Yet if we look at the facts of 
life as they are and not as they ought to be, we can hardly 
help concluding that the principle of collective responsibility, 
with its necessary corollary of vicarious suffering, has been 
of the greatest utility, perhaps absolutely essential, to the 
preservation and well-being of society. Nothing else, prob- 
ably, could have availed to keep primitive men together in 
groups large enough to make headway against the opposition 
of hostile communities ; in the struggle for existence a tribe 
which attempted to deal out even-handed justice between 
man and man on the principle of individual responsibility 
would probably have succumbed before a tribe which acted 
as one man on the principle of collective responsibility. 
Before the champions of abstract justice could have ascer- 
tained the facts, laid the blame on the real culprit, and 
punished him as he deserved, they must have run a serious 
risk of being exterminated by their more impetuous and less 
scrupulous neighbours. 

However much, therefore, the principle of collective The 
responsibility may be condemned in theory, there can hardly Principle of 
be a doubt that it has been very useful in practice. If it responsi- ° 
has done great injustice to individuals, it has done great ate 

favours 
service to the community ; the many have benefited by the the growth 
sufferings of a few. Men are far readier to repress wrong- ieee 
doing in others if they think that they themselves stand a 

chance of being punished for it than if they know that the 
punishment will only fall on the actual offender. Thus a 

habit is begotten of regarding all misdemeanours with severe 

— 
end 

{ 

—_— 

1 See, for example, above, vol. iii, stated by Sir George Grey, Journals 
p- 563. The collective responsibility of Tivo Expeditions of Discovery, ii. 
of the family in West Australia is well 239 5g. 

Totemism 
may be 

forgiven its 

“7 
40 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

disapprobation as injuries done to the whole society ; and 
this habit of mind may grow into an instinctive condemna- 
tion and abhorrence of wrong-doing, apart from the selfish 
consideration of any harm which the wrong may possibly 
entail on the person who condemns and abhors it. In 
short, the principle of collective responsibility not only 
checks crime but tends to reform the criminal by fostering a 
disinterested love of virtue and so enabling society to adopt 
in time a standard of justice which approaches more nearly 
to the ideal. . 

So far, therefore, as totemism has drawn,closer the bonds 
which unite men in society it has directly promoted the 

speculative growth of a purer and higher morality. An institution 

errors for 
the sake 
of its 
practical 
good. 

The 
problem 
of the 
origins of 
totemism 
and 
exogamy, 
in the 
absence of 
historical 
records, 

which has done this has deserved well of humanity. Its 
speculative absurdities may be forgiven for the sake of its 
practical good, and in summing up judgment we may 
perhaps pronounce that sentence of acquittal which was 
pronounced long ago on another poor sinner: Remtttuntur 
ez peccata multa, quoniam dilexit multum. 

§ 2. The Origin of Totemism 

Since the institutions of totemism and exogamy are 
found to prevail so widely among mankind, the question of 
their origins has naturally attracted the attention of students, 
and various theories have been put forward to account for 
them. The enquiry is beset with difficulties; for both the 
customs are very foreign to our civilised modes of thinking 
and acting, they have all the appearance of being very 

can only be ancient, and the savage and barbarous peoples who practise 

solved by 
general 
considera- 
tions and 
arguments 
drawn 
from 

them have no accurate record of their origin. Hénce in 
default of positive testimony we are obliged to have recofirse 
to general considerations and to arguments drawn from 
probability. As it is almost certain that both totemism 

probability, ad exogamy must have originated at a yery low level 

Both 
institutions 
originated 

of savagery, the causes which gave rise to them must be 
sought in the conditions of savage life and in the beliefs, 

in savagery prejudices, and superstitions of the savage mind. It is only 

and cannot 

be under- 

within recent years that savagery has been made a subject 

stood with- gf scientific study, and we are still far from understanding it 

“ 

~- a 
, SECT. H THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 41 

fully. But we have learned enough about it to perceive out a long 
the wide interval which separates the thought of the savage ae 
from our own, and accordingly to be distrustful of savage 
rationalistic theories which explain the customs of un- aes 
civilised peoples on the assumption that primitive man custom. 
thinks and acts precisely in the way in which we should 
think and act if we were placed in his circumstances. No 
doubt it is hard for us to put ourselves at the point of view 
of the savage, to strip ourselves, not merely of the opinions 
imprinted on us by education, but also of the innate 
tendencies whigh we have inherited from many generations 
of civilised ancestors, and having thus divested ourselves of 
what has become a part of our nature to consider what we 
should do under conditions of life very different from those 
by which from infancy we have been surrounded. None of 
us can ever do this perfectly ; at the most we can only do 
it approximately. But it cannot be done at all by deductive 
reasoning ; the only hope of success lies in the inductive 
method. df we are to penetrate into the mind of the savage 
and understand its working, we must impartially consider 
the actual beliefs and customs of the lower races, we must 
survey them as widely and study them as minutely as 
possible, and just in so far as we have satisfied these ° 
conditions are we justified in forming and expressing an 
opinion as to how uncivilised man would think and act 
under certain circumstances, what he would be likely to do 
and what he could not possibly think-of doing in such and 
such a situation. Many people, indeed, seem to be unaware 
of the long course of study which must be undertaken, the 
wide range of comparisons which must be drawn, before we 
are fitted to pass a judgment on theories of the origin of 
ancient institutions. They think that anybody may do so 
on the strength of what is called common sense, which 
generally means little more than the personal prejudices of 
the speaker. The problems of totemism and exogamy can 
never be solved by such methods. 

Three different theories of the origin of totemism have The writer 
at different times occurred to me as possible or probable. acenen 
Two of them I have seen reason to abandon; the third [ times pro- 

ounded 
still regard as probably true. I might content myself with tires 

several 
theories of 
totemism, 
two of 
which 

he has 
since 
abandoned. 

It is 
possible 
that both 
totemism 
and exo- 
gamy have 
originated 
in different 
ways 
among 
different 
peoples, 
but it is 
more 
probable 
that each of 
them has 
everywhere 
hada 
similar 
origin. 

42 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. II 

referring the reader to the passages in this and my other 
writings in which these theories have been explained ; but 
it may be well to restate them, if possible, more clearly, 
together with the reasons which have led me to reject two 
of them and to adhere to the third. And in order to allow 
my readers to judge for themselves of the relative value 
of these hypotheses I shall briefly state and discuss a few 
of the principal theories which have been broached by others. 
on the subject, lest, misled by the partiality of an author for 
his own views, I should unwittingly overlook and suppress 
elements of truth which my fellow-workers in this difficult 
branch of knowledge have brought to light. And in like 
manner with regard to exogamy I shall state some of the 
more notable opinions which have been held, giving my 
reasons for agreeing with or dissenting from them, and finally 
indicating what seem to me the most probable conclusions. 
At the outset we shall do well to bear in mind that 
both totemism and exogamy may possibly have originated 
in very different ways among different peoples, and that 
the external resemblances between the institutions in 
different places may accordingly be deceptive. Instances 
of such deception might easily be multiplied in other 
fields of science. Nothing can externally resemble the 
leaves or branches of certain trees more exactly than 
certain insects; yet the things which bear such an extra- 
ordinary resemblance to each other are not even different 
species of the same genus; they belong to totally different 
natural orders, for the one is an animal and the other is 
a plant.’ So it may possibly be both with totemism and 
with exogamy. What we call totemism or exogamy in 
one people may perhaps be quite different in its origin 
and nature from totemism or exogamy in another people. 
This is possible. Yet on the other hand the resemblances 
between all systems of totemism and all systems of exogamy 
are so great and so numerous that the presumption is 
certainly in favour of the view that each of them has 

1A, R. Wallace, Contributions to Sixth Edition (London, 1878), pp. 
the Theory of Natural Selection (Lon- 181 sg.3 A. R. Wallace, Darwinism 
don, 1871), pp. 56 sgg. As to what (London, 1889), pp. 239 sgg.; Zu- 
is called mimicry in insects, see further cyclopaedia Britannica, Ninth Edition, 
Charles Darwin, Zhe Origin of Species, xvi. 341 sg9. 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 43 

everywhere originated in substantially the same way, and 
that therefore a theory which satisfactorily explaias the origin 
of these institutions in any one race will probably explain 
its origin in all races. The burden of proof therefore lies 
on those who contend that there are many different kinds of 
totemism and exogamy rather than on those who hold that 
there is substantially only one of each. In point of fact 
most writers who have set themselves to explain the rise 
of the two institutions appear to have assumed, and in 
my judgment rightly assumed, that the solution of each 
problem is singular. 

With these preliminary cautions we will now take up 
some theories of the origin of totemism. 

The man who more than any other is entitled to rank Herbert 
as the discoverer both of totemism and of exogamy, J. F. Spencers 

theory that 
McLennan, never published any theory of the origin of totemism 

totemism, though he did publish and strongly held a theory ie ety 
of the origin of exogamy. But if he did not himself interpreta- 
speculate on the causes which led to the institution of es 
totemism his remarkable essays on “ The Worship of Animals 
and Plants”’ soon set others speculating on the subject. 
Amongst the first to enter the field was Herbert _ Spencer. 
His view was that totemism originated in a misinterpreta-, 
tion of nicknames. He thought that the imperfections of 
primitive speech prevented savages from clearly distinguish- 
ing between things and their names, and that accordingly 
ancestors who had been nicknamed after animals, plants, 
or other natural objects on the ground of some imaginary 
resemblance to them, were confused in the minds of their 
descendants with the things after which they had been 
named’; hence from revering his human progenitors the 
savage came to revere the species of animals or plants or 
other natural objects with which through an ambiguity of 
speech he had been led to identify them.2 A similar, though 
not identical, explanation of totemism was independently 

t 

1 Published in Zhe Fortnightly 2 This theory was put forward first 

Review for October and November 
1869 and February 1870. The papers 
are reprinted in McLennan’s posthum- 
ous book, Stwdres in Ancient History 
(London, 1896), pp. 491 599. 

and most clearly by Herbert Spencer 
in an.essay entitled ‘The Origin of 
Animal Worship,” which was published 
in Zhe Fortnightly Review for May 
1870. The essay, suggested by J. F. 

Similar 
theory 
proposed 
by Lord 
Avebury. 

The 
objection 
to such 
theories is 
that they 
attribute 
too great 
influence 
to purely 
verbal 
misunder- 
standings, 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. II 

44 

suggested by Lord Avebury. He regards totemism as a 
worship of natural objects, and thinks it may have arisen 
through the practice of naming, first individuals, and then 
their families, after particular animals, plants or other natural 
objects; for from naming themselves thus people might 
gradually come to look upon their namesakes, whether 
animals, plants, or what not, with interest, respect, and awe." 

The fundamental objection to both these theories has 
been already stated.” They attribute to verbal misunder- 
standings far more influence than verbal misunderstandings 
ever seem to have exercised. It is true that names are to 
the savage more substantial and vital things than they are 
to us. Yet even when we have allowed for the difference 
the alleged cause seems totally inadequate to account for 
the actual effects. At the time when, many years ago, these 
theories were propounded, speculation as to the origins of 
religion was unduly biassed by the teaching of a brilliant 
school of philologers, of whom in this country Max Miller 
was the leader. These scholars, starting with a natural and 
excusable partiality for words, discovered in them the 
principal source of mythology, which they imagined to flow 
from the turbid spring! of verbal misapprehension. That 
many blunders and many superstitions have originated in 
this way, it would be vain to deny; but that a great social 
institution such as totemism, spread over a large part of 
the globe, had no deeper root seems very improbable. It 
is true that neither Herbert Spencer nor Lord Avebury 
so far yielded to the seductions of the philological school 

McLennan’s recent papers on ‘The 
Worship of Animals and Plants,” was 
afterwards republished by Spencer in 
his Essays, Scientific, Political, and 
Speculative, vol. iii, Third Edition 
(London, 1878), pp. 101-124. The 
substance of the theory was afterwards 
embodied by the author in his large 
work Zhe Principles of Sociology, vol. 
i. §§ 169-176, 180-183 (pp. 331-346, 
354-359, Third Edition, 1904). 

1 Lord Avebury, Zhe Origin of 
Ciwlisation and the Primitive Con- 
dition of Man, Sixth Edition (Lon- 
don, 1902), pp. 217, 275 sgg. The 

theory was first briefly indicated by 
Lord Avebury (Sir John Lubbock) in 
an Appendix to the Second Edition 
of his Pre-historic Times, published in 
1869. The passage, reprinted in the 
Fifth Edition of that work (London, 
1890, p. 610), runs thus: ‘‘In en- 
deavouring to account for the worship 
of animals, we must remember that 
names are very frequently taken from 
them. The children and followers of a 
man called the Bear or the Lion would 
make that a tribal name. Hence the 
animal itself would be first respected, 
at last worshipped.” 
2 See above, vol. i. p. 87. 

SECT, II THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 45 

as to follow it in all its exaggerations ; both these eminent 
thinkers had too firm a grasp on the realities of life to 
be thus duped by words. Yet we may surmise that their 
views of totemism were unduly tinged by the colours 
of the fashionable mythological theory of the day. These 
colours have long faded. Even the rosy pink of dawn, 
which the leading artist of the school applied with a too 
liberal brush to the face of nature, has mostly weathered 
away; and we are left to contemplate the grim realities of 
savage life in duller, sadder hues. 

A different explanation of totemism was suggested by. a. 
the eminent Dutch scholar G,A. Wilken, who possessed an peciigh ion 
unrivalled acquaintance with the extensive literature in totemism 
which the ethnology of the East Indian Archipelago has a a 
been described by his fellow-countrymen. After giving an doctrine of 
account of the doctrine of the transmigration of human souls eames 
into animal bodies, as that doctrine is held in Indonesia, he of souls. 
proceeds as follows: “Thus we see that amongst the peoples 1 
of the Indian Archipelago the doctrine of the transmigration 
of souls has generally led to an idea of the relationship of the 
man with, or his descent from certain animals, which animals, 
thus raised to the rank of ancestors, are revered just as other 
ancestors are revered. In a certain sense we have here what 
in the science of religion we are accustomed to call totemism. 

The word is, as we know, derived from the North American 
Indians. Every tribe here has, under the name totem, one 
or other animal which is revered as a fetish, after which the 
tribe is named and from which its members trace their 
descent. The Redskin who, for example, recognises the 
wolf as his totem, has also the wolf for his guardian spirit, 
bears its name, and regards himself as related to the whole 
species. What we have found among the peoples of the 
Indian Archipelago answers to this completely. Only they 
have not come to the pitch of naming themselves after the 
animals which they thus revere as their ancestors.” Then 
after quoting Herbert Spencer’s theory of totemism, which 
has already been laid before the reader,’ Wilken adds: 
“Without controverting Spencer’s theory, for which this is 
not the place, we only wish to observe that in our opinion 
1 See above, p. 43. 

46 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. H 

totemism among the North American Indians, or wherever 
it may be found, may have sprung from the transmigration 
of souls in the same way in which we have indicated among « 
the peoples of the Indian Archipelago: the animal in which 
the souls of the dead are thought by preference to be incar- 
nate becomes a kinsman, an ancestor and as such is revered. 
Thus it is not, as Spencer supposes, a ‘ misinterpretation of 
nicknames,’ but the transmigration of souls which forms the 
connecting link between totemism on the one side and the 
worship of the dead on the other, which link, while it has 
dropped out among many peoples, is still for the most part 
clearly observable in the Archipelago.” ? 

It is true This theory of totemism is not, like the theories of 
that the = Herbert Spencer and Lord Avebury, open to the objection 
doctrine P : Y, Op 2) 
oftrans- that the alleged cause appears inadequate to produce the. 
mgma effect. If people really believe the souls of their dead to be + 
various lodged in certain species of animals and plants, the belief 
Leaner © would be a quite sufficient reason why they should respect 
oes these animals and plants and refrain from killing, eating, and 
mais; injuring them. But on this point we are not left to balance 
but wba mere speculative possibilities. We know as a matter of fact 
seeneto, okhat many peoples in many parts of the world have respected 
ee animals for this very reason.? Such respect certainly re- 
forthe | sembles the attitude of totemic peoples towards their totems, 
doctrine H H ; 

yet it seems to differ from it. For on the one hand the) 
of trans- 
migration theory of the transmigration of human souls into animals is 
I ry g 
ie held by many peoples who do not, or at all events who are 
totemic not known to practise totemism; and on the other hand 
tribes wit the theory in question is not held by those totemic peoples 
are best as to whose systems we possess the fullest information such 
acquainted. 

as the Australian aborigines, the Baganda of Central Africa, 
and most, if not all, of the North American Indians? This 

1G. A. Wilken, ‘Het Animisme xxviii. (1899) pp. 146-148. For Mr. 

bij de Volken van den Indischen 
Archipel,” De Znudische Gids, June 
1884, pp. 997-999. Wilken’s theory 
of totemism was afterwards taken up 
by Professor E. B. Tylor, who sup- 
ported it by Mr. Sleigh’s evidence as 
to certain Melanesian beliefs. See 
E. B. Tylor, ‘* Remarks on Totemism,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 

Sleigh’s evidence, see above, vol. ii. 
p. 81. 

2 For examples, see Zhe Golden 
Bough, Second Edition, ii. 430 sgg. 
Many more instances will be cited in 
the Third Edition of that book. 

3 An early authority on the Hopi or 
Mogqui Indians, Dr. P. G. S. Ten Broeck, 
informs us that their totemic clans are 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 47 

seems to shew that the two things, totemism ahd the doctrine 
of metempsychosis, are distinct and independent. If a belief 
in the transmigration of souls had been the origin of totemism, 
surely that belief would have been found lingering among the 
Australian aborigines, the most primitive totemic race with 
which we are acquainted. Why should it have vanished 
from among them, leaving its supposed product totemism in 
full bloom behind, and should have reappeared among higher 
races which know nothing of totemism? The natural infer- 
ence seems to be that metempsychosis is a later product of 
social evolution than totemism, of which indeed it may 
sometimes be an effect rather than the cause. 

On the other hand it is .to be observed that the However, 
hypothesis which derives totemism from metempsychosis is pice 
supported by the accounts of certain totemic tribes in Africa. derives 
We have seen that the historian of South Africa, Dr. Theal, ves 
bases the totemism of the Bantu tribes not as a theory but metem- _ 
as a fact on their belief in the reincarnation of their dead in at 
the form of animals,’ and similar statements have been made by the 
as to various tribes in the west and centre of the continent.” ealaea 
But all these statements are somewhat loose and vague; our certain 
information as to the totemic system of the tribes in question noes 
is for the most part very meagre, and till it is much fuller Africa. 
and more precise we shall do well not to draw inferences 
from it. Even if it should turn out that many Bantu tribes, 
unlike the Baganda, do actually explain their totemism by 
a belief that the souls of their dead are incarnate in their 
totems, I should still, for the reasons I have given, incline 
to regard that belief as a later development rather than as 
the source of totemism. 

supposed to be descended from ancestors 
who had been transformed by the great 
Mother into human shape after having 
been up to that time identical with 
their totems, namely, the deer, the 
bear, the hare, the prairie-wolf, the 
rattle-snake, the tobacco-plant, the 
reed-grass, sand, and water. The 
writer then proceeds as follows: ‘‘They 
are firm believers in metempsychosis, 
and say that when they die, they will 
resolve into their original forms, and 
become bears, deer, etc., again.” See 
Dr. P. G. S. Ten Broeck, ‘‘ Manners 

and Customs of the Moqui and Navajo 
Tribes of New Mexico,” in H. R. 
Schoolcraft’s /ndian Tribes of the 
United States, iv. 86. This im- 
portant statement seems not to have 
been confirmed or noticed by later 
authorities on the Hopi Indians, but it 
well deserves attention. I regret that 
it was overlooked by me in my account 
of the totemic system of these tribes 
(above, vol. iii. pp. 195 579-). 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 388 s¢¢. 

2 See above, vol. ii, pp. 398, 551 
59.5 560, 626, 629. 

48 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 11 
Theory Another theory of the origin of totemism is that the 
oe institution grew out of the personal guardian spirits of 
Setanta individuals. On this view the totem of a clan is simply 
eoacden the guardian spirit or personal totem of an ancestor, who 
piel acquired it for himself in a dream at puberty and through 
transmitted his influence and credit succeeded in transmitting it by 
hdr inheritance to his descendants. These descendants form 
totheir a clan, and revere as their totem the species of animals or 
ea: plants or other objects in which the guardian spirit of their 
theory is ancestor manifested itself. This theory is held by some 
ead eminent American anthropologists, including Dr. Franz Boas, 
American Miss Alice C. Fletcher, Mr. C. Hill-Tout, and Father A. G. 
Oiseeth Morice.’ It has the advantage of explaining very simply 
how a whole clan came to possess a common totem, for 
nothing seems more ‘natural than that the totem should 
have spread to a kindred group by inheritance from a 
common ancestor. Indeed, whatever theory we adopt of 
the origin of totemism we can hardly help supposing that 
the totem, guardian spirit, or whatever we may call it, of 
the individual preceded the hereditary totem of a group or 
clan and was in some way its original. 
This Further, this American theory, as we may call it, of the 
ee ae origin of totemism flows very naturally from the American 
flows facts, For amongst the North American Indians the two 
ecard institutions of clan totemism and personal guardian spirits 

American are both widely prevalent, and the attitude of men to their 

er clan totems on the one side and to their guardian spirits or 
nla ae personal totems on the other is very similar. What there- 
guardian fore can seem more obvious than that the two institutions 
anaes are in origin identical, and that the clan totem is simply the 
North guardian spirit or personal totem. become hereditary? « 

oe 1 F, Boas, “The Social Organiza. “The Origin of Totemism among the 

tion and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Museum for 
1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 336, 
393, 662; ¢d. in ** Twelfth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada,” Report of the British 
Association, Bristol, 1898, pp. 674- 
677; Miss Alice C. Fletcher, 7%e 
Import of the Totem (Salem, Mass., 
1897), pp. 8 sgg.; C. Hill-Tout, 

Aborigines of British Columbia,” 
Transactions of the Royal Soctety of 
Canada, Second Series, 1901-1902, 
vol. vii. Section ii. pp. 6 sgg.3 td. 
‘*Some Features of the Language and 
Culture of the Salish,” American 
Anthropologist, New Series, vii. 
(1905) pp. 681 sgg.; Father A. G. 
Morice, ‘‘ The Canadian Dénés,”’ 
Annual Archeological Report, 1905 
(Toronto, 1906), p. 205. 

~ 

a 
« 

SECT. I THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 49 

Yet there are serious difficulties in the “ of accepting But it is 
a theory which at first sight has so much to commend it. nt ee 
So long as we confine our view to American totemism, the evidence of 
hypothesis is plausible, and if we knew nothing about es 
totemism except what we can learn about it in’ America where, with 
we might well be disposed to acquiesce in it‘as satisfactory uaa 
and sufficient. But when we turn to the totemic systems guardian 
of tribes in other parts of the world, doubts inevitably arise. ae 
For the custom of possessing individual guardian spirits, for the 
apart from the totems of the clans, is very rare in Australia,’ oo 
unknown in India, and almost unknown among the Bantu “@9trs. 
tribes of Africa ;? unless we except the taboos imposed on 
individuals among some Bantu tribes of the lower Congo? 

who may, however, have borrowed them from their negro 
neighbours. On the other hand the guardian spirits of the 
American Indians have to a certain extent their analogies 

in the individual fetishes and bush-souls, which are common 

among the true negroes of West Africa.* But unlike the 
guardian spirits of the American Indians these African 

fetishes and bush-souls appear not to be acquired by indi- 

viduals for themselves in dreams at puberty. Hence surveying 

the facts of totemism as a whole we seem driven to conclude 

that the system of personal guardian spirits obtained by 
dreams at puberty is almost confined to America,’ and that 
therefore it cannot have been the general source of totemism. 

Even if we confine ourselves to the American facts we Even in 
shall find a difficulty in the way of the theory which derives ney 
the totem of the clan from the- guardian spirit of the encounters 
individual. For it is to be observed that amongst the North difficulty in 
American Indians, while we hear a great deal about the the com- 
guardian spirits of men, we hear very little about the guardian Significance 
spirits of women. This seems to shew that the guardian of the 

aor 2 ts 2 guardian 
spirits of women were of little importance by comparison spirits of 

with those of men. Hence it appears to follow that if the “°™"™ 
1 Amongst the Australian aborigines 3 See above, vol. ii. pp. 615 s¢g. 

personal guardian spirits in animal form 4 See above, vol. ii. pp. 572 599.5 

seem to be chiefly confined to medicine- — §.93 s¢q. 

men. See above, vol. i. pp. 412 5¢., 5 However, Kurnai medicine-men 

448 sq.) 482 59., 489 5g., 497 sg. acquired their guardian spirits in 

2 For some evidence of guardian 
spirits among the Bantus see above, 
vol. ii. pp. 453, 627. 

VOL. IV 

dreams. See vol. i. pp. 497 5¢. 
6 For the evidence see above, vol. iii. 
Pp. 370-456. 
E 

' “50 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, II 

which is clan totem is nothing but the guardian spirit become 

pare Hereditary, it ought to be inherited generally, perhaps always 
with : from the father and not from the mother. How then are 
descent 0 

the clan We to explain the large number of totemic clans in North 

totem in America which are hereditary in the maternal, not in the 

eae paternal line? If the theory which we are discussing is 
correct we must assume that amongst all the many Indian 
tribes which retain female descent of the totem far more 
importance was formerly attributed to the guardian spirits 
of women than of men. But such an assumption is not 
supported by any evidence and is in itself improbable. 

On the whole then we conclude that the totems of clans 
are not to be identified with the guardian spirits acquired by 
individuals in dreams at puberty. 

Theory of Another explanation of the origin of totemism has been 
tee ’ suggested by Dr. A. C. Haddon. He supposes that each 
that totems primitive local group subsisted chiefly on some one species 
originally Of animal or plant, and that after satisfying their own wants 
the the members of the group exchanged their superfluity for the 
aur " superfluities of other neighbouring groups. In this way each 
which local group might come to be named by its neighbours after the 
groups of : : ‘ : : 2 

people particular kind of food which formed its staple article of diet 
csi and of exchange. Thus “among the shore-folk the group 
and after that lived mainly on crabs and occasionally traded in crabs 
say they might well be spoken of as ‘the crab-men’ by all the groups 
named by with whom they came in direct or indirect contact. The 

he neigh- same would hold good for the group that dealt in clams or 
in turtle, and reciprocally there might be sago-men, bamboo- 
men, and so forth. It is obvious that men who persistently 
collected or hunted a particular group of animals would 
understand the habits of those animals better than other 
people, and a personal regard for these animals would 
naturally arise. Thus from the very beginning there would 
be a distinct relationship between a group of individuals and 
a group of animals or plants, a relationship that primitively 
was based, not on even the most elementary of psychic 
concepts, but on the most deeply seated and urgent of 
human claims, hunger.” ? 

1 A. C. Haddon, ‘‘ Address to the British Association, Belfast, 1902, pp. 
Anthropological Section,” Report of the 8-11 (separate reprint). 

- » 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 51 
| 
To this theory it has been objected by Professor Baldwin But the 
Spencer that if we may judge by the Australian aborigines, eee 

who have totemism in the most primitive form known to us, aap 
there is no such specialisation of diet between the local yt 

amongst 
not as a rule differ from those of neighbouring districts ; and | Hah 
otemic 

theory does 
groups as Dr. Haddon assumes. The district occupied by a not exist 
local totemic group is small; the animals and plants in it do the most 
primitive 
the natives of each district do not confine themselves ex- tribes; 
clusively or principally to any one article of diet, but eat 2nd itis 

ey : ; likel 
indifferently anything edible that they can lay hands on. en Ss 
Hence in every district we find totemic groups bearing the Sa 

names of all the edible animals and plants that live and accepted as 
grow in it... Thus the state of things postulated by Dr. pelea of 
Haddon’s theory does not exist in Australia, which may be and should 
regarded as the most typically totemic country in the world, contribute 
And the view that the names of the totem clans were evolution 
originally nicknames applied to them by their neighbours, a ie 
which the persons so nicknamed adopted as honourable 
distinctions, appears to be very unlikely. Strong evidence 

would be needed to convince us that any group of men had 
complacently accepted a nickname bestowed on them, perhaps 

in derision, by their often hostile neighbours ; nay, that they 

had not only adopted the nickname as their distinctive title 

and badge of honour, but had actually developed a religion, 

or something like a religion, out of it, contracting such a 
passionate love and admiration for the animals or plants 

after which they were nicknamed that they henceforth 

refused, at the risk of dying of hunger, to kill and eat them, 

1 Baldwin Spencer, ‘ Totemism in 
Australia,” Zrassactions of the Austral- 
asian Ass&&iation for the Advancement 
of Science, Dunedin, 1904, p. 417: 
‘‘At the present day, except that, 
of course, sea-fish do not exist in 
the interior, and so the interior tribes 
do not have totemic groups of this 
name, nor zwce versa do the coastal 
tribes have groups named after certain 
grass-seeds which only grow in the 
centre, in every part we find that there 
are totemic groups bearing the names 
of all edible animals and plants, and, 
so far as we can judge, every group of 
Natives has simply used as food all the 

edible objects which were to be found 
in its district. Kangaroos and emus 
are met with everywhere in Australia, 
but they have never been the exclusive 
or even chief food of any one group of 
Natives. We may feel certain that the 
origin of totemic names is not associated 
in the first instance with the staple food 
of local groups of individuals, becatse 
the Native—and the more primitive he 
is the more likely is this to be the case 
—feeds upon everything edible which 
grows-in his country.” Compare 
Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes 
of Central Australia (London, 1904), 
pp- 767 sg. 

The three 
theories of 
totemism 
proposed 
by the 
author. 

The 
author's 
first theory, 
that totem- 
ism origin- 
ated in the 
doctrine of 
the ex- , 
ternal soul 
or the sup- 
posed pos- 
sibility of 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 1! 

52 

though formerly these same animals or plants had been the 
very food on which they chiefly subsisted. The theory that 
nicknames are the root of totemism is, as I have already 
pointed out,’ improbable enough in itself, but the improba- 
bility is multiplied tenfold when it is assumed that these 
nicknames did not originate with the persons themselves but 
have been borrowed by them from their neighbours. In 
point of fact no single instance of such an adoption of nick- 
names from neighbours was known to Dr. Howitt, the most 
experienced of Australian anthropologists, in the whole of 
Australia? 

When I first published my small work on totemism in 
1887 I had no theory of totemism to suggest and confined 
myself to collecting and stating the facts, Since then the 
subject has continued to engage my attention, many new 
facts have come to light, and after prolonged study I have 
proposed three several explanations of totemism, of which, 
on mature reflection, I have discarded two as inadequate. 
The third, to which I still adhere, has been already stated 
in this book and I shall revert to it presently. But it may 
be worth while here to notice the two discarded hypotheses, 
as both of them, if they do not go to the root of totemism, ' 
may serve to illustrate some of its aspects. 

My first suggestion was that the key to totemism might 
be found in the theory of the external soul, that is, in the 
belief that living people may deposit their souls for safe | 
keeping outside of themselves in some secure place, where 
the precious deposit will be less exposed to the risks and 
vicissitudes of life than while it remained in the body of its 
owner. Persons who have thus stowed away their souls 
apart from their bodies are supposed to be immortal and 

1 See above, p. 44. 

2 A. W. Howitt, Zhe Native Tribes of 
South-East Australia (London, 1904), 
p. 154: ‘*Tome, judging of the possible 
feelings of the pristine ancestors of the 
Australians by their descendants of the 
present time, it seems most improbable 
that any such nicknames would have 
been adopted and have given rise to 
totemism, nor do I know of a single 

instance in which such nicknames have 
been adopted.” It is true that in 
West Australia some totemi¢ groups 
are said to have been named after the 
animals or plants on which they at 
one time chiefly subsisted. See above, 
vol. i. pp. 547 Sy, 555 59. But 
these explanations of the names are 
probably afterthoughts, and it is not 
suggested that the names were adopted 
from other people. 

SECT. II 

THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 

53 

invulnerable so long as the souls remain intact in the places depositing 
where they have been deposited; for how dan you kill a 

man by attacking his body if his life is not in it? 

The first 

in England to collect evidence of this widespread belief in 
external souls was my friend Mr. Edward Clodd, who read objects, 
a paper on the subject before the Folk-lore Society in 

1884.) 

belief was illustrated, to some extent with the same evidence, 
by the learned Dutch ethnologist Professor G. A. Wilken 

in Holland. 

But neither Mr. 

Clodd nor Professor Wilken 

associated the belief in the external soul with totemism. 

Each of them discussed the 

two subjects independently, 

without so much as mentioning the one in their discussion 

of the other Arguing from 
1 Edward Clodd, ‘‘ The Philosophy 
of Punchkin,” Zhe Folk-lore Journal, 
ii, (1884) pp. 289-303. The substance 
of this essay was afterwards republished 
by Mr. Clodd in his Afyths and Dreams 
(London, 1885), pp. 188-198. Mr. 
Clodd illustrates the belief by folk- 
tales, beginning with the story of 
Punchkin in Miss Deccan’s O/d Deccan 
Days and citing as further examples 
the Norse tale of ** The giant who had 
no heart in his body”; the Russian 
tale of ** Koshchei the Deathless ” ; the 
Celtic tale, from Mr. J. F. Campbell’s 
collection, of the king whose soul was 
in a duck’s egg ; the ancient Egyptian 
story of “The Two Brothers”; the 
tale in the 4raézan Nights of the jinnee 
whose soul was in the crop of a sparrow ; 
and many more. ‘* The central idea of 
the Punchkin group of stories,” says Mr. 
Clodd, ‘‘is the dwelling apart of the 
soul or hdart, as the seat of life, apart 
from the body, in some secret place in 
some animate or inanimate thing, often 
an egg or a bird, sometimes a tree, 
flower, or necklace, the fate of the one 
involving the fate of the other. Now, 
stripped of all local additions and detail, 
this notion of the soul existing apart from 
the body and determining its fortunes is 
the survival of primitive belief in one 
or more entities z# the body, yet not of 
it, which may leave that body at will 
during 'ife, and which perchance leaves 
it finally, to return not, at death” 

the facts collected by these 

(‘The Philosophy of Punchkin,” Zhe 
Folk-lore Journal, ii. (1884) p. 302). 

2G. A. Wilken, ‘*De betrekking 
tusschen menschen-dieren- en plantleven 
naar het volksgeloof,” De Jndische Gids, 
November 1884, pp. 595-612. Wilken, 
like Mr. Clodd, starts from the story 
of Punchkin in Miss Frere’s Old Deccan 
Days, and adds the Russian tale of 
** Koshchei the Deathless,” the ancient 
Egyptian story of ‘‘ The Two Brothers,” 
etc. The same evidence was afterwards 
reproduced by Wilken, with fresh matter, 
in his essay ‘‘ De Simsonsage,” which 
was published in De Gzds, 1888, No. 5. 
A copy of the latter paper was sent on 
publication to me by the author, with 
whom I had been in friendly cor- 
respondence since 1885 or 1886, and 
I used it with advantage in my dis- 
cussion of the external soul in Zhe 
Golden Bough (London, 1890), ii. 
296 sgg. But Wilken’s earlier paper 
on the same subject was unknown to 
me until Professor E. B. Tylor drew 
my attention to it in 1898. 

3 We have seen that Wilken ex- 
plained totemism by the doctrine of 
metempsychosis (above, pp. 45 ~9.). 
Mr. Clodd seems to have inclined to 
the view that totemism was rather the 
cause than the effect of a belief in 
the transmigration of souls. See his 
Myths and Dreams (London, 1885), 

PP: 99 599. 

the souls 
of living 
people for 
safety in 
external 

such as 
animals or 

Simultaneously or nearly simultaneously the same plants. 

On the 
whole this 
theory has 
not been 
confirmed 
by sub- 
sequent 
research, 
though the 

54 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. It 

writers and from others which I cited, I conjectured that the 
relation of a man to his totem is explicable on the supposi- 
tion that he supposes his soul to be lodged for safety in 
some external object, such as an animal or plant, but that 
not knowing which individual of the species is the receptacle 
of his soul he spares the whole species from a fear of 
unwittingly injuring the particular one with which his fate 
is bound up.’ Further, I suggested that a widespread rite of 
initiation at puberty, which consists in a pretence of killing 
the novice and bringing him to life again, may have been 
the ceremony by which his soul is definitely transferred for 
safety to his totem, the notion perhaps being that an inter- 
change of life is effected such that the man dies as a man 
and comes to life again as an animal, a plant, or whatever 
his totem may be. This transference was, on my theory, 
accomplished at puberty for the sake of guarding the 
individual against the mysterious dangers which the savage 
mind associates with sexual relations.” 

On the whole the results of subsequent research and 
increased knowledge of totemism have not confirmed this 
theory. It is true that amongst the most primitive: totemic 
tribes known to us, the, aborigines of Central Australia, 
there are traces of a doctrine of external ‘souls associated 
with totemism ; for there is some evidence that the ancestors 

doctrine of of the present totemic clans are supposed to have transferred 

external 
souls 
appears to 
be com- 
bined with 
totemism 
by some 
tribes in 
Central 
Australia 
and West 
Africa, 

their souls to certain sacred implements of wood and stone 
which they call churinga and nurtunjas® But the evidence 
is ambiguous and the connection of these sacred implements 
with totems is far from clear. Again, in West Africa 
totemism appears to be combined or entangled with the 
doctrine of the external soul among the Siena of the Ivory 
Coast and the Tshi-speaking peoples of the Gold Coast.‘ 
Further, the same doctrine seems to be widely spread, 
whether with or without totemism is uncertain, among the 
tribes ‘of Southern Nigeria and Cameroon; for we read 
again and again of a belief entertained by these peoples 
that the souls of living men and women are lodged in the 

1 The Golden Bough (London, 3 See above, vol. i. pp. 124-128. 
1890), ii. 332 sgq. 4 See above, vol. ii. pp. 551, 552» 
2 Of. ett. ii. 242-359- 560. 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 55 

bodies of animals, and that when the animals are killed the 
-men and women die simultaneously.! Such beliefs would 
certainly furnish an adequate motive for sparing the species 
of animals with which a man believed his own life to be 
indissolubly linked; they would therefore explain the 
common attitude of people towards their totems. Yet the 
evidence which connects this theory of external human 
souls in animal bodies with totemism appears to be in- 
sufficient to justify us in regarding it as the source of the 
whole institution. 

My second theory of totemism was suggested by the The 
epoch-making discoveries of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen in ail 
Central Australia, which threw.a flood of new and unex- theory, 
pected light on the subject. For the first time totemism Sepa 
was presented to us as a system essentially rational and ated asa 
practical in its aims, though certainly not in the means aoe a 
which it takes to compass them. For as totemism is designed to 
worked at present by the tribes of Central Australia, its Gate 
main business appears to be to supply the community with With the 
an abundance of food and of all the other necessaries of life, 
and comforts of life, so far as these can be wrung from the “Pecially 
penurious hand of nature in the desert. The object is and drink. 
excellent, but the measures which the natives have adopted 
to attain it are lamentably and absurdly inadequate. Each 
tribe is subdivided into a large number of totemic clans, 
and each clan is charged with the duty of manipulating for 
the general good of the community a particular department 
of nature which we call its totem. Nothing could be better 
in theory or worse in practice. A tribe so organised 
presents indeed a superficial resemblance to a modern 
industfial community organised on the sound economic 
principle of the division of labour. But the resemblance is 
deceptive. In reality the workers in the totemic hive are 
busily engaged in doing nothing. The bees are industrious, 
and there is a loud buzz, but unfortunately there is no honey. 

They spend their labour in vain. Rigged out in motley 
costumes of paint and birds’ down, they weary themselves 
in the performance of elaborate mummeries which come to 
nothing ; they waste their breath in the utterance of spells 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 593-600. 

This 
theory was 
suggested 
to the 
author by 
the dis- 
coveries of 
Messrs. 
Spencer 
and Gillen 
in Central 
Australia. 

56 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. IT 

which die away ineffectually on the wind. In short they 
seek to accomplish their ends by means of magic, and 
magic has always deceived those who trusted in it. All its 
reasonings are fallacious, all its high-sounding promises 
false and hollow. Yet nature in a manner conspires to 
maintain the delusion ; for sooner or later she always works 
the effect which the magician commands her to perform, 
and so he mistakes her for his servant. If we compare the 
face of nature to an illuminated screen on which figures pass 
to and fro, we may liken magicians to men gesticulating 
and shouting at the figures and imagining that they come 
and go at their bidding; while all the time the phantas- 
magoria is worked by a Master of the Show smiling invisible 
behind the screen. 

This remarkable revelation of totemism existing at the 
present day in Central Australia as an organised system of 
co-operative magic naturally suggested the thought, Do 
not these magical ceremonies for the multiplication of the 
totems furnish the clue to the origin of the institution? 
May not totemism simply be a system of magic designed 
to supply a community with all the necessaries of life and 
especially with the chief necessary of all, with food? The 
thought occurred to me in reading the proofs of Spencer 
and Gillen’s first great book, The Native Tribes of Central 
Australia, and I communicated it by letter to my friend 
Professor Baldwin Spencer. From him I learned that he 
had been coming independently to a similar conclusion, 
and accordingly when he visited England soon afterwards 
he read at my suggestion a paper to the Anthropological 
Institute in which he set forth the views of himself and his 
colleague Mr. F. J. Gillen on the subject... On the’ same 
occasion I sketched briefly the theory as it presented itself 
to me at the time,? and I afterwards published it more at 
length in two papers which are reprinted in the first volume 
of this book. It would be superfluous, therefore, to repeat 
here the arguments by which I supported the hypothesis. 

1 Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, 2 J. G. Frazer, ‘‘ Observations on 
**Some Remarks on Totemism as Central Australian Totemism,” Journal 
applied to Australian Tribes,” Journal of the Anthropological Institute, xxviii. 

of the Anthropological Institute, xxviii. (1899) pp. 281-286. 
(1899) pp. 275-280. 3 Above, vol. i, pp. 91-138. 

SECT. 11 THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 57 

Rather it is incumbent on me to state the reasons which 
have since led me, on mature reflection, té abandon it as 
unsatisfactory. 

Briefly stated, these reasons are two. The motive which But the 
the theory assigns for the origin of the institution is too (ro ini 
rational, and the social organisation which it implies is too theory 
complex, to be primitive. It is unlikely that a community ie 
of savages should deliberately parcel out the realm of nature of totem- 
into provinces, assign each province to a particular band of it 
magicians, and bid all the bands to work their magic and avd the 
weave their spells for the common good. Communities of saa 
this general pattern do certainly exist among the Australian oo sian 
aborigines, and so far the theory rests not on a flimsy is too com- 
structure of hypotheses but on a solid basis of fact. But Simi 
probably these co-operative communities of totemic magicians 
are developments of totemism rather than its germ. It may 
‘be possible to go behind them and to discover the elements 
out of which they have been evolved. We must seek for 
some simpler idea, some primitive superstition, and for some 
correspondingly simpler form of society, which together may 
have developed into the comparatively elaborate totemic 
system of the Central Australian tribes. 

After long reflection it occurred to me that ‘the The , 
simple idea, the primitive superstition at the root of se le 
totemism, may perhaps be found in the mode by which the vey, 
Central Australian aborigines still determine the totems of Pt 
every man, woman, and child of the tribe. That mode rests originated 
on a primitive theory of conception. Ignorant of the true ji, o0”” 
causes of childbirth, they imagine that a child only enters planation 
into a woman at the moment when she first feels it stirring paar 
in her womb, and accordingly they have to explain to si child- 
themselves why it should enter her body at that particular The theory 
moment. Necessarily it has come from outside and therefore peed by 
from something which the woman herself may have seen or the beliefs 
felt immediately before she knew herself to be with child. ae 
The theory of the Central Australians is that a spirit child Australian 
has made its way into her from the nearest of those trees, *>crgines. 
rocks, water-pools, or other natural features at which the 
spirits of the dead are waiting to be born again; and since 

only the spirits of people of one particular totem are believed 

58 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. IL 

to congregate at any one spot, and the natives well know 
what totemic spirits haunt each hallowed plot of ground, a 
woman has no difficulty in detefmining the totem of her 
unborn child. If the child entered her, that is, if she felt 
her womb quickened, near a tree haunted by spirits of 
Kangaroo people, then her child will be of the kangaroo 
totem ; if she felt the first premonitions of maternity near a 
rock tenanted by spirits of Emu people, then her child will 
be of the emu totem; and so on throughout the whole 
length of the totemic gamut. This is not a matter of 
speculation. It is the belief held universally by all the 
tribes of Central and Northern Australia, so far as these 
beliefs are known to us.’ : 

hae ; Obviously, however, this theory of conception does not 

the Centra) Dy itself explain totemism, that is, the relation in which 

Australian ‘Ou tand i i s 
ee groups of people stand to species of things. It stops short 

as to child- Of doing so by a single step. What a woman imagines to - 

ee enter her body at conception is not an animal, a plant, a 
one stage Stone or what not; it is only the spirit of a human child 
Paci which has an animal, a plant, a stone, or what not for its 
absolutely totem. Had the woman supposed that what passed into 
primitive. her at the critical moment, was an animal, a plant, a stone, 
or what not, and that when her child was born it would be 
that animal, plant, or stone, in human form, then we should 
have a complete explanation of totemism. For the essence 
of totemism, as I have repeatedly pointed out, consists in 
the identification of a man with a thing, whether an animal, 
a plant, or what not; and that identification would be 
complete if a man believed himself to be the very thing, 
whether animal, plant, or what not, which had entered his 
mother’s womb at conception and had issued from “it at 
childbirth. Accordingly I conjectured? that the Central 
Australian beliefs as to conception are but one remove from 
absolutely primitive totemism, which, on my theory, ought 
to consist in nothing more or less than in a belief that 
women are impregnated without the help of men by some- 
thing which enters their womb at the moment when they 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 155 sgg-, essay there reprinted was first published 

188 s¢9., 576 599- in 1905. 
2 Above, vol. i, pp. 157 577. The 

u 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 

59 

first feel it quickened; for such a belief would perfectly 
explain the essence of totemism, that is, the identification of 
groups of people with groups of things. Thus, if I was 
right, the clue to totemism was found just where we might 
most reasonably expect to find it, namely, in the beliefs and 
customs of the most primitive totemic people known to us, 
the Australian aborigines. In fact the clue had been staring 
us in the face for years, though we did not recognise it. 
But-a link in the chain of evidence was wanting; for, The 

as I have just pointed out, the Australian beliefs cannot be chat aind 
regarded as absolutely primitive.’ Three years after I pro- beliefs as 
to con- 

pounded my theory, the missing link was found, the broken Santon 
chain was completed, by the researches of Dr. W. H. R. and child- 

. : . 2 : bi 
Rivers ; for in the Banks’ Islands he discovered a series of Dt ane 

beliefs and customs which fulfil exactly my theoretical] found by 

definition of absolutely primitive totemism. The facts have eared 

‘already been fully laid before the reader ;*? here I need only Banks’ 

: . ; Islanders, 
briefly recapitulate them. In some of these islands many ioe” 

people identify themselves with certain animals or fruits and *ystem of 

believe that they themselves partake of the qualities and accord- 
character of these animals or fruits. Consistently with this a = 
belief they refuse to eat animals or fruits of these sorts on to be that 

the ground that to do so would be a kind of cannibalism praca 
they would in a manner be eating themselves. The reason areca 
which the 

they give for holding this belief and observing this conduct aithor had 
is that their mothers were impregnated by the entrance into theoretic. 

their wombs of spirit animals or spirit fruits, and that they cee 
themselves are nothing but the particular animal or plant 

which effected a lodgment in their mother and in due time 

1 However, according to the German 
missionary Mr. C. Strehlow absolutely 
primitive totemism does occur in the 
Loritja (Luritcha) tribe of Central 
Australia. He says : ‘When a woman 
on her wanderings catches sight of a 
kangaroo, which suddenly vanishes from 
her sight, and she at the same moment 
feels the first symptoms of pregnancy, 
then a kangaroo rafapfa (germ) has 
entered into her, not indeed the very 
kangaroo itself, for that was surely 
rather a kangaroo ancestor in animal 
form. Or a woman may find /alitja 
fruits and after a copious repast on 

them may feel unwell ; in that case the 
ratapa (germ) of a /al/itja has entered 
into her through her hips, not through 
the mouth. Both cases accordingly 

belong to the first mode in which ~ 

children originate, namely, by the 
entrance of a vatapa (germ) into a 
woman who passes by a totem place.” 
See the passage quoted by von 
Leonhardi in his Preface (the pages 
of which are not numbered) to Mr. 
C, Strehlow’s Die Aranda- und Loritja- 
Stimme in Zentral Australien, i. 
(Frankfurt am Main, 1907). 
2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 89 sgg. 

60 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 11 

was born into the world with a superficial and deceptive 
resemblance to a human being. That is why they partake 
of the character of the animal or plant; that is why they 
refuse to eat animals or plants of that species. This is not 
called totemism, but nevertheless it appears to be totemism 
in all its pristine simplicity. Theoretically it is an explana- 
tion of childbirth resting on a belief that conception can take 
place without cohabitation ; practically it is respect paid to 
species of animals, plants, or other natural objects on the 
ground of their assumed identity with human beings. The 
practice has long been known as totemism ; the theory which 
explains the practice has now been disclosed by the dis- 
coveries of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen in Central Australia 
and of Dr. W. H. R. Rivers in the Banks’ Islands, 
The Here at last we seem to find a complete and adequate 
toa ¢Xplanation of the origin of totemism. The conceptional 
tigezy of theory, as I have called my third and so far as I can see 
oem my final theory of totemism, accounts for all the facts in 
explain all a simple and natural manner. It explains why people 
the facts Of Commonly abstain from killing and eating their totemic 

totemism 
in an easy animals and plants or otherwise injuring their totems. The 

ots reason is that identifying themselves with their totems they 
are naturally careful not to hurt or destroy them. It 
explains why some people on the other hand consider them- 
selves bound occasionally to eat a portion of the totemic 
animal or plant. The reason again is that identifying 
themselves with their totem they desire to maintain and 
strengthen that identity by assimilating from time 
to time its flesh and blood or vegetable tissues. It 
explains why people are often supposed to partake of the 
qualities and character of their totems. The reason again 
is that identifying themselves with their totems they 
necessarily partake of the totemic qualities and character. 
It explains why men often claim to exercise a magical 
control over their totems, in particular a power of multiplying 
them. The reason again is that identifying themselves with 
their totems they naturally suppose themselves invested 
with the like powers for the multiplication or control of the 
species. It explains why people commonly believe them- 
selves to be descended from their totemic animals and plants, 

SECT. 1 THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 61 

and why women are sometimes said to have given birth to 
these animals or plants. The reason is that these animals 
or plants or their spirits are supposed to have actually 
entered into the mothers of the clan and to have been born 
from them in human form. It explains the whole of the 
immense range of totems from animals and plants upwards 
or downwards to the greatest works of nature on the one side 
and to the meanest handiwork of man on the other. The 
reason is that there is nothing from the light of the sun or the 
moon or the stars down to the humblest implement of domestic 
utility which may not have impressed a woman’s fancy at 
the critical season and have been by her identified with the 
child in her womb. Lastly, it explains why totemic peoples 
often confuse their ancestors with their totems. The reason 
is that regarding their ancestors as animals or plants in 
essence, though human in form, they find it hard to 
_ distinguish even in thought between their outward human 
appearance and their inward bestial or vegetable nature; 
they think of them vaguely both as men and as animals or 
plants ; the contradiction between the two things does not 
perplex them, though they cannot picture it clearly to their 
minds. Haziness is characteristic of the mental vision of 
the savage. Like the blind man of Bethsaida he sees men 
like trees and animals walking in a thick intellectual fog. 
Thus in the conceptional theory we seem to find a sufficient 
explanation of all the facts and fancies of totemism. 

We conclude, then, that the ultimate source of totemism Thus the 
is a savage ignorance of the physical process by which men poaienae 
and animals reproduce their kinds; in particular it is an totemism 
ignorance of the part played by the male in the generation ;°* 2”28* 

ignorance 

of offspring. Surprising as such ignorance may seem to the of Saas 
see : ° : * : nity. Such 
civilised mind, a little reflection will probably convince us iedoranek 

that, if mankind has indeed been evolved from lower forms ™st at 

of animal life, there must have been a period in the history have bead 
of our race when ignorance of paternity was universal among eee 

men. The part played by the mother in the production of men; and 
offspring is obvious to the senses and cannot but be perceived ee 
even by the animals; but the part played by the father is conception 
far less obvious and is indeed a matter of inference only, cra 
not of perception. How could the infantine intelligence of one which 

62 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. II 

would the primitive savage perceive that the child which comes 
eri forth from the womb is the fruit of the seed which was 
itselfto sowed there nine long months before? He is ignorant, as 

Satan we know from the example of the Australian aborigines, of 
savage; in the simple truth that a seed sowed in the earth will spring 
alerg up and bear fruit. How then could he infer that children 
find sup- are the result of a similar process? His ignorance is 
port in the * . 
common therefore a natural and necessary phase in the intellectual 
a development of our race.’ But while he could not for long 
women. ages divine the truth as to the way in which children come 
into the world, it was inevitable that so soon as he began 
to think at all he should turn his thoughts to this most 
important and most mysterious event, so constantly repeated 
before his eyes, so essential to the continuance of the species. 
If he formed a theory about anything it would naturally be 
about this. And what theory could seem to him more 
obviously suggested by the facts than that the child only 
enters into the mother’s womb at the moment when she 
first feels it stirring within her? How could he think that the 
child was there long before she felt it? From the stand- 
point of his ignorance such a supposition might well appear 
unreasonable and absurd. And if the child enters the 
woman only at the first quickening of her womb, what more 
natural than to identify it with something that simultane- 
ously struck her fancy and perhaps mysteriously vanished ? 
It might be a kangaroo that hopped before her and dis- 
appeared in a thicket; it might be a gay butterfly that 
flickered past in the sunshine with the metallic brilliancy 
of its glittering wings, or a gorgeous parrot flapping by 
resplendent in soft plumage of purple, crimson, and orange. 
It might be the sunbeams streaming down on her through an 
opening in a forest glade, or the moonbeams sparkling and 
dancing on the water, till a driving cloud suddenly blotted 
out the silvery orb. It might be the sighing of the wind in 
the trees, or the surf on some stormy shore, its hollow roar 

1 Since this was written I have not published, at least it did not reach 
received Mr. E. S. Hartland’s book me, till February 1910. So far as I have 
Primitive Paternity (London, 1909),in as yet read it I have found no reason 
which the view expressed in the text is to alter anything which I had written 
supported by a large array of evidence. on the subject. 

Though the book bears date 1909 it was 

SECT. 11 THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 63 

sounding in her ears like the voice of a spirit borne’ to her 
from across the sea. Anything indeed a struck’a woman 
at that mysterious moment of her life when she first knows 
herself to be a mother might easily be identified by her with 
the child in her womb. Such maternal fancies, so natural and 
seemingly so universal, appear to be the root of totemism. 

' Thus the present diffusion of totemism over a large part put white 
of the world is explained by causes which at a very remote totemism 
time probably operated equally among all races of men, to wit, soe 
an ignorance of the true source of childbirth combined with in ignor- 
a natural curiosity on the subject. We need not suppose ane 
that the institution has been borrowed to any great extent aan 
by one race from another. It may have everywhere sprung Among 
independently from the same simple root in the mental Deoples “ 
constitution of man. But it would be a great mistake to whom the 
imagine that the cause which originated the institution has sais j 
survived wherever the institution itself still lingers, in other is welt 
words, that all totemic peoples are totally ignorant of though 
paternity. In the history of society it constantly happens oui om 
that a custom, once started, continues to be practised long continue 
after the motive which originated it has been forgotten ; by (? Delieve 
the mere force of inertia an institution goes sliding along women 
the old well-worn groove though the impetus which first set 32” 0.4. 
it in motion may have died out ages ago. So it has been ally con- 

with totemism. The institution is still observed by many ¢Ghita-en 
tribes who are perfectly familiar with the part which the oe 
father plays in the begetting of children. Still even among of the e 
them the new knowledge has not always entirely dispelled other sex. 
the ancient ignorance. Some of them still think that the 
father’s hetp, though usual, is not indispensable for the pro- 
duction of offspring. Thus we have seen that the Baganda 
firmly believe that a woman may be impregnated by the 
purple flower of the banana falling on her shoulders or by 

the spirits of suicides and misborn infants which dart into 

her from their dishonoured graves at the cross-roads.1. Even 
among civilised races which have long sloughed off totemism, 

if they ever had it, traces of the same primaeval ignorance 
survive in certain marriage customs which are still observed 

in England, in certain rites which barren women still perform 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp 507 57. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

64 SECT. 11 

in the hope of obtaining a mother’s joys, and in a multitude 
of popular tales, which set forth how a virgin conceived and 
brought forth a child without contact with the other sex." 
Ages after such stories cease to be told of common people 
they continue to be related with childlike faith of heroes and 
demigods. The virgin birth of these worshipful personages 
is now spoken of as supernatural, but to the truly primitive 
savagé it seems perfectly natural; indeed he knows of no 
other way in which people are born into the world. Ia 
short a belief that a virgin can conceive and bring forth a 
son is one of the last lingering relics of primitive savagery. 
Thus the If we ask what in particular may have suggested the 
aren theory of conception which appears to be the tap-root of 
pregnant totemism, it seems probable that, as I have already indicated, 
a preponderant influence is to be ascribed to the sick fancies 

women 
may have 7 
had a pre- of pregnant women, and that so far, therefore, totemism may 

ponderant be described as a creation of the feminine rather than of the 
in the ; masculine mind. It is well known that the minds of women 
totemism. are in an abnormal state during pregnancy, nor is this strange; 
Such the presence of a living being within them, drawing its 
fancies and : ° 

longings Nourishment from their blood and growing day by day, 
are not,‘ must necessarily affect their whole bodily organism and 
to savages disorder in some measure the mental processes which 
butare depend on it. One of the commonest symptoms of 
commonly a : : ‘ A 
shared by this partial mental derangement is a longing for a special 
ee and sometimes unusual kind of food. At such times a 

woman will feel a craving for some particular viand for 
which in her normal state she has no decided liking. 
She will @onsume large quantities of the food, if she can 
get it, and many people deem it a duty to supply her 
with that for which she craves. In Chili, for example, if a 
woman with child looks longingly at some dainty which 
tempts her fancy in a shop window, the shopman, perceiving 
her condition, will give it to her for nothing. And it very 

1 See above, vol. ii, pp. 258-263. 
Many superstitious rites practised by 
women in all parts of the world for the 
purpose of obtaining offspring clearly 
imply an ignorance of the necessity of 
male co-operation. A large collection 
of examples will be found in Ploss and 

Bartels’s book Das Web® (Leipsic, 
1908),i. 772-791. On the whole subject 
I may now refer readers to Mr. E, S. 
Hartland’s book Primitive Paternity. 
% This touching civility was com- 
municated to me by my wife, who lived 
for several years in Chili. Similarly in 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 65 

often happens that after her child is born a woman associates 
it in some way with the food for which she had longed, 
and which had supported and solaced her in the weary, 
hazardous months of pregnancy. For example, to take an Examples 
actual case which happened not very long ago, Mrs. H. told eee 
a friend of mine, Mr. Walter Heape, F.R.S., that when her Walter 
sister, who is many years younger than herself, was born, she ele 
had marked, in clear outline on the back of her neck, a berry 
raspberry : this mark still persists and the lady is about ™* 
thirty years of age. The mother explained the mark by 
saying that she ate largely of raspberries during her pregnancy. 
As a matter of fact Mr. Heape was assured that she did so, 
that she had an extraordinary longing for the fruit and ate 
them continuously for many weeks ; for her husband and she 
being rich, she was provided with raspberries as long as it 
was possible to obtain them.’ Similar cases, I am told, are The lizard 
very common among women. To take another and some-™* 
what different case. Captain W. told Mr. Walter Heape 
that while he was in China his wife was sleeping lightly in 
bed one hot night without bedclothes and with her nightgown 
open and her chest exposed. A lizard fell from the roof on 
her chest between the breasts; she woke with a start and 
saw the animal running away. She foretold that the child 
she was with would be marked on the chest, and Captain 
W. assured Mr. Heape that when the child was born it bore 
the mark of a lizard, with long body, four outstretched legs, 
and tail, on the very part corresponding to the part of its 
mother’s chest on which the lizard had fallen. He added 
that the mark was red and that it persisted, though for how 
long it persisted Mr. Heape does not know. 

Cases of both sorts could be multiplied without difficulty. such 
I have cited these two merely as typical and as reported, pene 
though not at first hand, by an entirely trustworthy witness. might 
The first case illustrates the belief that a child may resemble 2™°"8 # 

totemic 
the Black Forest it is said that preg- F.R.S.,M.A., of Trinity College, Cam- 
nant women are allowed to gather fruit bridge, dated 20th January 1910. 
from other people’s gardens provided Mr. Heape is now resident at Greyfriars, 
that they eat it on the spot. See Ploss Southwold. He has paid special atten- 
und Bartels, Das IWezb,9 i. 918, where tion both to gynzcology and to cattle- 
more evidence on the subject will be breeding and is an acknowledged 
found (pp. 916-920). authority on both subjects. 
1 Letter of Mr. Walter Heape, 

VOL, IV F 

66 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. II 

people a fruit which the mother partook of freely during her preg- 
senda’ nancy; the other case illustrates the belief that a child may 
totem. resemble an animal which fell on the mother while she was 
big. Such fancies, whether well or ill founded, are exactly 
analogous to the fancies by which in the Banks’ Islands 
women determine what may be called the conceptional 
totems of their children! Can we doubt that, if totemism 
had not gone out of fashion in England, Mrs. H.’s child 
would have had a raspberry for its totem and Captain W.’s 
child a lizard? Thus while totemism either never existed 
among the civilised races or has long been extinct, the causes 
which in the remote past probably gave rise to the institution 
persist in the midst of our civilisation to this day. 
Breeders The belief that the unborn young is affected by impres- 
prea; sions of sight made on the pregnant mother is not confined 
and fowls to women; it is commonly shared by breeders of cattle, 
pay ce: horses, and fowls. On this subject Mr. Walter Heape writes 
vinced that to me: “Many breeders of prize fowls, I am told, will not 
the off- : : : . 
spring of allow their breeding hens to mix with badly marked fowls, 
animals is will even take care to remove any of the latter from a 
affected by é Bo Fae 2 . ; 
impress neighbouring pen which is in sight of their perfect birds. 
a Baas Breeders of horses, too, when breeding for pure colour, will 
mothe not allow their pregnant mares to mix with white-faced 
eee horses or even allow a white-faced horse to run in the next 
and preg- field Where it can be seen over the fence. They assert that 
many: if they do so they run great risk of getting foals with white 
faces or otherwise badly marked. I may quote, as a further 
modern example of this firmly established view, the well 
known breeder of black polled cattle who would not have 
any white or coloured article on his farm, but who had 
all his fences, gates, etc., all painted black. The influence of 
surroundihgs in this respect is of course a very ancient belief, 
it existed in the time of Jacob. But another perhaps even 
still more remarkable belief among many breeders is ex- 
emplified in the following. A well known breeder in the 
North of England told me, he set himself the task of im- 
proving his stud many years ago, and for that purpose 
employed as sires certain horses very markedly superior in 
looks to his breeding mares. For two or three years he was 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 89 sgg. 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 67 

greatly disappointed in the result; the foals, he said, invari- 
ably took after their mothers. He spoke especially of their 
outward appearance, which was of particular importance to 
him as he was breeding good class carriage horses, and 
stylish looking horses command a high price in this business. 
It occurred to him that it was the custom in his stables to 
have his mares covered in a loose-box which was rather dark, 
and that possibly this fact affected the result. He therefore 
arranged that the mares should be daily led about a yard, 
from whence they could see the stallion, for some days before 
they were covered, and further that they should be covered 
in the open yard after being near to the stallion for some 
time previously. The result he told me was extraordinary : 
the foals so produced almost invariably took after the sires. 
This belief in the transmission of maternal mental impressions 
to the young is not confined to stock, and is gravely referred 
to in medical books of about a hundred years ago and 
possibly later than that. You will understand that so far 
as the truth of these stories is concerned I can give you no 
assurance, indeed so far as is actually known there is no 
evidence in favour of their truth, and much evidence to 
induce one to believe they may all be otherwise explained. 
But I understand you are not concerned with the truth of 
these matters but only with the belief in their truth, and I 
have no hesitation in saying that both as regards women and 
as regards stock-breeders it is very widely and very firmiy 
believed.” ? 

_ The difficulty in the way of accepting such widespread Difficulty 
beliefs as true is this. There is no known means of com- Sanne 
munication by which sensations, ideas, or emotions can be how 

° . 1: : mental 
conveyed from a woman either to the unfertilised ova in her jnores. 
ovary or to a fertilised ovum, that is, to an embryo in her sions made 
womb. For so far as we are aware the only channel by une 
which sensations, ideas, and emotions can be transmitted is cam be 
a nerve, and there is no nerve connecting the nervous system oe 
of a woman either with the ova or with the embryo. An unborn 

s : : : young. 
ovum is an isolated cell enclosed by a specially thick mem- 
brane and lying in a specially produced cavity or follicule 
in the ovary. It absorbs nourishment from the surrounding 
1 Letter of Mr. Walter Heape to me, dated 20th January 1910. 

If such 
mental im- 
pressions 
are really 
conveyed 
to the 
embryo it 
must be 
by some 
agency of 
which at 
present we 
know 
nothing. 

68 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, If 

cells ; for processes of these cells are in direct communica- 
tion with the protoplasm of the ovum, being projected 
through minute pores in its thick enclosing membrane. The 
mother’s blood nourishes directly the cells and through them 
indirectly the ovum; but there is no nervous connection 
between the ovum and her. When the ovum has been 
fertilised by union with the male germ and has passed from 
the ovary into the uterus, the resulting embryo continues to 
be at least as much isolated from the mother’s body as the 
unfertilised ovum in the ovary had been. No nerve connects 
the embryo with the mother, and the blood of the mother 
does not circulate in the blood-vessels of the child. But its 
constituents pass indirectly into the blood of the embryo 
through the walls of the blood-vessels, That, so far as we 
know, is the only communication which takes place between 
a mother and her unborn infant.’ 

Thus it is difficult to understand how any mental impres- 
sions made on a woman either before or after conception 
can be transmitted by her to her offspring, since the physical 
mechanism by which alone, so far as we know, the trans- 
mission could take place is wholly wanting. Yet the wide- 
spread belief of women, and still more perhaps the almost 
universal belief of experienced breeders, in the frequent 
occurrence of such transmission is certainly deserving of 
attention. If the belief is indeed well founded, it would 
seem riecessary to conclude that mind can act on mind 
through a channel other than that of the nervous system. 
“So far as I can see,” writes Mr. Walter Heape, “if there, is 
such a thing as the transference of mental impressions from 
mother to ovum in ovary or from mother to embryo in 
uterus, it is brqught about by means of some force or agency 
of which we know nothing. I think we may say that most 
scientific men are inclined to deny that such transference 
really occurs. Personally I am not prepared to deny it, 
but if it is true I cannot explain how it is done.”? 

1 These physiological details I derive me dated 24th January igro. Mr. 
from explanations given me by Mr. F. H. A. Marshall, of Christ’s College, 
Walter Heape in conversation and in Cambridge, who has made a special 
two letters dated 2oth and 24th January study of sexual physiology, informed 
1910. me in conversation that he agrees with 

2 Letter of Mr. Walter Heape to Mr. Heape. 

SECT. 11 THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM 69 

It is to be hoped that science may yet enlighten us as if the 
to the dark border line which divides what we call mind Plein 
from what we call matter, and may inform us how the pressions 
mysterious transition is made from the one to the other. peepee 
If it should turn out that mind may communicate with wel 
mind by means of which we as little dream now as we Ounded it 
Jately dreamed of the existence of radium, it may follow supply a 

as a corollary that the impressions made on a mother’s aa ata 
mind are really imprinted, as so many people firmly believe, agrees 
on the mind and body of her unborn offspring. To de- eelale tie 
monstrate this would in a sense be to supply a physical an 
basis for totemism ; for it would shew that the resemblances distinct 
which women often trace between their children and the oe 
things which struck their fancy during pregnancy may be exogamous 
real, not merely fanciful ; that the figure of a raspberry or a 7" 
lizard, for example, may actually be printed on the body of 

an infant whose mother ate raspberries or was visited by a 

lizard while she had the child in her womb. Thus what 
appears to be the essence of totemism, namely, the identi- 
fication of human beings with species of animals, plants, or 

other things, would be intelligible and to a certain extent 
excusable, since it might often rest on a real, not merely an 
imaginary, similarity between the two. Further, we should 

then understand why each totemic clan, while it is compelled 

to draw all its wives from other clans, may nevertheless 
preserve a distinct physical type of its own, unaffected by 

the stream of alien blood which is constantly pouring into 

its veins. This remarkable preservation of the clan type 
under a rigorous rule of clan exogamy is exemplified by the 
Baganda in Central Africa and is reported of some Tinneh 

clans in North-West America.’ On the hypothesis which 

I have indicated we may suppose that the children of each 

clan take after their mothers or their fathers, as the case 

may be, according as the mental impressions made on 
pregnant women are derived mainly from their own clan or 

from the clan of their husband. Where husbands live with 

the families of their wives, the impressions made on a 
mother would naturally be derived chiefly from her own 
family and clan, and consequently the children would 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 505 sg., vol. iii. pp. 355» 356. 

79 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 15 

resemble their mothers; where the wives live with their 
husbands’ families, the impressions made on a mother would 
naturally be derived chiefly from her husband’s family and 
clan, and consequently children would resemble their 
fathers. But where the husband lives with his wife’s family, 
descent is usually, perhaps invariably traced in the maternal 
line ; where the wife lives with the husband’s family there is 
a tendency, by no means invariably carried out, to trace 
descent in the paternal line. Thus it would often, though 
certainly not always, happen that with maternal descent the 
children would resemble their mothers, and that with 
paternal descent they would resemble their fathers. But 
all this must remain a matter of speculation until the 
fundamental question of the possible influence of a mother on 
her unborn child has been definitely answered by biology. 
Even if Even if the answer should be negative—that is, even 
a though it should be demonstrated that the supposed in- 
proveto fluence is a pure superstition, and that all the numerous 
olen instances which have been alleged of it are apocryphal— 
stillhave the theory which derives totemism from a belief in such 
been the influence would not be affected thereby. That belief may 

totemism; be utterly false, yet still it has been held by a great part 

since many : ‘ 

great of mankind, and may therefore, like many other false 

institutions beliefs, have served as the base of a great institution. If 

have been ° : : : 

founded human institutions. were built only on truth, no doubt 

Sitioe they would be better and more durable; but taking the 

' world as it is we must acknowledge that many showy 

structures have been piled high on rotten foundations ; 
that error dies hard, and that systems founded on it have 
too often a very long lease of life. Amongst such systems 
the institution of totemism has been one. For eten if 
it could be proved to have a physical basis in certain real 
resemblances between people and things, the theoretical 
inferences which it has drawn from these resemblances are 
always false, and the practical rules which it has deduced 
from them are generally absurd. 

But while On the whole, then, the conceptional theory of totemism 

aes appears to satisfy all the conditions of a reasonable hypo- 

theory thesis, and we may acquiesce in it till a better shall have 

explain. been suggested. But the theory throws no light on the 

SECT. ITI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 71 

origin of the other great social institution which is generally totemism, 
associated with totemism, I mean the custom of exogamy. oo. mr 
In order to complete our view of the two institutions it only exogamy. 
remains to enquire how exogamy arose and how it has so 
often become almost inextricably entangled with totemism. 

§ 3. Zhe Origin of Exogamy 

The same acute mind which discovered totemism dis- J. r. 
covered exogamy. It was the Scotchman John Ferguson oe 
McLennan who first perceived and proclaimed the historical coverer 
importance of these two great institutions. The discoveries cena 
reflect all the greater credit on his acumen because the and of 
evidence by which he supported them was both scanty in ‘*™S™ 
amount and for the most part indifferent in quality. But 
the defect has been amply supplied by subsequent researches, 
which his far-seeing genius did more than anything else to 
stimulate and direct. An immense body of evidence, of 
which a large part has been placed before the reader in the 
preceding volumes, establishes the widespread existence and 
the powerful influence of the two institutions beyond the 
reach of doubt and cavil. Later writers may indeed, 
dazzled by the novelty and the range of the vista thus 
opened up into the human past, have exaggerated the 
impulse which the institutions in question, and particularly 
totemism, have given to the growth of society and religion ; 
but that they have both, and particularly exogamy, been 
factors of great moment in the moral and social evolution of 
humanity can hardly be disputed by any candid enquirer 
who is acquainted with the facts. Therefore among the 
pioneérs who have explored that dark region of primitive 
human thought and custom which lies beyond the pale of 
written history, and which but for him and a few like him 
might have seemed a limbo never to be lighted by the 
student’s lamp, a foremost place must always be assigned to 
John Ferguson McLennan. 

His discovery of exogamy preceded his discovery of He was lea 
totemism and was first given to the world in his book eer 
Primitive Marriage. We was led to the discovery by a exogamy 
study of the curious marriage ceremony which consists >Y 4" 

attempt to 
explain the 
form of 
capture as 
a marriage 
ceremony. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. IIT 

72 

in a pretence of carrying off the bride by violence even 
when the families on both sides have consented to the 
wedding and have indeed arranged it between them. This 
ceremony, which he called the form of capture at marriage, 
he found to be practised by many different peoples in 
many parts of the world; and searching for a cause which 
might explain it he came to the conclusion that the form 
or pretence of capturing wives must everywhere have been 
preceded by the reality of it, in other words, that at some 
time in the history of society there must have been a wide- 
spread custom of capturing women from other and _ hostile 
tribes in order to serve as wives to their captors. Pursuing 
this line of enquiry he next asked why men should carry 
off wives from other communities instead of marrying those 
whom they had at home. It was at this point that he made 
the discovery of exogamy. He found, that is to say, that 
it is a common‘ rule with savage and barbarous peoples 
never to marry a woman of their own tribal subdivision 
or group but always to marry a woman of a subdivision 
or group different from their own. This newly discovered 
rule he called by the name of exogamy or “ marrying out,” 
an excellent and appropriate word which is now practically 
indispensable in this branch of study.)-- 

1 McLennan’s first book, Primztive 
Marriage, in which the discovery of exo- 
gamy was announced, and of which the 
preface was dated January 1865, was 
afterwards reprinted with other essays 
in a volume called Studies 7x Ancient 
History, of which the first edition 
appeared in 1876 and the second in 
1886 (Macmillan and Co., London). 
I have used the oi eee edition of the 
Studies, and my references will be to 
it. For the account which I have 
given of the way in which McLennan 
was led to the discovery of exogamy, 
see his Studies in Ancient History 
(London, 1886), pp. xvi. sg., 9 s99., 
22 sgg-, 31 sgg. The adoption of the 
terms exogamy and endogamy (‘‘ marry- 
ing out” and “ marrying in”) is men- 
tioned and justified on p. 25 of that 
work. It is fair to add, and McLennan 
himself pointed it out (of. c7¢. p. 56), 
that the discovery of exogamy had 

been anticipated by the acute Cam- 
bridge ethnologist, R. G, Latham, in 
a passage which for the sake of its 
historical interest I will transcribe. 
Speaking of the Magars, a tribe of 
Nepaul, Latham says: ‘‘ Imperfect as 
is our information for the early history , 
and social constitution of the Magar, 
we know that a trace of a tribual 
division (why not say an actual division 
into tribes?) is to be found. There 
are twelve ¢hums. All individuals 
belonging to the same ‘hum are 
supposed to be descended from the 
same male ancestor ; descent from the 
same great mother being by no means 
necessary. So husband and wife must 
belong to different thums. Within 
one and the same there is no marriage. 
Do you wish for a wife? If so, look 
to the ¢hum of your neighbour ; at any 
rate look beyond your own. This is 
the first time I have found occasion to 

SECT. HI 

THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 73 
the existence of While 

McLennan did more than reveal | 
exogamy as an institution which has deeply affected the McLennan 
evolution of marriage and of the family. He also put fora 
forward a carefully considered hypothesis to explain its wee 
origin; and as he was a man of a cautious temper and a exogamy, 
singularly clear and penetrating “mind, his theory of the rise pane 
of the great institution which he discovered deserves respect- no theory 
ful attention, But while he believed that he could explain a ea 
exogamy he renounced the attempt to explain totemism, 
and contented himself with collecting facts and tracing, 
as far as he could, the influence of totemism on religion 
and society without lifting the veil which shrouded its 
origin. On this subject his brother writes: “It may here 
be said that he had for a time a hypothesis as to the 
origin of Totemism, but that he afterwards came to see that 
there were conclusive reasons against it. At last, as far 
as I know, he had none—which should be easily intelligible 
to any one who knows the subject and knows what, on 
his view, was involved in Totemism. To show its prevalence, 
to establish some leading points in its history, to exhibit 
it in connection with kinship and with Exogamy, and to 
make out its connection with worship appeared to him 
to be the matters primarily important.” ? 

McLennan’s caution in refusing to speculate on the Both 
origin of totemism at a time when the evidence at his Mctennan 
disposal did not admit of a correct solution of the problem Robertson 
can only be commended. It was not his fault if many others ere 
rushed in where he feared to tread. Thick darkness con- totemism is 
tinued to cover the beginning of totemism till the epoch- Se ae 
making discoveries of Spencer and Gillen threw a flood 
of light upon it; though, as I have pointed out, their light 
shone steadily on totemism for years before any one 

Latham, Descriptive Ethnology, Lon- 
don, 1859, vol. i. p. 80.) But the 

mention this practice. It will not be 
the last ; on the contrary, the principle 

it suggests is so common as to be 
almost universal. We shall find it in 
Australia ; we shall find it in North 
and South America; we shall find it 
in Africa; we shall find it in Europe ; 
we shall suspect and infer it in many 
places where the actual evidence of 
its existence is incomplete.” (R. G. 

brief flash of Latham’s somewhat 
meteoric genius cannot eclipse the star 
of McLennan. 

1 Donald McLennan, Zhe /atri- 
archal Theory, based on the Papers of 
the late John Ferguson McLennan 
(London, 1885), pp. Vi. 5g. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. HI 

74 

perceived, lying full within its radiant circle, the missing clue, 
the scarlet thread, which was to guide us to the heart of 
the labyrinth.’ But while the discoverer of totemism was 
content to confess his ignorance of its origin, he formed 
a clear and definite opinion as to its relation to exogamy. 
To quote his brother again: “As the theory of the Origin 
of Exogamy took shape, and the: facts connected with 
it reduced themselves to form in his mind, the conclusion 
was reached that the system conveniently called Totemism— 
from which his essay on the Worship of Animals and Plants 
took its departure—must have been established in rude 
societies prior to the origin of Exogamy. This carried back 
the origin of Totemism to a state of man in which no idea 
of incest existed.”* Similarly McLennan’s equally acute 
and far more learned disciple, W. Robertson Smith, wrote : 
“Totemism is generally found in connection with exogamy, 
but must, as J. F. McLennan concluded, be older than 
exogamy in all cases ; indeed it is easy to see that exogamy 
necessarily presupposes the existence of a system of kinship 
which took no account of degrees but only of participation 
in a common stock. Such an idea as this could not be 
conceived by savages in an abstract form ; it must necessarily 
have had a concrete expression, or rather must have been 
thought under a concrete and tangible form, and that form 
seems to have been always supplied by totemism. The 
origin of this curious system, lying as it does behind 
exogamy, is yet more obscure than the origin of the latter.” * 

“1 See above, pp. 57-59. the same stock-group, but living in 

2 Donald McLennan, Zhe Fatri- 
archal Theory (London, 1885), p. vi. 
Compare J. F. McLennan, Studies tn 
Ancient History, Second Series (Lon- 
don, 1896), pp. 58 sg.: ‘Unless the 
totem bond had been fully established 
in the stock-groups before they became 
to any great extent interfused ia local 
tribes, it could not have been established 
at all. It is the test, and apart from 
the memory of individuals, the only 
test, of blood-relationship among the 
lower races; and without it, as far as 
we know, there is absolutely nothing 
which could hold together, as a body 
of kindred, persons descended from 

different local tribes, or even the same: . 
persons living in the same local tribe. 
We have, then, the inference that the 
religious regard for the totem, the 
blood-feud, and of course the system 
of female kinship—without which no- 
commencement of the transfusion could 
have taken place—were firmly estab- 
lished in the original stock -groups, 
before the appearance of the system of 
capture or exogamy.” 

3 W. Robertson Smith, A%uship and 
Marriage in Early Arabia (Cam- 
bridge, 1885), p. 187 (pp. 218 sg. of 
the Second Edition, London, 1903). 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 75 

The course of subsequent research, whith has immensely Subsequent 
enlarged the evidence for the practice both of totemism and Scien 
of exogamy, has strongly confirmed the conclusion reached firmed the 
by these eminent scholars and thinkers as to the priority of peel By 
totemism to exogamy. Any theory based on the assumption totemism 
that the two things have from the first existed together as a 
different sides of the same institution, or that totemism is 
derived from exogamy, is founded on misapprehension and 
can only end in confusion and error. If we are to under- 
stand the rise and history of totemism and exogamy, we 
must clearly apprehend that totemism. existed in all its 
essential features before exogamy was thought of, in other 
words, that exogamy was an innovation imposed on com- 
munities which were already divided into totemic clans. 

The totemic clan is a totally different social organism 
from the exogamous class, and we have good grounds for 
thinking that it is far older. 

The theory by which J. F. McLennan attempted to McLennan 
explain the origin of exogamy is very simple and at first ony 
sight very persuasive. The general cause of exogamy, gamy arose 
according to him, was a scarcity of women, which obliged eect 
men to go outside of their own group for wives and _ so of women 
gradually established a prejudice in favour of foreign women ead 
so strong that in time men were strictly forbidden to marry infanticide, 
women of their own group. “The scarcity of women,” he Said 
says, “within the group led to a practice of stealing the eae sae 
women of other groups, and in time it came to be considered from other 
improper, because it was unusual, for a man to marry as 
woman of his own group.”’ Further, he explained this graduaty 
assumed scarcity of women by a general practice of female S ciadie 
infanticide. He supposed that savages, unable to support in favour 
all the children that were born, systematically murdered a Crpattiase 
large number of female infants, because they foresaw that foreign 
both in the search for food and in fights with hostile groups “°""" 
females would be far less useful than males. Accordingly 
by commonly killing female children and sparing male 
children they produced such a want of balance between the 

sexes and such a numerical preponderance of males over 

1jJ. F. McLennan, Stedies i 160; compare id. pp. 75 5g-, 99 Sg., 
Ancient History (London, 1886), p. 115, 124. 

The theory 
is open to 
grave 
objections, 

Tt turns 
entirely 
on the 
assumption 
that in 
primitive 
society 
there are 
commonly 
more men 
than 
women. 

76 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

females that there were not women enough in the group to 
supply all the men with wives. Hence in order to obtain 
wives it was necessary to go to other groups, and as the 
relations between neighbouring groups were, on McLennan’s 
hypothesis, uniformly hostile, the men could only obtain the 
women they needed by forcible capture. Thus a regular 
system of capturing wives was established ; men came to 
think that marriage by capture was the only true marriage ; 
and in time the practice of marrying women of their own 
group not only went out of fashion but was rigorously 
prohibited. This was, according to McLennan, the origin 
of exogamy. And after peaceful relations had been estab- 
lished between neighbouring groups, men had become so 
innured to the habit of stealing wives from their enemies 
that they continued to regard robbery as the only legitimate 
title to marriage; hence even when a marriage had been 
arranged between two families with the consent and approval 
of all the parties concerned, it was still, for the sake of 
decency and propriety, deemed necessary for the bridegroom’s 
family to make a great show of carrying off the bride by 
violence and for the bride’s family to make a corresponding 
show of desperate resistance. This was, according to 
McLennan, the origin of the form of capture at marriage. ? 

Plausible as McLennan’s theory of the origin of exogamy 
may seem at first sight to be, it is open to grave objections. 
I propose to shew briefly, first, that the facts which it 
assumes are not sufficiently attested to make them a sound 
basis for a theory ; and, second, that even if they were well 
attested they would not explain exogamy. 

First, as to the supposed facts, McLennan’s whole theory 
turns on an assumption that in primitive society there is 
a serious want of balance between the sexes and that the 
numerical preponderance is generally if not invariably, on 
the side of the males. This is an essential point in the 
theory. If it is not established, the whole theory remains a 
mere hypothesis suspended in the air without any solid 
foundation in fact. For it was just this numerical pre- 
ponderance of males, in other words, the scarcity of women, 

ij. F. McLennan, Studies t2 9 sgg., 22 sgyu 50 S9g-, 724 599.5 
wncient History (London, 1886), pp- 90 59., 115, 124, 160. 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 

77 

which according to McLennan led or sSavetied men to go 
abroad for their wives and so gave rise to the practice of 
exogamy. Hence it is of the first importance to enquire, 
Does this assumed numerical superiority of males over females 
commonly exist in primitive communities? are men gener- 
ally much more numerous than women in savage tribes ? 

The proposition that they are so, which is the crucial McLennan 
point in his hypothesis, was not proved by McLennan. Exact wrest 
Statistics as to the proportions of the sexes in primitive numerical 
communities are indeed almost wholly wanting, and in their Preponder- 
absence it is necessarily impossible to prove directly that net Wn 
men usually far exceed women in number among savage {practice 
tribes. Accordingly McLennan endeavoured to establish it of female 
indirectly by adducing evidence that in savage society the ROS 
balance of the sexes is artificially disturbed and the number 
of women greatly reduced by a widespread practice of female 
infanticide.’ That this cause has ‘n some cases produced This cause 
the assumed effect appears to be well attested. Infanticide pret. 
is known, for example, to have been exceedingly prevalent duced the 
in Polynesia, where the smallness of the islands and the ope roy 
impossibility of finding room for an expanding population Polyvesia. 
probably furnished the chief motive for murdering children 
at birth. Indeed this motive was alleged by the natives 
themselves as an excuse for the crime. They have been 
heard to say that if all the children born were allowed to 
live, there would not be food enough produced in the islands 
to support them.? Now with regard to the choice of 
victims we are told that “during the whole of their lives, the 
females were subject to the most abasing degradation ; and 
their sex was often, at their birth, the cause of their destruc- 
tion: if the purpose of the pnnatural parents had not been 
fully matured before, the circumstance of its being a female 
child was often sufficient to fix their determination on its 
death. Whenever we have asked them, what could induce 
them to make a distinction so invidious, they have generally 

1 yj. F. McLennan, Studies ix FE. Westermarck, Zhe Origin and 

Anctent History (London, 1886), pp. 
75 59-5 90 sg.3 ta., Studjes in Ancient 
History, Second Series (London, 1896), 
pp. 74-111. For a Jarge collection of 
evidence on infanticide in general, see 

Development of the Moral Ideas, i, 
(London, 1906) pp. 394 s¢g. 

2W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 
Second Edition, i. (London 1832) 

Pp- 257- 

In other 
parts of the 
world also 
female 
infanticide 
seems to 
have 
resulted in 
anumerical 
superiority 
of men 
over 
‘women. 

78 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, III 

answered, that the fisheries, the service of the temple, and 
especially war, were the only purposes for which they thought 
it desirable to rear children; that in these pursuits women 
were comparatively useless; and therefore female children 
were frequently not suffered to live. Facts fully confirm 
these statements.” ? 

In Vanua Levu, one of the two greatest of the Fijian 
Islands, a large proportion, nearer two-thirds than half, of 
the children born are said to have been murdered within 
two days of birth. Infanticide was reduced to a system. 
There were professional practitioners of it in every village. 
“All destroyed after birth are females, because they are 
useless in war, or, as some say, because they give so 
much trouble. But that the former is the prevailing 
opinion appears from such questions as these, put to per- 
sons who may plead for the little one’s life: ‘Why live? 
Will she wield a club? Will she poise a spear?’”? 
Again, among the Guanas of Paraguay the number of 
women is said to be much less than that of the men, and 
the disproportion is attributed to female infanticide, the 
women murdering most of their female children in order, 
on the principle of supply and demand, to enhance the 
value of those that remain.2 Again, female infanticide has 
been and perhaps still is commonly practised by the Todas 
of Southern India, with the result that the men considerably 
exceed the women in number.* Again, among the Loucheux 
of North-West America women are said to be fewer than men, 
and in this tribe also female infanticide appears to be one 
cause of the disproportion between the sexes.° Again, 
female infanticide used to be practised among several of the 
Naga tribes, in Assam, and there was consequently a great 
deficiency of women.® 

1 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, African tribes, including the Baganda, 
Second Edition, i. (London, 1832) shews that there is nothing improbable 
p. 257. in this supposition. See below, pp. 

2 Thomas Williams, Fiji and the 86 sg. 

Fijians, Second Edition (London, 3 F. de Azara, Voyages dans 7? Am- 
1860), i. 180 sg. If the estimate of ¢rigaze Aféridionale (Paris, 1809), ii. 
the number of children‘slain is correct, 93 59. 

we must suppose that girls were born £ See above, vol. ii. p. 263. 

in much larger numbers than boys in 5 See above, vol. iii. p. 358. 

Vanua Levu. The example of some 8 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by 

SECT. UT THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 79 

Thus there can be little doubt that ih some savage of On the 
barbarous communities female infanticide has actually pro- ey rm 
duced the effect assumed by McLennan. On the other some com- 
hand, it is to be observed that in other communities a con- asics 
trary practice of male infanticide has produced the contrary of male 
result, namely, a numerical preponderance of women over mantcide 

men. Thus among the Abipones of South America the have 
custom of infanticide was very common. The motive as- aes 
signed for the custom by the acute and observant missionary, ee, 
‘Dobrizhoffer, was not any provident Malthusian fear of the of women 
population exceeding the means of subsistence. It was a (ti nom 
rule, he tells us, with these savages that women suckled of the 
their children for three years, and that during this long period “\>ipones. | 
of lactation they might have no commerce with their 
husbands, The result was that the men, impatient of so 

long an abstention from the marriage bed, took to themselves 

other women in the interval. This excited the jealousy of 

their first wives, and accordingly in order to avoid a pro- 
longed separation from their husbands they commonly 
murdered their infants at birth, The same customs of lacta- 

tion prolonged for years and of chastity compulsory on 
nursing mothers are exceedingly common among savages? 

and are indeed one of the most frequent causes of poly- 

gamy ;” hence it is probable that these customs, rather than 

a prudent calculation of the ratio between the population and 

the means of subsistence, often furnish the real motive for 
infanticide. Be that as it may, among the Abipones the 
mothers more usually spared their female than their male 
infants, not because daughters were dearer to them than sons, 

but because they were much more profitable in the marriage 
market ; for whereas a wife had to be bought for a son, 
daughters could always be sold for a good price to husbands. 

Hence Dobrizhoffer conjectured, though he did not affirm, 

that in this tribe the women outnumbered the men. How- 

ever, he did not attribute their assumed numerical superiority 

purely to male infanticide ; he set it down partly to the death 

E. A. Gait, vol. i, (Shillong, 1892) Das H’eib 9 (Leipsic, 1908), i. 903 599., 

p. 120, note*®, But the writer adds ii. 478 sgq. 

that polyandry never resulted from 2 Compare E. Westermarck, Zhe 

these causes. History of Human Marriage (London, 
1 Forexamples see Ploss und Bartels, 1891), pp. 483 sg. 

Custom of 
the Banks’ 
Islanders. 

Even 
among low 
savages 
wha do 
not sell 
their 
daughters 
to hus- 
bands 
women 
are still 
valuable, 
because 
they can be 
exchanged 
for wives ; 
hence in 
such com- 
munities 

it is by 

no means 
clear that 
more girls 
than boys 
would be 
killed at 
birth, 

80 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

of men in the skirmishes which were constantly taking place 
with hostile tribes, And it is obvious that this latter cause 
must tend to diminish the number of males by comparison 
with females in all tribes which live in a perpetual state of 
warfare with their neighbours. 

Amongst the Banks’ Islanders a similar cold ‘calculation 
of profit induced women to spare their infant daughters 
oftener than their infant sons. “ Male children were killed,” 
says Dr. Codrington, “ rather than female in that group; if 
there were female children already, another would not be 
desired; but the females were rather preserved, as it is 
important to observe, because of the family passing through 
the female side, as well as with the prospect of gain when 
the girl should be betrothed and married.”? 

It may be said that tribes like the Abipones and the 
Banks’ Islanders, among whom women rank as a marketable 
commodity, so that it becomes worth their parents’ while 
to rear them like turkeys for sale, have made some progress 
on at least the strictly economic side of civilisation, and that 
therefore their example proves nothing for savages lower in 
the scale of culture, who have no property which they can 
excliange for wives. Hence it might be inferred that where 
the purchase of wives is not in vogue, one of the best 
guarantees for the preservation of female infants is absent, 
and that accordingly in such communities the practice of 
female infanticide may rage unchecked. But this is by 
no means true of the lowest savages whom we know well, 
the Australian aborigines. Among them the women are 
certainly not sold, for the simple reason that men have no 
property which would be accepted as a commercial equivalent 
for a wife. But if wives are not bought they are bartered. 
The commonest of all modes of obtaining a wife in aboriginal 
Australia appears to be to give a sister, daughter, or other 
female relative in exchange. A man who has not a sister, 

. daughter, or other female relative to give away stands little 

chance of getting a wife at all. On the other hand if a man 
is well provided with sisters and other womenkind he can 
acquire many wives by barter, and since this is an object of 

1M. Dobrizhoffer, Historia de 2 R. H. Codrington, The Afelan- 
Abiponibus (Vienna, 1784), ii. 107. estans (Oxford, 1891), p. 229. 

SECT. HI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 81 

ambition with the Australians, as with most savages, every 
man has a powerful motive for rearing as many daughters 
as he can with a view to swelling his harem or providing 
his sons with mates.1_ Thus even among the lowest savages 
it is by no means clear that a practicé of infanticide would 
tell more heavily against females than against males. 

In point of fact, though infanticide is common among Among the 
the Australian aborigines there is very little evidence that peor 
more girls than boys are murdered at birth. On _ the there is 
contrary, if we may judge by the evidence of the best Mle 
authorities, no distinction is made between the sexes in this that more 
respect, and that because the practice is not resorted to, as aed a 
McLennan supposed, from a provident desire to keep down murdered 
the population within the limits of the food supply, but simply oni 

under the pressure of immediate need, such as famine or the ae a of 
. . . * 4° ie Des! 
difficulty a mother finds in carrying and providing for two authorities 

infants at the same time. Hence it is usually a mere chance 1°45" 
whether a male child or a female child will be destroyed. made 
For example, if a woman’s first child is a female and she has retin 
afterwards a male child before the first is weaned and able to 

shift for itself, then the male child will probably be killed and 

the female child spared. But if the elder child was a boy and 

the younger a girl, then it is the girl who must go to the wall.? 

1 See P. Beveridge, ‘‘ Of the Abori- 
gines inhabiting the Great Lacustrine 
and Riverine Depression of the Lower 
Murray, Lower Murrumbidgee, Lower 
Lachlan, and Lower Darling,” Journal 
and Proceedings of the Royal Sectety of 
New South Wales for 1883, xvii. (1884) 
p. 23: ‘Polygamy is allowed to any 
extent, and this law is generally taken 
advantage of by those who chance to 
be rich in sisters, daughters, or female 
wards, to give in exchange for wives. 
No man can get a wife unless he has a 
sister, ward, or daughter, whom he can 
give in exchange. Fathers of grown- 
up sons frequently exchange their 
daughters for wives, not for their sons, 
however, but for themselves, even 
although they already have two or 
three.” As to the practice of exchang- 
ing sisters or other female relatives for 
wives, see above, vol. i. pp. 409, 460, 
463, 483, 491, 540, vol. ii, pp. 18, 

VOL. IV 

26, 28 sg., 40. 

2 E. J. Eyre, Journals of Expeditions 
of Discovery into Central Australia 
(London, 1845), ii. 324: ‘Infanticide 
is very common, and appears to be 
practised solely to get rid of the trouble 
of rearing children, and to enable the 
woman to follow her husband about 
in his wanderings, which she fre- 
quently could not do if encumbered 
with a child. ‘The first three or four 
are often killed; no distinction ap- 
pears to be made in this case between 
male or female children”; A. W. 
Howitt, Native Tribes of South-East 
Australia, p. 749: “In the Wotjo- 
baluk tribe fnfants were killed in the 
old times, no difference being made 
between boys and girls. If a couple 
had a child, either boy or girl, say ten 
years old, and a baby was then born to 
them, it might be killed and cooked 
for its elder brother or sister to eat’”’; 

G 

82 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. HI ¢ 

Again, in times of famine it seems to have been a frequent 
practice with the Australian savages not only to kill but to 
eat their children ;' but we are not told that they killed or 
spared either sex by preference at such a pinch. All this is 
in harmony with the improvident nature of low savages, who 
think that sufficient unto the day is the evil therefore and 
take no thought for the morrow. The long-headed, cold- 
hearted calculation, which spares boys because in years to 
come they will grow up to fight and hunt, or girls because 
they will fetch a round price in the marriage market, belongs 
to a higher stage of intellectual, if not of moral, evolution 
than the rude savagery to which the origin of exogamy must 
be referred. “An Australian native,” we are told, “never 
looks far enough ahead to consider what will be the effect on 
the food supply in future years if he allows a particular 
child to live; what affects him is simply the question of how 
it will interfere with the work of his wife so far as their 
own camp is concerned; while from the woman’s side the 
question is, can she provide food enough for the new-born 
infant and for the next youngest?”? Indeed when we 
remember that no Australian tribe is known ever to have 
stored food for use at a time of dearth, we may dismiss as 
improbable the supposition that they commonly killed their 

Spencer and Gillen, Vative Tribes of 
Central Australia, p. 264: “It is 
infanticide which is resorted to for the 
purpose of keeping down the number 
of a family. And here we may say 
that the number is kept down, not with 
any idea at all of regulating the food 
supply, so far as the adults are con- 
cerned, but simply from the point of 
view that, if the mother is suckling one 
child, she cannot ptoperly provide food 

average six children, or did before the 
advent of the Whites, and whilst living in 
their natural state; and that they reared 
two boys and one girl, as a rule; the 
maximum being about ten. The rest 
were destroyed immediately after birth ” 
{E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, 
i, 70). 

1 See below, pp. 261 sg. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, Native 7ribes 

for another, quite apart from the ques- 
tion of the trouble of carrying two 
children about” ; za@., Northern Tribes 
of Central Australia, p. 608: ‘In all 
of the tribes infanticide is practised. 
There is no difference made in respect 
of either sex. The usual reason given 
for killing the child is that there is 
another one still being suckled by the 
mother.” On the other hand Mr. 
E. M. Curr gave it as his opinion “that 
the Australian females bear on an 

of Central Australia, p. 264. However, 
the Mining tribe, which practised in- 
fanticide to a certain extent, alleged as 
a reason ‘‘that if their numbers in- 
creased too rapidly there would not be 
enough food for everybody” (A. W. 
Howitt, Mative Tribes of South-East 
Australia, p. 748). But this may be 
only a white ‘man’s way of saying what 
is said more exactly by Messrs. Spencer 
and Gillen from the native point of 
view. 

SECT. HI 

THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 

83 

female children lest in years to come they should imperil 
the means of subsistence of the family or tribe. 

Thus, in ascribing the origin of exogamy to a system of On the 
female infanticide conceived and executed on the politic prin- 
ciples of Malthus by rude savages,’ McLennan appears to have 
greatly overrated the intelligent foresight of primitive man. 
The practice of female infanticide has unquestionably been scarcity of 
common among many races, but there is great force in Mr. 
Fison’s contention that it has prevailed chiefly among more female 
advanced tribes and not among the very low savages, to 

whom the origin of exogamy must be referred, 

It is not 

whole, the 
theory that 
exogamy 
originated 
ina 

women 
caused by 

infanticide 
is unproved 
and im- 
probable. 

merely that the advanced tribes are in general more pro- 
vident and therefore more capable of carrying out a far- 
seeing, if cruel, policy which aims at adjusting the population 
to the means of subsistence ; they have often special motives 
for killing their female children which do not apply to 
peoples at a lower grade of culture? On the whole, then, 
we may set aside as unproved and improbable the theory 
which finds the origin of exogamy in a scarcity of women 
caused by female infanticide. 
But the proportion of the sexes in any community may But 

vary from many causes besides a systematic destruction of ree 
infant girls; and if it should appear that from any cause would still 
whatever there are generally many more men than women °° theoretic: 

all 
in savage tribes, McLennan’s hypothesis would still be tenable if 

theoretically tenable, since it depends simply on a general 
disproportion between the sexes in favour of males, and that for 
not at all on any particular cause of that disproportion. 
Unfortunately exact information as to the proportions of there are 
the sexes in the lower races is for the most part wanting, 
and the causes which determine the relative numbers of 47 

1 Compare what McLennan says 
on this subject (Studies in Ancient 
History, Second Series, p. 83): 
«Put in this point of view, a 
system of infanticide appears as em- 
bodying a policy of despair, developed 
from point to point, through trials and 
errors that no doubt were sometimes 
fatal to the groups making them, but 
which contributed to forward the think- 
ing ort by them of what was the best 
form of the policy, its best practical 

expression. We may believe that no 
animal below the rank of man in the 
full possession of his reasoning powers 
could have thought out such a policy, 
and for the credit of human nature 
that such a policy would never have 
been thought out or acted upon except 
in the most desperate circumstances.” 

2 See Mr. L. Fison’s criticisms of 
McLennan’s theory in Fison and 
Howitt’s Aamilaroi and Kurnat, pp. 
134-138. 

it should 
appear 

any cause 
whatever 

generally 
more men 

women in 
savage 

tribes, In 

point of 
fact, in 
some 
savage 
tribes 
there are 
commonly 
more 
women 
than men. 

84 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. Ill 
men and women in any community are to a great extent 
obscure.! These causes are of two sorts, according as they 

operate before birth to settle the sex of the offspring or 
during life to preserve members of one sex rather than of 
the other. Causes of the latter kind are by far the more 
obvious, and on the whole they appear in all communities, 
whether savage or civilised, to tell against the survival of 
men and in favour of the survival of women, that is, they 
tend to make the adult women outnumber the adult men. 
“The normal state of every population,” says Darwin, “is 
an excess of women, at least in all civilised countries, chiefly 
owing to the greater mortality of the male sex during youth, 
and partly to accidents of all kinds later in life.’? Thus in 
most European countries the females outnumber the males,* 
although the male births exceed the female births by five or 
six per cent! The reasons why nevertheless women consider- 
ably preponderate over men are, as Darwin has pointed out, 
first, that far more male than female children die at birth or 
in the first few years of life, and, second, that in are ue 
men are exposed to more dangers and hardships than women.” 

Thus the greater mortality of the males during life more than 
counterbalances their numerical preponderance at birth, and 
leaves the adult women more numerous than the adult men. 
But if this is so in Europe, where life is most secure, it 
seems clear that in a state of savagery the mortality of the 
men is likely to be still greater through their exposure to 
the manifold risks of war and of the chase by land and sea. 
Amongst the American Indians, for example, females used 
to be more numerous than males on account of the destruc- 
tion of the men in war. In some fighting tribes, such as 
the Blackfeet and Cheyennes, the women are said t6 have 
outnumbered the men by two to one.® Hence we may lay 

1 For a discussion of this subject, 

with the evidence, see E. Wester-- 

marck, History of Human Marriage 
(London, 1891), pp. 460 sgg. Com- 
pare Charles Darwin, Zhe Descent of 
aan, Second Edition (London, 1879), 
PP. 215 sg., 242 599. 

2 Ch. Darwin, Zhe Descent of Man, 
Second Edition, p. 257; compare 7d. 
Pp. 244. 

3 The Imperial Gazetteer of Jndta, 
The Indian Emprtre, i. (Oxford, 1909) 
P- 479. 

# Ch. Darwin, Zhe Descent of Man,? 
p- 243; E. Westermarck, A7story of 
Human Marriage, p. 469. 

5 Ch. Darwin, of, c7t. pp. 243 59., 
257; E. Westermarck, of. c7t, p. 465. 

® L. H. Morgan, Sysiems of Con- 
Sanguinity and Afinity of the Human 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 

it down as probable that the causes which! affect the pro- 
portion of the sexes during life are even mére unfavourable 
to an excess of males over females among savage than 
among civilised peoples; and that accordingly they tell 
heavily against the theory which assumes a numerical 
superiority of men to women as the basis of exogamy. 

It is otherwise, however, with the causes which deter- However, 
mine the proportion of the sexes at birth, For Diising peels 
“brings overwhelming evidence to show that while want that the 
and privation are constantly correlated with an increase of paeei 
male births, prosperity is associated with an increase of life favour 
female births; that while starvation and an unfavourable arlene 
climatic condition are inimical to the development of females, rather than 

: y's : of females, 
a plentiful supply of nutritious food and specially favourable 
physical conditions result in the ‘survival of an increased. 
proportion of that sex.”’ If this conclusion is correct, it 
seems clear that the scarcity of food, the hardships and 
privations of all sorts to which savages are’ much more ex- 
posed than civilised men must tend to prevent the birth of 
females and to favour the birth of males, Now although 
we have little exact information as to ‘the birth-rate in 
savage communities, there is a certain amount of evidence 
that in point of fact the men are more numerous than the 
women in some of the rudest tribes known to us. Thus we 
are told that among the Tasmanians the men greatly ex- 
ceeded the women in number.? Similarly, among the 
Australian aborigines the males are said by several authorities 
to preponderate considerably over the females ; one writer 

even puts the proportion at three to one* However, one 

85 

Family, ?. 477 (Smithsonian Contribu- 
tions to Knowledge, vol. xvii.). 

1 Walter Heape, M.A., F.R.S., 
‘The Proportion of the Sexes pro- 
duced by Whites and Coloured Peoples 
in Cuba,” Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Sotety of London, Series B, 
vol. 200, p. 275. Diising's conclusions 
are on the whole accepted by Dr. E. 
Westermarck (History of Human 
Marriage, pp. 470 s9q.). 

2 E, Westermarck, of 
Human Marriage, p. 462. 

3 J. Cassady, quoted by E. M. 

History 

Curr, Zhe Australian Race, ii. 424 
(‘¢the common proportion in our tribes 
being about three males to one 
female”); P. Beveridge, ‘‘Of the 
Aborigines inhabiting the Great Lacus- 
trine and Riverine Depression of the 
Lower Murray, Lower Murrumbidgee, 
Lower Lachlan, and Lower Darling,” 
Journal and Proceedings of the Royal 
Soctety of New South Wales for 1883, 
xvii. (Sydney, 1884) p. 21; A. Old- 
field, ‘‘ The Aborigines of Australia,” 
Transactions of the Ethnological Society 
of London, New Series, iii. (1865) 

86 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

of these authorities tells us that this excess of males is not 
due to a paucity of female children born, for at birth the 
sexes are about equal; the cause, according to him, is the 
far greater mortality of females after puberty, which in turn 
he attributes in some measure to their too early maternity.' 
Statistics are said to shew an excess of male over female 
births among the Todas and the Maoris, and an excess of 
living males over living females among the Hawaiians.” 

But there are grounds for thinking that the proportion 
iol of males and females at birth varies not merely with favour- 
favourable able or unfavourable conditions in respect to climate, food, 
Sra and so forth, but that it is in some measure predetermined 
some races by a racial tendency to produce either an excess of males or 
Kent? an excess of females. We have seen that European races 
tendency to produce more males than females by about five or six per 
oo cent. In India women are distinctly more numerous among 
males than the black aborigines, the Dravidians, than among the castes 
females, : 8 se : 
and others Of Aryan or semi- Aryan descent. Similarly, in Cuba 

to produce the black race tends to produce an excess of females 

Apart from 

more 
females and the White race an excess of males,‘ which seems to prove 
pie that the result is not determined merely by local and 

climatic conditions, but that a racial predisposition must also 
be reckoned with. In Africa also it appears that among the 
black races women considerably outnumber men, and that 
this disproportion is due in some measure to the greater 
number of female children which are born. Mr. C. W. 
Hobley formerly estimated that in the Bantu tribes of 

p. 250; C. Wilhelmi, quoted by R. 
Brough Smyth, Zhe <Aborigines of 
Victoria, i. 51. 

1 P. Beveridge, /.¢): ‘*I have seen 
girls frequently, of not more than eleven 
or twelve years old, becoming mothers ; 
and child-bearing at these tender years 
entails future infirmities, which materi- 
ally assist in carrying them off ere they 
have well reached maturity.” 

2 Chas. Darwin, Descent of Man, 
Second Edition (London, 1879), pp. 
256-258. 

3 The Imperial Gazetteer of India, 
The Indian Empire (Oxford, 1909), 
i. 480. Compare the Census of India, 
gor, vol, i. Part’ i. (Calcutta, 1903) 

pp. 107 sgg., where it is said (p. 107) 
that ‘‘the dearth of women is greatest 
in the north-west of India, and gradually 
becomes less noticeable towards the 
east and south, where it is eventually 
replaced by a deficiency of males. 
Women are also in a clear minority in 
the extreme east—in North Bengal, 
Assam, and Burma.” 

+ W. Heape, M.A., F.R.S., ‘¢ The 
Proportion of the Sexes produced by 
Whites and Coloured Peoples in Cuba,” 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London, Series B, vol. 200, 
pp. 318 sg., 321. 

5 E. Westermarck, History of Human 
Marriage, pp. 464, 468 sg. 

SECT. HI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 87 

Kavirondo there were three or four times ag many women 
as men! But he afterwards saw reason to reduce this 
estimate of their numerical superiority ; indeed, statistics 
collected by him shewed a higher birth-rate for males among 
the Bantu tribes, but on the other hand a higher birth-rate 
for females among the Nilotic negroes of Kavirondo.’ 
Among the Baganda the number of females born in former 
days is said to have exceeded the number of males born by 
at least two to one; but recent statistics shew that the 
numbers are now about equal? If this apparent fall in the 
birth-rate of females could be proved, it would confirm the 
view that polygamy leads to the production of a greater 
number of female births ;* since in the old days the Baganda 
were polygamous but have now under the influence of 
Christian teaching become monogamous. 

On the whole we may conclude that the evidence as to The 
the proportions of the sexes in savage tribes is too uncertain aes. 
and conflicting to allow any far-reaching conclusions to portions of 
be safely built upon it; and that accordingly the generalyn’ %**s 

‘among 

scarcity of women in primitive communities, on which savages 

McLennan rested his whole theory of the origin of exogamy, conficting 

has not been proved to exist. ea f 
Further, it may be doubted whether primitive groups, ery. 

are always, as McLennan assumed, mutually hostile and McLennan 
ready to carry off each other’s women by force whenever (sumed 
an opportunity offers. Certainly this assumption does not primitive 
hold good at present of some savages who rank low in the pa be 
scale of culture. Thus in regard to the aborigines of always 
Central Australia we are told that “the different local ater 
groups within the one tribe and the members of contiguous but this 

1C, W. Hobley, Zastern Uganda 
(London, 1902), p. 18. 

2 C. W. Hobley, ‘‘ Anthropological 
Studies in Kavirondo and Nandi,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
Xxxiil. (1903) pp. 353 59. 

3 I owe this information to the Rev. 
J. Roscoe. Speaking of the Baganda 
in the past, Messrs. Felkin and Wilson 
say: ** Careful observation has estab- 
lished the fact that there are a good 
many more female births than male, 

and on taking the groups of children 
playing by the roadside there will 
always be found to be more girls than 
boys” (Uganda and the Egyptian 
Soudan, i. 150 sg.). These writers 
estimated the proportion of women to 
men in Uganda at three and a half to 
one; but this great numerical pre- 
ponderance they traced in part to the 
influx of female captives taken in war. 

4 Ch. Darwin, The Descent of Man,* 
p. 245; E. Westermarck, History of 
Human Marriage, p. 470. 

88 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 111 

assumption tribes, where they are in contact, live for the most part in 

ve peal a state of mutual friendship. . . . To judge from ordinary 
ofsome accounts in popular works, one would imagine that the 
ae various tribes were in a state of constant hostility. Nothing 
ae o could be further from the truth.” * Again, no race of men 
day. lives under such hard conditions as the Eskimo and the 

Fuegians ; nowhere is the struggle for existénce sharper 
than in the frozen regions of the Arctic circle or on the 
desolate snow-beaten, rain-drenched coasts of Tierra del 
Fuego. Nowhere, accordingly, should we expect to find 
more fierce and relentless warfare waged than between 
neighbouring groups of the miserable inhabitants of these 
inhospitable lands. But on the contrary both of these races 
are reported to be ignorant of war. 

The pacific It is probably no mere accident that two of the most 
oo pacific races of the world, the Eskimo of the Arctic regions 

lowraces and the Todas of Southern India, neither of whom are 
seems to 

~ a 
flow from Known to have ever engaged in war, should at the same 

the time be also two of the most immoral races on record, as 
absence of 

sexual 

we count immorality in “sexual matters.” The reason is 

vetied Simple. Both these tribes appear to be almost free from 
rath that passion of sexual jeglousy which has always been one 

in Australia,” 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Northern 
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 31. 
Compare za., Native Tribes of Central 
Australia, p. 32: ‘* Asa general rule 
the natives are kindly disposed to one 
another, that is of course within the 
limits of their own tribe, and, where 
two tribes come into contact with one 
another on the border land of their 
respective territories, there the same 
amicable feelings are maintained be- 
tween the members of the two. There 
is no such thing as one tribe being in 
a constant state of enmity with one 
another so far as these central tribes are 
concerned.” Elsewhere Prof. Baldwin 
Spencer observes: ‘‘ Curiously enough, 
we find, judging by such accounts as 
we have of them, that there was much 
more hostility amongst the much-modi- 
fied groups of tribes in the south- 
eastern part of the continent than there 
is to-day amongst the much more 
primitive tribes of the centre.” See 
his Presidential Address, ‘* Totemism 

Transactions of the 
Australasian Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Science, Dunedin, 1904, 

Pp. 419. 

2 As to the Eskimo see J. Deniker, 
The Races of Man, p. 521. Speaking 
of the Yaghans of Tierra del Fuego 
Mr. Bridges, quoted by Dr. E. Wester- 
marck, Héstory of Human Marriage, 
p. 466, says: ‘* War was unknown, 
though fightings were frequert, but 
women took part in them as energetic- 
ally as the men, and suffered equally 
with them—if anything more.” Simi- 
larly the members of the French ex- 
pedition to Cape Horn repost that 
‘*there are never expeditions of war 
among the Yaghans, but they are very 
touchy and therefore inclined to quarrels 
and brawls.” See Alission scientifique 
du Cap Horn, 1882-1883, vii., 
Anthropologie, Ethnographte, par RP. 
Hyades, J. Deniker (Paris, 1891}, 
P. 374- 

SECT, II 

THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 89 

of the most fruitful causes of dissension and quarrelling, of 
secret murder and open war among mankind. While we 
gratefully acknowledge the domestic happiness of which the 

love of the sexes is a principal source, we must not blind 
ourselves to the heavy price of sorrow, tears, and blood by 

which that domestic happiness has been bought.’ 

Thus neither a general preponderance of the female thus 
sex over the male nor a general state of hostility between iti a 
neighbouring groups can be assumed to be characteristic rests on 
of primitive human society. Now McLennan’s theory of peas 
exogamy was based on these assumptions, and if they are tions. 
unproved the theory must rank as an hypothesis insufficiently 
supported by the facts. 

But even if for the sake of argument we suppose with Even if 
McLennan that primitive savage communities regularly pve 
suffer from a scarcity of women and are constiney, at. war munities 
with each other, it may still be maintained that {fider tI these unre 
assumed conditions the rise of exogamy would” be neither searcity of 

= women, it 
necessary nor probable. It would not be necessary ; for iffices nak 
women were scarce in any group, some of the men of that ai that 
group might prefer to do without wives rather than incur eeald 
the risk of extermination by capturing them from their @Ptir | 
neighbours, In point of fact this is what happened among their 
many tribes of the Australian aborigines, who, as we have Déishbours; 

: ‘ . 2 some men 
seen, lived on friendly terms with each other. Speaking of might’ 

1 As to the Todas, their moral laxity 
and their freedom from jealousy, see 
above, vol. ii. pp. 256, 264 sg. As to 
the Eskimo it may suffice to quote a 
passage from Captain G. F. Lyon’s 
Private Journal (London, 1824), pp. 
353-355: ‘*Even those men and 
women who seem most fond of each 
other, have no scruples on the score of 
mutual infidelity, and the husband is 
willingly a pander to his own shame. 
A woman details her intrigues to her 
husband with the most perfect uncon- 
cern, and will also answer to any charge 
of the kind made before a numerous 
assemblage of people. Husbands 

\\' prostitute wives, brothers sisters, and 
parents daughters, without showing 
the least signs of shame. It is con- 

Yisidered extremely friendly for two men 

to exchange wives for a day or two, 
and the reqnest is sometimes made by 
the women themselves. .. . When 
parties are out fishing, such young 
men as are at home make no scruple 
of intriguing with others’ wives, yet if 
the injured husband hears of it, it gives 
him little or no uneasiness. Divorced 
women and widows, and even young 
and well-looking girls, are equally 
liberal of their persons. There is one 
very remarkable fact attached to this 
general depravity, which is that we 
never heard of any quarrels arising 
respecting women, and this may be 
attributed to the men being totally 
unacquainted with such a passion 
as love, or its frequent attendant, 

jealousy.’ we BRg aD 
© #N\ 

prefer to 
do without 
wives 
rather than 
incur the 
. Tisks of 
war by 
abducting 
women 
from other 
tribes. 

% 

Or again, 
if women 
were scarce 
in a tribe, 
several 
men might 
share one 
wife 
between 
them. 

In this 
way 
polyandry 
might 
prevent the 
rise of 
exoganiy. 

go 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, 112 

the natives who inhabited the great lacustrine and riverine 
depression of the Lower Murray, Lower Lachlan, and Lower 
Darling Rivers, a well-informed writer, who knew the 
aborigines before they were contaminated by contact with 
the whites, tells us that “ fathers of grown-up sons frequently 
exchange their daughters for wives, not for their sons, 
however, but for themselves, even although they already 
have two or'three. Cases of this kind are indeed very hard 
for the sons, but being aboriginal law they must bear it as 
best they can, and that too without murmur; and to make 
the matter harder still to beai, the elders of a tribe will not 
allow thé young men to go off to other tribes to steal wives 
for themselves, as such measures would be the certain means 
of entailing endless feuds with their accompanying bloodshed, 
in the attempts that would surely be made with the view of 
recovering the abducted women.”! To the same effect 
another wtiter on the Australian aborigines tells us that 
“at present, as the stealing of a woman from a neighbouring 
tribe would involve the whole tribe of the thief in war for 
his sole benefit, and as the possession of the woman would 
lead to constant attacks, tribes set themselves very generally 
against the practice.”? | 

Again, when women are scarce an obvious expedient 
for remedying the deficiency without incurring the enmity 
of neighbouring groups by the capture of wives is for several 
men to share one wife. Hence with tribes of pacific temper 
the natural outcome of a numerical preponderance of males 
is not exogamy but polyandry ; indeed McLennan himself 
admitted that polyandry may thus retard or even prevent 
the establishment of exogamy.’ In point of fact the Todas, 
who suffer from a deficiency of women, practise polyandry, but 
being an eminently peaceful people they seem never to have 
made war on their neighbours or to have captured women 

1 P. Beveridge, ‘Of the Aborigines 
inhabiting the Great Lacustrine and 
Riverine Depression of the Lower 
Murray, Lower Murrumbidgee, Lower 
Lachlan, and Lower Darling,” Journal 
and Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
New South Wales for 1883, xvii. 
(Sydney, 1884) p. 23. 

- M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, 

i, 108. 

3“ Polyandry supplied a method 
whereby the want of balance might be 
the less felt, and may thus have 
retarded, and in some cases prevented, 
the establishment of exogamy” (J. F. 
McLennan, Studies in Ancient History, 
London, 1886, p. 124). ' 

en 

Las 

SECT. III 

THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY QI 

from them. The same observation applies lo the Tibetans. 
The severe climate and barren nature of the ¢ountry in which 
they live render a large increase of population undesirable 
if not impossible, and the prudent inhabitants have taken 
measures to prevent it by consigning many of their women to 
nunneries and by sharing the remainder among polyandrous 
groups of husbands. Apart’ from the scarcity of women 
thus artificially created it is said that in every Tibetan 
family there are more.males than females." Yet being a 
peaceful people they have never sought to furnish themselves 
with wives and booty by preying on their neighbours; with 
them, as with the Todas, a dearth of women has not given 
rise to a systematic capture of women and hence to 
exogamy. Indeed the evidence adduced by McLennan? 
seems quite inadequate to support his inference, that a 
systematic capture of women has been common among 
mankind and that it has exercised a momentotiss influence 
on the development of marriage. Even in Australia, the 
classical land of exogamy as well as of totemism, though 
the practice exists, it is a rare and exceptional mode of 
obtaining a wife.’ 

But the fatal objection to McLennan’s theory is that, Andit + 
even if we grant him all his premises, the conclusion does (ory. 
not follow from it. Let us suppose that a tribe has many a tribe, 
males and few females, that the tribesmen are of a warlike BUD any 
and predatory character and surrounded by hostile tribes, refusing to 
whom they systematically plunder of their women. Still te 
this does not explain why, because their own women are Asa rule, 

é . th i 
few in number, the men should abdicate the use of them ae ee 

entirely, As a rule the scarcity of an article enhances «ticle 

* ° . Z : enhances 

its value; why should it be different with women? On its vaiue. 

McLennan’s theory the scarcity of an article ought, WY. 
should it 
be different 

3 ELM. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, with 

1 P, Du Halde, Zhe General History 
of China (London, 1741), iv. 444. 

2jJ. F. McLennan, Srudies in 
Ancient History (London, 1886), pp. 
31-49. No doubt the evidence could 
he much enlarged. See, for example, 
E. Westermarck, History of Human 
Marriage, pp. 383 sgg. But even 
so it appears insufficient to justify 
McLennan’s conclusion. 

i. 108; Spencer and Gillen, ative Women? 

Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 104, 
554 5g. The latter writers speak here 
of the Central tribes, but their observa- 

_tions probably apply to the Australian 

aborigines in general. For some cases 
of wife-capture in Australia, see above, 
vol. i, pp. 426 59., 450, 475, 476, 
541. 

92 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

instead of enhancing its value, to deprive it of all value 
whatever and decide the people who suffer from the 
scarcity to make no use of what they have, but to beg, 
borrow, or steal the article from their neighbours. But it 
is absurd to suppose that men will renounce the use of the 
little they have got merely because it is little and because 
other people have more of it. In the British Islands at the 
present day the supply of home-grown corn and meat is 
totally inadequate to feed the existing population and 
immense quantities of foreign corn and meat have to be im- 
ported to make good the deficiency. But the importation of 
American wheat and Australian mutton shews no tendency 
to induce such a decided preference for these articles that 
the consumption of English wheat and English mutton by 
the English people is likely in time to be prohibited under 
pain of death. Yet that is what on McLennan’s theory of 
exogamy we ought to expect. An hypothesis which logically 
leads to such a conclusion may safely be dismissed as 
unsatisfactory. 

Thus McLennan’s theory of the origin of exogamy 
\| assumes the existence of conditions which have not been 

proved to exist; and evem if we grant all its assumptions 

it fails to give a reasonable and probable solution of the 

problem. 
Dr. An entirely different theory has been proposed by Dr. 
bitcatiis ; Edward Westermarck. He finds the origin of exogamy in 
theory ‘lan instinctive or innate aversion to marriage and sexual 
pee of intercourse in general between persons who have lived 

exogamy. closely together from early youth, and he supposes that 
since the persons who thus live closely together are“ com- 
monly blood relations, the instinct in question finally took 
the form of an aversion to marriage with near kin. To 
quote his latest exposition of his view : 

He holds “T pointed out that there is an innate aversion to 

Catt sexual intercourse between persons living very closely 

originated together from early youth, and that, as such persons are 

epee in most cases related by blood, this feeling would naturally 

sexual display itself in custom and law as a horror of intercourse 

intercourse Hetween near kin. Indeed, an abundance of ethnographical 

between 

SECT. HI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 93 

facts seem to indicate that it is’ not in the first place by persons 
the degrees of consanguinity, but by the close living together, ¥e™¥* 
that prohibitory laws against intermarriage are determined. brought up 
Thus many peoples have a rule of ‘exogamy’ which doesy re that 
not depend on kinship at all, but on purely local considera- as such 
tions, all the members of a horde or village, though not Eomuicnly: 

related by blood, being forbidden to intermarry. The blood 
“1: y ; relations 

prohibited degrees are very differently defined in the the i 

customs or laws of different nations, and it appears that aes 

the extent to which relatives are prohibited from inter- the form 

marrying is nearly connected with their close living together. aan > 

Very often the prohibitions against incest are more or lesswmarriage 

one-sided, applying more extensively either to the relatives an pear 

on the father’s side or to those on the mother’s, according 

as descent is reckoned through men or women. Now,, 

since the line of descent is largely connected with local 

relationships, we may reasonably infer that the same local 

relationships exercise a considerable influence on the table 

of prohibited degrees. However, in a large number of 

cases prohibitions of intermarriage are only indirectly 

influenced by the close living together. Aversion to the 

intermarriage of persons who live in intimate connection 

with one another has called forth prohibitions of the inter- 

marriage of relations; and, as kinship is traced by means 

of a system of names, the name comes to be considered 

identical with relationship. This system is necessarily one- 

sided. Though it will keep up the record of descent either 

on the male or female side, it cannot do both at once; and 

the line which has not been kept up by such means of record, 

even where it is recognised as a line of relationship, is natur- 

ally nfore or less neglected and soon forgotten. Hence the 

prohibited degrees frequently extend very far on the one 

side—to the whole clan—but not on the other. . . 

“ The question arises :—How has this instinctive aversion According 
to marriage and sexual intercourse in general between eae - 
persons living closely together from early youth originated ? question 
I have suggested that it may be the result of natural ,ou"4 
selection. Darwin’s careful studies of the effects of. cross- natural 
and self-fertilisation in the vegetable kingdom, the consensus *¢°t™ 
of opinion among eminent breeders, and experiments made marriages 

) 

with near 
kin appear 
to be 

injurious 
to the 
species. 

Hence the 
common 
horror of 
incest is 
an effect 
of the 
survival 

of the 
fittest. 
Races 
which had 
the instinct 
survived, 
races which 
had it not 
perished 

94 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

with rats, rabbits, and other animals, have proved that self- 
fertilisation of plants and close interbreeding of animals are 
more or less injurious to the species; and it seems highly 
probable that the evil chiefly results from the fact that the 
uniting sexual elements were not sufficiently differentiated. 
Now it is impossible to believe that a physiological law 
which holds good of the rest of the animal kingdom, as 
also of plants, would not apply to man as well. But it is 
difficult to adduce direct evidence for the evil effects of 
consanguineous marriages. We cannot expect very con- 
spicuous results from other alliances than those between 
the nearest relatives—between brothers and sisters, parents 
and children,—and the injurious results even of such unions 
would not necessarily appear at once. The closest kind of 
intermarriage which we have opportunities of studying is 
that between first cousins. Unfortunately, the observations 
hitherto made on the subject are far from decisive. Yet 
it is noteworthy that of all the writers who have dis- 
cussed it the majority, and certainly not the least able of 
them, have expressed their belief in marriages between 
first cousins being more or less unfavourable to the offspring ; 
and no evidence which ,can stand the test of scientific 
investigation has hitherto been adduced against this vitw. 
Moreover, we have reason to believe that consanguineous 
marriages are much more injurious in savage regions, where 
the struggle for existence is often very severe, than they have 
proved to be in civilised societies, especially as it is among 
the well-to-do classes that such marriages occur most 
frequently. 

“Taking all these facts into consideration, I am inclined 
to think that consanguineous marriages are in some way or 
other detrimental to the species. And here I find a quite") 
sufficient explanation of the horror of incest; not because 
man at an early stage recognised the injurious influence of 
close intermarriage, but because the law of natural selection 
must inevitably have operated. Among the ancestors of {( 
man, as among other animals, there was no doubt a time 
when blood-relationship was no bar to sexual intercourse. 
But variations, here as elsewhere, would naturally present 
themselves—we know how extremely liable to variations the 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAM VY 

95 

sexual instinct is; and those of our ancestofs who avoided in the 
in-and-in breeding would survive, while the others would 
gradually decay and ultimately perish. Thus a sentiment 
would be developed which would be powertul enough, as a 
rule, to prevent injurious unions. Of course it would display 
itself, not as an innate aversion to sexual connections with 
near relatives as such, but as an aversion on the part of 
individuals to union with others with whom they lived ; but 
these, as a matter of fact, would be blood-relations, so that 
the result would be the survival of the fittest. Whether man 
inherited this sentiment from the predecessors from whom he 
sprang, or whether it was developed after the evolution of 
distinctly human qualities we cannot know. It must have 
arisen at a stage when family ties became comparatively 
strong, and children remained with their parents until the 
age of puberty or even longer. And exogamy, resulting 
from a natural extension of this sentiment to a larger group, 
would arise when single families united into hordes.” } 
To complete this statement of Dr. Westermarck’s theory pr. 

it should be added that by marriage he means monogamy, Wester 
that is, “a more or less durable connection between male and holds that 
female, lasting beyond the mere act of propagation till after £07" th 
the birth of the offspring” ;*? that “monogamy prevailed times the 
almost exclusively among our earliest human ancestors” ;* tye, 
and that “in all probability there has been no stage of human 
human development when marriage has not existed, and that has tenn 

the father has always been, as a rule, the protector of his a ies 
us 

patriarchal 
more excited by strange females than family, 

by those with whom they habitually 

struggle for 
existence. 

1 Edward Westermarck, Zhe Origin 
and Development of the Moral Ideas, 

ii. (London, 1908), pp. 368-371. The 
theory #® set forth in detail by the 
writer in his Aistory of Human 
Marriage (London, 1891), ch. xv. pp. 
320-355, 544-546. In his views on 
this subject Dr. Westermarck seems 
to agree substantially with Darwin, 
who in his book Zhe Variation of 
Animals and Plants under Domestica- 
dion (Popular Edition, London, 1905), 
vol. ii, p. 128, wfites as follows: 
«* Although there seems to be no strong 
inherited feeling in mankind against 
incest, it seems possible that men 
during primeval times may have been 

lived ; in the same manner as, according 
to Mr. Cupples, male deerhounds are 
inclined towards strange females, while 
the females prefer dogs with whom they 
have associated. If any such feeling 
formerly existed in man, this would 
have led to a preference for marriages 
beyond the nearest kin, and might 
have been strengthened by the off- 
spring of such marriages surviving in 
greater numbers, as analogy would lead 
us to believe would have occurred.” 

2 E. Westermarck, History of 
Human Marriage, pp. 19 59. 

3 E. Westermarck, of. cét. p- 549- 

96 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

family. Human marriage appears, then, to be an inheritance 
from some ape-like progenitor.”? 

Thus in Dr, Westermarck’s opinion the monogamous 
patriarchal family has always been the normal type of 
married life from the very beginning of human history, 
though with the progress of civilisation the marriage bond 
has generally become more durable than it was amongst 
our earliest ancestors.” 

The chief The fundamental difficulty in the way of accepting 
objection Dr, Westermarck’s theory appears to be analogous to the one 
Wester which besets the theory of McLennan. Even if we grant 
ee all the premises, the conclusion does not seem to follow 
that it does necessarily from them. Suppose we admit, as there seems 
Ae a to be some ground for doing, that there is a natural aversion 
aversion to to, or at least a want of inclination for, sexual intercourse 
between between persons who have been brought up closely together 

heen from early youth, it remains difficult to understand how this 
intocn could have been changed into something very different, 

biaplere to namely an aversion to sexual intercourse with persons near 
Marriage . . ° ° 
between. Of kin. This change from local exogamy to kinship\t 
blood- exogamy is clearly the crucial point of the whole theory. 

relations ; ° 
in other Yet Dr. Westermarck does not attempt to demonstrate it. 

Miaileemn He takes it for granted as a transition that would be made 
exogamy naturally and perhaps unconsciously. Yet if the natural 
oe and instinctive aversion, as Dr. Westermarck admits, is not 
kinship to marriage with persons of the same blood but only to. 
aia a marriage with persons who have long lived together in the 
same place, why should this aversion have so entirely changed 
its character that it is now directed far more strongly against 
consanguineous marriages than against marriages with house- 
mates? Ifthe rot of the whole matter is a horror of matriage 
between persons who have always lived with each other, how 
comes it that at the present day that horror has been weakened ~ 
into a mere general preference for marriage with persons whose 

1 E, Westermarck, History of .. . The tie that kept together hus- 
Human Marriage, p. 50. , Compare band and wife, parents and children, 
\ id. p. 538: “Ail the evidence we was, if not the only, at least the 
possess tends to, show that among principal factor in the earliest forms of 
our earliest human ancestors the family, | man’s social life. Human marriage, in 
not the tribe, formed the nucleus of all probability, is an inheritance from 
every social group, and, in many cases, some ape-like progenitor.” 
was itself perhaps the only social group. 2 E. Westermarck, of. cz?. p. 549- 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 97 

attractions have not been blunted by long familiarity ? For 
we may safely affirm that if the deep horror which 
Dr. Westermarck assumes as the ultimate origin of exogamy 
ever existed, it no longer exists at the present day. Neither 
sentiment nor law forbids the marriage of persons who have 
been brought up from childhood together, and such marriages 
are probably not uncommon. Why then should the parent 
sentiment have grown so feeble while its bastard offspring 
has grown so strong? Why should the marriage of a 
brother with a sister, or of a mother with a son, excite the 
deepest detestation, furnish the theme for the most moving 
tragedy, and be most sternly forbidden by the law, while the 
origin of it all, the marriage between housemates, should 
excite at most a mild surprise too slight probably to suggest 
even a subject for a farce, and should be as legitimate in the 
eye of the law among all civilised nations as any other 
marriage? This Dr. Westermarck has yet to explain, and 
till he does so satisfactorily we must pronounce that the 
chain of reasoning by which he supports his theory breaks 
down entirely at the crucial point. : 

Quite apart from this fundamental difficulty, it is not ‘Moreover, 
easy to see why any deep human instinct should need to be toy 
reinforced by law. There is no law commanding men to froma 
eat and drink or forbidding them to put their hands in the Pa") 
fire. Men eat and drink and keep their hands out of the what need 
fire instinctively for fear of natural not legal penalties, "Shere 

y s p » to reinforce 
which would be entailed by violence done to these instincts, that 
The Jaw only forbids men to do what their instincts inclinejby legal 
them to do; what nature itself prohibits and punishes, it pains and 

ag ‘ penalties ? 
would be superfluous for the law to prohibit and punish. 
Accordingly we may always safely assume that crimes for- 
bidden by law are crimes which many men have a natural 
propensity to commit. If there was no such propensity 
there would be no such crimes, and if no such crimes were 
committed what need to forbid them? Instead of assuming, 
therefore, from the legal prohibition of incest that there is a 
natural aversion to incest, we ought rather to assume that 
there is a natural instinct in favour of it, and that if the law 
represses it, as it represses other natural instincts, it does 
so because civilised men have come to the conclusion that 
VOL. IV H 

Dr. 
Wester- 
marck’s 
theory 
does not 
sufficiently 
take 
account of 
the factors 
of intelli- 
gence, 
delibera- 
tion, and 
will. 

98 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. Ilr 

the satisfaction of these natural instincts is detrimental to 
the general interests of society. 

Lastly it may be observed that Dr. Westermarck’s 
theory of the origin of exogamy appears to suffer from a 
weakness which has of late years vitiated other speculations 
as to the growth of human institutions. It attempts to 
explain that growth too exclusively from physical and 
biological causes without taking into account the factors of 
intelligence, deliberation, and will. It is too much under 
the influence of Darwin, or rather it has extended Darwin’s 
methods to subjects which only partially admit of such 
treatment. Because, in treating of the physical evolution of 
man’s body and his place in the animal creation, Darwin 
rightly reckoned only with physical and biological causes, it 
has seemed to some enquirers into the history of man’s 
social evolution that they will best follow his principles and 
proceed most scientifically if they also reckon with nothing 
else. They forget the part that human thought and will 
have played in moulding human destiny. They would 
write the history of man without taking into account the 
things that make him a man and discriminate him from the 
lower animals. To do this is, to adopt a common compari- 
son, to write the play of Hamlet without the Prince of 
Denmark. It is to attempt the solution of a complex 
problem while ignoring the principal factor which ought to 
enter into the calculations, It is, as I have already said, 
not science but a bastard imitation of it... For true science 
reckons with all the elements of the problem which it sets 
itself to solve, and it remembers that these elements may 
differ widely with the particular nature of the subject under 
investigation. It does not insist on reducing the *hetero- 
geneous at all costs to the homogeneous, the multiformity 
of fact to the/uniformity of theory. It is cautious of trans- 
ferring to one study the principles and methods which are 
appropriate to another. In particular the science which 
deals with human society will not, if it is truly scientific, 
omit to reckon with the qualities which distinguish man 
from the beasts. 

Besides the particular difficulties which encumber Dr. 

1 See above, vol. i. p. 281. 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 99 

Westermarck’s theory of exogamy his general view of the Further, 
history of marriage is open to very serioys objections. If Dees 
the‘ normal human family from the earliest times down to primitive 

the present day has been the monogamous patriarchal family Penily fal 
with the father as guardian of his own children, how comes ¢o explain 
it that throughout a large part of mankind, especially among oe 
savages, descent has been traced through the mother and kinand the 
not through the father; that property, where it exists, has ie 
been inherited from her and not from him; and that the eee 
guardian .of the children has not been their father but early 
their mother’s brother? To these questions Dr. Westermarck S°ciety- 
makes no satisfactory answer,’ and I do not see how on his 
hypothesis a satisfactory answer is possible. The system of ¥~ 
mother-kin and the position of the mother’s brother in 
savage and barbarous society are formidable obstacles to a 
theory which represents patriarchal monogamy as the primi- 

tive and generally persistent form of the family for the 

whole human race. Further, it is to be remembered that 

Dr. Westermarck’s theory was formulated at a time when it 

was still possible to affirm that “there does not seem to be 

a single people which has not made the discovery of father- 
hood.”* Now, however, we know that many tribes of 
Central and Northern Australia, who practise exogamy in 

its most rigid form, are still wholly ignorant of the fact of 
physical paternity ;* from which we may safely infer that 
physical paternity was equally unknown to the still more 
primitive savages with whom the system of exogamy origi- 

nated. Such ignorance is not indeed fatal to the mere 
existence of a monogamous family of the type supposed by 

Dr. Westermarck ; for the connubial relations of the husband 

to his’ wife need not be affected by it, and even the social 

bond which unites him to his children is not necessarily 
dissolved because he happens to be unaware of the bodily 
relation in which he stands to them. But surely the social 

tie must at least be sensibly weakened when its physical 

basis is unknown. 

1E. Westermarck, History of Human Marriage (London, 1891), p. 
Human Race, pp. 41, 539 5¢- 105. 
3 See above, vol. i. pp. 93 59., 
2E. Westermarck, History of 155 sgg-, 188-193, 576 sgg. 

100 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 1 
Prof. E. A theory of exogamy entirely different from the pre- 
ulin ee ceding theories has been put forward by Professor Emile 
oy: Durkheim, He would derive exogamy from a religious 
that sentiment based on certain occult or magical virtues which 
exogamy the savage attributes to blood, above all to the menstruous 
Rurnetes blood of women.’ This religious reverence or awe for . 
ee blood is in its turn traced by Professor Durkheim to 
the blood totemism, which is, on his view, the ultimate source of 
pa exogamy.? According to him, the totem is not only the 
clan, ancestor but the god of every true totemic clan; all the 
ares members of the clan are derived from him and share his 
menstruous divine substance. “The totemic being is immanent in the 
ae clan, he is incarnate in every individual, and it is in the 
which ¥ blood that he resides. He is himself the blood. But while 
Sean he is an ancestor, he is also a god; born the protector of 
having _— the group, he is the object of a veritable worship; he is the 
cae centre of the religion peculiar to the clan. It is on him 

with them. that depend the destinies of individuals as well as of the 
whole. Consequently there is a god in each individual 
organism (for he is wholly and entirely in each), and it is in 
the blood that the god resides; from which it follows that 
the blood is a thing; divine. When it flows, it is the god 
who is spilled. . . . The religious respect which it inspires 
forbids all idea of contact, and, since woman passes, so to 
say, a part of her life in blood, the same feeling extends to 
her, stamps her with its impress, and isolates her.”* But a 
totem is only sacred to the members of one totemic clan ; 
the prohibitions which hedge it round are observed by them 
1 E. Durkheim, ‘* La Prohibition de” 
Vinceste et ses origines,” L'dunée 

soctologigue, i, (Paris, 1898) pp. 1-70. 
See particularly b. 40, “la nature re- 

dott tenir dtroitement aux idées que le 
primitif se fait de la menstruation et 
du sang menstruel.” 

ligieuse des sentiments qui sont a la 
base de Pexogamie”; also p. 51, ‘* les 
vertus magiques attribudes au sang ex- 
pliquent Pexogamie” ; also n. 65, ‘les 
préjugés relatifs au sang eurent amend 
les hommes QS interdire toute union entre 
parents” ; also p. 47, ‘seule, quelque 
vertu occulte, attribuée a Torganisme 
fiminin en géntral, peut avoir déter- 
min€ cette mise en quarantaine réci- 
progue. Un premier fait est certain: 
est que tout ce systeme de prohibitions 

2 E. Durkheim, of. cét. p. 51, “ A/azs 
si les vertus magigues attribudes au 
sang expliquent Pexogamie, d’oit vien- 
nent elles-mémes? Qu'est-ce gut a pu 
déterminer les soctétés primitives a préter 
au liguide sanguin de st dranges pro- 
priétés? La réponse a cette question se 
trouve dans le principe méme sur leguel 
repose tout le systeme religicux dont 
Pexogamie dépend, & savotr le totém- 
sme.” 

3 E. Durkheim, of. cét. pp. 52 59. 

SECT, II THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY IOI 

alone. Other people may violate these prohibitions with 
impunity, since the totem is not their totem: to them there 
is nothing divine in it, they may therefore deal with it as 
they please. That is why, according to Professor Durkheim, " 
a man is forbidden to eat his own totem and to marry a 
- woman of his own totemic clan; the god of the clan is in 
her, especially in her blood ; hence no man of the clan may 
come into profane contact with a woman of the clan; above 
all, he may not enter into sexual relations with her, because 
in doing so he would be trespassing on the very spot where 
the divine manifestations of the sacred blood periodically 
occur. But on the other hand a man is free to marry or 
have intercourse with a woman of any totem other than his 
own, since her god is not his god, and he is therefore not 
bound to respect the divine life which resides in her blood.’ 
Thus Professor Durkheim finds the origin of exogamy This 

in totemism, which he regards as a religion or worship of nee 
the totem. I have already pointed out that such a con- rests on an 
ception of totemism rests on a fundamental misapprehension (onception 
of the nature of the institution as it exists in its purity, of _ 
particularly among the Australian aborigines ;? and I am 2" 
the more concerned to emphasise the mistake because [| mystical 
formerly committed it myself and have drawn Professor een 
Durkheim after me astray.2 Since my original treatise on 
totemism, to which Professor Durkheim refers for proof ot 
the worship of the totem, was published, the evidence as 
to the system has been greatly enlarged, especially by the 
researches of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen, and when we 
consider all the facts and allow for the inevitable haziness 
and confusion of savage thought on the subject, the con- 
clusion to which the facts point is that the relation between 
a man and his totem is one of simple friendly equality and 
brotherhood, and by no means one of religious adoration of 
a deity mysteriously incarnate not only in the whole totemic 
species of animals or plants, but also in the flesh and above 

1 E. Durkheim, ‘* La Prohibition de religion of the totem, which I have 
Pinceste et ses origines,” Z’Année quoted (above, p. 100), Prof. Durk- 
sociologigue, i. (Paris, 1898) pp. 50, heim refers his readers for evidence to 
53 59. my original treatise Zotemzsm, which 

2 See above, pp. 4-6, 27 59. is reprinted in the first volume of this 

3 After giving his account of the work. 

102 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

all in the blood of every man, woman, and child of the clan. 
A mystical religion of this abstract sort might be appro- 
priate enough to sects like the Gnostics, the heirs of an 
ancient civilisation and of a long train of subtle philosophies ; 
it is wholly foreign and indeed incomprehensible to the 
simple, concrete modes of thought of a savage, and to 
attribute it to the extremely rude savages with whom the 
system of exogamy must unquestionably have originated 
is to commit the serious mistake of interpreting primitive 
thought in terms of advanced thought ; it is to invert the 
order of development. A theory of exogamy which rests 
on such a basis is wholly untenable. 

Apart from the fundamental error which vitiates Pro- 
clea fessor Durkheim’s ingenious speculations on this subject he 
Durkheim has, as it seems to me, fallen into others hardly less serious. 
aesera'eS The importance which he. assigns to menstruation as a 
ee of principal factor in determining exogamy appears altogether 
tion, which CXaggerated. Indeed it is very hard to see how the awe or 
ee horror which savages unquestionably entertain for menstru- 
nothing to OUS blood! can have had anything whatever to do with 
oan yexogamy. The essence of exogamy is a discrimination 

between women who tare marriageable and women who are 
not marriageable; but all women menstruate; how then 
can the fact of menstruation serve to discriminate marriage- 
able from non-marriageable women, in other words, how can 
it explain exogamy? We cannot explain a specific differ- 
ence by means of a generic attribute: menstruation is a 
generic attribute of all women ; how then can it be invoked 
to explain the specific difference which exogamy makes 
between marriageable and non-marriageable women? If 
the awe or horror of menstruous blood is a reason for avoid- 
ing marriage with any woman, it is a reason for avoiding 
marriage with all women, since all women menstruate. The 

In 

logical conclusion from such 

1 I am not likely to under-estimate 
the force and influence of this horror, 
as I was, I believe, among the first to 
draw attention to it, and to illustrate 
it by a large array of facts drawn from 
many parts of the world (Zhe Golden 
Bough, First Edition, 1890, vol. i. 
pp. 169 sg., vol. ii. pp. 225-242). 

premises is not exogamy but 

Indeed, just as in the case of the sup- 
posed totemic religion, Professor Durk- 
heim himself appeals to my evidence 
on the subject of menstruation (E. 
Durkheim, of. cé¢. p. 42), but I can- 
not think him judicious in the infer- 
ences he has drawn from it. 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 103 

celibacy. In short, menstruation appears to be wholly 

irrelevant to the question of exogamy.’ 
Again, Professor Durkheim errs in confusing exogamous Further, 

classes or phratries with totemic clans; he is of opinion oa 

that the exogamous class or phratry is nothing but an confuses 

original or primary totemic clan which has become sub- Poel 

divided into a number of secondary totemic clans.? It is class with 

the more incumbent on me to correct this confusion because Bae 

I fear I am again at least partly responsible for it. In my is 2 totally 

original treatise, TZotemism, I majntained the view of cree 

exogamous classes or phratries which was adopted some °ganisa- 

ten years later by Professor Durkheim. But the new ie 

evidence given to the world by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen 

in the year after Professor Durkheim had published his 

theory induced me to abandon that view; it convinced me 

that, so far as Australia at least is concerned, exogamous 

classes or phratries are a totally different social organisation 

from totemic clans, that they are later in origin than the 

totemic clans, and have been superposed upon them; and 

that we shall never understand the relation of totemism to 

exogamy so long as we identify these tyo disparate institu- 

tions, the totemic clan and the exogamous class, in other 

words, so long as we suppose that totemic clans have been 

from the outset exogamous.2 As Professor Durkheim 

adheres to the old view after the publication of the new 

evidence,’ I am compelled to dissent from him on this as 

well as on the other points which I have indicated. 

A theory of the origin of exogamy different from all the L. H. 

: ° : : Morgan's 
preceding theories was suggested by the eminent American ihacey 

ethnologist, L. H. Morgan, to whom we owe the discovery of foc e 
. rigi 

1 The same objection does not lie strangers to deflower their wives. See exogamy. 

against the theory that exogamy was 
based on an aversion to shedding the 
blood of a woman of the same clan at 
defloration. See S. Reinach, Cu/tes, 
AMythes, et Religions, i. (Paris, 1905) 
p- 166, But though such an aversion 
might be a good reason for not de- 
flowering a woman, it would be no 
reason for refusing to marry her after- 
wards. We know that many peoples 
have been in the habit of engaging 

the references in my Adonis, Attis, 
Ostris, Second Edition, p. 52, note 2 

2 E. Durkheim, “ La Prohibition de 
Yinceste et ses origines,” L’dxnde 
Soctologique, i. (Paris, 1898) pp. 5 599. 

3 See above, pp. 8-10, and above, 
vol. i. pp. 162 sg., 257 599. 

4 E. Durkheim, ‘Sur le totém- 
isme,” L’Annde soctologigue, v. (Paris, 
1902) pp. 90 s¢g. 

Morgan , 
held that 
exogamy 
was 

intro- 
duced to 
prevent the 
marriage 
or cohabi-! 
tation of 
blood 
relations, 
especially 
of brothers 
with 
sisters, 
which had 
been 
common 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. HI 

104 

the classificatory system of relationship. Unlike the other 
writers, whose hypotheses have been set forth, Morgan lived 
for many years on intimate terms with savages who still 
practised both totemism and exogamy ; and in approaching 
the problem his practical familiarity with exogamous com- 
munities gave him a decided advantage over enquirers who 
had no such first-hand knowledge of the institution they dis- 
cussed. It is significant that while Morgan’s conclusions 
have been commonly rejected by anthropologists of the 
study, they have been accepted by men who have personally 
investigated totemism and éxogamy among those tribes in 
which the two institutions still exist in the greatest perfec- 
tion. No men have done more to advance our knowledge 
of exogamy than Messrs. Howitt, Fison, Spencer, and Gillen 
have done by their researches among the Australian 
aborigines ; and their agreement with Morgan’s opinion on 
the origin of the institution furnishes at least a certain pre- 
sumption in favour of its truth. 

Morgan held that sexual promiscuity prevailed univers- 
ally at a very early period of human history, and that 
exogamy was instituted to prevent the marriage or cohabita- 
tion of blood relations, especially of brothers with sisters, 
which had been common under the preceding conditions,’ 
“It is explainable,” he says, “and only explainable in its 
origin, as a reformatory movement to break up the inter- 
marriage of blood relatives, and particularly of brothers and 
sisters, by compelling them to marry out of the tribe who 
were constituted such as a band of consanguinei. It will be 
seen at once that with the prohibition of intermarriage in 
the tribe this result was finally and permanently effected. 
By this organization the cohabitation of brothers and sisters 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Family, pp. 484 5g., 487-490 (Smzth- 
sontan Contributions to Knowledge, 
vol. xvii.) ; 7@., Ancient Society (Lon- 
don, 1877), pp- 58, 425, 426, 498- 
503. Morgan did not use the word 
exogamy, but described the institution 
in his earlier work by the phrase 
‘‘tribal organization,” and in his later 
work by the phrase ‘gentile organiza- 
tion.” Both these expressions are 

exceedingly vague and unsatisfactory, 
and it is much to be regretted that 
Morgan rejected the perfectly ap- 
propriate and indeed necessary term 
exogamy (Ancient Society, pp. §11599-)- 
Morgan was often unfortunate in his 
choice of words, and his inappropriate 
and pedantic terminology has probably 
done much to repel readers from a sub- 
ject which is sufficiently unattractive 
in itself without the aid of gratuitous 
disfigurements. 

SECT. III THE Chey OF EXOGAMY 105 

was permanently abolished, since they were necessarily of ina 

the same tribe, whether descent was in| the male or the Preceding 
female line. . . . It struck at the roots of promiscuous sexual pro- 

intercourse by abolishing its worst features, and thus became men 

a powerful movement towards the ultimate realization of 
marriage between single pairs, and the true family state.” ? 

This view furnishes, I believe, the true key to the whole This view 

system of exogamy. It was suggested to Morgan by his\f, een 
study of the classificatory system of relationship in its and has 
various forms, particularly by a comparison of the Polynesian cecacis 
form with the Asiatic and American forms.’ It is true thatgonfirmed 
he appears to have erred in treating the Polynesian form as PY ou ne 
primitive and as evidence of the former cohabitation of of the 
brothers with sisters, whereas there are grounds for thinking one 
that the Polynesian form is on the contrary decadent, and she 
that the former cohabitation of brothers with sisters cannot aborigines, 
be inferred from it. But while his theory has certainly 
been weakened at an important point by the correction of 
this error, it has on the other hand been greatly strengthened 
by the additional knowledge which we have since acquired 
of the social organisation of the Australian aborigines. 
These very primitive savages have carried out the principle 
of exogamy with a practical ingenuity and a_ logical 
thoroughness and precision such as no other known race of 
men exhibit in their marriage system ; and accordingly a 
study of their matrimonial institutions, which have been 
accurately described by highly competent observers, affords 
a better insight into the meaning of exogamy than can be 
obtained elsewhere. It is accordingly to Australia that we 
must look for a solution of the enigma of exogamy as well 
as of totemism. ‘ 

Full details as to the Australian systems of marriage The 
have already been laid before the reader, and I have ex- oe 
hibited their general principles i im outline so as to bring out and 
clearly thefr aim and purpose.* We have seen that these ais 
marriage systems fall into a series of varying complexity of the 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- uses instead of Polynesian, Asiatic, 
Sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 484 and American. 
Sq. 3 See above, vol. ii. pp. 169-172. 

2 Malayan, Turanian, and Gano- 4 See vol. i. pp. 271-288, 399-402, 
wanian are the terms which Morgan 445 sg. 

\BR4 

- 

106 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. HI 

Australian from the two-class system, which is the simplest, to the 
ra eight-class system, which is the most complex, with a four- 
tohave class system occupying an intermediate position between the 

ts Sn two extremes. All three systems—the two-class system, the 
eee four-class system, and the eight-class system—are compatible 
bisections Cither with male or with female descent; and in fact the 
ee two-class system and the four-class system are actually found 
forthe | sometimes with male and sometimes with female descent, 
saloons while on the other hand the eight-class system has hitherto 
the been discovered with male descent only. Further, I pointed 
of nearkin, OUt that these three systems appear to have been produced 

by a series of successive bisections of the community, the 
two-class system resulting from the first bisection, the four- 
class system resulting from the second bisection, and the 
eight-class system resulting from the third bisection. Further, 
.we saw that the effect of these successive bisections of the 
community into exogamous classes, with their characteristic 
rules of descent, was to bar the marriage of persons 
whom the natives regard as too near of kin, each new 
bisection striking out a fresh list of kinsfolk from the 
number of those with whom marriage might be lawfully 
contracted ; and as the effect produced by these means is in 
accordance with the deeply-rooted opinions and feelings of 
the natives on the subject of marriage, we appear to be 
justified in inferring that each successive bisection of the 
community was deliberately instituted for the purpose 
of preventing the marriage of near kin. In no other way 
does it seem possible to explain in all its details a system 
at once so complex and so regular. It is hardly too much 
to affirm that no other human institution bears the impress 
of deliberate design stamped on it more clearly than the 
exogamous classes of the Australian aborigines. To suppose 
that they have originated through a series of undesigned 
coincidences, and that they only subserve by accident the 
purpose which they actually fulfil and which i8 cordially 
approved of by the natives themselves, is to tax our 
credulity almost as heavily as it would be to suppose 
that the complex machinery of a watch has come to- 
gether without human design by a mere fortuitous con- 
course of atoms, and that the purpose which it serves of 

‘N 

4 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 107 

marking time on the dial, and for the gake of which the 
owner of the watch carries it about with him, is simply an 
accidental result of its atomic configuration. The attempt | 
in the name of science to eliminate human will and purpose 
from the history of early human institutions fails disastrously, °, .. 
when the attempt is made upon the marriage system of the 
Australian aborigines.’ 

We have seen, first, that the effect of the two-class Effects 
system is to bar the marriage of brothers with sisters in pee aide 
every case, but not in all cases the marriage of parents with four-class, 
children, nor the marriage of certain first cousins, namely, ooh cies 
the children of a brother and of a sister respectively ; second, systems. 
that the effect of the four-class system is to bar the marriage - 
of brothers with sisters and of parents with children in every 
case, out not the marriage of first cousins, the children of a 
brother and of a sister respectively ; thirdly, that the effect 
of the eight-class system is to bar the marriage of brothers 
with sisters, of parents with children, and of first cousins, the 
children of a brother and of a sister respectively.? 

Hence if we are right in assuming that these three Thus the 
marriage systems were instituted successively and in this pe 
order for the purpose of effecting just what they do effect, it of the 
follows that the two-class system was instituted to prevent pera 
the marriage of brothers with sisters; that the four-class have 
system was instituted to prevent the marriage of parents (7s 
with children; and that the eight-class system was instituted attempt to 
to prevent the marriage of certain first cousins, the children ear 

of a brother and a sister respectively, the marriage of all once 
w 

other first cousins (the children of two brothers or of two The hae 

sisters) having been already prevented by the institution off ayersion to 

the tvo-class system.’ Me 

If this inference is correct, we see similar 

marriages 
that in Australia exogamy originated, just as Morgan ear 

supposed, in an attempt to prevent the marriage of brothers must have 
with sisters, and that the prohibitions of marriage with 4 
4 

1 We have seen (vol. i. p. 514) 
that as a result of a lifetime of observa- 
tion and reflection the shrewd and 

win Spencer. See his Presidential 
Address, ‘‘Totemism in Australia,” 
Transactions of the Australasian Associ. 

cautious Dr. A. W. Howitt firmly be- 
lieved in the deliberate institution of 
the Australian marriage system; and 
the belief is shared by Professor Bald- 

ation for the Advancement of Science, 
Dunedin, 1904, pp. 419 sg. 

2 See above, vol. i, pp. 274-279. 

3 See above, vol. i. p. 181. 

before 

“it was 
embodied 
in an 
exogamous 
rule. 

\ 

st) 

That 
aversion 
shews itself 
in the 
widespread 
customs of 
avoidance 
which are 
observed 
by certain 
marriage- 
able 

108 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

parents and with certain first cousins followed later. Thus 
the primary prohibition is that of marriage between brothers 
and sisters and not, as might perhaps have been expected, 
between parents and children. From this it does not 
necessarily follow that the Australian aborigines entertain a 
deeper horror of incest between brothers and sisters than of 
incest between parents and children. All that we can fairly 
infer is that before the two-class system was instituted incest 
between brothers and sisters had been commoner than incest 
between parents and children, and that accordingly the first 
necessity was to prevent it. The aversion to incest between 
parents and children appears to be universal among the 
Australian aborigines, as well among tribes with two classes 
as among tribes with four classes, although the two-class 
system itself is not a bar to certain cases of that incest. 
Thus we perceive, what it is important to bear steadily in 
mind, that the dislike of certain marriages must always have 
existed in the minds of the people, or at least in the minds 
of their leaders, before that dislike, so to say, received legal 
sanction by being embodied in an exogamous rule. In 
democratic societies, like those of the Australian savages, law 
only gives practical effect to thoughts that have been long 
simmering in the minds of many. This is well exemplified 
in the prohibition of marriage between certain first cousins 
as well as in the prohibition of marriage between parents 
and children. For many Australian tribes dislike and pro- 
hibit all marriages between first cousins,’ even though they 
have not incorporated that dislike and prohibition in their 
exogamous organisation by adopting the eight-class system, 
which effectually prevents all such marriages. 

The aversion, whether instinctive or acquired, to the for- 
bidden marriages shews itself markedly in the customs of 
social avoidance which in many savage communities persons 
who stand in the prohibited degrees of kinship or affinity 
observe towards each other; for the only reasonable 
explanation of such customs, which we have now traced 
throughout most of the exogamous and totemic tribes of the 
world,’ is that they are precautions against unions which the 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 346, 439, 2 See the references in the Index, 
449 59-1 459, 474 59-, 483- s.v. ** Avoidance.” 

i 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 109 

people regard as incestuous. In some! Australian tribes persons 
this custom of avoidance is observed between brothers and Se 
sisters,’ although brothers and sisters are universally barred 
to each other in marriage by all the exogamous systems, the 
two-class system, the four-class systera, and the eight-class 

system alike. No doubt it is possible theoretically to such 
explain this avoidance as merely an effect of the exogamous inp ese 
prohibition. But this explanation becomes improbable when rather the 
we observe that similar customs of mutual avoidance are pr are 
frequently observed towards each other by persons who are exogamy, 
not barred to each other by the exogamous rules of the jvfhre 
classes. For example, the custom that a man must avoiatfglaces 

his wife’s mother is observed in Australia by tribes which sacine 

have female descent*® as well as by tribes which have male who are 
3 : . 5 not barred 

descent ;*° yet in tribes which have two classes with female to each 

descent a woman always belongs to the same exogamous aie 

class as her daughter, and is therefore theoretically marriage- exogamous 

able with her daughter’s husband. Similarly with first ™* 

cousins, the children of a brother and a sister respectively, 

they are sometimes bound to avoid each other even although 

the exogamous system of the tribe interposes no barrier to 

their union. Hence it is a legitimate inference that in all 

such customs of mutual avoidance between persons who are 

sexually marriageable, but socially unmarriageable, with 

each ‘other, we see rather the cause than the effect of 

exogamy, the germ of the institution rather than its fruit. 

That germ, if I am right, is a feeling of dread or aversion to 

sexual union with certain persons, a feeling which has found 

legal or rather customary expression in the exogamous pro- 

hibitions. The remarkable fact that the custom of mutual 

avoidance is often observed between adult brothers and 

sisters and between parents and their adult children’ seems 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 542, 565 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 395, 404 
sg. Compare E. M. Curr, Zhe sg., 416 sg., 541, 565. 
Australian Race,i. 109. ‘*The laws 3 See above, vol. i. pp. 440, 451. 
with respect to women are very strin- 4 This is the case in Central New 
gent. A woman in most tribes, for Ireland and Uganda, See above, vol. 
instance, is not allowed to converse or ii. pp. 130 sg., 508. Compare above, 
have any relations whatever with any vol. ii. pp. 629, 637 59. 
adult male, save her husband. Even 6 For instances of the mutual avoid- y 
with a grown-up brother she is almost ance of brothers and sisters, see the 
forbidden to exchange a word.” referénces in the Index, s.v. ‘* Avoid- 

The rise of 
exogamy 
was 
probably 
preceded 

by a period 
of sexual 
promiscuity. 

\ 

Ilo SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. HI 

to tell strongly against the view of Dr. Westermarck, that 
sexual desire is not naturally excited between persons who 
have long lived together; for no classes of persons usually 
live longer together than brothers with their sisters and 
parents with their children ; none, therefore, should be more 
perfectly exempt from the temptation to incest, none should 
be freer in their social intercourse with each other than 
brothers with sisters and parents with children, That 
freedom indeed exists among all civilised nations, but it 
does not exist among all savages, and the difference in this 
respect between the liberty granted to the nearest relations 
by civilisation and the restrictions imposed on them by 
savagery certainly suggests that the impulse to incest, which 
is almost extinct in a higher state of society, is so far from 
being inoperative in a lower state of society that very 
stringent precautions are needed to repress it. 

Thus the exogamous system of the Australian aborigines, 
forming a graduated series of restrictions on marriage which 
increase progressively with the complexity of the system as 
it advances from two through four to eight classes, appears to 
have been deliberately devised for the purpose of preventing 
sexual unions which ‘the natives regarded as incestuous. 
The natural and almost inevitable inference is that before 
the first bisection of a community into two exogamous 
classes such incestuous unions between persons near of kin, 
especially between blood brothers and sisters, were common; , 
in short, that at some period before the rise of exogamy 
barriers between the sexes did not exist, or in other words 
there was sexual promiscuity. Under the influence of 
exogamy, which in one form or another is and probably has 
been for ages dominant in Australia, the age of sexual pro- 
miscuity belongs to a more or less distant past, but clear 
traces of it survive in the right of intercourse which in many 

ance.” For instances of thc mutual Ceylon, among whom ‘a father will 

avoidance of father and daughter, see 
above, vol. ii. pp. 189, 424. For 
instances of the mutual avoidance of 
mother and son, see above, vol. ii. pp. 
77, 78, 189, 638. To the instances 
cited of mutual avoidance between 
parents and their adult children may 
be added the case of the Veddas of 

not see his daughter after she has 
attained the age of puberty, and a 
mother will not see her son after he 
has grown a beard.” See “On the 
Weddas, by a Tamil native of 
Ceylon,” Zvansactions of the Ethno- 
logical Society of London, New Series, 
lit, (1865) p. 71. 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY IIt 

Australian tribes the men exercise ovér unmarried girls 
before these are handed over to their husbands.’ That the 
licence granted to men on these occasions is no mere out- 
burst of savage lust but a relic of an ancient custom is 
strongly suggested by the methodical way in which the right 
is exercised by certain, not all, of the men of the tribe, who 
take their turn in a prescribed and strictly regulated order. 
Thus even these customs are by no means cases of absolutely 
unrestricted promiscuity, but taken together with the con- 
verging evidence of the series of exogamous classes they 
. point decidedly to the former prevalence of far looser 
relations between the sexes than are now to be found among 
any of the Australian aborigines. 

But it must always be borne in mind than in postulating But though 
sexual promiscuity, or something like it, as the starting-point eae 
of the present Australian marriage system we affirm nothing seems 
as to the absolutely primitive relations of the sexes among ‘>’ 

preceded 
mankind. All that we can say is that the existing marriage\gxogamy, 

customs of the Australian aborigines appear to have sprung eee 
from an immediately preceding stage of social evolution in ee 
which marriage, understood as a lasting union between single absolutely 
pairs, was either unknown or rare and exceptional, and in Primitive 
which even the nearest relations were allowed to cohabit 
with each other. But as I have already pointed out,’ though 
the Australian savages are primitive in a relative sense by 
comparison with ourselves, they are almost certainly very 
far indeed from being primitive in the absolute sense of the 
word; on the contrary, there is every reason to think that 
by comparison with truly primaeval man they have made 
immense progress in intelligence, morality, and the arts of 
life. *Hence even if it could be proved that before they 
attained to their present level of culture they had passed 
through a lower stage in which marriage as we understand 
it hardly existed, we should have no right to infer that their 
still more remote ancestors had continued in a state of sexual 
promiscuity ever since man became man by a gradual evolu- 
tion from a lower form of animal life. It is no doubt 
interesting to speculate on what may have been the relations 

1 See above, vol. i, pp. 311-313, : 2 See above, p. 17, and above, vol. 
419, 499, 545. 1 pp. 342 5g. 

The three 
typical 
marriage 
systems 
of the 
Australian 
aborigines 
considered 
as a series 
of reforma- 
tions 
designed 
to remedy 
sexual 

promiscuity. 

It would 
seem that 
the division 
of a com- 
munity 
into two 
exogamous 
classes 

was devised 
aS a means 
of enabling 
people the 
more easily 
to avoid 
those 
marriages 
to which a 
strong 
aversion 
hadalready 
grown up 
in the com- 
munity, 
especially 
the 
marriages 
of brothers 

E12 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, III 

of the human sexes to each other from the earliest times 
down to the period when savage man emerges on the stage 
of history ; but such speculations are apparently destined to 
remain speculations for ever, incapable of demonstration or 
even of being raised to a high degree of probability. 

From the darkness of the absolutely unknown and the 
quicksands of the purely conjectural we emerge to something 
like daylight and firm ground when we reach the well-defined 
exogamous system of the Australian aborigines in its three 
forms of the two-class system, the four-class system, and the 
eight-class system. Let us accordingly consider these systems 
as a series of reformations designed successively to remedy a 
previous state of more or less unrestricted sexual promiscuity ; 
and let us see in detail how the actual rules of the three systems 
square with this hypothesis. The attempt may at least help 
to clarify our ideas on a somewhat abstruse subject, and to 
illustrate the mode in which a system of exogamy leads to its 
regular attendant, the classificatory system of relationship, 

We will take up the three typical marriage systems of 
the Australian aborigines, the two-class system, the four-class 
system, and the eight-class system, in this order, beginnirig 
with the simplest and ending with the most complex. 

We start then by hypothesis with a state of society in 
which men and women had been allowed freely to cohabit 
with each other, but in which nevertheless in the minds of 
many, and especially of the most intelligent members of the 
community, there had, for some reason unknown to us, 
been long growing up a. strong aversion to consanguineous 
unions, particularly to the cohabitation of brothers with 
sisters and of mothers with sons. For we may safely assume 
that the recognition of these simplest and most obvious 
relationships preceded the rise of exogamy in any form. On 
the other hand, there can at the outset have been no scruple 
felt on the ground of consanguinity to the cohabitatioh of a 
father with his daughter, if we are right in assuming that 
when exogamy was instituted the physical relationship of 
fatherhood had not yet been recognised. Accordingly the 
aim of the more thoughtful part of the social group, prob- ; 
ably consisting chiefly of the older men, was to devise seme 
means of putting a stop to those sexual unions which 

SECT. ILI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 113 

had come to be regarded as evil and detrimental to the with sisters 
community, especially the unions of brothers with sisters and 74 of | 

of mothers with sons. To us the obvious thing might with sons. 
appear to be simply to prohibit the unions in question. 
But for some reasons which we can cnly conjecture, there 
would seem to have been difficulties in the way of taking 
this course. With the undeveloped intelligence of the low 
savages, with whom exogamy must certainly have originated, 
it may well have been difficult for everybody to remember 
his individual relationships to everybody else, and accordingly 
to know whether he might or might not cohabit with any 
particular woman with whom he might chance to be thrown 
into contact ; for where the sexual relations were of so loose, 
vague, and temporary a character, it is likely enough that in 
later life mothers and sons, brothers and sisters would often 
drift apart and fail to remember or recognise each other when 
they met. To obviate the difficulty and to prevent the 
danger of incest, whether accidental or otherwise, it may 
accordingly have occurred to some primitive sages, of whom 
there must always have been at least a few, that instead of 
asking everybody to carry about in his head his own partic- 
ular family tree, to be produced and consulted at sight 
whenever he fell in with an attractive woman, it would be 
much simpler to divide the whole community, probably a 
very small one, into two groups and two only, and to say 
that everybody in the one group might cohabit with every- 
body in the other group but with nobody in his own. And 
to prevent the consanguineous unions which had probably 
been the most frequent and were now the most disapproved 
of, to wit, the cohabitation of brothers with sisters and of 
mothers with sons, it was only necessary to enact that a 
mother with her children should always be arranged together 
in one group. We may suppose, then, that the proposal to 
divide the community into two exogamous and intermarrying 
groups, with each mother and her children arranged together | 
in one group, was approved by the community and put into 

practice. Henceforth the question with whom a man might 

cohabit and with whom he might not was greatly simplified. 

He had only to ascertain from any particular woman whether 

she belonged to his group or to the other group, and his 

VOL. IV I 

The 
two-clas$ 
system 
with its 
classifica- 
tory 
relation- 
ships an! 
rules of 
marriage: 
” 

The 
classifica- 
tory 
relation- 
ships of 
an A man 
tu the 

A women. 

114 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

course was: clear. The mental relief thus afforded to the 
scrupulous and superstitious but dull-witted savage was 
probably very considerable. 

Let us suppose that the two newly-created exogamous 
groups were called A and B, and let us now see the 
effects of this simplest of all forms of exogamy, the 
division pf a community into two exogamous groups 
or classes with a rule that any man in one class may 
cohabit with any woman in the other class but with no 
woman in his own. As the children are, on our hypo- 
thesis, arranged in the same class with their mothers, the 
system which we are about to examine is a two-class 
system with female descent. We will first consider the 
relations of a man A to all the women of the community, 
and for the sake of simplicity we will suppose that there are 
only three generations alive, namely, A’s own generation, the 
generation above him, and the generation below him. Then 
we obtain the following group or classificatory relationships 
and the following rules of marriage :— 

(2) All the A women in the generation above the man 
A are his group mothers or his mother’s sisters, and~ one 
of them is his actual’ mother, but he calls them all his 
mothers, not because he thinks he was born of them all, but 
because they are collectively the mothers of all the men and 
women of his class and generation. All the A women in 
his own generation are his sisters or cousins, the daughters 
either of his mother’s sisters (for his mother’s sisters are A 
and their daughters are A) or of his father’s brothers (for his 
father’s brothers are B and their children are A); but he 
calls them all his sisters. All the A women in the genera- 
tion below his own are his sisters’ daughters (for his °sisters 
are A and their daughters are A) or his daughters-in-law 
(for his sons are B and their wives are A). All these A 
women belong to A’s own class; hence by the rule of 

Prohibitedlexogamy he may not marry nor cohabit with them. Thus 

degrees of 
marriage, 

he is forbidden to marry his group mothers (including his 
actual mother and her sisters), his group sisters (includ- 
ing his actual sisters and his cousins, the daughters 
either of his mother’s sisters or of his father’s brothers), 
the daughters of his group sisters, and his group daughters- 

SECT. LI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 115 

in-law (including his actual daughters-in-Jaw, the wives of 
his sons). 

(6) All the B women in the generation above A’s own The 
are his group mothers-in-law and one of them is his actual ‘!@ssifica- | 
mother-in-law (since his wife is a B and her mother is a B), relation- 
but he calls them all his mothers-in-law, because by the pan oe 
rule he is free to marry or cohabit with the daughters of to the 
any of them. All the B women in his own generation are ® ¥°™*™ 
his cousins, the daughters either of his father’s sisters (for his 
father’s sisters are B and their daughters are B) or of his 
mother’s brothers (for his mother’s brothers are A and their 
daughters are B). All the B women in the generation below 
his own are his daughters or the daughters of his brothers 
(for his brothers like himself are A and marry B women 
and their daughters are B); but he ‘calls them all his 
daughters. The reason why he calls his brother's daughters 
his daughters may have been, as we shall see afterwards, 
because at this stage of social evolution a group of brothers 
commonly cohabited with a group of sisters and the in- 
dividual fatherhood of the children was uncertain, though 
the group fatherhood was certain or probable. All these B [Permitted 
. women belong to the other class from A ; hence by the rule SSriage. : 
of exogamy he may marry or cohabit with any of them. 
Thus he. is allowed to marry his mother-in-law, his cousins 
(the daughters either of his father’s sisters or of his mother’s 
brothers), his daughters, and his brothers’ daughters. But 
of these women it is natural that he should marry or cohabit 
chiefly with the women of his own generation, and as these 
are his cousins (the daughters either of his father’s sisters 
or of his mother’s brothers), it follows that his cousins (the 
daughters either of his father’s brothers or of his mother’s 
brothers) are his proper wives or mates, and consequently 
he calls them all his wives, because by the fundamental law 
of the classes he may marry any of them. That is why 
among the Urabunna, who have this simplest of all forms of 
exogamy, the two-class system with female descent, a man’s 
proper marriage is always with his cousin, the daughter 
either of his father’s sister or of his mother’s brother, but 
never with his cousin the daughter either of his father’s 
brother or of his mother’s sister, since marriage with the 

The effect 
of the 
two-class 
system 

is to 
regulate 
satisfac- 
torily all 
marriages 
between 
men and 
women of 
the same 
generation, 
but not all 
marriages 
between 
men and 
women of 
different 
genera- 
tions ; 
since with 
female 
descent the 
two-class 
system 
allows a 
man to 
cohabit 
with his 
mother-in- 
law and 
his own 
daughter, 
while with 
male 
descent 

it allows 
him to 
cohabit 

116 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

daughter either of a father’s brother or of a mother’s sister 
is barred by the two-class system of exogamy, and that 
whether descent is traced in the male or in the female line. 
The same reason doubtless explains the widespread prefer- 
ence for marriage with a cousin, the daughter either of a 
father’s sister or of a mother’s brother, combined with the 
strict prohibition of marriage with a cousin, the daughter 
either of! a father’s brother or of a mother’s sister. Accord- 
ingly, wherever we find that preference combined with that 
prohibition we may reasonably infer that a two-class system 
of exogamy was once in force.” 

What then were the results of this first attempt to bar 
sexual unions which had come to be viewed with general 
disapprobation as incestuous? Regarded from the stand- 
point of this growing moral sentiment, the results were 
partly satisfactory and partly unsatisfactory. They were 
satisfactory so far as they prevented cohabitation with 
mothers, sisters, and daughters-in-law ; they were unsatis- 
factory so far as they permitted cohabitation with the wife’s 
mother and with a man’s own daughters; for with regard 
to father and daughter it seems probable that an aversion 
to their sexual union had grown up long before the physical 
relationship between the two was recognised, and while he 
still stood to her only in the position of her mother’s consort 
and the guardian of the family. Thus in regard to the 
women of a man’s own generation, amongst whom his 
wives or mates are most naturally sought, the system at 
first succeeded perfectly, since it assigned to him as his 
wives or mates his cousins, the daughters either of his father’s 
sisters or of his mother’s brothers ; for the early popularity 
of this particylar marriage may be safely inferred from the 
preference accorded to it by so many races down to the 
present day. But while the new matrimonial machinery 
worked smoothly and without a hitch in regard to the coh&bita- 
tion of all men and women of the same generation, it jolted 
badly or even broke down at the cohabitation of men and 
women of different generations, since it allowed a man to 

-cohabit with his mother-in-law in the generation above his 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 177 577-, «180 sqg. 
2 Compare vol. ii. pp. 224-228. 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 117 

own, and with his daughters in the generation below his own. with his 
And if the rule of male descent had been adopted instead of PV 
female descent, the difficulty of regulating the cohabitation and his 
of men and women in different generations would not have Stushter 
been evaded, it would only have been changed ; for with a 
two-class system and male descent it can easily be shewn, 

by a similar demonstration, that while a man is prevented 

from cohabiting with his mother-in-law in the generation 
above his own, and with his own daughter in the generation 
below his own, since they both belong to his own exogamous 

class, he is on the other hand free to cohabit with his 

own mother in the generation above his own, and with his 
daughter-in-law in the generation below. his own, since they 

both belong to the other exogamous class into which he 
marries. Thus the result of adopting a two-class system 

with male descent would be if anything rather worse than 
better, since it would substitute leave to marry a mother for 
leave to marry a daughter, and it is probable that ever since 

the notion of incest arose sexual union with a mother has 

been deemed a graver offence than sexual union with a 
daughter, if for no other reason than that the relationship 
between a mother and her son must from the first have 

heen seen to be consanguineous, whereas the relationship 
between a father and his daughter was for long supposed to 

be only social. 

Thus whichever way the founders of the two-class How were 
system of exogamy arranged descents, they. were dis- emi 
concerted by finding that under it, though the sexual two-class 
relations between men and women of the same generation >5<™ 
were now, so far as they conformed to the system, entirely remedied? 
satisfactory (since either with male or female descent men, 
regularly cohabited with their cousins, the daughters of their 
father’s sisters or of their mother’s brothers), the sexual rela- 
tions between men and women of different generations were 
still very unsatisfactory on some important points, inasmuch 
as with female descent a man might marry his daughter or 
his mother-in-law, while with male descent he might marry 
his mother or his daughter-in-law. What was to be done? 

The object was to prevent certain persons of one 
generation from cohabiting with certain persons of another 

a 

The 
object was 
attained by 
subdivid- 
ing each 
exogamous 
class into 
two sub- 
classes, 
and 
ordaining 
that two 
successive 
genera- 
tions 
should 
never 
belong to 
the same 
subclass. 
Thus the 
creation 
of the 
four-class 
system 
effectually 
cured the 
worst evils 
which the 
two-class 
system had 
failed to 
remedy. 

118 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, Il 

generation, and it appears to have struck some inventive 
genius that this could readily be effected by subdividing 
each of the two exogamous classes into two companion sub- 
classes according to generations, and by ordaining that 
henceforth each of the four resulting subclasses should 
marry into only one other subclass, and that two 
successivg generations should never belong to the same 
subclass, or, to be more precise, that children should 
never belong to the subclass of either parent, but always 
to the companion subclass of their father or of their 
mother according as descent was seckoned in the male or 
in the female line, If this expedient were adopted, all 
the most objectionable permissions granted by the old 
two-class system would be cancelled, all the loopholes left 
for incest would be closed. For whereas under the two- 
class system with female descent a man was free to marry 
his daughter because she belonged to the other exogamous 
class, under the new four-class system with female descent 
he would no longer be free to do so, since, although she 
still belonged to the other exogamous class, and was there- 
fore so far marriageable, she had now been transferred to a 
different subclass inté which he was forbidden to marry. 
Similarly, whereas under the two-class system with male 
descent a man was free to marry his mother because she 
belonged to the other exogamous class, under the new four- 
class system with male descent he was no longer free to do 
so, since, although she still belonged to the other exogamous 
class, and was therefore so far marriageable, she had now 
been transferred to a different subclass into which he was 
forbidden to marry. Again, whereas under the old two-class 
system with female descent a man was free to marry his 
mother-in-law since she belonged to the same exogamous 
class as her daughter, his wife, under the new four-class 
system with female descent he was no longer free to do so, 
since, although she still belonged to the same exogamous 
class as her daughter, his wife, and was therefore so far 
marriageable, she had now been transferred to a different 
subclass into which he was forbidden to marry. Similarly, 
whereas under the old two-class system with male descent a 
man was free to marry his daughter-in-law because she 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 119 

belonged to the other exogamous class, under the new four- 
class system with male descent he was no honger free to do 
so, since, although she still belonged to the other exogamous 
class and was therefore so far marriageable, she had now 
been transferred to another subclass into which he was 
forbidden to marry. Thus all the evils which have been 
indicated as incidental to the two-class system are remedied 
by the four-class system, whether descent be traced in the 
male or in the female line. If the rules of the new system 
are only observed, the possibility of incest with a sister, a 
mother, a mother-in-law, and a daughter-in-law is absolutely 
prevented. Hence many Australian tribes have acquiesced 
in the four-class system as adequate to all their require- 
ments and have never pushed the exogamous subdivision 

further.? 

The reason why a large group of tribes in Central and 
Northern Australia has carried the subdivision one step 

1 An entirely different explanation 
of the four-class system has been 
suggested by Professor E. Durkheim. 
See E. Durkheim, ‘‘La Prohibition 
de Vinceste,” Longe soctologigue, i. 
(1898) pp. 11-22. But his explana- 
tion suffers from the fatal defect that it 
explains only the four-class system with 
female descent and not the four-class 
system with male descent. Yet the four- 
class system with male descent exists 
in tribes which occupy a considerable 
range of country in South - eastern 
(Queensland, as Dr. A. W. Howitt 
pointed out long before Prof. Durkheim 
published his theory. See A. W. 
Howitt, ‘* Further Notes on the Aus- 
traliangClass Systems,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xviii. (1889) 
pp. 48-50; compare his .Varizve Tribes 
of South-East Australia, pp. 114-118. 
Thus Prof. Durkheim is mistaken in 
affirming (op. cit, p. 21) that ‘‘ Howitt 
dui-méme a remarqué que partout on le 
clan se recrute ex masculis et per 
masculos, /a classe n’existe pas.” No 
such statement is made by Dr. Howitt 
in the passage ( Journal of the Anthro- 
pological Institute, xviii. 40) to which 
Prof. Durkheim refers, and even if Dr. 
- Howitt had made such a statement it 

would have been refuted by the facts 
adduced by Dr. Howitt himself a few 
pages further on, where he records (pp. 
48-50) the existence of a considerable 
grasp of tribes with a four-class system 
and male descent. Moreover, since 
Prof. Durkheim published his theory 
of the four-class system, the researches 
of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen have 
revealed the existence of a very large 
body of tribes in Central and Northern 
Australia, which have an eight-class 
system with male descent. Hence, 
whereas Prof. Durkheim had ventured 
to conjecture (of. cz¢. p. 21) that the 
subclasses would disappear with male 
descent, they are found on the contrary 
to multiply with it. Professor Durk- 
heim’s theory of the four-class system 
may therefore be dismissed as inade- 
quate to account for the facts, since it 
offers no explanation of the numerous 
cases of tribes with four or eight 
classes and male descent. The ex- 
planation which I have adopted has 
the advantage of explaining all the 
facts of the four-class and eight-class 
systems alike, whether descent be 
reckoned in the male or in the female 
line. 

120 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

Fro further by splitting each exogamous subclass into two and 
subsequent . : 5 

ete ae producing the eight-class system, appears to have been a 
of the growing aversion to the marriage of first cousins, the children 
ight-cl: : A 

Sic », Of a brother and of a sister respectively. For we know that 
some tribes many Australian tribes forbid such marriages, even though 

pee they have not adopted the cight-class system, which 

ioe kanaa effectually prevents them.’ Indeed some tribes which dis- 
© preven s ; oe 
the mar- countenarice the marriage of first cousins, such as the Dieri 

riage of and the Kulin, never advanced beyond the stage of the two- 
certain first 

cousins, Class system. This shews, as I havé already pointed out? 

viz, the . 
children of how even an exogamous community may by a simple 

—_ 

abrother prohibition bar marriages which it disapproves of without . 

and a sister : - : 
respect. needing to extend its exogamous system by further sub- 

ively. divisions. The incest line has most commonly wavered at 
first cousins, the children of a brother and of a sister 
respectively, opinion sometimes inclining decidedly in favour 
of, and sometimes decidedly against, these unions. So it 
has been in Australia and so it has been elsewhere® down 
to our own time in our own country. In Australia some, 
but not all, of the tribes which disapproved of the marriages 
of first cousins expressed their disapproval by extending 
their exogamous system so-as to include such unions in its 
ban. Others contented themselves with keeping the old 
exogamous system in its simpler forms of two or four classes 
and merely forbidding the marriages in question. 

Thus the Thus the whole complex exogamous system of the 

iia Australian aborigines is explicable in a simple and natural 

exogamous 

peace ’ way if we suppose that it sprang from a growing aversion 
of the * . ° . . . 
Australian to the marriage of near kin, beginning with the marriage of 

eee brothers with sisters and of parents with children, and ending 
able on the at the marriage of cousins, who sometimes fell within and 
hypomhesis sometimes without the table of forbidden degrees. To 
sprang prevent these marriages the tribes deliberately subdivided 

from an themselves into two, four, or eight exogamous classes, the 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 346, 439, castes in India prefer these marriages 
449 597., 459, 474 sg., 483. Astothe toall others. Other peoples, such as 
prevention of the marriage of first the Southern Melanesians, the Masai, 
cousins by means of the eight-class the Baganda, and the Indians of Costa 

system, see above, vol. i. pp. 277 59. Rica forbid them altogether. See vol. 
j . ii, pp. 75 sg7., 141 sgg., 224 599., 409, ° 
? Vol. i. pp. 346, 439- 508; iil. 552; and the references in 

* For example, the Fijians and many _ the Index, s.z. ‘* Cousins.” 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGA MV 121 

4 
three systems succeeding each other in ajseries of growing aversion 

iS z, to the ma: 
complexity as each was found inadequate to meet the Faces of 

increasing demands of public opinion and morality. The vear kin, 

F : and that i 
scheme no doubt took shape in the minds of a few men of a Was pio 

sagacity and practical ability above the ordinary, who by ‘luced by 
their influence and authority persuaded their fellows to put a 
it in practice; but at the same time the plan must have Pisections 
answered to certain general sentiments of what was right and community 
proper, which had been springing up in the community long regstaniel 
before a definite social organisation was adopted to enforce such mar- 
them. And what is true of the origination of the system in 8°; 

its simplest form is doubtless true of each successive step 

which added at once to the complexity and to the efficiency of 
the curious machinery which savage wit had devised for the 
preservation of sexual morality. Thus, and thus only, does 

it seem possible to explain a social system at once so 
intricate, so regular, and so perfectly adapted to the needs 

and the opinions of the people who practise it. In the 

whole of history, as I have already remarked, it would 

hardly be possible to find another human institution on‘ 

which the impress of deliberate thought and purpose has 

been stamped more plainly than on the exogamous systems 

of the Australian aborigines. 

Thus we may suppose that exogamy replaced a previous What 
state of practically unrestricted sexual promiscuity. What ned ed 
the new system introduced was not individual marriage but was not 
group marriage ; that is, it took away from all the men of seid 
the community the unlimited right of intercourse with all but group 
the women and obliged a certain group of men to confine an phae 
themselves to a certain group of women. At first these size of the 
groups were large, but they were reduced in size by each He ercane 
successive bisection of the tribe. The two-class system left was re- 
every man free to cohabit, roughly speaking, with half the eras 

women of the community ; the four-class system forbade him ee P 
7 3 section O! 
to have sexual relations with more than one fourth of the the tribe. 

women ; and the eight-class system restricted him to one bee 
eighth of the women. Thus each successive step in fhe group mar- 
exogamous progression erected a fresh barrier between the oe 
sexes ; it was an advance from promiscuity through group ficatory 
marriage towards monogamy. Of this practice of group in 
a ship. 

Classi- 
ficatory 
relation- 
ships of 
men to 
each other 
in the 
two-class 
system. 

122 SUMMAR ¥Y AND CONCLUSION SECT. I 

marriage, intermediate between the two terms of the series, 
promiscuity on the one side and monogamy on the other, 
the most complete record is furnished by the classificatory 
system of relationship, which defines the relations of men 
and women to each other according to the particular genera- 
tion and the particular exogamous class to which they 
belong. The cardinal relationship of the whole system is 
the marridgeability of a group of men with a group of 
women. All the other relationships of the system hinge on 
this central one. , . 
We have seen how with the institution of the primary 
two-class system all the men at once fall into classifica- 
tory relationships to all the women according to genera- 
tions and classes, these relationships being an extension of 
the simplest and most obvious of human relationships; the 
relationship of husband to wife in the largest sense of the 
word,the relationship of a mother to her children, and the rela- 
tionship of these children, as brothers and sisters, to each other. 
Simultaneously, of course, the classificatory relationships of 

“the men to each other are determined by the same means. 

The 
classi- 
ficatory 
relation- 
ships of an 
A man to 
the other 
A men. 

For example, if the system is composed of two exogamous 
classes with descent inj the female line, and we name the 
classes as before A and B, we may define as follows the 
relations of an A man to all the other men of the community, 
assuming for the sake of simplicity that the men are all com- 
prised in three generations, namely A’s own generation, the 
generation above his own, and the generation below his 
own. 

(a) To take first the classificatory relationships of an 
A man to the other A men. In the generation above 
his own all the, A men are his mother’s brothers (sitice his 
mother is A and her brothers are A) or his fathers-in-law 
(since his wives are B and their fathers are A). In his own 
generation all the A men are his brothers or his cousins, the 
sons either of his mother’s sisters (since his mother is A and 
her sons are A) or of his father’s brothers (since his father’s 
brothers are B and their sons are A), but he calls them all 
indiscriminately his brothers. In the generation below his 
own all the A men are the sons either of his sisters (since 
his sisters are A and their children are A) or of his female 

SECT. II THE ORIGIN OF EXQGAMY 123 

cousins, the daughters of his mother’s pisters ot of his 
father’s brothers ; but he calls them all his nephews. 

(8) To take now the classificatory relationships of an A tie 
man tothe B men. In the generation above his own all the B ¢lsssif- 
men are his group fathers or his father’s brothers and one of rlatiohs 
them is his actual father, but he calls them all his fathers. ae rae 
In his own generation all the B men are his cousins, the the B men, 
sons either of his father’s sisters (since his father’s sisters are 
B and their sons are B) or of his mother’s brothers (since his 
mother’s brothers are A and their sons are B), and they are 
all his wife’s brothers (since his wife is a B). In the genera- 
tion below his own all the B men are his sons or his 
brother’s sons (since his brothers are A and their sons are 
B), but he calls them all indiscriminately his sons. A reason 
for thus confounding his own sons with his brother’s sons has 
already been suggested.! There are grounds for thinking, as 
I shall point out presently, that a very early form of group 
marriage consisted of a group of brothers married to a 
group of sisters, and in such unions it might be difficult 
or impossible for a man to distinguish his own sons from 
his brothers’ sons. 

If the reader will take the trouble to compare the rela- The 
tionships of men and women, which I have thus theoretically eae 
deduced from a simple exogamous bisection of the com- relation- 
munity, with the relationships actually recognised by the ac 
classificatory system, as these relationships have come before from the 
us again and again in the course of this work,’ he will at ee 
once perceive their substantial agreement, though for the munity 
sake of simplicity and clearness I have refrained from Sein ou 
following the system through its more remote ramifications ne 
in thé fourth and fifth generations. The agreement should nppeit 
convince him that the classificatory system of relationship a ag 
has in fact resulted from a simple bisection of the com- by the 
munity into two exogamous classes and from nothing else. {Pscavent 
It should be particularly observed that the two-class system into four 

of exogamy suffices of itself to create the classificatory “1 “S"* 

1 Above, p. 115. and Gillen, Wative Tribes of Central 

2 See the references in the Index, Australia, pp. 76 sgg.3 td., Northern 
sv. **Classificatory System of Rela- 7 rébes of Central Australia, pp. 78 
tionship,” or the tables in Spencer sgg. 

124 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. TI 

subclasses System of relationship, which appears not to have been 
which have materially affected by the subsequent adoption of the four- 

taken place . f " : 2 

insome class and eight-class systems in certain tribes. This observa- 
Australian 4; so 3 : : 

tribes. but tion is important, because, while the classificatory system of 

which have relationship is found to be diffused over a great part of the 

not been’ world, the four-class and eight-class systems have hitherto 

occurin been detected in Australia alone. In the absertce of evidence 

eee ae to the cohtrary we accordingly infer that the successive 

world. bisections of the two-class system into four and eight classes 
have been inventions of the Australian intellect alone, and 
that the existence of the classificatory system in other races 
of men raises no presumption that these races have ever 
practised exogamy in any more complex form than the 
simple two-class system. 

Thus with the institution of two exogamous classes and 
the resulting system of group marriage the classificatory 
system of relationship springs up of itself; it simply defines 
the relations -of all the men and women of the community to 
each other according to the generation and the exogamous 
class to which they belong. The seemingly complex system 
of relationship, like the seemingly complex system of 
exogamy on which it; is based, turns out to be simple 
enough when we view it from its starting-point in the 
bisection of a community into two exogamous classes. 

The But in dealing with aboriginal Australian society we are 
a of not left to infer the former prevalence of group marriage 
marriage from the classificatory system of relationship alone. We 
aie have seen that a practice of group marriage actually pre- 
till Jately, vails, or prevailed till lately, among many Australian tribes, 
‘Austraian especially in the* dreary regions about Lake Eyre, where 

tribes, nature may almost be said to have exhausted her ingenuity 
though ° : ° ° + 
the inter. in making the country uninhabitable, and where accordingly 

marrying the aborigines, fully occupied in maintaining a bare struggle 
roups . . s . 
oe auch 108 existence, enjoyed none of those material advantages 

ae which are essential to intellectual and social progress.’ 
an 

exogamous Naturally enough, therefore, the old custom of group 
classes. 

. | As to existing, or lately existing, Eyre, see vol. i. pp. 341 sg. As to 
group marriage in Australia, see above, the necessity of material advantages 
vol. i. pp. 308 sgg-, 363 syg. As to for intellectual and social progress, see 
the nature of the country about Lake above, vol. i. pp. 167 599-, 314 599. 

SECT, I THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 125 

marriage has lingered longest amongst these most backward 
tribes, who have retained exogamy in its simplest and 
oldest form, that of the two-class system. But even 
among them the marriage groups are by no means co- 
incident with the exogamous classes; they are far narrower 
in extent, they are a still closer approximation to the 
custom of individual marriage, that is, to the marriage of 
one man with one woman or with several women, which 
is now the ordinary form of sexual union in the Australian 
tribes. Thus the history of exogamy may be compared to 
a series of concentric rings placed successively one within 
the other, each of lesser circumference than its predecessor 
and each consequently circumscribing within narrower 
bounds the freedom of the individuals whom it encloses. 
The outermost ring includes all the women of the tribe ; the 
innermost ring includes one woman only. The first ring 
represents promiscuity ; the last ring represents monogamy. 

In what precedes I have assumed that when a com- When 
munity first divided itself into two exogamous classes the 8" 
children were assigned to the class of their mother, in other stituted, 
words, that descent was traced in the female line. One ‘hte “re 

reasons 
obvious reason for preferring female to male descent would for tracing 
be the certainty and the permanence of the blood relation- ard ; 
ship between a mother and her child compared with the exegamous 
uncertainty:and frequently the impermanence of the social oe 
relationship between a man and the children of the woman agree Te 
with whom he cohabited; for in speaking of these early tine. 
times we must always bear in mind that the physical re- 
lationship of a father to his children was not yet recognised, 

and that he was to them no more than their guardian and 

the consort of their mother. Another strong reason, which 

indeed flows as a consequence from the preceding reason, 

for preferring female to male descent in the original two- 

class system of exogamy was that the aversion to incest 

with a mother was probably much older and more deeply 

rooted than the aversion to incest with a daughter, and 

that, while a two-class system with female descent bars 

incest with a mother, a two-class system with malé 
descent does not do so; for whereas a two-class system 

with female descent puts a mother and her son in the same 

But with 
group 
marriage 
it is as 
easy to 
determine 
group 
fatherhood 
as it is to 
determine 
group 
mother- 
hood ; 
hence 
from the 
beginning 
of exogamy 
some tribes 
may have 
preferred 
to trace 
descent of 
exogamous 
classes in 
the male 
rather than 
in the 
female line, 

126 SOMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

exogamous class and thereby prevents their sexual union, a 
two-class system with male descent puts mother and son 
in different exogamous classes and therefore presents no 
barrier to their sexual union. For these reasons it seems 
probable that when exogamy was first instituted most 
people adopted maternal rather than paternal descent of the 
exogamous classes. ‘ 

But it need not necessarily have been so. I have 
already pointed out’ that with group marriage it is as 
easy to trace group fatherhood as group motherhood, 
Since the group of fathers is just as well known as the 
group of mothers, though the individual father may be un- 
known, It is therefore perfectly possible that, in instituting 
exogamy some tribes from the beginning preferred to assign 
children to the group of their fathers instead of to the group 
of their mothers. Of course such an assignation would not 
imply any recognition of physical paternity, the nature and 
even existence of which were most probably quite unknown 
to the founders of exogamy. All that these primitive 
savages understood by a father of children was a man who 
cohabited with the children’s mother and acted as guardian 
of the family. That cohabitation, whether occasional or 
prolonged, would be a fact as familiar, or nearly as familiar, 
to every member of the community as the fact of the 
woman’s motherhood ; and though nobody thought of con- 
necting the cohabitation with the motherhood as cause and 
effect, yet the mere association of the man with the woman 
gave him an interest in her children, and the more pro- 
longed the association, in other words, the more permanent 
the marriage, the greater would be the interest he would take 
in them. ; The children were obviously a part of the 
woman’s body; and if from long possession he came to 
regard the woman as his property, he would naturally be 
led to regard her children as his property also. In fact, as 
I have already suggested,” we may conjecture that a man 
looked on his wife’s children as his chattels long before he 
knew them to be his offspring. Thus in primitive society 
it is probable that fatherhood was viewed as a social, not a 
physical, relationship of a man to his children. But that 

1 Vol. i. pp. 167, 248 59., 335 59. 2 Vol. i, p. 167. 

~ 

. 

- 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 127 

social relationship may quite well have been considered a 
sufficient reason for assigning children to the class of the 
man who had the right of cohabiting with their mother 
rather than to the class of the mother herself. Hence we 
cannot safely assume that Australian communities, such as 
the Arunta and other Central tribes, who now transmit 
their exogamous classes in the paternal line, ever trans- 
mitted them in the maternal line.’ So far as exogamy is 
concerned, father-kin may be as primitive as mother-kin. 
To complete our view of Australian exogamy it only 1 remains 

‘ . < . to examine 
remains to indicate the relation of the exogamous classes pee ona 

to the totemic clans, and to shew how the exogamy of of the 

the clans came, under certain circumstances, to follow as a Gcoune™" 

corollary from the exogamy of the classes, that is, primarily abe totemic 
from the bisection of a community into two intermarrying |, Central 

groups. We have seen that among the Arunta and other -\ustralia 
ogni : 7 . the rule of 
tribes of Central Australia, whose totemic, though not their ¢xogamy 

exogamous, system appears to be the most primitive, the aoe 
totemic clans are not exogamous, and the reason why they wo the 
are not exogamous is that these tribes have retained the truly et 
primitive mode of determining a person’s totem, not by the because 
totem of his father or mother, but by the accident of the place ear 
where his mother imagined that the infant’s spirit had passed totemism, 

into her womb. Such a mode of determining the totem, if it is a 

rigorously observed, clearly prevents the totems from being among 

hereditary and therefore renders them useless for the purposes (11... the 

of exogamy ; since with conceptional totemism of this sort application 

eas of the 
you cannot prevent, for example, a brother from cohabiting exogamous 

with a sister or a mother from cohabiting with her son by oe to the 
ny . . otems 
laying down a rule that no man shall cohabit with a woman outa not 

of thé same totem. For with conceptional totemism it may Prevent oS 
arriage o 

happen, and often does happen, that the brother’s totem is near kin. 
different from the sister’s totem and the mother’s totem 
different from the son’s totem. In such cases, therefore, an 

1 Professor E. Durkheim, indeed, Spencer and Gillen pointed out 
has argued that in these Central tribes (Worthern Tribes of Central Australia, 
descent of the classes was traced in p. 121, note!), his argument rests on 
the female line before it was traced in a misapprehension of the facts, and 
the male line. See E. Durkheim, “Sur collapses when that misapprehension is 
le totémisme,” L?danée sociologique, corrected. 

v. (1902) pp. 98 sgg. But, as Messrs. 

128 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, II 

exogamous rule which forbids cohabitation between men 
. and women of the same totem would be powerless to pre- 
vent the incest of a brother with a sister, or the incest of a 
mother with her son. Accordingly the Arunta and other 
tribes of Central Australia, as well as the Banks’ Islanders, 
who have retained the primitive system of conceptional 
totemism, have logically and rightly never applied the rule 
: of exogamly to their totemic clans, because they saw, what 
indeed was obvious, that its application to them would not 
effect the object which exogamy was instituted to effect, to 
wit, the prevention of the marriage of near kin. Thus 
the omission of these tribes to apply the rule of- exogamy 
to their totemic clans, while they strictly applied it to the 
classes, not only indicates in the clearest manner the sharp 
distinction which we must draw between the exogamous 
flasses and the totemic clans, but also furnishes a strong 
argument in favour of the view that exogamy was instituted 
for no othtr purpose than to prevent the marriage of near 
kin, since it was strictly applied to those social divisions 
which effected that purpose, and was not applied at all to 
those social divisions which could not possibly effect it. 
In other From this it follows that amongst the Arunta and other 
ee tribes of Central Australia exogamy was introduced before 
possible the totems had become hereditary. Was it so in the other 
that the Australian tribes? It is not necessary to suppose so. We 

totems had 

become may imagine that people took their totems regularly either 

eee from their father or their mother before the introduction of 

ee exogamy, that is, while persons of the same totem were still 
Seo ade, free to cohabit with each other. If, then, exogamy in its 

and ifthat simplest form of a two-class system were instituted in a 
were SO 

the totemic Community whi¢h up to that time had consisted of a nimber 
Secret of hereditary totemic, but not exogamous, clans, it is easy 
become to see that the exogamy of the totemic clans would be 
yen a natural, though not a necessary, consequence. For.an. 
distributed Obvious way of drawing the new exogamous line through 
ee ee the community would be to divide up the hereditary totemic 
clases. clans between the two exogamous classes, placing so many 

clans on one side of the line to form the one class, and 

so many clans on the other side of the line to form the 

other class. In this way, given the exogamy of the two 

~ 

SECT, III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 131 

there are many causes which would tend in course of time with female 
- ° descent or 
to give a preference to male descent or father-kin over oo vin 
female descent or mother-kin. Amongst these causes the there — 
principal would probably be the gradual restriction of group V4", 
marriage within narrower and narrower limits and with it tendency 

the greater certainty of individual fatherhood ; for it is to ‘Pre 

be remembered that although exogamy appears to have pone or 
been instituted at a time when the nature of physical po with 

paternity was unknown, most tribes which still observe the paar 
: : . . restriction 
institution are now, and probably have long been, acquainted of group 

with the part which the father plays in the begetting of pera 
offspring. Even in South-Eastern Australia, where, favoured fatherhood 

by a fine climate and ample supplies of food, the aborigines oe 

had made the greatest material and intellectual progress, more and 

the fact of physical paternity was clearly recognised,’ though See 

it is still unknown to the ruder tribes of the Centre and the and with 
North, And with the knowledge of the blood tie which f/° Se 
unites a man to his children, it is obvious that his wish to men would 
draw them closer to himself socially would also naturally be S¢s"¢mer 
strengthened. Thus, whereas the system of father-kin, once to transmit 
established, is perfectly stable, being never exchanged for nega 
mother-kin, the system of mother-kin, on the other hand, is to their 
unstable, being constantly liable to be exchanged for father- chiisiveas 
kin. The chief agency in effecting the transition from oe 
mother-kin to father-kin would appear to have been 4 sisters’ 
general increase in material prosperity bringing with it _ ero 
large accession of private property to individuals. For it is man’s heirs 
when a man has much to bequeath to his heirs that he Saat 
becomes sensible of the natural inequity, as it now appears mother- 
to him, of a system of kinship which obliges him to transmit On the 
all his goods to his sisters’ children and none to his own, otherhand, 
Hence it is with the great development of private property neg 
that devices for shifting descent from the female to the ene 
male line most commonly originate. Amongst these father-kin 
devices are the practice of making presents to a man’s own oe 
children in his lifetime, in order that when he dies there motive to 
may be little or nothing to go to his sisters’ children ; the *¢b2"8° 
practice of buying his wife and with her the children from mother- 
her family, so that henceforth the father is the owner as” 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 338, 439 59. 

Thus the 
whole 
marriage 
system 

of the 
Australian 
aborigines 
can be 
explained 
by two 
simple 
principles. 

Will the 
same 
theory 
explain 
exogamy 
in other 
patts of 
the world? 
It is true 

132 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 111 

well as the begetter of his offspring; and the practice of 
naming children into their father’s clan instead of into their 
mother’s. Examples of all these methods of shifting the 
line of descent from the female to the male line have come 
before us in the eourse of our survey,’ and no doubt they 
might easily be multiplied. Hence, as I have already 
pointed out? wherever we find a tribe wavering between 
female descent and male descent we may be sure that 
it is in the act of passing from mother-kin to father-kin, 
and not in the reverse direction, since there are many 
motives which induce men to exchange mother-kin for 
father-kin but none which induce them to exchange father- 
kin for mother-kin. If in Australia there is little or no 
evidence of a transition from maternal to paternal descent, 
the reason is probably to be found in the extreme poverty 
of the Australian aborigines, who, having hardly any property 
to bequeath to their heirs, were not very solicitous as to who 
their heirs should be. 

Thus the whole apparently intricate, obscure, and 
confused system of aboriginal Australian marriage and 
relationship can be, readily and simply explained on the 
two principles of conceptional totemism and the division of 
a community into two exogamous classes for the sake of 
preventing the marriage of near kin. Given these two 
principles as starting-points, and granted that totemism 
preceded exogamy, we see that the apparent intricacy, 
obscurity, and confusion of the system vanish like clouds 
and are replaced by a clear, orderly, and logical evolution. 
On any other principles, so far as I can perceive, the attempt 
to explain Australian totemism and exogamy only darkens 
darkness and confounds confusion. 

Having found, as it seems, an adequate explanation of 
the growth, though not of the ultimate origin, of exogamy 
in aboriginal Australia, we naturally ask whether a similar 
explanation can account for the growth of exogamy in all 
the other parts of the world where it is practised. The 
germ of the whole institution, if I am right, is the deliberate 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 71 57., vol. ii, p. 195, vol. iii. pp. 42, 72, 174 59.5 
308 59. 2 See above, vol. i. p. 71. 

SECT. IIT THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 133 

bisection of the whole community into two exogamous that 
classes for the purpose of preventing the! sexual unions of ee 
near kin. Accordingly on this hypothesis we should expect simple 

to find such a bisection or traces of it in all exogamous oe 
tribes. The facts, however, do not by any means altogether found in 
answer to that expectation. It is true that a division into {%™ Paces: 
two exogamous classes, in other words, a two-class sytem are reasons 
exists commonly, though not universally, in Melanesia! and ae 
is found among some tribes of North American Indians, such it may 

as the Iroquois, the Tlingits, the Haidas, and the Kenais2 have been 
But the existence of two and only, two exogamous divisions aigeee 
in a community is rare and exceptional. Usually we find Seonie 
not two exogamous classes but manly exogamous clans, as paca 
appears to be the invariable rule among the numerous only 
totemic peoples of India and Africa.® But is it not possible $rye" 
that in some communities these exogamous and _ totemic totemic 
‘clans may once have been grouped in exogamous classes or *"S 
phratries which afterwards disappeared, leaving behind them 
nothing but the exogamy of the totemic clans, in other 
words, the prohibition of marriage between men and women 

of the same totemic clans? This is not only possible ; it 
appears to have actually happened in totemic communities 
widely separated from each other. Thus in the Western 
Islands of Torres Straits there is reason to think that the 
totemic clans were formerly grouped in two exogamous 
classes or phratries, but that the exogamy of the classes has 

been relaxed while the exogdmy of the totemic clans has 

been retained.* Careful enquiry led Dr. Seligmann to the 
conclusion that the same thing has happened among the 
Mekeo people and the Wagawaga people of New Guinea.° 

In North America the very same change is known to have 

taken place among the Iroquois, as we learn from the high 
authority of L. H. Morgan,-who lived among them for long 

and knew them intimately. Formerly, he says, the Iroquois 

were divided into two exogamous classes or phratries, each 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 69 sgg., | West are reported to be divided into 

118 sgg., 127 sq.) 131 sg- two exogamous classes, though not into 
2 See above, vol. iii, pp. 11 sg., totemic clans. See above, vol. ii. 
265 sg., 280 sg., 364 5g. . PP. 541, 590. 
3 However, in Africa the Gallas in 4 See above, vol. ii. pp. 5-7- 

the East and the Wepa people in the 5 See above, vol. ii. pp. 44 57-, 

A strong 
motive for 
dropping 
the exo- 
gamy of 
the classes 
and retain- 
ing the 
exogamy 
of the 
clans is 
that the 
former is 
far more 
burden- 
some than 
the latter, 
since it 
imposes 
far greater 
restrictions 
on mar- 
riage. 

134 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, III 

comprising four totemic clans, and no one might marry a 
woman in any of the four clans of his owh class or phratry 
without incurring the deepest detestation and disgrace. In 
process of time, however, he tells us, the rigour of the system 
was relaxed, until finally the prohibition of marriage was 
confined only to the totemic clan.’ Again, precisely the 
same change is reported to have taken place among the 
Hurons or Wyandots. Our best authority on the tribe, 
Mr. W. E. Connolly, informs us that formerly the Wyandots 
were divided into two exogamous classes or phratries, one of 
which comprised four and the other seven totemic clans. 
In old times marriage was forbidden within the class or 
phratry as well as within the totem clan, for the clans 
grouped together in a class or phratry were regarded as 
brothers to each other, whereas they were only cousins to’ 
the clans of the other class or phratry. But at a later time 
the rule prohibiting marriage within the class was abolished 
and the ‘prohibition was restricted to the totemic clan; in’ 
other words, the clan continued to be exogamous after the 
class had ceased to be so.” On the other side of America 
the same change would seem to have taken place among the 
Kenais of Alaska, though our information as to that tribe 
is not full and precise enough to allow us to speak with 
confidence.® 

These facts shew that in tribes which have two exogam- 
ous classes, each class comprising a number of totemic clans, 
there is a tendency for the exogamy of the class to be 
dropped and the exogamy of the clan to be retained. An 
obvious motive for such a change is to be found in the far 
heavier burden which the exogamous class imposes on those 
who submit td it. For where a community is divided into 
two exogamous classes every man is thereby forbidden to 
marry, roughly speaking, one half of all the women of the 
community. In small communities, and in savage society 
the community is generally small, such a rule must often 
make it very difficult for a man to obtain a wife at all; 
accordingly there would be a strong temptation to relax the 
burdensome exogamous rule of the class and to retain the 

1 See above, vol, iii. p. 11. 2 See above, vol. iii. pp. 33 59. 
3 See above, vol. iii. pp. 364 sg. 

SECT. IIT THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 135 

far easier exogamous rule of the clan. The relief afforded 
by such a relaxation would be immediate, and it would be 
all the greater in proportion to the number of the totemic 
clans. If there were, let us say, twenty totemic clans, then, 
instead of being excluded from marriage with ten of them 
by the severe rule of class exogamy, a man would now be 
excluded from marriage with only one of them by the mild 
rule of clan exogamy. The temptation thus offered to 
tribes hard put to it for wives must often have proved irre- 
sistible. It is therefore reasonable to suppose that many 
tribes besides the Western Islanders of Torres Straits, the 
Iroquois, and the Wyandots have tacitly or formally 
abolished the exogamy of the class, while they satisfied 
their scruples by continuing to observe the exogamy of the 

‘clan. In doing so they would exchange a heavy for a light 

matrimonial yoke. 
The foregoing considerations suggest that everywhere Thus clan 

‘ : exogamy 
the exogamy of the totemic clan may have been preceded way aay 

by exogamy of the class or phratry, even where no trace of where have 
a two-class system has survived ; in short, we may perhaps pads 
draw the conclusion that exogamy of the totemic clans is class 
always exogamy in decay, since the restrictions which it “°8"” 
imposes on marriage are far less sweeping than the restric- 
tions imposed by the exogamy of the classes or phratries. 

But there is another strong and quite independent reason The 

for thinking that many tribes which now know only the oacnee 
exogamy of the totemic clans formerly distributed these classifi- 

totemic clans into two exogamous classes. We have seen Ysten of 
that wherever the system of relationship of a totemic people relation- 
has been ascertained, that system is classificatory, not descrip- eee 

‘tive, In its nature. To that rule there appears to be no Peoplesis 

é : th 
exception. But, further, we have found that the classifica- ee 

tory system of relationship follows naturally and necessarily (fering 
as a corollary from the system of group marriage created -by totemic 
the distribution of a community into two exogamous classes.’ ead 
Hence we may infer with some degree of probability that, distributea 
: : in two 
wherever the classificatory system now exists, a two-class exowanibls 
system of exogamy existed before. If that is so, then classes. 

exogamy would seem everywhere to have originated as in 
1 See above, pp. 114 sg9. 

136 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 111 

Australia by a deliberate bisection of the community into 
two exogamous classes for the purpose of preventing the 
marriage of near kin, especially the marriage of brothers 
with sisters and of mothers with sons. 
Thus An advantage of adopting this ds a general solution of 
exogamy the whole problem of exogamy is that, like the solution of 

m very- 
where have the problem of totemism which I have adopted, it enables 
in ene us to understand how the institution is found so widely 
pes distributed over the globe without obliging us to assume 
community either that it has been borrowed by one distant race from 
sie eae another, or that it has been transmitted by inheritance from 
classes | the common ancestors of races so diverse and remote from 
ee of cach other as the Australian aborigines, the Dravidians of 
preventing India, the negro and Bantu peoples of Africa, and the 
ee geot indians of North America. Institutions so primitive and 
near kin. $0 widespread as totemism and exogamy are explained more- 
easily and naturally by the hypothesis of independent origin 
in many places than by the hypothesis either of borrowing 
ofof inheritance from primaeval ancestors. But to explain 
the wide diffusion of any such institution, with any appear- 
ance of probability, on the hypothesis of many separate 
origins, we must be able to point to certain simple general 
ideas which naturally suggest themselves to savage men, and 
we must be able to indicate some easy and obvious way in 
which these ideas might find expression in practice A 
theory which requires us to assume that a highly complex 
process of evolution has been repeated independently by 
many races in many lands condemns itself at the outset. If 
a custom has sprung up independently in a multitude of 
savage tribes all over the globe, it is probable that it has 
originated in'some idea which to the savage mind appears 
very simple and obvious. Such a simple idea we have 
found for totemism in the belief that women can be im- 
pregnated without the aid of the other sex by animals, 
plants, and other natural objects, which enter into them and 
are born from them with the nature of the animals, plants, 
or other natural objects, though with the illusory appear- 
ance of human beings. Such a simple idea we have found 
for exogamy in the dislike of the cohabitation of brothers 

with sisters and of mothers with sons, and we have seen 

SECT. IT THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 137 

how this dislike might easily find expressign in the distribu- 
tion of a community into two exogamous classes with female 
descent, which effectually prevents all such cohabitations. 
The hypothesis has at least the merit of simplicity which, as 
I have just said, is indispensable to any theory which 
professes to explain the independent origin in many places 
of a widespread institution. 

At the same time it is possible to push the theory of Exogamy 
independent origins too far. Within certain limits it seems ™¥ have 

probable that exogamy has spread from one tribe to another iia 
by simple borrowing. This may well have happened, for ¥ Sve" 
example, among the Australian aborigines, who for the most points and 
part live in friendly communication with each other and readily ae 
pass on their simple inventions to their neighbours. Indeed en 
we know that changes in the exogamous classes have been biting 
spreading for some time from one Australian tribe to Peoples. 
another ;* there is therefore no improbability, indeed there 

is great ‘probability, i in the view that the plan of bisecting a 
community into two exogamous classes may have originated 

in a few Australian tribes, possibly in one tribe only, and may 

have been passed on by the inventors to their neighbours 

till it spread by diffusion over the whole continent. And 

in other parts of the world we may suppose that the same 

thing has happened within certain ethnical and geographical 
boundaries. In short, it appears likely that exogamy, in 

the form of the two-class system, has sprung up inde- 
pendently at a number of points in widely separated areas, 

such as the different continents, and that from these points 

as centres it has been diffused in gradually widening circles 
among neighbouring peoples. 

But if exogamy has been instituted in other parts of Exogamy 
the world to serve the same purpose that it appears to have system of 
served in Australia, we must conclude that it has everywhere group 
been originally a system of group marriage deyised for the iain 
sake of superseding a previous state of sexual promiscuity, supersede 
which had for some time been falling into general disrepute pen 
before a few of the abler men hit upon an expedient for sexual pro. 
abolishing it or rather for restraining it within certain limits, Shared 
Such a state of absplute sexual promiscuity, we must state of 

1 See above, vol. i. p. 283. 

promis- 
cuity isa 
matter of 
inference 
only ; there 
is no good 
evidence 
that it has 
ever been 
practised 
by any 
race of 
men within 
historical 
times, 

Group 
marriage 
among the 
Chuckchees 
and 
Herero. 

138 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. Hf 

remember, is a matter of inference, not of observation. 
There is no good evidence, so far as I am aware, that it 
has ever been practised by any race of men within historical 
times; and if it ever existed, as we have reason to think 
that it did, the moral and social conditions which it implies 
are so low that it could not reasonably be expected to have 
survived at the present day even among the lowest of 
existing savages. The numerous statements which have 
been made as to a total absence of restrictions on the 
intercourse of the sexes in certain races seem all to be 
loose, vague, and based on imperfect knowledge or on 
hearsay ; certainly not one of them has ever borne the 
scrutiny of a thorough scientific investigation.’ Even group 
marriage, which appears from exogamy and the classificatory 
system of relationship to have succeeded promiscuity as the. 
next stage of progress, has left few traces of itself anywhere 
but in Australia, where in a restricted form it has been 
practised by a number of tribes down to modern times. 
In our survey of totemism we have indeed met with what 
has been described by competent and independent observers 
as regular systems of group marriage among the Chuckchees 
of North-East Asiaiand the Herero of South-West 
Africa.2 But such cases are too isolated to allow us to lay 
much stress on them. They may spring from purely local 
and temporary circumstances rather than from such general 
and permanent causes as would alone suffice to explain the 
prevalence of group marriage over the vast area now 
occupied by the exogamous and classificatory peoples. 

1 On this subject I agree with L. H. 
Morgan, who says (Ancient Society, p. 
502): ‘It is not probable that any 
people within the time of recorded 
human observation have lived in a 
state of promiscuous intercourse like 
the gregarious animals. The perpetua- 
tion of such a people from the infancy 
of mankind would evidently have been 
impossible. The cases cited, and 
many others that might be added, are 
better explained as arising under the 
punaluan family, which, to the foreign 
observer, with limited means of observa- 
tion, would afford the external indica- 
tions named by these authors. Pro- 

miscuity may be deduced theoretically as 
a necessary condition antecedent, to the 
consanguine family ; but it lies concealed 
in the misty antiquity of mankind 
beyond the reach of positive know- 
ledge.” By ‘‘the punaluan family” 
Morgan means a form of group marriage 
which was practised in Hawaii. The 
unsatisfactory nature of the evidence 
adduced for a practice of sexual pro- 
miscuity within historical times has 
been rightly shewn by Dr. E. Wester- 
marck (Hestory of Human Marriage, 
pp. 51 599). 

2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 348 sgq., 
366 59. 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 139 

Again, very great laxity in the relations of the sexes, Loose 
combined with either polyandry or something like group Sc" 
marriage, is known to exist among the Todas of India and in some 
the Masai and the Bahima of Africa. But it is a singular ator) 
fact that these three tribes are, or were till lately, purely India and 
“pastoral, devoting themselves entirely to the care of their “+ 
cattle and subsisting on their products. This suggests, as 

I have already indicated,’ that there is something in the 
pastoral life that affects the relations of the sexes in a 
peculiar way which we do not clearly understand ; for 
though the limitation which that mode of life necessarily 
imposes on the means of subsistence might naturally lead 

to polyandry as a device for keeping down the population, 

it would hardly explain the general relaxation of sexual 
morality which characterises these tribes. In these circum- 
stances we cannot safely draw any general inferences as to 

group marriage from the practice of the Todas, the Masai, 

and the Bahima. Again, apparent traces of sexual com- Traces of 
munism survive in the licentious customs of various peoples,’ nae 
but these also are too few and too isolated to allow us to munism in 
give much weight to them as evidence of a former general oe 
practice of group marriage. 

But there are two customs of wide prevalence throughout Relics of 
the world which separately and in conjunction may perhaps marriage 
be explained on the hypothesis that they are relics of group are perhaps 
marriage and in particular of that form of group marriage ‘0 be found 

in the two 

which L. H. Morgan called the punaluan, to wit, the union customs of 
of a group of husbands who are brothers with a group of ‘te, /evrate 

wives who are sisters. The first of these customs is the sororate, 
. : : that is, 
world-wide rule which allows or requires a man to marry the in the 

widow of his deceased elder brother; the other is the rule oe if 
. 7 ’ marryi 
which allows or requires a man to marry the younger sisters deceased 
either of his living or of his deceased wife. Or, to put the fusband's 
same customs from the point of view of the woman, we may anda 
say that the former custom allows or requires her to marry inne 
her deceased husband’s brother, and that the latter custom wife's 

allows or requires her to marry the husband either of her mister, 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 256, 265, 3 See above, vol. ii. pp. 129, 145 
415 5g., 538 59. 599-5 403, 602 sg., 638 sg., iii 
2 Above, vol. ii, p. 539. 472. 

The 
custom 
of the 
sororate, 
that is, the 
right to 
marry a 
wife’s 
younger 
sisters 
either in 

140 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. II 

living or of her deceased sister. The former custom has 
long .been known under the name of the /evzrate, from the 
Latin Jevir, “a husband’s brother” ; the latter custom, which 
has received very little attention, has no distinctive name, 
but on analogy I propose to call it the sovorate, from’ the 
Latin sovor, “a sister.” The two customs are in fact 
correlative; they present in all probability two sides of one 
original custom, and it is convenient to give them corre- 
sponding names. 

The practice of the levirate, or the custom which gives a 
younger brother the right of marrying his deceased elder 
brother’s widow, is so familiar and has been so fully 
exemplified in the preceding volumes of this work? that it 
would be superfluous to dwell upon it here. But the 
correlative practice of the sororate, or the custom which gives 
a man the right of marrying his wife’s younger sisters either 

her lifetime in her lifetime or after her death, has been so little noticed 

or after 
her death, 

that it may be well not only to recall some of the instances 

is observed Of it which we have already met with, but to illustrate it 

by many 
tribes of 
North 
American 
Indians. 

with some fresh examples for the sake of shewing the 
wide prevalence of the custom and its importance in the 
history of marriage. ,Its significance in this respect was 
first pointed out by L. H. Morgan, whose attention was 
pointedly drawn to it by finding it observed in about 
forty tribes of North American Indians? Accordingly we 

1 See the references in the Index, 
s.v. ‘ Levirate.” 

2.L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
Pp. 432: ‘*One custom may be cited 
of unmistakable punaluan origin, which 
is still recognized in at least forty 
North American Indjan tribes. Where 
a man married the eldest daughter of a 
family he became entitled by custom 
to all her sisters as wives when they 
attained the marriageable age. It was 
a right seldom enforced, from the 
difficulty, on the part of the individual, 
of maintaining several families, although 
polygamy was recognized universally as 
a privilege of the males. We find in 
this the remains of the custom of 
punalua among their remote ancestors. 
Undoubtedly there was a time among 
them when own sisters went into the 

marriage relation on the basis of their 
sisterhood ; the husband of one being 
the husband of all, but not the only 
husband, for other males were joint 
husbands with him in the group. After 
the punaluan family fell out, the right 
remained with the husband of the eldest 
sister to become the husband of all her 
sisters if he chose to claim it. It may 
with reason be regarded as a genuine 
survival of the ancient punaluan custom.” 
The term punaluan, which Morgan 
applied to a certain form of group 
marriage, is derived from the Hawaiian 
word pinalia, signifying a marriage 
relationship, which is defined as follows 
in a letter written to L. H. Morgan 
in 1860 by Judge Lorin Andrews of 
Honolulu : ‘* The relationship of pitza- 
‘#a is rather amphibious. It arose 

SECT, II THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 14! 

shall begin with examples of the custom drawn from these 
tribes, . 

A writer of the eighteenth century, speaking of the Exampies 
Indians in the neighbourhood of the great lakes, says: “It ofthe 
is not uncommon for an Indian to marty two sisters ; some- among the 
times, if there happen to be more, the whole number ; and aa 
notwithstanding this (as it appears to civilized nations) North 
unnatural union, they all live in the greatest harmony.” ! A". 
Another writer, referring to the Indians of the south-western 
deserts, observes that “in general, when an Indian wishes 

to have many wives he chooses above all others, if he can, 

sisters, because he thinks he can thus secure more domestic 
peace.”” The general practice, as defined by L. H. Morgan, 

is that “when a man marries the eldest daughter he becomes, 

by that act, entitled to each and all of her sisters as wives 

when. they severally attain the marriageable age. The 

option rests with him, and he may enforce the claim, or yield 

it to another.”* That the custom prevailed especially The 
among the Indians of the great plains or prairies we learn Sr" 

7 i . _ among the 
from a well-informed writer, who says that “with the plains Indians of 

tribes, and perhaps with others, the man who marries the p.2<" 
eldest of several daughters has prior claim upon her un- 
married sisters.”* Thus among the Osages “polygamy is 
usual; for it is a custom that, when a savage asks a girl 
in marriage and gets her to wife, not only she but all her 
sisters belong to him and are regarded as his wives. It is 
a great glory among them to have several.”*® As to the 
Potawattamies we are informed that “it was usual for them, 
when an Indian married one of several sisters, to consider 
him as wedded to all; and it became incumbent upon him 
to take them all as wives. The marrying of a brother's 

from the fact that two or more brothers 
with their wives, or two or more sisters 
with their husbands, were inclined to 
possess each other in common; but 
the modern use of the word is that of 
dear friend, or intimate companion,” 
See L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
p: 427. 

1 J. Carver, Zravels through the 
Interior Parts ‘of North America, 
Third Edition (London, 1781), p. 367. 

2 E. Domenech, Seven Years’ Resid- 

ence tn the Great Deserts of North 
America (London, 1860), ii. 306. 

3 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 477 59. 

4 J. Mooney, ‘Myths of the 
Cherokee,” Nineteenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 491. 

5 Annales de P Assoctation de la pro- 
pagation de la Fot, No. v. (Mars, 
1825) (Second Edition, Lyons and 
Paris, 1829) p. 56. 

142 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

widow was not interdicted, but was always looked upon 
as a very improper connexion.”’ It is curious thus to find 
in the same tribe the sororate obligatory and the levirate 
discountenaced, though not forbidden. More usually the 
two correlative customs are equally observed by the same 
people. This, for instance, is true of the Blackfeet Indians, 
amongst whom all the younger sisters of a man’s wife were 
regarded as his wives, if he chose to take them; and when 
a man died his eldest brother had the right to marry the 
widow or widows.” Similarly among the Kansas all a wife’s 
sisters were destined to be her husband’s wives, and when a 
man died his eldest brother took the widow to wife without any 
ceremony, removing her and her children, whom he regarded 
as his own, to his house.2 So with the Minnetarees or 
Hidatsas, a man who marries the eldest of several sisters 
has a claim to the others as they grow up, and he generally 
marries them ; further,a man usually takes to wife the widow 
of his deceased brother.* So too with the Apaches, a man 
will marry his wife’s younger sisters as fast as they grow up, 
and he likewise weds the widow of his deceased brother. 
Amongst the Mandans, when a man married an eldest 
daughter he had a right to all her sisters;® and similarly 
amongst the Crows, if a man married the eldest daughter 
of a family he had a right to marry all her younger sisters 
when they grew up, even in the lifetime of his first wife, 
their eldest sister.’ The customs of the Arapahoes in this 
respect are especially worthy of attention. Amongst them 
“a wife’s next younger sister, if of marriageable age, is 
sometimes given to her husband if his brother-in-law likes 
him. Sometimes the husband asks and pays for his wife’s 
younger sistey. This may be done several times if she 
has several sisters. If his wife has no sister, a cousin (also 
called ‘sister ’) is sometimes given to him. When a woman 
1 W. H. Keating, Expeditio to the widow. 

Source of St, Peters River (London, 3 See above, vol. iii. p. 127. As to 

1825), i. 111. the ‘eldest brother,” see the preceding 
2 See above, vol. iii. p. 85. By pote. 

‘*the eldest brother” is probably meant 

only the eldest surviving brother, not & See ah L iii 

the first-born of all the brothers. For CE BDOVEs VOle aus P. 246. 

the usual rule is that only a younger ® See above, vol. iii. p. 136. 

brother may marry his deceased brother’s 7 See above, vol. iii. p. 154. 

4 See above, vol. iii. p. 148. 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 

143° 

dies, her husband marries her sister. When a man dies, his 
brother sometimes marries his wife. He is expected to do 
so.”' In this tribe, although apparently a man can no 
longer claim his wife’s younger sisters as a right in his wife’s 
lifetime, on the other hand he seems regularly to marry his 
deceased wife’s sister, just as he is expected’ to marry his 
deceased brother’s widow. The two customs are strictly 
analogous. And just as the custom of marrying a deceased 
wife’s sister is doubtless derived from the custom of marrying 
her other sisters in her lifetime, so by analogy we may 
reasonably infer that the custom of marrying a deceased 
brother’s wife is derived from an older custom of sharing a 
brother’s wives in the brother’s lifetime. But to this point 
we shall return presently. 

The custom of the sororate is by no means confined to The 
the Indians of the great prairies. Perhaps the rudest of all winch tis 
the Indian tribes of North America were the aborigines of Indians of 
the Californian Peninsula, and among them, “before they C#m 
were baptized, each man took as many wives as he liked, Oregon. 
and if there were several sisters in a family he married them 
all together.”* Further to the north, at Monterey in 
California, it was likewise the custom for a man to marry 
all the sisters of one family. Still further ‘to the north, 
among the Maidus, another Californian tribe, a man had a 

1A, L. Kroeber, Zhe Arapaho, p. 
14 (Bulletin of the American Aluseum 
of Natural History, vol. xviii. Part i. 
New York, 1902). 

2 J. Baegert, “An Account of the 
Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Cali- 
fornian Peninsula,” Annual Report of 
the Smithsonian Institution for the 
Year~z863, p. 368. This J. Baegert 
was a German Jesuit missionary who 
lived among these savages for seventeen 
years during the second half of the 
eighteenth century. Some passages 
from his account (4.c.) of their marriage 
customs may be quoted: ‘* The son- 
in-law ‘was not allowed, for some time, 
to look into the face of his mother-in- 
law or his wife’s next female relations, 
but had to step aside, or to hide himself, 
when these women were present. Yet 
they did not pay much attention to 
consanguinity, and only a few years 

since, one of them counted his own 
daughter (as he believed) among the 
number of his wives, . . . They lived, 
in fact, before the establishment of the 
mission in their country, in utter 
licentiousness, and adultery was daily 
committed by every one without shame 
and without any fear, the feeling of 
jealousy being unknown to them, 
Neighbouring tribes visited each other 
very often only for the purpose of 
spending some days in open debauchery, 
and during such times a general prosti- 
tution prevailed.” It is interesting to 
find the avoidance of a wife’s mother, 
with its implied disapprobation of 
incest, practised among savages whose 
sexual relations in general seem to 
have been very loose, 

3 La Pérouse, Voyage, ii, 303, quoted 
by H. H. Bancroft, Native Races of 
the Pacific States, i. 388, note !21, 

The 
sororate 
among the 
Crees, the 
Northern 
Tinnehs, 
and the 
Kaviaks. 

144 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 111 

right to marry his wife’s sisters, and, very significantly, if he 
did not exercise his right, it passed to his brother. Moreover, 
it was usual for him to marry the widow of his deceased 
brother.’ Passing still further northwards we come to the 
tribes of Oregon, the Flatheads, Nez Percés, Spokans, 
Walla-wallas, Cayuse, and Waskows, and “ with all of them, 
marrying the eldest daughter entitles a man to the rest of 
the family,jas they grow up. If a wife dies, her sister or 
some of the connexion, if younger than the deceased, is 
regarded as destined to marry him. Cases occur in which, 
upon the death of a wife (after the period of mourning . 

expires), her younger sister, though the wife of another man, 
is claimed, and she deserts her husband and goes to the 
disconsolate widower. The right of a man is recognised, 
to put away his wife, and take a new one, even the sister of 
the discarded one, if he thinks proper. The parents do not 
seem to object to a man’s turning off one sister, and taking 
a younger one—the lordly prerogative, as imperious as 
that of a sultan, being a custom handed down from time 
immemorial.” The right to marry a wife’s ‘sister must 
indeed be a strong one when it is thus able to supersede 
the existing right of the husband in possession. Further, 
we see that among these Indians of Oregon the right to | 
marry a deceased wife’s sister is merely a consequence of the 
right to marry the sisters in the wife’s lifetime. Similarly, 
still further to the north, among the Crees or Knisteneaux, 
“when a man loses his wife, it is considered as a duty to 
marry her sister, if she has one; or he may, if he pleases, 
have them both at the same time.”* And amongst the 
Northern Tinnehs, who border on the Eskimo in the far 
north, men make no scruple of having two or three sisters 
for wives at one time.* Similarly among the Kaviaks of 
Alaska “incest is not uncommon, and two or three wives, 
often sisters, are taken by those who can afford to support 
them.”> Far away from those icy regions the Caribs 

1 See above, vol. iii. p. 498. 3A, Mackenzie, Voyages from Mon- 
2 Major B. Alvord, ‘‘Concerning ¢real through the Continent of North 

* the Manners and Customs, the Super- America (London, 1801), pp. xevi. sg. 

stitions, etc., of the Indians of Oregon,” 4 See above, vol. iii. p. 354. 
in H. R. Schooleraft’s /rdian Tribes 5 W. Dall, Alaska and its Resources 
of the United States, v. 654 sq. (London, 1870), p. 138. 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 145 

practised similar marriage customs under tropical suns. The 
“Very often,” we are told, “the same man will take to wife Se dk 
three or four sisters, who will be his cousins-german or Caribs and 
his nieces. They maintain that having been brought up @"- 
together the women will love each other the more, will live 

in a better understanding, will help each other more readily, 

and, what is most advantageous for him, will serve him 
better.”' Again, among the few cases of polygamy which 

Sir R. Schomburgk found among the Macusis of British 
Guiana was one of an Indian who had three sisters to wife.” 

Similar customs are observed in other parts of the The 
world, Thus in’ Africa among the Zulus a man often me 
marries two sisters, and it is the ordinary practice for him to and Mada- 
wed his deceased brother’s wife Among the Bantu tribes *°" 
of Kavirondo a man has the right to marry all his wife’s 
younger sisters as they come of age; they may not be given 
in marriage to any one until he has déclined their hands.* 
Among the Basoga it was customary for a wife to induce 
her sister or sisters to come and live with her and become 
wives of her husband.” Among the Banyoro there are no 
restrictions on marriage with several sisters; a man may 
marry two or more sisters at the same time. Moreover, if 
his wife dies, he expects her parents to furnish him with one 
of her sisters to replace the dead wife. Also if his wife 
proves barren, he may demand one of her sisters in 
marriage.® Thus, like some Indian tribes of North America, 
the Banyoro practise marriage with the sister both of a living 
and of a deceased wife. In Madagascar it is said to be 
customary for a man to receive, along with his wife, her 
younger sisters in marriage.’ 

Im Southern India a Kuruba man may marry two sisters, The 
either on the death of one of them, or if the first wife is 7775" 
barren or suffers from an incurable disease.2 Among the 
Medaras of the Madras Presidency a man often marries two 

1 Labat, Nouveau Voyage aux Isles 5 See above, vol. ii. p. 461. 

de [ Amerique, Nouvelle édition (Paris, 6 See above, vol. ii. p. 522. Com- 
, vol. ii, p. i 

1742), ii. 77 59. oa re vol. ii. pp. 453 and 463 as to 
2 R. Schomburgk {Leipsic, 1847- ie Bageshu aay Ree 
1848), Retsen in Britisch-Guiana, ii. 1 Th. Waitz, Anthropologie der 
. 2 

318. _ ul 
3 See above, vol. ii. p. 384. ence ii. 438. 
4 See above, vol. ii. p. 451. See above, vol. ii. p. 245. 

VOL. IV . L 

The 
sororate in 
Australia, 
Oceania, 
and Asia. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. IIT 

146 

sisters if one of them is sickly, and marriage with a deceased 
wife’s sister is regarded with especial favour.’ Again a 
Bestha man may wed two sisters, but the custom is not 
recommended, and he is positively forbidden to marry his 
deceased brother’s widow.” Among the Saoras of Madras it 
is said to be common for a man to marry his wife’s sister, 
and the two sisters so married live together till a child is 
born, after which they must separate. The Saoras also 
practise the levirate in its usual form—that is, a younger 
brother generally marries the widow of his deceased elder 
brother ; if he is too young for marriage, the widow waits 
for him till he is grown up.2 Among the inhabitants of the 
hills near Rajamahall a man may marry his wife’s sisters, 
and he may take to wife the widow of his deceased elder 
brother.*| Among the Garos of Assam polygamy is allowed 
and a man may marry two sisters, but in that case he must 
marry the elder before the younger.? 

Some tribes of Queensland and North-West Australia 
allow a man to marry two or more sisters.® In Samoa “it 
was a common practice in the olden days for a woman to 
take her sister or sisters with her, and these were practically 
the concubines of the ‘husband.””’ In the Mortlock Islands 
custom assigned to a husband, along with his wife, all her 
free sisters, but only chiefs availed themselves of the 
privilege® Among the Fijians a man was not allowed to 
pick and choose in a family of sisters; if he married one of 
them he was bound in honour to marry them all.2 Among 
the Rodes, a savage tribe of hunters in the mountains. of 
Cambodia, polygamy is in vogue, and a man who has 
married the eldest daughter of a family has an acknowledged 

lV See above, vol, ii. p. 250. 

2 See above, vol, ii. p. 272. 

3 F. Fawcett, ‘*On the Saoras (or 
Savaras), an Aboriginal Hill People of 
the Eastern Ghats of the Madras Presi- 
dency,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Society of Bombay, i. (1886) pp. 231, 
234 59. 

4 Lieutenant Thomas Shaw, ‘The 
Inhabitants of the Hills near Raja- 
mahall,” Aséatic Researches, Fourth 
Edition, iv. (London, 1807) pp. 59s 
60. 

5 Major A. Playfair, Zhe Garos 
(London, 1909), p. 69. 

6 See above, vol. i. pp. 572, 577 n% 

7 Rev. George Brown, D.D., A/e/an- 
estans and Polynesians, their Life 
Histories Illustrated and Compared, 
p. 116 (type-written copy). 

8 J. Kubary, ‘Die Bewohner der 
Mortlock-Inseln,” Afitthedlungen der 
geographischen Gesellschaft in Hamburg, 
1878-79, p. 37 (separate reprint). 

® See above, vol. ii. p. 143. 

SECT, III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 147 

right to marry all her younger sisters; they may not wed 
anybody else without his consent! Lastly, among the 
Kamtchatkans a man often marries two sisters either at the 
same time or one after the death of the other; and when 
a husband dies, his surviving brother marries the widow, 
whether he already has a wife or not.’ 

Thus the custom which allows a man the right of marry- In some 
ing his wife’s younger sisters in her lifetime appears to be hiding 
very widespread, and often it is supplemented by a per- is only 
mission to marry them after her death. But among some Practsed 

peoples, though a husband is allowed or even obliged to death of 
« on 4 r ._ the first 
marry his wife’s sisters, one after the other, when she is wife; that 

dead, he is no longer permitted to marry them during her is, a man 

lifetime. Thus amongst the Koryaks of North-Eastern fee 
Asia a man may not marry the sister of his living wife, but of his 

he is obliged to marry his deceased wife’s younger sister, but not of 
though he is forbidden to marry her elder sister. Similarly, Ds ving: 
a Koryak widow is bound to marry her deceased husband’s 
younger brother, but is forbidden to marry his elder brother.® 
So among the Ramaiyas, a pedlar class of North-Western 
India, a man may not have two sisters to wife at the same 
time, but there is no rule against his marrying his deceased 
wife’s younger sister. In like manner among the Oswals, 
a trading class of the same region, a man is forbidden to 
marry his deceased wife’s elder sister, but allowed to marry 
her younger sister.° The Cheremiss of Russia will not marry 
two sisters at the same time, but they are pleased to marry 
one after the other... Among the Battas of Sumatra, if a 
rwife dies childless, her husband has the right to marry her 
sisters successively, one after the other, without having to 
pay another bride-price for them to the parents; if the 
parents refuse their consent to the new marriage, the 
widower may demand the restitution of the price he paid 
for his first wife.’ In the island of Engano a widower 

1J. Moura, Ze Royaume du the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, * 

Cambodge (Paris, 1883), i. 426, 427, 
428. 

2G. W. Steller, Beschretbung von 
dem Lande Kamtschatka (Frankfort and 
Leipsic, 1774), p. 347. 

3 See above, vol. ii. p. 352. 

4 W. Crooke, 7rzbes and Castes of 

iv. 224. 

5 W. Crooke, of. ctf. iv. 99. 

6 J. G. Georgi, Beschreibung aller 
Nationen des russischen Reichs (St. 
Petersburg, 1776-1780), i. 31. 

7 C. Jj. Temminck, Coup a@’eil 
général sur les possessions néerland- 

Avoidance 
of wife's 
sister in 
wife's 
lifetime. 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. IIT 

148 

usually marries his deceased wife’s sister ; but if he fails to 
do so, we are told, he has not to pay a fine for culpable 
negligence. In the Louisiade Archipelago, to the east of 
New Guinea, when a woman dies her husband may take her 
unmarried sister to wife without any fresh payment, and she 
may not refuse him. But if he does not care to marry her, 
and she marries somebody else, her husband must pay the 
bride-price to her dead sister’s husband instead of to her 
own people. Yet though a man may, and indeed should, 
marry his deceased wife’s sister, he ought not to approach 
her closely or hold prolonged conversation with her during 
his wife’s lifetime, nor should he speak to her alone in the 
forest ; if he does so, she might tell her sister, his wife, who 
would thereupon think she had cause for jealousy, and a 
domestic quarrel might -be the result. In this case the 
ceremonial avoidance of the wife’s sister in the lifetime of 
the wife is clearly a precaution to prevent an improper 
intimacy between the two, Further, in the Louisiades the 
correlative custom of the levirate is also in vogue ; that is, 
a man has the right to marry his deceased brother’s 
widow, after she has completed her term of ‘mourning? 
Among the Wabemba, a tribe on the western shore of 
Lake Tanganyika in Africa, when a man’s wife dies he 
has the right to marry her younger sister, if she is still 
unmarried. But if all his deceased wife’s sisters are married, 
the widower sends a present to the husband of his late wife’s 
younger sister, and the woman is ceded to him by her hus- 
band for a single day; so strong is the claim of the widower 
on his deceased wife’s sisters. The Wabemba practise the 
levirate as well as the sororate ; when a man dies his oldest 
brother marries the widow.2 Among the Iroquois ‘a man 
was bound to marry his deceased wife’s sister or, in default 
of a sister, such other woman as the family of his deceased 
wife might provide for him. If he failed to do his duty by 

aises dans V Inde Archipélagique (Ley- 
den, 1847), ii. 55. 

1 J. Winkler, ‘Bericht iiber die 
zweite Untersuchungsreise nach der 
Insel Engano,” Tijdschrift voor Ind- 
tsche Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, L 
(1908), p. 152. 

2 C.G. Seligmann, 7he Aelanesians 
of British New Guinea (Cambridge, 
1910), pp. 738 sg. 

3 See above, vol. ii. p, 630. By 
‘oldest brother” is probably meant 
the eldest surviving brother. See 
above, p, 142 n?, 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 149 

marrying her, he exposed himself to the fluent invective of 
the injured woman. In like manner, when his brother died, 
an Iroquois man had no choice but to marry the widow.' 
Among the Omahas a man sometimes marries his deceased 
wife’s sister in obedience to the express wish of his dying 
wife; and a brother is as usual yoked in matrimony to 
his deceased brother’s widow.2. Among the Biloxi a man 
might marry his deceased wife’s sister, and a woman might 
marry her deceased husband’s brother, but it is not said 
‘that as among the Iroquois such marriages were obligatory.® 
Lastly, among the Pima Indians it was customary for a 
widower to wed his deceased wife’s sister.’ 

Many more cases of the same sort might no doubt be Taken 
collected, but the preceding instances suffice to prove that together 
in the opinion of many peoples a man has a natural right, customs of 
sometimes amounting to an obligation, to marry all his '¢,!evire 

and the 

wife’s younger sisters either in his wife’s lifetime or after sororate 
° ° : : oint to 
her decease. Among some tribes the right is exercised )Sormer 

both during the life and after the death of the first wife ; custom of 
among other tribes it is exercised only after her death, but a ice. 
in these cases we can hardly doubt that the restriction is a pes 
comparatively late modification of an older custom which which a 
allowed a man to marry the sisters of his living as well as ahead 
of his deceased wife. But if the sororate, limited to the married a 
right of marrying a deceased wife’s sister, is almost certainly SUP 
derived from an older right of marrying a living wife’s sister, held their 
it becomes highly probable that the world-wide custom of Sommon. 
the levirate, which requires a woman to marry her deceased 
husband’s brother, is in like manner derived from an older right 

of marrying her living husband’s brother; and as the two 
customs of the sororate and the levirate are commonly practised 

by the same peoples we seem to be justified in concluding 

that they are two sides of a single ancient institution, to wit, a 
practice of group-marriage in which a group of brothers married 

a group of sisters and held their wives in common. Among 

the Central Australian tribes it still happens not infrequently 

! See above, vol. iii. p. 19. 4 Frank Russel, ‘“‘The Pima In- 
dians,” Zwwenty-sixth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology 
3 See above, vol. iii. p. 155. (Washington, 1908), p. 184. 

2 See above, vol. iii. p. 108. 

While the 
levirate 
and the 
sororate 
are cor- 
relative 
customs, 
they have 
diverged 
from each 
other in 
practice. 

150 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, III 

that the sisters of one family are all married to the brothers 
of another family ;/ and although this is not group-marriage, 
since each brother has only one sister to wife, it may well 
be a relic of an older custom in which a group of husbands, 
who were brothers, held in common a group of wives, who 
were sisters. In point of fact group-marriage of this sort 
still occursi among the Todas of Southern India, whose 
marriage customs, as we have seen,? are very primitive. 
“Their practice is this: all brothers of one family, be they 
many or few, live in mixed and incestuous cohabitation with 
one or more wives. If there be four or five brothers, and 
one of them, being old enough, gets married, his wife claims 
all the other brothers as her husbands, and as they success- 
ively attain manhood, she consorts with them ; or if the wife 
has one or more younger sisters, they in turn, on attaining a 
marriageable age, become the wives of their sister’s husband 
or husbands, and thus in a family of several brothers, there 
may be, according to circumstances, only one wife for them 
all, or many ; but, one or more, they all live under one roof, 
and cohabit promiscuously, just as fancy or taste inclines. 
Owing, however, to the great scarcity of women in this tribe, 
it more frequently happens that a single woman is wife to 
several husbands, sometimes as many as six.”* But while 
the customs of the levirate and the sororate thus appear to 
be correlative, both together testifying to an ancient and 
widespread custom of group-marriage which has for the most 
part passed away, they have in practice diverged somewhat 
from each other at the present time, the levirate only operat- 
ing after the death of the first husband, the sororate operating 
both during the life and after the death of the first wife. 
The reason of the divergence may be, as I have already 
suggested,* the greater strength of jealousy in men than 
in women which prompted men to refuse to share their 
wives with their brothers, while women were, and are 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 256, 264 sg. 
of Central Australia, p. 559: “Not 3 J. Shorit, M.D., **An Account of 
infrequently a woman’s daughters will the Hill Tribes of the Neilgherries,” 
be allotted to brothers, theelder brother 7ransactions of the Ethnological Soctety 
taking the elder daughter, the second of London, New Series, vii. (1869) 
brother the second daughter, and so_ p. 240. 
on.” 4 Vol. ii. p. 144. 

SECT, 111 THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 151 

still often, quite willing to share their husbands with their 

sisters. 
On these grounds, therefore, it appears to be a reasonable Thus a 

hypothesis that at least a large part of mankind has passed !'ge part 

‘ hh Te of mankind 
through the stage of group-marriage in its progress upward appears to 
from a still lower stage of sexual promiscuity to a higher ee 
stage of monogamy. Apart from the customs to which throug 

the stages 

have just called attention and the traces of a wider freedom 6 sexual 
formerly accorded to the sexes in their relations with each promiscuity 
other, the two great landmarks of group-marriage are exo- ne 
gamy and the classificatory system of relationship, which, as 

I have-attempted to shew, are inseparably united and must 

stand or fall together as evidence of an ancient system of 
communal marriage. 

But exogamy and the classificatory system of relationship There is 
are, roughly speaking, confined to the lower races of man- 20 (car 
kind : they form a clear and trenchant line between savagery that the 
and civilisation! Almost the only civilised race which, so 8a 
to say, stands astride this great border-line are the Aryan races, the 
Hindoos, who possess the system of exogamy without the ean the 

classificatory system of relationship.” Whether they have Semites, 

1 Compare L. H. Morgan, Systems 
of Consanguinity and Affinity, p. 470: 
‘“When it is considered that the 
‘domestic relationships of the entire 
human family, so far as the latter is 
represented in the Tables, fall under 
the descriptive or the classificatory 
form, and that they are the reverse of 
each other in their fundamental con- 
ceptions, it furnishes a significant sepa- 
ration of the families of mankind into 
two great divisions. Upon one side 
are the Aryan, Semitic and Uralian, 
and upon the other the Ganowanian, 
the Turanian and the Malayan, which 
gives nearly the line of demarcation 
between the civilized and uncivilized 
nations. Although both forms are older 
than civilization, it tends to show that 
the family, as now constituted, and 
which grew out of the development of 
a knowledge of property, of its uses, 
and of its transmission by inheritance, 
lies at the foundation of the first 
civilization of mankind.” 

2 To them may perhaps be added the 

Singhalese who, speaking a language 
which appears to be Aryan, nevertheless 
possess the classificatory system of re- 
lationship. But the Singhalese appear 
not to be Aryans by blood. See above, 
vol. ii. pp. 333-335. Further, the 
Albanians are said to be exogamous. 
See Miss M. E. Durham, reported in 
The Athenaeum, No. 4297, 5th March 
1910, p. 283: ‘*High Albania is the 
only spot in Europe in which the tribal 
system exists intact. The tribes occupy 
the mountain land which forms the 
north-west corner of Turkey in Europe. 
They are exogamous, but male blood 
only counts. Each tribe is ruled by a 
council of elders, by ancient laws handed 
down by oral tradition, which are 
strictly enforced. . . . Among other 
very ancient customs, the Levirate is still 
practised, even by many of the Roman 
Catholic tribes. Blood revenge is 
extremely prevalent. . . . Communal 
families of as many as forty members 
live together in one room, ruled by 
the house lord, who has often power 

have as 2 
whole 
practised 
exogamy 
and 
counted 
kinship 
according 
to the 
classifica- 
tory system 
of relation- 
ship ; 
hence it 

is not 
necessary 
to suppose 
that they 
have 
passed 
through 
the stages 
of sexual 
promiscuity 
and group- 
marriage. 

The rise 
and decay 
of exo- 
gamy. 

152 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

inherited exogamy from the common ancestors of the whole 
Aryan family or have borrowed it from the dark-skinned 
aborigines of India, with whom they have been in contact 
for thousands of years, is a question of the highest interest 
not merely for the history of the Aryans in particular, but 
for the history of human marriage in general; since if it 
could be made probable that the whole Aryan family had 
once passed through the stage of exogamy, with its natural 
accompaniment the classificatory system of relationship, it 
would become difficult to resist the conclusion that exogamy, 
with all its implications of group-marriage and a preceding 
custom of sexual promiscuity, had once been universal among 
mankind. But in the absence of proof that the Semites and 
the Aryans in general ever practised exogamy and counted 
kinship on the classificatory system we are not justified in 
concluding that these institutions have at one time been 
common to the whole human race. Nor, apart from the 
want of direct evidence, does there appear to be any reason 
in the nature of “things why these institutions should be 
necessary stages in the social. evolution of every people. 
The object of exogamy, as I have attempted to shew, was 
to prevent the marriage of near kin, especially the marriage 
of brothers with sisters and of mothers with sons; and it 
seems perfectly possible that some peoples may have 
achieved this object directly by a simple prohibition of con- 
sanguineous marriages without resorting to that expedient of 
dividing the whole community into two intermarrying 
classes, from which the vast and cumbrous system of 
exogamy and the classificatory relationships grew by a 
logical development. The history of exogamy is the history 
first of a growing and afterwards of a decaying scrupulosity 
as to the marriage of near kin. With every fresh scruple a 
fresh bar was erected between the sexes, till the barriers 
reach their greatest known height in the eight-class system 
of the Australian aborigines, which practically shuts the 
door for every man upon seven-eighths of the women of the 
community. Whether any tribes ever carried their scruples 
still further and reduced within even narrower limits the 

of life and death over his subjects. for an occasional forcible capture. 
Marriage is always by purchase, save Children are betrothed in infancy.” 

SECT, HI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 153 

number of a man’s possible wives is not known ; and if 
there ever were such tribes they probably perished either 
from the mere difficulty of propagating their kind under 
these too elaborate restrictions, or because their ever- 
dwindling numbers could not resist the pressure of less 
scrupulous and faster breeding neighbours. Having reached 
its culminating point in bloated systems of eight classes and 
the like, exogamy begins to decline. The exogamy of the 
classes was the first to go, leaving behind it the far less 
extensive and therefore far less burdensome exogamy of the 
clans, whether totemic or otherwise. It is in this greatly 
shrunken form, shorn of its original classes, that the institu- 
tion is still found in the great majority of exogamous 
peoples outside of Australia. The last stage of decay is 
reached when the exogamy of the clan breaks down also, 
and henceforth marriage is regulated by the prohibited 
degrees alone. 

Now it is quite possible that the great civilised families The great 
of mankind, who now regulate marriage only by the pro- — 
is : y 
hibited degrees of kinship, have run through this course of always 
social development and decay in the remote past. They h@ve com 

tented 
may at one time in their history, not necessarily the earliest, themselves 
have practised sexual promiscuity, have felt a growing aver- Abies 
.sion’ to the marriage of near kin, have embodied that incest 
aversion in a system of exogamy, and finally, discarding that abd iay 
system with its exaggerations, have reverted to a simple that pro- 

Liye . hibition in 
prohibition of the marriage of persons closely related LY a system of 
blood.’ But it is not necessary to suppose that they have exogamy. 
followed this long roundabout road merely to return to the 
point from which they started. They may always have 
confined themselves to a simple prohibition of the incestuous 
unions which they abhorred. 

Whether that be so or not, it appears highly probable yowever 
that the aversion which most civilised races have entertained that may 
to incest or the marriage of near kin has been derived by pees 
them through a ‘long series of ages from their savage eee : 

is) 

1 L. H. Morgan thought it probable system of relationship. See his 
that the Aryan and Semitic peoples Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, 
have passed through the stages of pp. 492 sg. 3 Aucrent Society, pp. 413, 
group-marriage and the classificatory 429. TB R Ps 

ty 

154 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. UE 

incesthas ancestors ; for there is no evidence or probability that the 

Fi eae aversion is a thing of recent growth, a product of advanced 
inherited civilisation. Even therefore though the primitive forefathers 
from : : 

aajane of the Semites and the Aryans may have known nothing 

ancestors. either of totemism or of exogamy, we may with some 

Why did : : 
savages confidence assume that they disapproved of incest and that 

abhor and their disapprobation has been inherited by their descendants 

tony to this day. Thus the abhorrence of incest, which is the 

or the essence of exogamy, goes back in the history of mankind to 
rai iod of very rude savagery ; and we may fairly suppose 
of near a perio yY gery ; ay y supp’ 
aed that, whether it has been embodied in a system of exogamy 
or not, it has everywhere originated in the same primitive 
modes of thought and feeling. What, then, are the primitive 
modes of thought and feeling which gave rise to the abhor- 
rence of incest? Why, in other words, did rude and ignorant, 
savages come to regard with strong disapprobation the 
cohabitation of brothers with sisters and of parents with 
children? We do not know and it is difficult even to guess. 
None of the answers yet given to these questions appears to 
Itcannct be satisfactory. It cannot have been that primitive 
Nave been savages forbade incest because they perceived it to be 
savages injurious to the offspring ; for down to our own time the 
jorbade opinions of scientific men have differed on the question whether . 
ea the closest inbreeding, in other words, the highest degree of 
paiovel incest, is injurious or not to the progeny. “The evil results 
ittobe from close interbreeding,” says Darwin, “are difficult .to 
injurious "i . 
to the detect, for they accumulate slowly, and differ much in degree 
peering with different species, whilst the good effects which almost 
results of invariably follow a cross are from the first manifest” ;? 
paleo and it may be added that the evil effects of inbreeding, if 
to detect, they exist, are hecessarily more difficult to detect in man 
aii than in most other species of animals because mankind 
scientific breeds so slowly. With quick-breeding animals like fowls, 
not agreed Where the generations follow each other in rapid succession, 
about it is possible to observe the good or ill effects of inbreeding 
a and outbreeding in a short time. But with the human race, 
even if we were perfectly free to make experiments in 
breeding, many years would necessarily elapse before the 
1 Charles Darwin, Zhe Variation of tion, Popular Edition (London, 1905), 
Animals and Plants under Domestica- ii. 113. 

. 

SECT. ITI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 155 

effect of these experiments would be clearly manifested. 
Accordingly we cannot suppose that any harmful con- 
sequences of inbreeding have been observed by savages and 
have provided them with the motive for instituting exogamy. 
All that we know of the ignorance and improvidence of 
savages confirms the observation of Darwin that they “are 
not likely to reflect on distant evils to their progeny.”? 
Indeed the improbability that primitive man should have 
regulated the relations of the sexes by elaborate rules 
intended to avert the evil effects of inbreeding on the 
offspring has been greatly increased since Darwin wrote by 
the remarkable discovery that some of the most primitive of 
existing races, who observe the strictest of all systems of 
exogamy, are entirely ignorant of the causal relation which 
exists between the intercourse of the sexes and the birth of 
offspring. The ignorance which thus characterises these 
backward ‘tribes was no doubt at one time universal amongst 
mankind and must have been shared by the savage founders 
of exogamy. But if they did not know that children are 
the fruit of marriage, it is difficult to see how they could 
have instituted an elaborate system of marriage for the 
express purpose of benefiting the children. In short, the 
idea that the abhorrence of incest originally sprang from an 
observation of its injurious effects on the offspring may 
safely be dismissed as baseless. 

But if the founders of exogamy did not believe that the Nor 
cohabitation of the nearest blood relations is detrimental to oe 
the progeny, can they have believed that it is detrimental to founders of 
the parents themselves; in other words, can they have thought ;.02*"™ 

have 

that the mere act of sexual intercourse with a near relative imagine 
. . . e . that incest 
is in itself, quite apart from any social consequences OF jg injurious 

moral sentiments, physically injurious to one or both of the to ie 
actors? I formerly thought that this may have been so cone 
and was accordingly inclined to look for the ultimate origin ee ie 
of exogamy or the prohibition of incest in a superstition there is 
of this sort, a baseless fear that incest was of itself injuri- Ne esi 
ous to the incestuous couple.” But there are serious and that 

indeed, as it now seems to me, conclusive objections to this "78° 

1 Charles Darwin, 7he Variation of tion (London, 1905), ii. 127. 
Animals and Plants under Domestica- 2 See above, vol. i. p. 165. 

156 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, III 

attribute view.’ For in the first place there is very little evidence that 
eae savages conceive the sexual intercourse of near kin to be harm- 
effectsto ful to the persons who engage in it. The Navahoes, indeed, 
the crime. think that if they married women of their own clan their bones . 
would dry up and they would die ;? and the Baganda are of 
opinion that if a man and woman of the same clan should 
marry each other (which sometimes happens accidentally 
through ignorance of their relationship) they will suffer from 
tremor of the limbs and a breaking out of sores on the body 
which would end in death if the incestuous union were not 
dissolved.2 But not much stress can be laid on this super-. 
stition of the Baganda, since the same natural penalty is 
believed by them to be entailed by any breach of taboo, 
such as the eating of the totemic animal or contact 
between a father-in-law. and a daughter-in-law. Had the 
dread of harm caused by incestuous unions to the parties 
themselves been the origin of exogamy, it seems prob- 
able that the dread would have been peculiarly deep 
and general among the Australian aborigines, who of all 
mankind practise exogamy in its most rigid forms. Yet so 
far as I know these savages are not said to be actuated by 
any such fear in observing their complex exogamous rules. 
Further, But the mere general want of evidence is not the most 
pati conclusive argument against the theory in question; for 
with which unfortunately the records which we possess of savage life are 
est iy so imperfect that it is never safe to argue from the silence 

generally 

punished of the record to the absence of the thing. In short mere 
by savages : id 1 brok di h h 
seems to negative evidence, always a broken reed, is perhaps nowhere 

shew that so broken and treacherous a prop for an argument as in 
they believe . « . 

ittobe anthropology) Conclusions laid down with confidence, one 
: cat day on the strength of a mere negation may be upset the 
endangers next day by the discovery of a single positive fact. Accord- 
Canes ingly it is perfectly possible that a belief in the injurious 
rather than effects of incest on the persons who engage in it may in fact 

1 These objections have been in- 2 See above, vol. iii. p. 243. 
dicated by Mr. Andrew Lang. His 
observations on the point are perfectly 
just, and I have profited by them. See 
his article, ‘‘The Totem Taboo and 4 This also I learn from the Rev. 
Exogamy,” A/an, vi. (1906) pp. 130 J. Roscoe. Compare above, vol. ii. 
5q. PP- 473, 509- 

3 This I learn from my friend the 
Rev. J. Roscoe. 

SECT, HI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 157 

‘ be common among savages, though at presenti very few cases simply the 

of it have been reported. A more formidable objection to the ae 
theory which would base exogamy on such a belief is drawn themselves. 
from the extreme severity with which in most exogamous 
tribes breaches of exogamy have‘been purished by the com- 
munity. The usual penalty for such offences is death inflicted 
on both the culprits... Now if people had thought that incest 
injured the incestuous persons themselves and nobody else, 
society might well have been content to leave the sinners to 
suffer the natural and inevitable consequences of their sin. 
Why should it step in and say, “You have hurt . yourselves, 
therefore we will put youto death”? It may be laid down as 
an axiom applicable to all states of society that society only 
punishes social offences, that is offences which are believed 
to be injurious, not necessarily to the individual offenders, 
but to the community at large; and the severer the punish- 
ment meted out to them, the deeper the injury they must 
be supposed to inflict on the commonwealth. But society 
cannot inflict any penalty heavier than death; therefore 
capital crimes must be those which are thought to be most 
dangerous and detrimental to the whole body of the people. 
From this it follows that in commonly punishing breaches 
of exogamy, or in short incest, with death, exogamous tribes 
must be of opinion that the offence is a most serious injury 
to the whole community. Only thus can we reasonably 
explain the horror which incest usually excites among them 
and the extreme rigour with which they visit it even to the 
extermination ot the culprits. 

What then can be tlie great social wrong which was Now many 
supposed to result from incest ? how were the guilty persons terieve that 
belfeved to endanger the whole tribe by their crime? A the effect of 

l possible answer is that the intercourse of near kin was oo 
thought to render the women of the tribe sterile and to crime in 

: ‘ general is 
endanger the common food-supply by preventing edible to make 
animals from multiplying and edible plants from. growing ; Yomen 
in short, that the effect of incest was supposed to be sterility to prevent 
of women, animals, and plants. Such beliefs appear in Ronee 

point of fact to have been held by many races in from mutti- 
different parts of the world. The idea that sexual crime PY" 

1 See the references in the Index, s.v. ‘* Unlawful Marriages.” 

If such a 
belief was 
entertained 
by the 
founders of 
exogamy, 
it would 
have been 
a perfectly 
sufficient 
motive for 
instituting 
the system, 

158 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

in general and incest in particular blights the crops is 
common among peoples of the Malayan stock in the Indian 
Archipelago and their kinsfolk in Indo-China; but it is also 
strongly held by some natives of West Africa, and there 
are grounds for thinking that similar notions as to the 
injurious influence of incest on women and cattle as well as 
on the corm prevailed among the primitive’ Semites and the 
primitive Aryans, including the ancient Greeks, the ancient 
Latins, and the ancient Irish. The evidence has been 
collected by me elsewhere.! Now if any such beliefs were 
entertained by the founders of exogamy, they would clearly 
have been perfectly sufficient motives for instituting the 
system, for they would perfectly explain the horror with 
which incest has been regarded and the extreme severity 
with which it has been punished. You cannot do men a 
deeper injury than by preventing their women from bearing 
children and by stopping their supply of food ; for by doing 
the first you hinder them from propagating their kind, and 
by doing the second you menace them with death. The 
most serious dangers, therefore, that can threaten any com- 
munity are that its women should bear no children and that 
it may have nothing to eat; and crimes which imperil 
the production of children and the supply of food deserve 
to be punished by any society which values its existence 
with the utmost rigour of the law. If therefore the savages 
who devised exogamy really supposed that incest prevented 
women from bearing children, animals from multiplying, and 
plants from growing, they were perfectly justified from their 
point of view in taking the elaborate precautions which they 

1 Psyche’s Task, a Discourse con- 
cerning the Influence of Superstition on 
the Growth of Institutions (London, 
1909), pp. 31-51. To the evidence 
there cited for the belief in ancient 
Ireland should be added (Sir) John 
Rhys’s Celtic Heathendom (London, 
1888), pp. 308 sg., as my friend the 
author has kindly pointed out to me. 
The Rev. John Roscoe informs me 
that the pastoral tribes of Central 
Africa with which he is acquainted, 
including the Bahima, Banyoro, and 
Baganda, have no objection to the 
closest inbreeding of their cattle ; 

they will mate brother and _ sister, 
father and daughter, mother and son 
without scruple. Yet they themselves 
practise exogamy and avoid incest. 
The contradiction is curious and tells 
rather against than for the theory, 
which I have suggested in the text, 
that exogamy may have originated in 
a fear of human incest blighting the 
edible animals and plants. It is true 
that the Basoga are reported to abhor 

“incest in their cattle and to punish it 

(see above, vol. ii. p. 461); but Mr. 
Roscoe doubts whether the report is 
accurate. 

SECT, III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 159 

did to prevent sexual unions which in their opinion 
such deadly blows at the life of the community, 

But was this really their belief? The only serious di 
culty in the way of supposing that it was so, is the abse 
of evidence that such notions are held by the most primitiv 
exogamous peoples, the Australian aborigines, amongst 
whom we shoukl certainly expect to find them if they had h¢ 
indeed been the origin of exogamy. Further, it is to be oe 

aborig 

observed that all the peoples who are known to hold the among 
whom, if id 

eliefs in question appear to be agricultural, and what they j, indeea 

specially dread is the sterilising effect of incest on their ip Srigia 

rops; they are not so often said to fear its sterilising gamy, 

ffect on women and cattle, though this may be partly oe oe 

explained by the simple circumstance that some of these scledid 

aces do not keep cattle. But the savage founders of *urish. 

xogamy, if we may judge by the Australian aborigines of 

o-day, were certainly not agricultural; they did not even 

now that seed put in the ground will germinate and grow. 

hus the known distribution of the beliefs as to the sterilis- 

ng effect of incest on women, animals, and the crops, 

uggests that it is a product of a culture somewhat more 

dvanced than can be ascribed to the savages who started 

xogamy. In fact, it might be argued, as I have argued 

Isewhere,' that all such notions as to the injurious natural 

onsequences of incest are an effect rather than the cause of 

ts prohibition ; that is, the peoples in question may first 

ave banned the marriage of near kin for some reasons 

nknown and may afterwards have become so habituated 

to the observance of the incest law that they regarded in- 

fractions of it as breaches of what we should calli natural 

law*and therefore as calculated to disturb the course of 

nature. In short, it is possible that this superstition is 

rather late than early, and that therefore it cannot be the 

root of exogamy. 

On the other hand it must be borne in mind that the Neverthe. 
chief consideration which tells against the assumption of eae ee 
such a superstition as the origin of exogamy is the purely that 
negative one that no such superstition has yet, so far as Cxsamy 
I know, been found among the Australian aborigines, froma 

1 Psyche’s Task, pp- 44-47- 

160 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. III 

onest whom on this theory it might be expected to 
sh. But I have already pointed out the danger of 
ying on merely negative evidence ; and considering every- 
ng as carefully as I can I incline, though with great 
esitancy and reserve, to think that exogamy may have 
sprung from a belief in the injurious and especially the 
sterilising effects of incest, not upon the persons who engage 
in it, at least not upon the man, nor upon the offspring, bu 
upon women generally and particularly upon edible animals 
and plants; and I venture to conjecture that a carefu 
search among the most primitive exogamous peoples no 
surviving, especially among the Australian aborigines, migh 
still reveal the existence of such a belief among them. A‘ 
least if that is not the origin of exogamy I must confess t 
being completely baffled, for I have no other conjecture tc 
offer on the subject. 
But if But if exogamy and the prohibition of incest, which ig 
andthe. its essence, originated in a mere superstition such as I hav 
prohibition conjecturally indicated, would it necessarily follow that they 
of incest have both been evil and injurious, in other words, that i 

have 

sprung would have been better if men had always married thei 
from a . ° : 
meresuper- Nearest relations instead of taking, as they generally hav 

wee taken, the greatest pains to avoid such marriages? Th 
oes 1 
follow that Consequence would by no means be necessary. I have 

ba Apt shewn elsewhere! that superstition has often proved a mos 

Not neces- Valuable auxiliary of morality and law, that men have very 
betlela a often done right from the most absurd motives, It ma 
is oftena have been so in the case of exogamy and the prohibitior 
es of incest. All turns on the question whether inbreeding or 
of law and. outbreeding, endogamy or exogamy is better for the species, 
rene and that is a question which can be settled only by bioldgy ; 
on the it lies quite outside the province of anthropology. So far 

ti : : os : 
Vnether a8 mankind is concerned, and it is with them alone that we 

inbreeding have to do in this enquiry, the materials at our disposal 
or out- : : : : 
breeding, @Ppear to be insufficient to enable us to arrive at a definite 

endogamy conclusion ; for amongst the peoples known to us in history 
or exo- ‘. ° . * 
gamy, is outbreeding, whether in the form of exogamy or in the simple 

the more prohibition of incest, has been the practice of such an over- 
beneficial 

1 Psyche’s Task, a Discourse con- the Growth of Institutions (London, 
cerning the Influence of Superstition on 1909). 

ECT. II THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 161 

: vhelming majority, and the contrary practice bf inbreeding to the 
or €i.dogamy has been followed by such a very small minority, On 
that a fair comparison of the effects of the two practices question 
cannot be instituted. But as mankind has apparently been Deaient 
evolved from lower species of animals which in like manner °f scientific 
° . : e2 < men are 

propagated their kinds by the union of the sexes, it is highly aividea. 
probable that the good or ill effects which follow from in- Some think 
precding and outbreeding, from endogamy and exogamy, is no harm 
in the human species, follow from them also in the lower pies 
species ; and as the breeding of many of the lower animals inbreeding, 
has long been the object of careful observation and exact tae 
experiments conducted both by practical breeders and scien- degree of 
tific men, a large body of evidence has been accumulated, from "°° 
which it is possible with a considerable degree of probability 

to draw conclusions applicable to man. Now upon the 
fundamental question whether inbreeding or outbreeding, 
whether endogamy or exogamy, is the more beneficial in the 

long run, the opinions of experts appear to be divided. A 

writer, Mr. A. H. Huth, who carefully investigated the question 

with special reference to its bearing on man, reached the con- 

clusion that the closest inbreeding or endogamy between the 

huinan sexes is not in itself injurious to the progeny, and that 

the evil consequences which are often supposed to flow from 

it are to be explained by other causes, particularly by morbid 
tendencies in the stock, which are naturally increased in the 
offspring whenever they are transmitted to it from both the 
parents. The same view of the harmlessness of inbreeding 

or endogamy was held by the eminent Dutch anthropologist, 

Professor G. A. Wilken,? and apparently by the eminent 

1A..H. Huth, Zhe Marriage of 
Near Bin considered with respect 10 
the Laws of Nations, the Results of 
Experience, and the Teachings of 
Biology, Second Edition (London, 
1887). 

2G, A. Wilken, ‘ Huwelijken 
tusschen Bloedverwanten,” De Gras, 
1890, No. 6. In this work (pp. 2 sg. 
of the separate reprint) Prof. Wilken 
quotes with approval the following 
passage from a French writer, M. 
Boudin: “ Comment, voila des parents 
consanguins, tleins de force et de santé, 
exenpts dq toute infirmité appréciable, 

VOL. IV 

incapables de donner & leurs enfants ce 
gwits ont, et leur donnant au contraire 
ce gwils wont pas, ce giwils n'ont jamais 
eu, et cest en présence de tels faits que 
Pon ose prononcer le mot hérédité!” 
The orator appears to forget the 
numerous cases of hermaphrodite 
plants endowed with all the organs 
of both sexes and perfectly capable of 
fertilising other plants and of being 
fertilised by them, yet perfectly in- 
capable of fertilising themselves, nay 
sometimes actually poisoning them- 
selves by their own pollen. See Ch. 
Darwin, Zhe Variation of Animals and 

M 

- 

162 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. HI 

But the French anthropologist Paul Topinard.! But so far as I car. 
aera gather their opinion is not shared by the best and most 
and latest recent authorities. Thus after weighing all the available 
ee evidence as carefully as possible Darwin concludes as follows : 
be that =“ Finally, when we consider the various facts now given, which 
inbreeding 
or incest is Plainly show that good follows from crossing, and less plainly 
aa ee that evil follows from close interbreeding, and when we bear 
injurious in mind that with very many organisms elaborate provisiong 
eee have been made for the occasional union of distinct indi 
vigour, Viduals, the existence of a great law of nature is almost 
camdiea proved; namely, that the crossing of animals and plants 
the fertility which are not closely related to each other is highly beneficial 
te or even necessary, and that interbreeding prolonged during 
many generations is injurious.”? The evils which Darwin 
believed to result from close and long interbreeding are loss 
of constitutional vigour, of size, and of fertility? Similarly 
Mr. A. R. Wallace concludes: “The experiments of Mr. 
Darwin, showing the great and immediate good effects of a 
cross between distinct strains in plants, cannot be explained 
away ; neither can the innumerable arrangements to secure 
cross-fertilisation by insects. . . . On the whole, then, the 
evidence at our command proves that, whatever may be its 
ultimate cause, close interbreeding doves usually produce bad 
results; and it is only by the most rigid selection, whether ' 
natural or artificial, that the danger can be altogether 
obviated.” * 
Opinion ot Again, my friend Mr. Walter Heape, F.R.S., who has 
ie made exact researches into the breeding both of men and 

animals, writes to me as follows: “ From what you tell me 
of exogamy in its simplest form, ze. in so far as it provides 
against the marriage of mother and sister and the marriage 
of cousins * (concubitants and others), it is so closely in accord 

Plants under Domestication (London, 
1905), ii. 139 sgg. The facts of nature 
do not always correspond to our logical 
expectations. 

1 P. Topinard, LiAxthropologie, 
Quatriéme Edition (Paris, 1884), pp. 
397 sg. It is also shared by M, 
Salomon Reinach. See his Cu/tes, 
Mythes, et Religions, i. (Paris, 1905) 

: Pp. 157 5979- 

2 Charles Darwin, Zhe Fartation of 
Animals and Plants under Domestica- 
tion (London, 1905), ii. 157. 

3 Ch. Darwin, of. c7é. ii. 156. 

4A. R. Wallace, Darwinism, an 
Exposition of the Theory of Natural 
Selection (London, 1889), p. 162. 

5 Mr. Heape is here under a slight 
misapprehension. The marriage of 
cousins is preverted not by the simplest 

SECT. HI THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 163 

with the experience of breeders of animals that, failing a clear 
social reason for the law, it might be fairly assuraed to have 
its origin in accordance with known biological! phenomena. 
I cannot claim to be considered capable of expressing a final 

opinion on the subject, but I think I may say that, so far as 
breeders know, inbreeding of brother and sister, father and 
daughter, grandfather and granddaughter, and cousins, is 
essential for the rapid fixing of a type and is the best 
method, if not the only method, of producing the ancestor 
of a new and definite variety (see Evolution of British Cattle). 
At the same time indefinite inbreeding (‘in and in breeding ’) 
is found to be associated with deterioration. . . . Breeders are 
firmly convinced that indefinite inbreeding certainly results 
in deterioration, that is their experience. ... Thus the 
practice of exogamy is in accord with the experience of 
breeders.” In particular Mr. Heape tells me that a tendency 
to. infertility is believed to be a common result of continuous 
inbreeding in stock, and that in his judgment the belief is 
certainly true.’ 

To the same effect Mr. F. H. A. Marshall, Fellow of Opinion 
Christ’s College, Cambridge, whose researches into sexual |, OUMe, 
physiology will shortly be published in full, informs me that Marshal 
long-continued inbreeding carried on in the same place and 
under the same conditions certainly tends to sterility, but 
that this tendency can be to some extent counteracted by 
changing the conditions of life, particularly by removing the 
animals to a considerable distance. For instance, he tells 
me that racehorses, which have inbred perhaps more than 
any other animal, tend to be sterile, but that the offspring 
of racehorses which have been sent to Australia recover their 
fertility both with each other and with the parent stock 
without any infusion of fresh blood. Old breeders were 
quite aware of the advantage which domestic animals gained 
from new surroundings ; hence some of them used to send 
part of their stock, for example, to Ireland and then after 
a time to bring the animals or their descendants back 
reinvigorated and rendered more prolific by the change. 
but by the most complex form of exo- 1 Extracted from a letter of Mr. 

gamy, namely the eight-class system. Walter Heape dated Greyfriars, South- 
But the mistake is immaterial. wold, 17th December 1909. 

164 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. Il 

Darwin's This bears out an opinion expressed by Darwin as follows: 
tiew twat. There is good reason to believe, and this was the opinion 
inbreeding of that most experienced observer, Sir J. Sebright, that the 
may be evil effects of close interbreeding may be checked or quite 
orpre- prevented by the related individuals being separated for a 
vented by 7 . *.° : 
changing few generations and exposed to different conditions of life. 
a Sarr This conclusion is now held by many breeders ; for instance, 
life without Mr. Carr remarks, it is a well-known ‘fact that a change of 
oe soil and climate effects perhaps almost as great a change in 
blood. the constitution as would result from an infusion of fresh 
blood’ I hope to show in a future work that consanguinity 
by itself counts for nothing, but acts solely from related 
organisms generally having a similar constitution, and 
having been exposed in most cases to similar conditions.” + 
Similarly Mr. A. R. Wallace writes: “It appears probable, 
then, that it is not interbreeding in itself that is hurtful, but 
interbreeding without rigid selection or some change of 
conditions. . . . In nature, too, the species always extends 
over a larger area and consists of much greater numbers, 
and thus a difference of constitution soon arises in different 
parts of the area, which is wanting in the limited numbers 
of pure bred domestic animals. From a consideration of 
these varied facts we conclude that an occasional disturb- 
ance of the organic equilibrium is what is essential to keep 
up the vigour and fertility of any organism, and that this 
disturbance may be equally well produced either by a cross 
between individuals of somewhat different constitutions, or 
by occasional slight changes in the conditions of life.”” 
Thus if these eminent authorities are right, the radical 
defect of consanguineous marriages is not the mere con- 
fluence of two streams of the same blood ; it is that the two 
individuals who conjugate are not sufficiently differentiated 
from each other. A certain degree of difference between 
1 Ch. Darwin, Zhe Variation of the evil results of interbreeding may 
Animals and Plants under Domestica- be much diminished or quite elimin- 
tion (London, 1905), ii. 115; compare ated.” Some breeders keep large 
td, ii, 156: ‘‘ There is good reason to stocks at different places for the sake 
believe that by keeping the members of crossing them with each other (Ch. 
of the same family in distinct bodies, Darwin, of. czf. ii. 117). 
especially if exposed to somewhat 

different conditions of life, and by 2A, R. Wallace, Darwinisne 
occasionally crossing these families, (London, 1889), pp. 326 sq. 

SECT. III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 165 

them is essential to fertility and life; too great sameness 

leads to sterility and death. The conclusion may perhaps Analogy 
be confirmed by an analogy drawn from the lowest forms of oe ae 
animal life, the humble Protozoa, which have not yet attained 

to a discrimination of the sexes and propagate their kind, 
generation after generation, by the alternate growth and 
fission of the individual. But though this solitary mode of 
reproduction may be repeated many times, experiments 
prove that it cannot be continued indefinitely. There comes 

a time in the history of each individual when it appears that 

the organism is becoming worn out, is shrinking after every 
successive division, in short is shewing signs of senile decay. 

It must then unite with another organism of a different 
origin, if the cycle of growth and reproduction is to begin 
afresh ; such a union is absolutely necessary to the per- 
petuation of the species.’ 

From the testimonies which I have cited we may safely But if 
conclude that infertility is an inevitable consequence of in- rata 
breeding continued through many generations in the samé conse- 
place and under the same conditions. The loss of fertility, ene * 

long-con- 

indeed, “ when it occurs, seems never to be absolute, but only oe 
relative to animals of the same blood; so that this sterility jider the 

is to a certain extent analogous with that of self-impotent same con- 
plants which cannot be fertilized by their own pollen, but io 
are perfectly fertile with pollen of any other individual of the gamous 
same species.”” It is a curious coincidence that infertility is tae 
precisely the effect which many more or less primitive peoples mie psi 
have attributed to incestuous marriages, though they have tage as 
not limited that effect to womankind but have extended it sia 
to animals and plants. As they cannot have reached these exogamous 
conclusions from experience, they would seem to have arrived aati 
at them through some purely superstitious fancy which as existence. 
yet escapes us.* Be that as it may, if the sexual unions of aarti! 

near kin tend in the long run to be unproductive, it is obvious the endo- 

1 See Professor J. Y. Simpson’s 
article ‘* Biology” in Dr. J. Hastings’s 
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 
ii. (Edinburgh, 1909) p. 630. 

* Ch. Darwin, Zhe Variation of 
Animals and Plants under Domestica- 
tion (London, 1905), ii. 157. How- 
ever, Darwin reports a case of inbreed- 

ing some owl-pigeons till their extreme 
sterility almost extinguished the breed ; 
and another case of inbreeding trum- 
peter-pigeons till ‘inbreeding so close 
stopped reproduction.” See Ch. Darwin, 
op. cit, ii, 131. 

3 See above, pp. 157-160. 

166 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT, II 

gamous that any motive, whether purely rational or purely superstitious, 
peoples which led a people to eschew and forbid such unions must 
always have so far contributed to the welfare of the community 
Hagen by assisting it to multiply fast, though no doubt the same 
know, so scruples pushed to an exaggerated extent, as in the eight- 
few in class system of the Australian aborigines, might have the 
by com- contrary effect by acting as a positive check on population. 
pebtne On the other hand so far as a people entertained no aversion 
exogamous to incest and indulged in it freely, just so far would it 
ca multiply more slowly than its more scrupulous neighbours 
- and would thereby stand at a manifest disadvantage in com- 
peting against them. Thus the practice of outbreeding or 
exogamy would help, and the practice of inbreeding or 
endogamy would hinder, any community which adopted it 
in the long series of contests which result in the survival of 
the fittest ; for in one factor of vital importance, the possi- 
bility of rapid breeding, the exogamous community would 
be the fit and the endogamous community the unfit. These 
considerations may partly explain why at the present day, 
and so far’ as we know throughout history, the races which 
practise exogamy or prohibit incest have been vastly more 
numerous than the races which practise endogamy and 
permit incest ; and it is a fair inference that in the struggle 
for existence many endogamous peoples have disappeared, 
having been either extinguished or absorbed by their more 
vigorous and prolific rivals. 
Thus the On the whole, then, if we compare the principles of 
ony exogamy with the principles of scientific breeding we can 
present srareely’ fail to be struck, as Mr. Walter Heape has pointed 
vom. Out,’ by the curious resemblance, amounting almost to coin- 
blance cidence, between the two. 
miners In the first place under exogamy the beneficial effects 
fa oa of crossing, which the highest authorities deem essential to 
is the welfare and even to the existence of species of animals 
institution and plants, is secured by the system of exogamous classes, 
ane either two, four, or eight in number, which we have seen 
classes Every reason to regard as artificially instituted for the express 
pana purpose of preventing the cohabitation of the nearest blood 
ofcrossing, relations. Now it is very remarkable that the particular 

1 See above, pp. 162 sg, 

SECT. IIT THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 167 

form of incest which the oldest form of exogamy, the two- ana the 

class system, specially prevents is the incest of brothers with order in 

sisters, That system absolutely prevents all such incest, woes 

while it only partially prevents the incest of parents with bain 
1s 

children,’ which to the civilised mind might seem more shock- in accora- 

ing on account of the difference between the generations, as Ong)? 

well as for other reasons. Yet this determination of savage logical 

man to stop the cohabitation of brothers with sisters even Peeples 

before stopping the cohabitation of parents with children 

is in accordance with the soundest biological principles; for 

it is well recognised both by practical breeders and scientific 

men that the sexual union of brothers with sisters is the 

closest and most injurious form of incest, more so than the 

sexual union of a mother with a son or of a father with a 

daughter. The complete prohibition of incest between 

parents and children was effected by the second form of 

exogamy, the four-class system. Lastly, the prohibition of 

marriage between all first cousins, about which opinion has 

wavered down to the present time even in civilised countries, 

was only accomplished by the third and latest form of 

exogamy, the eight-class system, which was naturally adopted 

only by such tribes as disapproved of these marriages, but _ 

never by tribes who viewed the union of certain first cousins 

either with indifference or with positive approbation. 

Nor does this exhaust the analogies between exogamy Further, 
and scientific breeding. We have seen that the rule of the vad 
deterioration and especially of the infertility of inbred of chang. 
animals is subject to a very important exception. While earns 
the evil can be removed by an infusion of fresh blood, it can of life 
also be remedied in an entirely different way by simply Sou 
changing the conditions of life, especially by sending some by the 
animals to a distance and then bringing their progeny back Seat 
‘to unite with members of the family which have remained ena 
in the old home. Such a form of local exogamy, as we may or in ad- 
‘call it, without the introduction of any fresh blood, appears oe 
to be effective in regenerating the stock and restoring its lost tice of 

14. 3 . . : 7 class exo- 
fertility.” But this system of local exogamy, this marriage pariye 
1 See above, pp. 107 sg., 114-119. tion (London, 1905), ii. 114, 123, 
2 Ch. Darwin, Zhe Variation of 130, 56. 
Animals and Plants under Domestica- 3 See above, pp. 163 sg 

The 
analogy of 
exogamy 
to scientific 
breeding 
cannot be 
due to 
any exact 
knowledge 
or far- 
seeing care 
on the 
part of its 
savage 
founders ; 
it must 

be an 
accidental 
result of 

a super- 
stition, an 
uncon- 
scious 
mimicry 
of science, 

168 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION SECT. 111 

of members of the same race who have lived at a distance 
from each other, is also practised by many savage tribes 
besides or instead of their system of kinship exogamy. It 
is often a rule with them that they must get their wives not 
merely from another stock but from another district. For 
example, we have seen that the Warramunga tribe of 
Central Australia is divided into two intermarrying classes 
which occupy separate districts, a northern and a southern, 

with the rule that the northern men must always marry 

wives from the southern district, and that reciprocally all the 
southern men must marry wives from the northern district.’ 
Indeed, as I have already pointed out,> there are some 
grounds for conjecturing that the custom of locally separating 
the exogamous classes may have been adopted at the very 
outset for the sake of sundering those persons whose sexual 
union was deemed a danger to the community. It might 
be hard to devise a marriage system more in accordance 
with sound biological principles. 

Thus exogamy, especially in the form in which it is 
practised by the lowest of existing savages, the aborigines 
of Australia, presents a curious analogy to a system 
of .scientific breeding. That the exogamous system of 
these primitive people was artificial and that it was de- 
liberately devised by them for the purpose which it actually 
serves, namely the prevention of the marriage of near kin, 
seems quite certain; on no other reasonable hypothesis can 
we explain its complex arrangements, so perfectly adapted 
to the wants and the ideas of the natives. Yet it is im- 
possible to suppose that in planning it these ignorant and 
improvident savages could have been animated by exact 
knowledge of its consequences or by a far-seeing care for'the 
future welfare of their remote descendants. When we reflect 
how little to this day marriage is regulated by any such 
considerations even among the most enlightened classes in 
the most civilised communities, we shall not be likely to 
attribute a far higher degree of knowledge, foresight, and 
self-command to the rude founders of exogamy. What idea 
these primitive sages and lawgivers, if we may call them so, 

1 See the references in the Index, s.z. 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 246-249. 
“« Exogamy, local.” 3 Above, vol. i. p. 248. 

SECT, III THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY 169 

had in their minds when they laid down the fundamental 
lines of the institution, we cannot say with certainty ; all 
that we know of savages leads us to suppose that it must 
have been what we should now call a superstition, some crude 
notion of natural causation which to us might seem trans- 
parently false, though to them it doubtless seemed obviously 
true. Yet egregiously wrong as they were in theory, they 
appear to have been fundamentally right in practice. What 
they abhorred was really evil; what they preferred was 
really good. Perhaps we may call their curious system an 
unconscious mimicry of science. The end which it accom- 
plished was wise, though the thoughts of the men who 
invented it were foolish. In acting as they did, these poor 
savages blindly obeyed the impulse of the great evolutionary 
forces which in the physical world are constantly educing 
higher out of lower forms of existence and in the moral 
world civilisation out of savagery. If that is so, exogamy 
has been an instrument in the hands of that unknown power, 
the masked wizard of history, who by some mysterious 
process, some -subtle alchemy, so often transmutes in the 
crucible of suffering the dross of folly and evil into the ane 
gold of wisdom and good. 

NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

' NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

VOLUME I 

P. 4. The sex totem... the individual totem. — These 
terms are unsatisfactory, for reasons which I have already indi- 
cated.! For “sex totem” I have suggested “sex patron,” and 
the suggestion has, I understand, been accepted by a committee 
of anthropologists, who for “individual totem” propose to sub- 
stitute “guardian genius.” 

P. 7. The Kalang .. . transformed into a dog.—The full 
legend of the descent of the Kalangs from a dog which married 
a woman has been recorded.? It presents the characteristic 
traits of the Oedipus story; a mother marries her son un- 
wittingly, and the son kills his dog-father without knowing 
the relation in which he stood to the animal. In one version 
of the legend the woman has twin sons by the dog and after- 
wards unwittingly marries them both. It is said that the belief 
of the Kalangs in their descent from a dog plays a great part in 
all their ceremonies, the intention of which is to summon their 
ancestors into their midst. For example, they strew ashes on the 
floor for eight nights before a wedding, and if they find the foot- 
prints of a dog in the ashes, they take it as a sign that the ancestors 
are* pleased with the marriage. Similarly, they draw omens from 
the footprints of a dog in ashes or sand at a certain festival 
which they hold once in seven months. It is also said that the 
Kalangs have wooden images of dogs, which they revere.2 Accord- 
ing to the Javanese, the incest which the Kalangs tell of in their 
traditions is repeated in their customs ; for it is reported that 
among them mother and son often live together as man and wife, 

1 See above, vol. iii. pp. 454-456. M[echelen], 26z¢. pp. 438-441. Com- 
2 See E. Ketjen, ‘*De Kalangers,” pare P. J. Veth, Java (Haarlem, 1875- 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal. Land- 1884), iii. pp. 581 sg. 
en Volkenkunde, xxiv. (1877) pp. 430- 3 E, Ketjen, of. ct. pp. 424- 
435, with the notes of H. L. Ch. te 427- 

173 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

174 
and it is a belief of the Kalangs that worldly prosperity and riches 
flow from such a union.1 However, in spite of the tradition of 
their descent from a dog, there seems to be no sufficient evidence 
that the Kalangs have totemism. Indeed the story of a canine 
origin, combined with incest, is told of other peoples in the Malay 
Archipelago.” 

P. 8. The Ainos . . . suckled by a bear.—According tq the 
‘Rev. John Batchelor many of the Ainos who dwell among the 
mountains believe themselves to be descended from a bear. They 
belong to the Bear clan and are called Aimun Kamui sanikiri, that 
is, ‘descendants of the bear.” Such people are very proud and 
say, ‘As for me, I am a child of the god of the mountains; I am 
descended from the divine one who rules in the mountains.” 
Further, Mr. Batchelor tells us that the Ainos of a certain district 
often call each other by names which mean “children of the eagle” 
and “descendants of the bird,” these being terms of reproach 
which they hurl at one another in their quarrels. He thinks that 
these epithets are evidence of clan totemism.? However, there is 
no sufficient proof that the Ainos are totemic.4 The usual tradition 
is that the Ainos, like the Kalangs of Java, are descended from 
a woman and a dog. 

P. 9. “That brother belonging to me you have killed.”—‘“ In 
one instance, a native at Béran plains, desired a European not to 
kill a génar, which he ‘was then chasing, but to catch it alive, as it 
was ‘him brother. The animal, however, was killed, at which the 
native was much displeased, and would not eat of it, but unceasingly 
complained of the ‘tumbling down him brother.’”® Again, with 
regard to the Moorloobulloo, a tribe of Central Australia, at the 
junction of King’s Creek and the Georgina or Herbert River, we 
are told that “the persons of this tribe take each the name of some 
bird or animal, which the individual calls brother, and will not eat.” ? 

1 E. Ketjen, “‘ De Kalangers,” 77jd- 
schrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en 
Volkenkunde, xxiv. (1877) p. 427. 

2 J. C. van Eerde, ‘*De Kalang- 
legende op Lombok,” 7ijdschrift voor 
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xlv. (1902) pp. 30-58, especially pp. 
30 sg. 

3 Rev. John Batchelor, The Ainu 
and their Folk-lore (London, 1901), pp. 
10 sg. 

4 See above, vol. ii. p. 348 note. 

5 See W. M. Wood, ‘‘The Hairy 
Men of Yesso,” Zvansactions of the 
Ethnological Society of London, New 
Series, iv. (1866) p. 37; Lieut. 

Swinton C. Holland, ‘On the Ainos,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
iii. (1874) p. 236; H. C. St. John, 
Notes and Sketches from the Wild Coasts 
of Nipon (Edinburgh, 1880), pp. 29 sg.3 
Isabella L. Bird, Unbeaten Tracks in 
Japan (New Edition, 1885), pp. 250, 
255, 315; D. Brauns, /apanische 
Marchen und Sagen (lseipsic, 1885), 
pp. 167-170. 

6 George Bennett, Wanderings in 
New South Wales, Batavia, Pedir 
Coast, Singapore and China (London, 
1834), i, 131. 

7 J. O. Machattie, in E. M. Curr’s 
The Australian Race, ii. 366 sy. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 175 
Some Peruvian Indians would not kill the fish of a certain river ; 
“for they said that the fish were their brothers,” ! 

P. 9. The Ojibways (Chippeways) do not kill . . . their totems, 
etc.—However, this statement seems to apply to the guardian 
animals of individuals rather than to the totemic animals of clans.? 

P. 10. Split totems.—-Some of the ancient Egyptians, like 
many modern savages, appear to have restricted their veneration to 
certain parts of the sacred animals, whereby they were able to satisfy 
at once their consciences and their appetites by abstaining from 
some joints and partaking of others. Thus Sextus Empiricus 
writes: ‘Of the Egyptians who are counted wise some deem it sacri- 
legious to eat the head of an animal, others to eat the shoulder- 
blade, others the foot, and others some other part.”% Again, 
Lucian says that, while some of the ancient Egyptians revered whole 
animals, such as bulls, crocodiles, cats, baboons, and apes, others 
worshipped only parts of animals; thus the right shoulder would be 
the god of one village, the left shoulder the god of a second village, 
and half of the head the god of a third.* 

_ P. 13. A Samoan clan had for its totem the butterfly, etc.— 
The worshipful animals, plants, and so forth of the Samoans 
appear to have been rather deities developed out of totems than 
totems in the proper sense.5 

P. 14. Sometimes the totem animal is fed and even kept alive 
in captivity.—A very few cases of feeding wild animals or keeping 
them in captivity on the ground of their sanctity have met us in the 
course of this work.6 The natives of the Pelew Islands regard the 
puffin as a divine bird; they often feed it and keep it tame.” It 
is said that in antiquity a Greek general, marching at the head of an 
army into the interior of Libya, discovered three cities called the 
_ Cities of Apes, in which apes were worshipped as gods and lived 
with the people in their houses. The inhabitants generally called 
their children after the apes and punished with death any sacri- 
legious person who dared to kill one of the sacred animals.® 

*P. 15. The dead totem is mourned for and buried, etc.—It is 

1 Garcilasso de la Vega, First Part 
of the Royal Commentaries of the 
Yucas, translated by C. R. Markham, 
vol. i. p. 168. See also above, vol. 
li, p. 372. 

2 See above, vol. iii. pp. §1 59. 

3 Sextus Empiricus, ed. I. Bekker 
(Berlin, 1842), p. 173. 

4 Lucian, Jupiter Tragoedus, 42, 

5 See above, vol. ii. pp. 151, 166 sg. 

6 See above, vol. ii. p. 35 (as to 
the Bugilai of New Guinea) $ vol, ii. p. 

341 (as tothe aborigines of Formosa) ; 
and vol. iii. p. 576 {as to the Bororos 
of Brazil). 

7 J. Kubary, “Die Religion der 
Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s -4/ler/e/ aus 
Volks- und Menschenkunde (Berlin, 
1888), i. 38 sg. 

8 Diodorus Siculus, Szbliotheca 
Historica, xx. 58. The passage was 
pointed out to me by my learned friend 
Mr. William Wyse. 

Prohibited 
foods in 
Australia, 

176 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

by no means clear that any of the sacred animals, whose solemn 
burial is recorded in this paragraph, were totems. A similar custom 
of burying sacred animals, not necessarily totems, is observed else- 
where. ‘Thus in Malabar “killing a snake is considered a grievous 
sin, and even to see a snake with its head bruised is believed to be 
a precursor of calamities. Pious Malaydlis, when they see a snake 
killed in this way, have it burnt with the full solemnities attendant 
on the cremation of high-caste Hindus. The carcase is covered 
with a piece of silk, and burnt in sandalwood. <A Brahman is 
hired to observe pollution for some days, and elaborate funeral 
oblations are offered to the dead snake.”1 Some of the totemic 
clans of the Gold Coast bury their totemic animals.” 

P. 16. Circumlocutions . . . to give no offence to the worship- 
ful animal.—The custom of referring to animals, especially dange?- 
ous animals, by circumlocutions for the sake of avoiding the use of 
their ordinary names is very widespread and is no doubt commonly 
based on a fear of attracting the attention of the creatures or.of 
putting them on their guard. The animals so referred to need not 
be totems ; often they are the creatures which the hunter or fisher- 
man wishes to catch and kill. 

P. 17. The worshippers of the Syrian goddess . . . break out 
in ulcers.—According to the Greek comic poet Menander, when 
the Syrians ate fish, their feet and bellies swelled up, and by way of 
appeasing the goddess whom they had angered they put on sack- 
cloth and sat down on dung by the wayside in order to express the 
depth of their humiliation.4 

P. 17. The Egyptians . . . would break out in a scab.— Aclian 
ascribes to the Egyptian historian Manetho the statement, that any 
Egyptian who drank of pig’s milk would be covered with leprosy.5 

P. 19. Food prohibitions, which vary chiefly with age.—These 

prohibitions are, or were, common among the aborigines of Australia. 

Thus with regard to the natives of Victoria in particular we are told 
that they “have many very curious laws relating to food. The old 
men are privileged to eat every kind of food that it is lawful for any 
of their tribe to eat, but there are kinds of food which a tribe will 
eat in one district and which tribes in another part of the continent 
will not touch. The women may not eat of the flesh of certain 
animals; certain sorts of meat are prohibited to children and young 
persons ; young married women are interdicted from partaking of 
1 Edgar Thurston, LZthnographic 3 For many examples of the custom 
Notes in Southern India(Madras, 1906), see Zhe Golden Bough, Second Edition, 
p. 288, quoting Mr. C. Karunakara i. 451 sgg 
Menon. As to the solemn burial of # Menander, quoted by Porphyry, 
certain sacred animals in Madagascar, De Adstinentia, iv. 15. 
see above, vol. ii. pp. 633, 635. ® Aelian, De Natura Animaltum, 
2 See above, vol. ii, pp. 556, 557+ x. 16. 

VOL, I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 177 

dainties that delight the palates of older women ; and men may not 
touch the flesh of some animals until a mystic ceremony has been 
duly celebrated. Their laws, indeed, in connection with hunting 
and fishing, and the collecting, cooking, and eating of food, are 
numerous and complex; and as the penalties believed to be 
-incurred for a breach of these laws are, in most cases, serious 
diseases, or death, they are obeyed. Some suppose that cunning 
old men established the laws for the purpose of reserving to them- 
selves those kinds of food which it was most difficult to procure, 
and that one effect of their prohibitions was to make the young 
men more expert in hunting; and it has been suggested that the 
eating of some animals was interdicted in order that the natural 

increase might not be prevented. 

In looking over the list of 

animals prohibited to young men, to women, and to children, one 
fails to see, however, any good reasons for the selection—unless we 
regard nearly the whole of the prohibitions as having their source 

in superstitious beliefs.” ! 

In the Yarra tribe young people were 

forbidden to eat the flying squirrels, porcupines, emus, bustards, 
ducks, swans, iguanas, turtles, a species of large fish (oora-mook), 
and youhg opossums, but they might eat old male opossums. If 
any young person ate of any of the forbidden animals before leave 
was granted him by the old men, it was said that he would sicken 
and die, and that no doctor could save him. But after the age of 
thirty he might eat any of the animals with impunity.? “No young 
men are allowed to eat the flesh or eggs of the emu, a kind of 
luxury which is thus reserved exclusively for the old men and the 
women. I understood from Piper, who abstained from eating emu, 
when food was very scarce, that the ceremony necessary in this 
case consisted chiefly in being rubbed all over with emu fat by an 
old man. Richardson of our party was an old man, and Piper 
reluctantly allowed himself to be rubbed with emu fat by Richardson, 
but from that time he had no objection to eat emu. The threatened 
penalty was that young men on eating the flesh of an emu would 
be afflicted with sores all over the body.”® Among the Birria, 
Koongerri, and Kungarditchi tribes of Central Australia, at the 
junction of the Thomson and Barcoo rivers, it was believed that if 
a young ‘man were even to break an emu egg, the offended spirits 
would raise a storm of thunder and lightning, in which the culprit 
himself would probably be struck down. Among the Port Lincoln 
tribes of South Australia the general principle of the food laws is 
said to have been “that the male of any animal should be eaten by 
grown-up men, the female by women, and the young animal by 

1 R. Brough Smyth, Zhe aides 

of Victoria, i. 234. 

2 R. Brough Smyth, of. c7#. i. 235. 

3 Major T. L. Mitchell, 
VOL. IV 

Three Ex- 

peditiens into the Interior of Eastern 
Australia (London, 1838), ii. 340 sg. 
4 E. M. Curr, The Australian Race, 
ii. 377. 
N 

178 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 
children only. An exception, however, is made with respect to the 
common kangaroo-rat, which may be eaten promiscuously. The 
wallaby, especially that species called by the natives yurridnt, and 
the two species of bandicoot, Aurkulla and yartiri, must on no 
account be eaten by young men and young women, as they are 
believed to produce premature menses in the latter, and discolour 
the beards of the former, giving them a brown tinge instead of a 
shining black.'. . . Guanas and lizards are proper food for girls, 
as accelerating maturity, and snakes for women, promoting 
fecundity.” } 

Among the aborigines of Australia the prohibitions to eat certain 
animal or vegetable foods often come into operation at those 
initiatory ceremonies which mark the attainment of puberty and the 
transition from boyhood to manhood. We shall recur to this 
subject a little further on.? 

P. 20. The Psylli, a Snake clan in Africa . . . exposed their 
new-born children to snakes, etc.—The ancient historian Dio 
Cassius has also recorded that the Psylli were immune to snake- 
bites, and that they tested their new-born children by exposing 
them to snakes, which did them no harm. According to the 
historian, Octavian attempted to restore the dead Cleopatra to life 
by means of these men® The Greek topographer Pausanias also 
refers to the power which the Libyan Psylli were thought to possess 
of healing persons who had been bitten by snakes.t In the Punjab 
there is a Snake caste or tribe (za¢), the members of which worship 
snakes and claim to be immune to their sting. They will not kill a 
snake, and if they find a dead one, they put clothes on it and give 
the reptile a regular burial. The Tilokchandi Baises in North- 
Western India claim to be descended from the snake-god, and it is 
sald that no member of the family has been known to die from 
snake-bite.6 Members of the Isowa sect in Morocco assert that 
snakes, scorpions, and all other venomous creatures cannot harm 
them, and that they therefore handle them with impunity.? 

P. 21. Some judicial ordeals may have originated in totem 
tests of kinship.—At Calabar in West Africa the sharks were the 
juju or sacred animals. They throng the creek before the town 
and used to be regularly fed. In former times criminals had to 

1 C. W. Schiirmann, ‘‘ The Aborig- 
inal Tribes of Port Lincoln,” Native 
Tribes of South Australia, p. 220. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 40-42, and 
below, pp. 217 sgq. 

3 Dio Cassius, Historia Romana, li. 
14. 

4 Pausanias, Description of Greece, 
ix. 28. 1, 

5 F, A. Steel, in Panjab Notes and 
Queries, vol, ii. p. 91, § 555- 

6 Panjab Notes and Queries, vol. iii. 
p- 162, § 664. 

7 A. Leared, Aforocco and the Moors 
(London, 1876), p. 267. 

VOL. I 

NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 179 

swim across the creek as an ordeal. If they escaped the maws of 
the ravenous sharks, they were deemed innocent.! 

P. 22. The Snake clan (Ophiogenes) of Asia Minor, etc.—The 
Snake clan (Ophiogenes) were a mythical people, who are said to 
have lived at Parium in Mysia.2 The statement in the text that 
if they were bitten by an adder they had only to put a snake to 
the wound is erroneous. What Strabo reports is that when people 
were bitten by adders the Snake men healed them by touching 
their bodies and so transferring the poison to themselves and thus 
relieving the inflammation. He tells us that the founder of the 
family is said to have been a hero who had been an adder before 
he took human shape. ‘“ As we crossed the Kal Aspad, we saw a 
tomb named Imam Zadahi—Pir Mar (P:v Mar signifies Saint Snake), 
a shrine of great celebrity in Luristan. This saint is said to have 
possessed the miraculous power of curing the bites of all venomous 
serpents ; and, at the present day, whenever a Lur in the vicinity 
is bitten by a snake, he repairs to the shrine, and, according to 
popular belief, always recovers. The descendants of this holy 
personage, too, claim to have inherited the miraculous power, and 
I have certainly seen them effect some very remarkable cures.” 3 

P. 25. The Yezidis abominate blue.—Their strongest curse is 
“May you die in blue garments.”* Hindoos of the Kurnal District 
will not grow indigo, for simple blue is an abomination to them.® 
It is very unlikely that such dislikes have anything to do with 
totemism. 

P. 25. The sun was the special divinity of the chiefs of the 
Natchez.—The Natchez had a temple dedicated to the sun, in 
which a perpetual fire was kept burning. They thought that the 
family of their chiefs was descended from the sun and that their 
souls returned to it at death. The chief of the whole nation was 
called the Great Sun and his relations the Little Suns. These 
human Suns looked down on their fellow-tribesmen with great 
contempt.® 

P, 26. The clansman is in the habit of assimilating himself to 
his totem, etc.—“ To the obseryations I have made before about 

all African tribes, that in their attire they endeavour to imitate 
some part of the animal creation, I may add that they seem to 

1 Captain John Adams, Remarks Koords, p. 277. 

on the Country extending from Cape 
Palmas to the River Congo (London, 
1823), pp. 138 sg. 

2 Strabo, xiii, 1. 14. 

3 Rawlinson, in Journal of the 
Royal Geographical Society, ix. (1839) 
. 96.- 

’ Millingan, Wild Life among the 

6 (Sir) Denzil C. J. Ibbetson, Ae- 
port on the Revision of Settlement of 
the Panipat Tapsil and Karnal Par- 
ganah of the Karnal District (Alaha- 
bad, 1883), p- 155. 

6 « Relation de la Louisiane,” 
Voyages au nord, Troisiéme Edition 
(Amsterdam, 1731-1738), v. 24. 

Custom of 
extracting 
front teeth 
at initiation 
and other 
occasions in 
Australia, 

Extraction 
of teeth 
associated 
with rain, 

180 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, I 
show a special preference for copying any individual species for 
which they have a particular reverence. In this way it frequently 
happens that their superstition indirectly influences the habits of 
their daily life, and that their animal-worship finds expression in 

their dress.” ! 

P. 27. The practice of knocking out the upper front teeth at 
puberty . . , is, or was once, probably an imitation of the totem. 
—This statement is not well founded. There is no evidence that 
the widespread custom of knocking out, chipping, or filing the 
teeth 2 is an imitation of the totemic animal, nor indeed that it has 
anything to do with totemism, though it is observed by many 
totemic tribes. The custom of knocking out one or two front teeth 
of each male novice at initiation occurs in the extreme north of 
Queensland,* and is common in South-Eastern Australia, but since 
in the tribes which practise it the operation is performed alike on 
all lads, whatever their totem, it seems impossible that the extraction 
of the tooth or teeth can be intended to assimilate the men to their 
various totemic animals. Like so many other rites which mark 
the attainment of puberty among savages, this strange custom of 
extracting or mutilating the teeth is probably based on some crude 
superstition which we do not yet understand. Among the Central 
Australian tribes the extraction of teeth is not practised as a rite of 
initiation, obligatory upon all young men before they are admitted 
to the privileges of manhood ; still it is submitted to voluntarily by 
many men and women and is associated, curiously enough, in their 
minds with the production or the prevention of rain. Thus in 
the Arunta tribe the custom is observed especially by members of 
the Rain or Water totem ; indeed it is almost, though not quite, 
obligatory on both men and women of that clan as well as on the 
natives of what is called the Rain Country (Aartzwia Quatcha) to 
the north-east of the Arunta territory. In the Arunta tribe the 
operation is usually performed before marriage and always after the’ 
members of the Rain or Water clan have observed their magical 
ceremony (éntichiuma) for the making of rain or water. To explain 
the special association of tooth-drawing with the rain totem the 
natives say that the intention of the rite is to make the patient’s 

1G. Schweinfurth, Zhe Heart of 
Africa, Third Edition (London, 1878), 
i, 192. 

2 For a collection of evidence on 
this subject see H. von Ihering, ‘‘ Die 
kinstliche Deformirung der Ziahne,” 
Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, xiv. (1882) 
pp. 213-262. 

3 See above, vol. i. p. 535. 

4 See the references in vol. i. p. 
412 note?; and further E. J. Eyre, 

Journals of Expeditions of Discovery 
énto Central Australia (London, 1845), 
ii, gto; Native Tribes of South Aus- 
tralia (Adelaide, 1879), pp. 266 sg.; 
Journal and Proceedings of the Royal 
Soctety of New South Wales, 1882, pp. 
165 sg., 172, 209; 2@., 788}, pp. 26 
sq.3 E. M. Curr, The Australian Race, 
i. 164, iii, 273; R. Brough Smyth, 
The Aborigines of Victoria, i. 61, 62; 
64 5g., ii. 296. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 181 

| 

face look like a dark cloud with a light rim, which porzends rain! 
The explanation seems far-fetched, but at least it shews that in the 
minds of the aborigines the custom is associated with, if not based 
upon, the principle of sympathetic or imitative magic. In the 
Warramunga tribe the ceremony of knocking ove teeth is always 
performed after the fall of heavy rain, when the natives have had 
enough and wish the rain to stop. The Tjingilli in like manner 
extract the teeth towards the end of the rainy season, when they 
think that no more rain is needed ; and the extracted teeth are 
thrown into a water-hole in the belief that they will drive the rain 
and clouds away. Again, in the Gnanji tribe the rite is always 
observed during the rainy season ; and when the tooth has been 
drawn it is carried about for some time by the operator. Finally 
it is given by him to the patient’s mother, who buries it beside 
some water-hole for the purpose of stopping the rain and making 
the edible water-lilies to grow plentifully.? 

Superficially regarded the initiatory rite of tooth-extraction so Relation 
far resembles the initiatory rite of circumcision that the essential] of tooth- 
part of both consists in the removal of a part of the patient’s body ; traction 
accordingly it is probably not without significance that the tribes of initiatory 
South-Eastern Australia, who practise the rite of tooth-extraction, tite to cir- 
do not observe the rite of circumcision; while on the contrary U™ision. 
the tribes of Central Australia and North-West Queensland, who 
practise the rite of circumcision, do not observe the rite of tooth- 
extraction as an initiatory ceremony.’ With great diffidence I have Theory of 
conjectured that the two rites of circumcision and tooth-extraction circum- 
may have had this much in common, that they were both intended “'™ 
to promote the reincarnation of the individual at a future time by ~ 
severing from his person a vital or especially durable portion and 
subjecting it to a treatment which, in the opinion of these savages, 
was fitted to ensure the desired object of bringing him to life again 
after death.* 

The evidence which has suggested this conjecture is indeed 
very slight and scanty ; but a few points in it may be mentioned. 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 
of Central Australia, pp. 213, 450 
sq.3 t@., Northern Tribes of Central 
Australia, pp. §88 sgq. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, Northern 
Tribes of Central Australia, pp. §93- 
596. 

3 Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 
of Central Australia, pp. 118 note}, 
213,453599.3 W. E. Roth, Ethuological 
Studies among the North- West-Central 
Queensland Aborigines (Brisbane and 
London, 1897), pp- III, 170 sgg. 

The relation between circumcision and 
tooth-extraction as alternative rites of 
initiation had already been indicated by 
E. J. Eyre, who used it as an argument 
for determining the migrations of the 
various Australian tribes from what he 
conceived to be their starting-point on 
the north-west coast of the continent. 
See E. J. Eyre, Journals of Expeditions 
of Discovery into Central Australia 
(London, 1845), ii. 405-411. 

4J. G. Frazer, “The Origin of 
Circumcision,” Zhe Judependent Re- 
wiew, November 1904, pp. 204-218, 

Custom of 
placing 
extracted 
teeth in 
trees. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 1 

182 
Thus among the natives of the Goulburn River in the central part 
of Victoria, when a youth reaches manhood, “he is conducted by 
three of the leaders of the tribe into the recesses of the woods, 
where he remains two days and one night. Being furnished with a 
piece of wood he knocks out two of the teeth of his upper front 
jaw; and on returning to the camp carefully consigns them to his 
mother. The youth then again retires into the forest, and remains 
absent two nights and one day; during which his mother, having 
selected a young gum tree, inserts the teeth in the bark, in the 
fork of two of the topmost branches. This tree is made known 
only to certain persons of the tribe, and is strictly kept from the 
knowledge of the youth himself. In case the person to whom the 
tree is thus dedicated dies, the foot of it is stripped of its bark, and 
it is killed by the application of fire; thus becoming a monument 
of the deceased.” In some of the Darling River tribes in New 
South Wales the youth after initiation used to place his extracted 
tooth under the bark of a tree, near a creek, water-hole, or river ; 
if the bark grew over it or the tooth fell into the water, all was 
well; but if it were exposed and ants ran over it, the natives 
believed that the youth would suffer from a disease in his mouth.” 
These customs seem to shew that a mystic relation of sympathy 
was supposed to exist between the man and his severed tooth of 
such a nature that when it suffered he suffered, and that when he 
died the tooth and its temporary receptacle must both be destroyed.* 

1 W. Blandowski, ‘ Personal Ob- 
servations made in an Excursion towards 
the Central Parts of Victoria,” Zrans- 
actions of the Philosophical Society of 
Victoria, i. (Melbourne, 1855), p. 72. 
Compare R. Brough Smyth, The 
Aborigines of Victoria, i. 61; Spencer 
and Gillen, Matzve Tribes of Central 
Australia, pp. 453 sg. It may be 
noted that in the tribes of Central 
Victoria described by Mr, Blandowski 
a young man as usual was prohibited 
from holding any communication with 
his wife’s mother. Once ‘a mother- 
in-law being descried approaching, a 
number of é:bras [women] formed a 
circle around the young man, and he 
himself covered his face with his hands.” 
See W. Blandowski, of. czt. p. 74. 

2 F. Bonney, “‘Onsome Customs of 
the Aborigines of the River Darling, 
New South Wales,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xiii. (1884) 
p. 128. Similarly among tribes of the 
Itchumundi nation to the west of the 
Darling River a young man takes his 

extracted tooth together with the hair 
which has been plucked from his 
private parts and conceals them under 
the bark of a tree which has its roots 
in a water-hole. See A. W. Howitt, 
Native Tribes of South-East Australia, 
PP. 675 5g. 
' 

3 The belief in a sympathetic re- 
lation between the manand his extracted 
tooth comes out plainly in a custom of 
the Dieri. After the novice’s mouth 
is healed his father takes the two ex- 
tracted teeth, ‘blows two or three 
times with his mouth, and then jerks 
the teetn through his hand to a distance. 
He then buries them about eighteen 
inches in the ground. The jerking 
motion is to show that he has already 
taken all the life out of them; as, 
should he fail to do so, the boy would 
be liable to have an ulcerated mouth, 
an impediment in his speech, a wry 
mouth, and ultimately a distorted face.” 
See A. W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of 
South-East Australia, p. 656. 

* 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 183 

If these aborigines believed in the reincarnation of the dead, as to 
which however we have no information, it might be that the 
burning of the tree and the tooth was intended to liberate the 
vital essence of the dead man as a preliminary to rebirth. In this 
connection it deserves to be noticed that it is the mother of the 
youth who deposits his tooth in the tree, just as among the Gnanji 

it is the mother of the patient who buries the tooth beside a 
water-hole ; and further that in the Arunta and Kaitish tribes the 
extracted tooth is thrown away in the direction where the boy’s or 
girl’s mother is supposed to have encamped in the far-off dream 
times (a/cheringa).| This at least suggests that the tooth may 
possibly be regarded as an instrument of impregnation and there- 

fore of a new birth, The same may perhaps be the meaning of 

a curious custom observed in the Warramunga tribe ; the extracted 
tooth is pounded up and given in a piece of flesh to the mother 

or to the mother-in-law of the patient to eat, according as the 
person operated on is a girl or a boy.2. In some Queensland tribes 
“the custom of knocking out the two front teeth is connected with 

the entry into their heaven. If they have the two front teeth out 

they will have bright clear water to drink, and if not they will have 

only dirty or muddy water.” Such a belief, if it is really held, 
proves that the practice of .extracting teeth at puberty is associated 

in the native mind with the life hereafter and is supposed to be 

a preparation for it. Customs to a certain extent similar are Disposal 
observed by some Australian aborigines in regard to the foreskins nd ae 
which are severed at circumcision. Thus in the Warramunga tribe severed at 
the foreskin is placed in the hole made by a witchetty grub in a circum- 
tree and is supposed to cause a plentiful supply of grubs; or it “sion. 
may be put in the burrow of a ground spider and then it is thought 

to make the lad’s genital organ to grow. The lad himself never 

sees the severed foreskin and, like the Victorian natives in regard 

to the trees where their extracted teeth are deposited, never knows 
where this portion of himself has been placed. These beliefs as 

to the foreskin, like the beliefs as to the tooth deposited in a water- 

hole, suggest that a fertilising virtue is ascribed to the severed 
foréskin as well as to the severed tooth. Further, among some 
tribes of North-Western Australia the foreskin of each lad who has 
been circumcised is tied to his hair and left there till his wound 

is healed, after which it is either pounded up with kangaroo meat 

and eaten by its owner, or is taken by his relations to a large tree 

and there inserted under the bark.6 However we may explain it, 

} Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 
of Central Australia, pp. 452, 453> 
455 59. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, Vorthern 
Tribes of Central Australia, p. §93- 

3 E. Palmer, ‘* Notes on some 

Australian Tribes,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xiii. (1884) 
p. 291. 
4 Spencer and Gillen, Morthern 
Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 353 59- 
5 E. Clement, ‘* Ethnographical 

Hawaiian 
custom of 
knocking 
out teeth 
in mourn- 
ing for a 
king or 
chief. 

184 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

a curious parallelism thus exists between the ritual of circumcision 
and the ritual of tooth-extraction, since both of the severed and 
unpalatable parts of the body, thé foreskin and the tooth, are either 
eaten or deposited in a tree, which is kept secret from the man or 
woman from whose person the one or the other has been abstracted. 
In the Unmatjera tribe the boy himself hides his foreskin, under 
cover of darkness, in a hollow tree, telling no one but a cousin, his 
father’s sister’s son, where he has put it, and carefully concealing it 
from women. A pregnant hint as to the part played by the tree in 
the ceremony is furnished by the Unmatjera tradition, that the 
ancestors of the tribe always placed their foreskins in their nanja 
trees, that is, in the trees where their disembodied spirits were 
supposed to tarry in the interval between two successive incarna- 
tions! As such trees are among the spots where women are 
supposed to conceive children through the entrance of the dis- 
embodied spirits into their womb, it is hardly rash to conjecture 
that the intention of placing the severed foreskin in such a tree 
was to ensure that the person from whom it was taken might 
hereafter, when his present life was over, be born again of a 
woman into the world. The same idea may have been at the root 
of the practice of similarly placing the extracted tooth in a tree ; 
although with regard to the latter custom we unfortunately know 
too little as to the beliefs of the natives who practise it to be 
justified in advancing this hypothesis as anything more than a bare 
conjecture, 

In Hawaii it was a custom to knock out one or more front teeth 
as a mark of grief at the death of a king or chief; and though this 
custom was not obligatory, it was yet so common that in the old 
heathen days few men were to be seen with an entire set of teeth, 
and many had lost all their front teeth both on the upper and 
lower jaw, which, apart from its other inconveniences, caused a 
great defect in their speech. The custom was practised both by 
men and women, but oftener by men than by women. Sometimes 
a man knocked out his own teeth with a stone ; but more commonly 
some one else kindly did it for him, putting a stick against the tooth 
and hammering it with a stone till it broke. If men shrank from 
the pain of the operation, women would often perform it upon them 
while they slept.2_ It is probable that this custom was not a mere 

Notes on the Western Australian 
Aborigines,” Jnternationales Archiv 

2W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 
Second Edition, iv. (London, 1836) p. 

fiir Ethnographie, xvi. (1904) p. 11. 

} Spencer and Gillen, Northern 
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 341. 
As to the #anja trees or rocks, the 
homes of disembodied spirits, see i¢., 
Native Tribes of Central Australia, 
pp. 123-125, 132-134. 

176. Compare Zhe Voyages of Captain 

James Cook round the World (London, 
1809), vii. 146; L. de Freycinet, 
Voyage autour du monde, ii. (Paris, 
1829) p. 601; O. von Kotzebue, 
Reise um die Welt (Weimar, 1830), ii. 
116. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 185 

extravagant exhibition of sorrow; we may surmise that it sprang from 
some superstition, Indeed Captain Cook, the first to record it, 
expressly says: ‘ We always understood that this voluntary punish- 
ment, like the cutting off the joints of the finger at the Friendly 
Islands, was not inflicted on themselves from the violence of grief 
on the death of their friends, but was designed as a propitiatory 
sacrifice to the Zatooa [spirit], to avert any danger or mischief to 
which they might be exposed.”! It is possible that these sacrifices 
of teeth may have been originally intended, nut so much to appease 
the vexed ghost of the departed, as to strengthen him either for his 
life in the world of shades or perhaps for rebirth into the world. I 
have suggested elsewhere? that this was the intention with which 
mourners in Australia wound themselves severely and allow the 
blood to drip on the corpse or on the grave.* In some tribes of Teeth _ 
Central Africa, as I learn from my friend the Rev. John Roscoe, all rarer ee 
the teeth which have been at any time extracted from a man’s : 
mouth are carefully preserved and buried with him at death in his 

grave, doubtless in order that he may have the use of them at his 

next resurrection. It is accordingly legitimate to conjecture that 

the teeth which the Hawaiians knocked out of their mouths at the 

death of a king or chief may have been destined for the benefit of 

the deceased, whether by recruiting his vital forces in general or 

by furnishing him with a liberal, indeed superabundant, supply of 

teeth. 

Throughout the East Indian Archipelago it is customary to file Custom of 
and blacken the teeth of both sexes at puberty as a necessary pre- filing and 
liminary to marriage. The common way of announcing that a girl eaorded 
has reached puberty is to say, “She has had her teeth filed.” the East 
However, the ceremony is often delayed for a year or two, when years 
there is no immediate prospect of a girl’s marriage. The operation pelle 
is chiefly confined to the upper canine teeth, the edges of which are 
filed down and made quite even, while the body of the tooth is 
hollowed. However, the teeth of the lower jaw are very often filed 
also. Sometimes the teeth are filed right down to the gums ; some- 
times they are filed into a pointed or triangular shape, so that 
all together they resemble the edge of a saw. The custom of thus 
pointing the teeth is found particularly in Java, some districts of 
Sumatra, the Mentawei Islands, among the Ootanatas on the south- 

1 The Voyages of Captain James 
Cook round the World (London, 1809), 
vii. 146. 

2 «The Origin of Circumcision,” 
The Independent Rewtew, November 
1904, pp. 208 sgz. 

3 See F. Bonney, ‘‘On some Customs 
of the Aborigines of the River Darling, 

New South Wales,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xiii. (1884) 
pp. 134 sg.3; Spencer and Gillen, 
Native Tribes of Central Australia, 
pp. 507, 509; éd., Northern Tribes 
of Central Australia, pp. 516 sg.3 G. 
Grey, Journals of Two Expeditions of 
Discovery in North-West and Western 
Australia (London, 1841), ii. 332. 

Custom of 
filing the 
teeth in 
the East 
Indian 
Archi- 

pelago. 

186 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

west coast of New Guinea, some negrito and some Malay tribes of 
the Philippines, and very commonly among the Dyaks of Sarawak 
in Borneo.! In the island of Bali the four upper front teeth are 
filed down to the gums and the two eyeteeth are pointed. For 
three days after the operation the patient is secluded in a dark 
room ; above all he is strictly enjoined not to enter the kitchen. 
Even when he has been released from the dark chamber he must 
for eight days thereafter take the greatest care not to cross a river 
or even a brook, and not to enter a house in which there is a dead 
body.? In some parts of the East Indian Archipelago, for example, 
in Minahassa, a district of northern Celebes, the teeth may only be 
filed after the death of the nearest blood-relations, which seems to 
shew that in these places, as in Hawaii, the custom i$ associated 
with mourning.? Contrary to the practice of the Australian 
aborigines, with whom tooth-extraction and circumcision are alterna- 
tive rites of initiation, some tribes observing the one and some the 
other, all the peoples of the East Indian Archipelago circumcise 
both sexes, so that among them the nearly universal custom of 
filing the teeth is practised in addition to, not as a substitute for, 
circumcision. But while almost all the Indonesian peoples file their 
teeth, very few of them knock out their teeth, like the aborigines of 

1 John Crawford, History of the 
Indian Archipelago (Edinburgh, 1820), 
i, 215 59.3 G. A. Wilken, Handlerqding 
voor de vergeliykende Volkenkunde van 
Nederlandsch-Indié (Leyden, 1893), 
Pp. 234 sgq. ; 7d. ‘Over de mutilatie 
der tanden bij de volken van den 
Indischen Archipel,” Bijdragen tot de 
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 
landsch-Indié, xxxvii. (1888) pp. 472- 
504. Compare W. Marsden, History 
of Sumatra (London, 1811), pp. 52 
59.5470; T. S. Raffles, he History of 
Java (London, 1817), i. 95, 3513 T. 
J. Newbold, Political and Statistical 
Account of the British Settlements in 
the Straits of Malacca ( London, 1839), 
i, 253; S. Miller, Retsen en Onder- 
sockingen in den Indischen Archtpel 
(Amsterdam, 1857), ii. 279; B. F. 
Matthes, Bijdragen tot de Ethnoiogie 
van Zuid-Celebes (The Hague, 1875), 
pp. 705g. ; A. L. van Hasselt, Volks- 
beschrijving van Midden- Sumatra 
(Leyden, 1882), pp. 6-8; J. B. 
Neumann, ‘*Het Pane en Bila- 
stroomgebied op het eiland Sumatra,” 
Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch 
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, Tweede 
Serie, Deel iii. Afdeeling, Mehr uitge- 

breide Artikelen, No. 3 (Amsterdam, 
1886), pp. 460-464; J. G. F. Riedel, 
‘* De landschappen Holontalo, Limoeto, 
Bone, Boalemo en Kattingola, of 
Andagile,” Tijdschrift voor Indische 
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xix. (1869) 
p- 1333 zd. ‘* Die Landschaft Dawan 
oder West- Timor,” Deutsche geo- 
graphische Blatter, x. 284; td. De sluik- 
en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en 
Papua (The Hague, 1886), PP. 75, 
137, 1775 251, 418; zw, The Island 
of Flores or Pulau Bunga, p. 8 (re- 
printed from the Mevve coloniale tnter- 
nationale). As to the different modes 
of mutilating the teeth and _ their 
geographical distribution in the Indian 
Archipelago, see H. von Ihering, 
** Die kiinstliche Deformirung der 
Zahne,” Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, xiv. 
(1882) pp. 240-253. 

2 R, van Eck, ‘*Schetsen van het 
eiland Bali,” 7vdschrift voor Neder- 
landsch- Indié, N.S. ix. (1880) pp. 
423-429. 

3G. A. Wilken, Handletding voor 
de vergelijkende Volkenkunde (Leyden, 
1893), p. 236. 

4G, A, Wilken, of. ct. pp. 225, 
234. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 
| 

Australia. Indeed the latter custom appears to be reported only of 
some tribes of Central Celebes and of the natives of Engano.! 
Thus it is said that among the Tonapos, Tobadas, and Tokulabis 
of Central Celebes women have two front upper teeth knocked 
out at puberty and the lower teeth filed away to the gums. The 
reason alleged for the practice is that a woman once bit her 
husband so severely that he died.2 The wide prevalence of the 
custom of filing the teeth and the comparative absence of the 
custom of breaking them out in the Indian Archipelago favour the 
view that the former is a mitigation of the latter, the barbarous old 
practice of removing certain teeth altogether having been softened 
into one of removing only a portion of each.® 

The practice of filing the teeth is found also in some tribes of Custom of 
Indo-China. Thus among the Phnongs, on the left bank of the filing the 
Mekong River in Cambodia, when children are thirteen years of ee 
age, the teeth of the upper jaw are cut down almost to the gums China. 
and|they are kept short by filing or rubbing them from time 
to time. No reasonable explanation of the custom is given by the 
people. Similarly among the Khveks of French Cochin-China men 
and women file their upper incisor teeth down to a level with the 
gums ;° and the men of Drai, a village of the Mois, also have their 
teeth filed, which according to the Annamites is a sign of 
cannibalism. In China we hear of the Ta-ya Kih-lau, or “the 
Kih-lau which beat out their teeth.” “These are found in Kien-si, 
Tsing-ping, and Ping-yueh. Before the daughters are given in 
marriage, two of their front teeth must be beaten out to prevent 
damage to the husband’s family. This practice has secured to this 
tribe its designation, as given above. This tribe is divided into 
five clans, which do not intermarry.”“ Among the aborigines of 
northern Formosa “one of the most singular customs is that of 
knocking out the eye tooth of all the children when they reach the 

(1888) 

187 

1G. A. Wilken, ‘Over de muti- Nederlandsch~ Iudté, xxxvii. 
latie der tanden,” Bijdragen tot de 
Taal. Land- en Volkenkunde van 

Nederlandsch - Indié, xxxvii. (1888) 

p» 484. 
4 J. Moura, Le Royaume du 
Cambodge (Paris, 1883), i. 416. 

pp. 483 sg. 3 ta. Handletding voor de 
vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Neder- 
landsch - Indié (Leyden, 1893), p. 
236. 

2 J.G.F. Riedel, ‘De Topantunuasu 
of oorspronkelijke Volksstammen van 
Centraal Selebes,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- 
Land. en Volkenkunde van Neder- 
landsch - Indié, xxxv. (1886) pp. 92 
Sq. 
3 This is the opinion of Dr. Uhle, 
quoted by G. A. Wilken, ‘ Over de 
mutilatie der tanden,” Azjdragen tot 
de Taal- Land. en Wolkenkunde van 

6 E. Aymonier, Notes sur le Laos 
(Saigon, 1885), p. 57- 

6 Humann, ‘ Excursion chez les 
Mois,” Cochinchine francaise, ex- 
cursions et reconnatssances, No. 19 
(Saigon, 1884), p. 36. 

7 “Sketches of the Miau-tsze,” 
translated by the Rev. E. C. Bridgman, 
Journal of the North China Branch of 
the Royal Asiatic Society, vol, i. No. 3 
(December 1859), p. 283. These 
*‘ Sketches” were written by a China- 
man who travelled in the province of 
Kwei-chou. 

Custom of 
knocking 
out, chip- 
ping, or 
filing the 
teeth in 
Africa. 

188 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

age of six or eight years, in the belief that it strengthens their speed 
and wind in hunting.” ? 

In Africa the custom of knocking out, chipping, or filing the 
teeth is very common.?, Thus among the Herero or Damaras both 
boys and girls about the age of puberty have the four lower incisor 
teeth knocked out and a wedge-shaped or triangular opening (like 
an inverted V) made in the upper row by chipping pieces off the 
two middle incisor teeth with a rough stone The people regard 
this artificial deformity as a beauty ; no girl will attract a lover if she 
has not undergone this painful mutilation. As to the meaning of 
the custom the Herero themselves are uncertain.2 According to 
one account the name for the operation (oruvara ruomusisi) means 
“ fashioned after the likeness of the holy ancestral bull.”4 It is to 
be observed that among the Herero all the males are also circum- 
cised, the operation being performed on them between the ages of 
six and ten, some years before their teeth are knocked out and 
chipped.’ All the Batoka tribes in the valley of the Zambesi 
“follow the curious custom of knocking out the upper front teeth 
at the age of puberty. This is done by both sexes, and though the 
under teeth, being relieved from the attrition of the upper, grow 
long and somewhat bent out, and thereby cause the under lip to 
protrude in a most unsightly way, no young woman thinks herself 
accomplished until she has got rid of the upper incisors, . . . 
When questioned respecting the origin of this practice, the Batoka 
reply that their object is to be like oxen, and those who retain their 
teeth they consider to resemble zebras. Whether this is the true 
reason or not, it is difficult to say; but it is noticeable that the 
veneration for oxen which prevails in many tribes should here 
be associated with hatred to the zebra, as among the Bakwains ; 
that this operation is performed at the same age that circumcision is 
in other tribes; and that here that ceremony is unknown. The 
custom is so universal that a person who has his teeth is considered 
ugly. . . . Some of the Makololo give a more facetious explanation 

1 E. C, Taintor, ‘* The Aborigines of 
Northern Formosa,” Journal of the 
North China Branch of the Koyal 
Asiatic Society, New Series, No. 9, 
p- 65. 

2 As to the different forms of the 
mutilation and their geographical dis- 
tribution in Africa, see H. von Ihering, 
“* Die kiinstliche Deformirung der 
Zahne,” Lettschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
xiv. (1882) pp. 220-240. 

3H. Schinz, Deutsch - Stidwest 
Afrika, pp. 169-1713 J. Irle, Die 
Herero (Giitersloh, 1906), pp. 104 sg. 
Compare Sir James Edward Alexander, 
Expedition of Discovery into the In- 

terior of Africa (London, 1838), ii. 163 ; 
C. J. Andersson, Lake Ngami, Second 
Edition (London, 1856), p. 226; 
James Chapman, 7%ave/s tz the Interior 
of South Africa (London, 1868), ii. 
215; J. Hahn, ‘Die Ovaherero,” 
Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft fir Erd- 
kunde su Berlin, iv. (1869) p. 501; G 
Fritsche, Die Eingeborenen Stid- fishes 
(Breslau, 1872), p. 235. 

4 «6 Zetchen oder gebildet nach dem 
heiligen Abnenstier™ (J. Irle, Dée 
Herero, p. 105). 

5 J. Hahn, Ac. 3 H. Schinz, Deztsch- 
Sddwest - Afrika, pp. 168 sg.3 J. 
Irle, Dee Herero, pp. 192-104. 

VOL. 1 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 189 

of the custom ; they say that the wife of a chief having in a quarrel 
bitten her husband’s hand, he, in revenge, ordered her front teeth 
to be knocked out, and all the men in the tribe followed his example ; 
but this does not explain why they afterwards knocked out their 
own.”! The Babimpes, another tribe of South Africa, knock out 
both upper and lower front teeth ;? the Mathlekas file their teeth 
to stumps ;*% and the Bashinje file them to points The Banabya 
or Banyai file their middle front teeth “in order to be like their 
cattle.”5 “The Makalakas or Bashapatani file the upper front 
teeth, like the Damaras, with a stone; the Batongo knock out the 
two upper front teeth with an axe. . . . This rite is practised as 
a sort of circumcision.” ® The Mashona file a wedge-shaped or 
triangular opening (like an inverted V) between two front teeth.’ 
The Maio, Baluba (or Bashilanga), and Kizuata-shito file their teeth ; 
the Bakuba break out the two upper front teeth.§ 

Similar mutilations are practised widely in West Africa. Thus Mutilations 
“the Mussurongo and Ambriz blacks knock out the two middle of the teeth 
front teeth in the upper jaw on arriving at the age of puberty. The pea 
Mushicongos are distinguished from them by having all their front 
teeth, top and bottom, chipped into points.”® Among the Otando 
people (a branch of the Ashira nation) the fashion of mutilating the 
teeth varies, ‘Many file the two upper incisors in the shape of a 
sharp cone, and the four lower ones are also filed to a sharp point. 
Others file the four upper incisors to a point. A few among them 
have the two upper incisors pulled out.”?° Among the Aponos both 
men and women extract the two middle upper incisors and file the 
rest, as well as the four lower, to points. The Ishogos and 
Ashangos “adopt the custom of taking out their two middle upper 
incisors, and of filing the other incisors toa point ; but the Ashangos 
do not adopt the custom of filing also the upper incisors. Some of the 
women have the four upper incisors taken out.” 1” Among the Apingi 
both men and women file their teeth. Among the Songo negroes of 

1 David Livingstone, Afisstonary ceedings of the Royal Geographical 
Travels and Researches in South Society, New Series, viii. (1886) p. 69. 
Africa (London, 1857), hp. 532 59- 8 «Silva Porto’s Journey from Bihe ‘ 
With the latter explanation of the (Bie) to the Bakuba Country,” Prbceed- 
custom compare the explanation of it ings of the Royal Geographical Soztety, 
given by some tribes of Celebes (above, — New Series, ix. (1887) pp. 755, 756. 
Pp. Piet 645 F 9 J. J. Monteiro, <Azgola and the 
3 D. Livingstone, of. ct. p. 263. River Congo (London, 1875), i. 262 sq. 
Fi eepeuese ie " Daumas, Relation 1 P, B. Du Chaillu, 4 Journey to 
dun voyage exploration (Paris, Ashongo-land (London, 1867), p. 210. 

1842), p. 357. nf - : 
+ D. Livingstone, of. cét. p. 442. P. B. Du Chaillu, of. cz”. p. 255. 
5 J. Chapman, 7ravels in the /n- 12 P, B. Du Chaillu, of. czt. p. 331. 
terior of South Africa, ii. 160 sg. Compare zézd. pp. 285 sg. 
8 J. Chapman, of. cé?, ii. 215. 13 Pp. B, Du Chaillu, Zxplorations 

7 W.M. Kerr, ‘Journey from Cape and Adventures in Equatorial Africa 
Town inland to Lake Nyassa,” Pro- (London, 1861), p. 442. 

190 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 
Loanda it is a common custom to file the upper incisor teeth to a 
point.! Kalunda women often file the upper incisor teeth so as to 
round, not point, them; and they break the two opposite teeth 
quite out.2 The Musulungus, who occupy the islands of the 
Congo and a part of the north bank, “have no tattoo, but they 
pierce the nose septum and extract the two central and upper 
incisors ; the Muxi-Congoes or Lower Congoese chip or file out a 
chevron in the near sides of the same teeth.” Amongst the Bayaka 
of Loango it is the universal custom to point the upper front teeth.* 
However, in Loahgo the fashion of mutilating the teeth varies, 
Some people knock them out, others file them either horizontally 
or so as to leave a triangular gap; others again point them.® 
Further, the custom of filing the teeth to a point is said to prevail 
among all the negro tribes of the west coast of Africa from the 
Casamance River in Senegambia to the Gaboon.6 Among the 
Krumen and Grebus “the two middle incisors of the upper jaw are 
filed away, leaving an angular space.” 7 

Mutilations Similar deformations of the teeth are practised by many tribes 

of the teeth of Central and Eastern Africa. ‘Thus among the Bakuba, in the 

in Centra’ ,valley of the Kasai River, a southern tributary of the Congo, the, 

Africa. two upper front teeth are always knocked out at puberty.2 Again, 
with regard to the tribes about the southern half of Lake Tangan- 
yika we are told that they chip the two upper front incisors, or all 
of them, and extract the two centre front teeth in the lower jaw.” 
Again, some of the Wakhutu “have a practice—exceptional in 
these latitudes—of chipping their incisors to sharp points, which 

imitate well enough the armature of the reptilia.”!0 The Wadoe 
1 Pp, Pogge, Jm Retche des Muata Africa (London, 1825), p. 1993 E. 
Jamwo (Berlin, 1880), p. 36. Reclus, Nouvelle Géographie uni- 

2 Pp. Pogge, op. cét. p. 98. 

3 R. F. Burton, Zwo Trips to 
Gorilla Land (London, 1876), p. 89. 

* Paul Giissfeldt, Die Loango- 
Expedition (Leipsic, 1879), p. 198. 

5 A. Bastian, Die deutsche Ex- 
pedition an der Loangzo-Aiiste (Jena, 
1874), i. 185. 

6 J. B. Bérenger-Feraud, Les Peuples 
de la Sénégambie (Paris, 1879), pp. 289, 
297, 302 sg., 308. Compare S. M. 
X. Golberry, Fragments dun Voyage er 
Afrigue (Paris, 1802), p. 406 (where it 
is said that the teeth of the natives 
near Sierra Leone are pointed “ like 
those of a shark ”); T. Winterbottom, 
An Account of the Native Africans in 
the Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone 
(London, 1803), pp. 104 sg.3 A. G. 
Laing, Zravels in the Timannee, Koor- 
anko, and Soolima Countries in Western 

verselle, xii, 380; W. Allen and T. 
R. H. Thomson, Narrative of the 
Expedition to the River Niger in 1841 
(London, 1848), ii. 297. 

7 W. Allen and T. R. H. Thomson, 
op. cit. i, 125. 

8 L. Wolf, ‘‘Reisen in Central- 
Africa,” Verhandlungen der Gesell- 
schaft fiir Erdkunde xu Berlin, xiv. 
(1887) p. 84; H. Wissmann, L. Wolf, 
C. von Franguis, H. Miiller, Zve Juneren 
Afrikas, die Erforschung des Kassai 
(Leipsic, 1885), p. 242. 

9 V. L. Cameron, ‘ Examination 
of the Southern Half of Lake Tangan- 
yika,” Journal of the Royal Geographi- 
cal Society, xv. (1875) p. 215. 

10 R, F. Burton, “‘ The Lake Regions 
of Central Equatorial Africa,” Journal 
of the Royal Geographical Society, 
xxix. (1859) p. 97. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 191 
“ frequently chip away the two inner sides of thé upper central 
incisors, leaving a small chevron-shaped hole. This mutilation 
however is practised almost throughout Intertropical Africa.”! The 
Wasagara “chip the teeth to points like sharks.” The Wahehe 
chip the two upper incisors, and some men extzact three or four of 
the lower front teeth. Among the Wapare men and women have 
the four upper incisors pointed “ uke sharks,” and often the two 
lower teeth are knocked out at puberty. The Makua of East 
Africa have as a rule their front teeth filed to a point.® Of the 
tribes visited by Captains Speke and Grant on their famous journey, 
it is said that “they generally wear down, with a bit of iron, the 
centre of their incisor teeth; others, the N’geendo, for example, 
convert all the incisors into eye-teeth shape, making them to 
resemble the teeth of the crocodile.”® Among the Wanyamwezi a 
triangular opening is made in the upper front teeth by chipping 
away the edges of the two middle incisors ; the women extract two 
of the lower front teeth. The former custom—that of making a 
triangular opening in the middle of the upper front teeth—is shared 
by many African peoples.’ The A-Kamba sharpen to a point the 
incisor teeth in the upper jaw and knock out the two middle 
incisors from the lower jaw. The teeth are sharpened at the first 
circumcision ceremony, and by the man who operates on that 
occasion. Ifa child dies who has not had the middle incisor tooth 
of the lower jaw knocked out, this tooth is removed after death, 
else it is believed that some one will soon die in the village. The 
Nandi pull out the two middle incisor teeth in the lower jaw, and a 
chief or medicine-man has in addition one of the upper incisors 
removed. Besides the extraction of teeth the Nandi practise 
circumcision both on men and women.® Almost all Masai men 
and most Masai women knock out the two middle incisor teeth of 
the lower jaw, a custom which is also very common among the 

1 R. F. Burton, ‘* The Lake Regions 
of Central Equatorial Africa,” Journal 
of the Royal Geographical Society, 

London, New Series, iii, (1865) pp. 
88 5g. 
7 EL Reclus, ouvelle Gdographie 

xxi. (1859) p. 99. 

2 R, F. Burton, of, czt. p. 131. 

3 R. F. Burton, of. cét. p. 138. 

40. Baumann, Usamébara (Berlin, 
1891), p. 222. 

6H. E. O’Neill, “Journey in the 
Makua and Lomwe Countries,” Pro- 
ceedings of the R. Geographical Society, 
New Series, iv. (1882) p. 197. 

6 Capt. Grant, ‘*On the Native 
Trites visited by Captains Speke and 
Grant in Equatorial Africa,” Trans- 
actions of the Ethnological Society of 

universelle, xiii. 218; F. Stublmann, 
Mit Emin Paschains Hers von Afrika 
(Berlin, 1894), p. 84; R. A. Ashe, 

Two Kings of Uganda (London, 1889), 
p. 287; J. Becker, La Vie en Afrique 
(Paris and Brussels, 1887), pp. 187, 
259. 

5 C. W. Hobley, Zhe Ethnology of 
the A-Kamba, pp. 17 sg., 67 (un- 
published). 

9 Sir Harry Johnston, Zhe Uganda 
Protectorate (London, 1904), ii. 864, 
868; C. W. Hobley, Zastern Uganda, 
(London, 1902), pp. 38, 39. 

Mutilations 
of the teeth 
in Eastern 
and Central 
Africa, 

. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 1 

192 
The Masai also circumcise both men and women 
about puberty. In British East Africa the Awa-Wanga draw the 
four middle teeth of the lower jaw; the Ketosh extract two or 
three, the Ithako and Isukha only one. Were a man’s teeth not 
drawn, it is believed that he would certainly be killed in war ; and 
if his wife’s teeth were not drawn, he would also be slain in battle. 
People laugh at a man who keeps all his teeth; they say he is like 
a donkey.? The Ja-luo, a Nilotic people of Kavirondo, who do not 
practise circumcision, draw the six middle teeth of the lower jaw. 
If a man has not these teeth drawn, it is said that his wife will die 
soon after marriage.? Similarly the Bantu Kavirondo, who also do 
not practise circumcision, “usually pull out the two middle incisor 
teeth in the lower jaw. Both the men and women do this. It is 
thought that if a man retains all his lower incisor teeth he will be 
killed in warfare, and that if his wife has failed to pull out her teeth 
it might cause her husband to perish.”* The Basoga also extract 
two of the lower front teeth.© The Banyoro pull out the four lower 
incisors ; “this is a practice learnt, no doubt, from the neighbouring 
Nilotic tribes. As individuals of both sexes grow old, their upper 
incisor teeth, having no opposition, grow long and project from the 
gum in a slanting manner, which gives the mouth an ugly hippo- 
potamine appearance. The Banyoro do not circumcise.”® The | 
males of all the Congo pygmies seen by Sir Harry Johnston were 
circumcised, ‘and all in both sexes had their upper incisor teeth 
and canines sharpened to a point, after the fashion of the Babira 
and Upper Congo tribes.”7 Among the Lur, to the west of the 
Albert Nyanza Lake, the four lower incisors are extracted, or rather 
pushed out, at the age of puberty. The Latuka also remove the four 
lower incisors.? The Monbutto, in the upper valley of the Congo, file 
the upper middle incisors so as to present a vacant triangular space 
in the row of teeth;?® but “they neither break out their lower 
incisor teeth, like the black nations on the northern river plains, nor 
do they file them to points, like ‘he Niam-niam.” They practise 
circumcision.14_ Among the tribal marks of the Agar and Atwot is 

Nilotic tribes. 

1 Sir Harry Johnston, 7ke Uganda 
Protectorate (London, 1904), ii. 803, 
804; A. C. Hollis, Zhe Masai 
(Oxford, 1905), pp. 261 sg., 296 sg., 
299s ew 

W. Hobley, Zastern Uganda, 
(London 1902), p. 20. 

3 C. W. Hobley, of. cit. p. 313 
compare Sir Harry Johnston, op. cit. 
ii. 783. 

4 Sir Harry Johnston, of. czt. ii. 
728; L. Decle, Three Years in Savage 
Africa, p. 464. 

5 L. Decle, Ze. 

6 Sir Harry Johnston, op. ett, ii, 
581. Compare Zmin Pasha in Central 
Africa, being a Collection of his Letters 
and Journils (London, 1888), pp. 61, 
194. 

7 Sir Harry Johnston, of. cet. 
538. 

8 Emin Pasha in Central Africa, 
being a Collection of his Letters and 
Journals, p. 154. 

9 [bid, p. 237. 

10 Tbid, p. 212. 

1G. Schweinfurth, Zhe Heart of 
Africa (London, 1878), ii. 53. 

ii, 

VOL. I 

NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 193 
the removal of the four lower incisor teeth and he two canines.! 
The Niam-niam “ fall in with the custom, common tc the whole of 
Central Africa, of filing the incisor teeth to a point, for the purpose 
of effectually gripping the arm of an adversary either in wrestling or 
in single combat.”2 Among the Upotos of the middle Congo 
the practice of filing the teeth is general. Men as a rule file 
only the teeth of the upper jaw, but women file the teeth of the 
lower jaw as well. Among the Dinkas of the Upper Nile “ both 
sexes break off the lower incisor teeth, a custom which they 
practise in common with the majority of the natives of the district 
of the Bahr-el-Ghazal. The object of this hideous mutilation is 
hard to determine ; its effect appears in their inarticulate language.” 4 
The Nuehr, a tribe of the same region, akin to the Dinkas, similarly 
knock out the two front teeth of the lower jaw as soon as they 
appear in both sexes. The mutilation affects many sounds in the 
language, giving them a peculiar intonation which it is hard to 
imitate.5 In the Madi or Moru tribe the upper and lower incisor 
teeth are extracted from both sexes at puberty.6 The Bendeh, a 
pagan tribe of the Soudan, file all their teeth, except the molars, 
into a round shape.’ The Somrai and Gaberi, of the eastern 
French Soudan, remove an upper and a lower incisor tooth; the 
Sara, of the same region, remove two of each. ® 

In contrast to the natives of Africa, among whom the custom Custom of 
of removing or mutilating the teeth is widely spread, almost all the pranits : 
Indian tribes of America appear to have wisely refrained from ee. me 
maiming and mutilating themselves in this absurd fashion. How- 
ever, the natives of the province of Huancavelica in Peru pulled 
out two or three teeth both in the upper and in the lower jaw of 
all their children, as soon as the second set of teeth had made its 
appearance. According to tradition the custom was instituted by 
an Inca as a punishment for the treason of a Huancavelica chief,® 
but the story was probably invented to explain the origin of a 

1 Emin Pasha in Central Africa, 
pp. 238 sg. 

2G. Schweinfurth, Zhe Heart of 
Africa, i. 276, 

3 M. Lindeman, Zes Ugotos (Brussels, 
1906), p. 21. 

4G. Schweinfurth, Zhe Heart of 
Africa, i. 503 compare zd. pp. 135 
Sq. 
5 E. Marno, Reisen im Gebtete des 
Biauen und Weissen Nil (Vienna, 
1874), p. 345. 

6 R, W. Felkin, ‘Notes on the 
Madicr Moru Tribe of Central Africa,” 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
Edinburgh, xii. (1882-1884) p. 315. 

VOL. IV 

7 Travels of an Arab Merchant 
(Mohammed Ibn-Omar El Tounsy] #x 
Soudan (London, 1854), p. 224. 

8 G. Nachtigal, Sahara und Sudai:, 
ii, 683. 

® Garcilasso de la Vega, First Part 
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas, 
translated by Clements R. Markham 
(London, 1869-1871), ii. 426 5g. ; 
Cieza de Leon, Zvavels, translated by 
ClementsR. Markham (London, 1864), 
pp. 177, 181. The number of teeth 
extracted in each jaw was two accord- 
ing to Garcilasso de la Vega, but three 
according to Cieza de Leon. 

SAABRAN ° 

The 
custom of 
removing 
teeth is not 
an imita- 
tion of the 
totem ; 
probably 

it is based 
on some 
savage 
superstition 
as to 
puberty 
which we 
do not 
understand, 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

194 
practice of which the real meaning had been forgotten. Some 
Indians of Central America used to knock out a front tooth of 
every captive whom they took in war.t This they may have done 
either to mark him or perhaps to have in their possession a piece 
of his person, by means of which they imagined they could control 
him on the principle of sympathetic magic. 

From the foregoing survey we may gather that, though some 
tribes of South Africa are said to draw their teeth in order to 
resemble the cattle which they revere,? yet there is no sufficient 
ground for holding that the custom of extracting or mutilating the 
teeth is an attempt to imitate the totemic animal, or indeed that it 
has any direct connection with totemism. If we ask what is the 
real origin of a practice, which can hardly have helped and must 
often have hindered its practitioners in their hard struggle for 
existence, we may safely dismiss as insufficient the answer that 
it was simply designed to adorn and beautify the face.® That it is 
now regarded as an ornament by the people who disfigure themselves 
in this way is certain, but this is only an instance of a taste which 
has been perverted by long habit. With far greater probability we 
may suppose that this curious form of self-mutilation, whether it is 
practised as a rite of initiation at puberty or as a rite of mourning 
after a death, is based on some deep-seated superstition, but what 
the exact nature of the superstition may be remains obscure. The 
late eminent Dutch ethnologist G. A. Wilken suggested somewhat 
vaguely that the extraction ef teeth at puberty is a sacrifice ;* but 
why or to whom the sacrifice was offered he did not attempt to 
determine. I have conjectured that the practice may perhaps have 
been intended to facilitate the reincarnation either of the patient 
himself or of some one else at a future time; but I admit that the 
conjecture seems far-fetched and improbable. We might be able 
to understand the custom, as well as the kindred custom of cir- 
cumcision and other mutilations of the genital organs, if only we 
knew how primitive man explained to himself the mysterious 
phenomena of puberty; but that is one of the many unsolved 
problems of anthropology. 

In connection with the practice of extracting or mutilating the 
teeth at puberty may be mentioned the widespread African custom 
of putting all children to death who cut their upper teeth before the 

1H. H. Bancroft, The Native Races 
of the Pacific States, i. 764. 
2 See above, pp. 188, 189. Ob- 

ing themselves to these animals. 
3 This was the view of H. von 
Thering (‘ Die kiinstliche Deformirung 

servers have noted the resemblance of 
pointed human teeth to the teeth of 
sharks or crocodiles, See above, pp. 190, 
191. But it is not said that the natives 
have adopted the custom of pointing 
their teeth for the purpose of assimilat- 

der Zahne,” Zettschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
xiv. (1882) pp. 217 sg.). 

4G. A. Wilken, ‘‘ Over de mutilatie 
der tanden,” Bijdragen tot de Taai- 
Land- en Volkenkunde van Neder- 
landsch-Indié, xxxvii. (1888) p. 17. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 195 

lower, because it is believed that such children will be wicked and African 
will bring misfortune on all about them. The custom is particularly aiine se 
common among the tribes of Eastern Africa. For example, we are death 
told that “the Agogo, or child who cuts the two upper incisors children 
before the lower, is either put to death or he is given away or sold ae 
to the slave-merchant, under the impression that he will bring teeth before 
disease, calamity, and death into the household. The Wasawahili the lower. 
and the Zanzibar Arabs have the same superstition: the former 

kill the child; the latter, after a 4/z#mah, or prelection of the Koran, 

make it swear, by nodding its head, unable to articulate, that it 

will not injure those about him.”! Among the Banyoro “the 
cutting of children’s upper incisors before the lower appears to be 

feared as bringing misfortune, and when it occurs, the mbandua 
(magician) is at once summoned to perform certain dances for the 
protection of the child, and is rewarded by a goat.”? But in most 

tribes the unlucky children were put to death, Among the 
Wajagga of Mount Kilimandjaro, in East Africa, a child who cuts 

his upper teeth first is generally put to death. If it is exception- 

ally allowed to live, the parents take great care to conceal the : 
misfortune, for the popular belief is that such a child will after- 

wards murder his or her spouse, or that the spouse will die soon 

after marriage. It is a lifelong disgrace to any man or woman to 

have cut the upper teeth before the lower. If he is a man, he 

will get no girl to marry him except such a one as is despised and 
rejected by everybody else; if she is a woman, nobody but an ugly 

old man will take her to wife.? 

P. 27. The bone . . . which some Australian tribes thrust 

1 R. F, Burton, ‘‘ The Lake Regions 
of Central Equatorial Africa,” Journal 
of the R. Geographical Soctety, xxix. 
(1859) pp. 91 sg. See further C. 
Velten, Svtlen und Gebraucheder Suakelé 
(Gottingen, 1903), p. 24; J. M. Hilde- 
brandt, ‘‘Ethnographische Notizen 
itber Wakamba und ihre Nachbarn,” 
Lettschiift fiir Ethnologie, x, (1878) 
p- 395; O. Baumann, Usambara und 
seine Nachbargebtiete (Berlin, 1891), pp. 
43, 131, 237; A. Widenmann, “ Die 
Kilimandscharo - Bevéikerung,” Peter- 
manns Mitteilungen, Ergancungsheft, 
No. 129 (Gotha, 1899), p. 90; Ch. 
Delhaise, Motes Ethnographiques sur 
quelques Peuplades du Tanganika 
(Brussels, 1905), pp. 33 5-3 Sir H. 
H. Johnston, Britesh Central Africa 
(London, 1897), pp. 416 sg.; H. 
Griitzner, ‘‘ Ueber die Gebrauche der 
Basutho,” Verhandlungen der Berliner 
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethno- 

logis, und Uregeschichte, 1877, p. (78) 
(Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, ix.); D. 
Livingstone, Aftsstonary Travels and 
Researches in South Africa (London, 
1857), p. 5773 J. B. Labat, Relation, 
Historique de [Ethiopie Occidentale 
(Paris, 1732), ii. 115; R. Clarke, 
‘*The Inhabitants of Sierra Leone,” 
Transactions of the Ethnological Soctety 
of London, New Series, ii. (1863) p. 
3333 J. F. Schon and S. Crowther, 
Journals (London, 1842), p. 50; W. 
Allen and T. R. H. Thomson, 
Narrative of the Expedition to the 
River Niger in 18z1 (London, 1848}, 
i. 243 59. 

2 Emin Pasha in Central Africa, 
being a Collection of his Letters and 
Journals, p- 94. 

3M. Merker, ‘* Rechtsverhaltnisse 
und Sitten der Wadschagga,” eter- 
manns Mitteilungen, Ergdnzungsheft 
No. 138 (Gotha, 1902), p. 13. 

196 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

Thecustom through their nose, etc.—There is nothing to shew that this 

of wearing custom is connected with totemism, in particular that it is an 

a pone oF imitation of the totemic animal. Like the custom of knocking out 

through the teeth, the practice of wearing a bone or stick thrust through the 

nose seemS nose probably originated in superstition and not in a mere desire 
not to be : ° : 

totemic. to beautify the person. In the Arunta and Ilpirra tribes of Central 

Australia, when a boy’s nose has been bored, he strips a piece of 

bark from a gum tree and throws it as far as he can in the direction 

where his mother, or rather the spirit of which his mother is a 

reincarnation, used to encamp in the far-off dream times (a/cheringa).+ 

Similarly, as we saw,? he throws his extracted tooth in the same 

direction, which seems to shew that to the minds of the natives 

there is some similarity or connecting link between the customs of 

tooth-extraction and nose-boring. In the same tribes, when a girl’s 

nose has been bored, which is commonly done by her husband 

soon after she comes into his possession, she fills a small wooden 

vessel full of sand and facing towards the quarter where her mother’s 

spirit camped in the alcheringa days, she executes a series of short 

jumps, keeping her feet close together and her legs stiff, while she 

moves the sand in the’ vessel about as if she were winnowing seed. 

Neglect to perform this curious ceremony would, it is said, be 

regarded as a grave offence against her mother. In the Warra- 

munga tribe every medicine-man wears a structure called hufpitja 

thrust through his nose ; it, is not only an emblem of his profession 

but is associated in some mysterious way with his magical powers.* 

In the Pacific island of Yap, one of the Caroline group, all who 

die before their noses are pierced have the operation performed on 

their dead bodies in order, as the natives say, that they may be 

able to find the right house in heaven.5 This shews that the 

custom is supposed in some way to have a direct bearing on the 

life after death, though perhaps only in so far as a person not so 

marked might be regarded as imperfect and therefore as not 

entitled to a good place in the other world. It deserves to be 

observed that most of the bodily mutilations which savages volun-. 

tarily inflict on thémselves, such as piercing the nose, the lips, and 

the ears, the practice of circumcision, subincision, and so forth, are 

concerned with the natural openings of the body, and may therefore 

perhaps have been designed to guarc against the intrusion of 

dangerous objects, whether material or spiritual, which might 

insinuate themselves through these passages into the person, One 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Wative Tribes Tribes of Central Australia, p. 484. 

of Central Australia, p. 459; 1a., The structure seems to be a little 
Northern Tribes of Central Australia, cylindrical mass of tightly-wound fur- 

p. 615. string. 
2 See above, p. 183. 5 A, Senfit, ** Die Rechtssitten der 
3 Spencer and Gillen, ce. Jap-Eingeborenen,” Globus, xci. (1907) 

4 Spencer and Gillen, Northern pp. 143. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 197 

of these natural openings is the navel, and though mutans of Mutilation 
that part of the body seem to be rare, they are not unkrown. Thus of the 
the Rendilis, a nomadic tribe of Samburu-land in Eastern Equatorial] 52¥¢l- 
Africa, “are circumcised in the Mohammedan manner, and, in 
addition, they are mutilated in a most extraordinary fashion by 

having their navels cut out, leaving a deep hole. They are the 

only tribe mutilated in this manner with the exception of the Marle, 

who inhabit the district north of ‘Basso Ebor’ (Lake Stephanie), 

and who are probably an offshoot of the Rendili.” 1 

P. 28. Tribes . . . distinguished by their tattoo marks.—The Tattooing 
practice of having tribal marks tattooed or incised on the body is 2s 4 tribal 
very common, especially in Africa, but there is usually no reason ae 
to regard such marks as imitations of totems; for the mark is the 
same for all members of a tribe, whereas the totemic clans are 
always subdivisions of a tribe, so that marks borne by all the tribes- 
people indiscriminately cannot be totemic. In Africa the tribal 
mark usually consists of a number of cuts arranged in a particular 
pattern most commonly on the face, but also on other parts of the 
body. For example, the Dahomans mark themselves with a 
perpendicular cut between the eyebrows; the Whydahs cut both 
cheeks so as to give them the appearance of being pitted with the 
small-pox; and “the inhabitants of the neighbouring states are 
likewise known by the scarifications on their bodies, every country 
making use of this custom in their own manner. The Ardrahs 
make an incision in each cheek, turning up a part of the flesh 
towards the ears, and healing it in that position. ‘The Mabees are 
distinguished by three long oblique cuts on one cheek and a cross 
on the other.”2 ‘The scarzn, or tattoos, which are common to all 
Negro nations in these latitudes, and by which their country is 
instantly known, are, in Bornou, particularly unbecoming. The 
Bornouese have twenty cuts or lines on each side of the face, which 
are drawn from the corners of the mouth towards the angles of the 
lower jaw and the cheek-bone; and it is quite distressing to witness 
the torture the poor little children undergo who are thus marked, 
enduring not only the heat, but the attacks of millions of flies. 
They have also one cut on the forehead in the centre, six on each 
arm, six on each leg and thigh, four on each breast, and nine on 
each side, just above the hips.” § 

1A, Arkell-Hardwick, 42 vory 
Trader in North Kenia (London, 
1903), p. 228. 

2 Archibald Dalzel, Héstory of 
Dahomy (London, 1793), p- xviii. 

3 Denham and Clapperton, Zyrazels 
and Discoveries in Northern and Cen- 
tral Africa (London, 1831), ili, 175. 
For more examples of such tribal marks 

in Africa, see ‘‘Dr. Livingstone’s Ex- 
pedition to Lake Nyassa,” Journal of 
the Royal Geographical Society, xxxiii. 
(1863) p. 256; V. L. Cameron, 
‘* Examination of the Southern Half of 
Lake Tanganyika,” ¢b¢@. xlv. (1875) 
p. 215; Keith Johnston, ‘‘ Notes of 
a Trip from Zanzibar to Usambara,” 
Proceedings of the R. Geographical 

198 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

VOL, I 

P. 29. These Australian tribal badges are sometimes represen- 

tations of the totem.—This is inexact. 

Soctety, New Series, i. (1879) p. 5563 
Joseph Thomson, ‘‘ Notes on the Basin 
of the River Rovuma, East Africa,” 
thid. N.S. iv. (1882) pp. 74, 793 
H. E, O’Neill, ‘Journey in the 
Makua and Lomwe Countries,” zdzd. 
p. 196; W. M. Kerr, ‘* Journey from 
Cape Town overland to Lake Nyassa,” 
zbid, N.S. viii. (1886) p. 72; C. T. 
Wilson and R. W. Felkin, Uganda 
and the Egyptian Soudan, ii, 1223 J. 
Becker, Za Vie en Afrique (Paris and 
Brussels, 1887), ii, 187, 305; A. 
Bastian, Die deutsche Expedition an 
der Loango-Kiiste, i. 313 5g-) 317, 318, 
319, 3233; T. J. Hutchinson, /mpres- 
sions of Western Africa (London, 
1858), p. 187; f. Adams, Sketches 
taken during Ten Voyages in Africa, 
pp. 6, 9, 16, 24, 33, 42; W. Allen and 
T. R. H. Thomson, Narrative of the 
Expedition to the River Niger in 1841 
(London, 1848), i. 124 59., 242, 3453 
J. A. Grant, A Walk across Africa 
(Edinburgh. and London, 1864), p. 
174; G. Nachtigal, Sahara and Sudan, 
ii. (Berlin, 1879) pp. 142, 173, 622, 
683; H. H. Johnston, “On the Races 
of the Congo,” Journal of the Anthro- 
pological Institute, xiii. (1884) p. 474 $ 
Herbert Ward, Five Years with the 
Congo Cannibals (London, 1890), p. 
136; Ch. Delhaise, Motes LEthno- 
graphiques sur quelques Peuplades du 
Tanganika (Brussels, 1905), p. 273 
‘E. Delmar Morgan, Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xvii. (1888) 
p- 235, speaking of the Congo tribes 
says, ‘‘ The tattoo marks of the Bab- 
wendes form a lozenge shape on the 
forehead, those of the Batekes are 
arranged in lines on both cheeks and 
on the breast. It has been remarked 
by a recent writer (Dr. Chavanne) 
that tattooing is regarded by the natives 
as a protection against their fetish or 
evil spirit” ; R. Clarke, ‘* The Inhabit- 
ants of Sierra Leone,” Zvransactions 
of the Ethnological Soctety of London, 
New Series, ii. (1863) p. 355; T. V. 
Robins, ‘‘ Notes and Sketches on the 
Niger,” zdé@. v. (1867) p. 86; Emin 
Pasha in Central Africa, being a 
Collection of his Letters and Journals, 

What is affirmed by-the 

pp. 60 s¢., 237, 338, 342, 346; A. 
B. Ellis, The Tshd-speaking Peoples of 
the Gold Coast, pp. 289 sg.3 G A. 
Lethbridge Banbury, Sierra Leone 
(London, 1888), p. 199; E. Reclus, 
Nouvelle Géographie Universelle, xi. 
813 sg., xii, 380, 384, 396, 7213; T. 
Winterbottom, An Account of the 
Native Africans in the Neighbourhood 
of Sierra Leone (London, 1803), pp. 
105-107; J. Matthews, 4 Voyage to 
Sterra Leone (London, 1791), pp. 110 
sq.3 R. F. Burton, Zwo Trips to 
Gorilla Land (London, 1876), ii. 234 ; 
G, Schweinfurth, 7e Heart of Africa 
(Edinburgh, 1878), i. 50, 276; Sir 
H. H. Johnston, Bretish Central 
Africa, p. 423. Similar evidence 
might easily be multiplied. The fullest 
description of tribal tattoo marks in 
Africa which I have met with is given 
by H. Hale from his observations of 
negro slaves in Brazil. See Ch, Wilkes, 
Narrative of the United States Ex- 
ploring Expedition, New Edition (New 
York, 1851), i. 54-64. Among 
the Maoris, according to one account, 
each tribe was distinguished by its 
tattoo marks. See W. Ellis, foly- 
nestan Researches, Second Edition, 
iii. 354 59g. ; W. Brown, New Zealand 
and its Aborigines (London, 1845), p- 
31. However, other good authorities 
deny that the Maori tattoo marks 
denote the tribe to which the person 
belongs. See E. Dieffenbach, Trave/s 
tn New Zealand (London, 1843), ii. 
43; E. Shortland, Zhe Southern Dis- 
tricts of New Zealand (London, 1851), 
pp. 16 sg. ‘The Caroline Islanders 
tattoo themselves not out of motives 
of decency, nor altogether for orna- 
ment, but as a means of distinguishing 
their tamilies and clans, and of retain- 
ing the memory of persons, objects, 
and events” (United States Exploring 
Expedition, Ethnology and Philology, 
by Horatio Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), 
p- 76). The Shans and Karens of 
Burma have their distinctive tribal 
marks produced by tattooing. See 
Capt. C. J. F. S. Forbes, British 
Burma (London, 1878), p. 238. 

VOL, I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 199 

authority (Mr. Chatfield) is only that “the raised Heatides on the The body 
bodies of the natives are the blazon of their respective classes or Scars of the 
totems.” But the blazon of a totem (by which the writer probably peeione 
means a totemic clan) need not be a representation of the totem. are said by 
Moreover, Mr. Chatfield’s statement has not been confirmed by some to 
trustworthy authorities and its accuracy is doubted! The Central ceri 
and North Central tribes investigated by Messrs. Spencer and but this is 
Gillen are in the habit of making many scars on their bodies by denied by 
cutting the skin with flint or glass and then rubbing ashes or the a 
down of an eagle-hawk into the wounds. Sometimes the scars 
stretch right across the chest or abdomen. As a rule they are 
longer and more numerous on men than on women. But at the 
present day their form and arrangement have no special meaning ; 
they indicate neither the tribe nor the class nor the totem. The 
natives regard them as purely decorative, and Messrs. Spencer and 
Gillen could find no evidence in the customs and traditions of the 
tribes that these cicatrices ever had a deeper meaning. Indeed the 
enquirers confess that they are very sceptical as to the supposed 
symbolism of these marks in any part of Australia.2_ In the tribes 
of North-West Central Queensland the bodies of both men and 
women are scarred with transverse cuts across the trunk from the 
level of the nipples to the navel, and with a few on the shoulders ; 
some tribes add scars on the back. These marks are optional, not 
compulsory, and the custom of making them is dying out in this 
part of Australia. Like Messrs. Spencer and Gillen, Mr. Roth 
could discover no pictorial or hidden signification attached to 
the marks. However, the explorer E. J. Eyre affirmed that 
“there are many varieties in the form, number, or arrangement of 
the scars, distinguishing the different tribes, so that one stranger 
meeting with another anywhere in the woods, can at once tell, from 
the manner in which he is tattooed, the country and tribe to which 
he belongs, if not very remote.” 4 Again, he observes that “each 
tribe has a distinctive mode of making their incisions. Some have 
scars running completely across the chest, from one axillar to the 
other, whilst others have merely dotted lines ; some have circles 
and semicircles formed on the apex of the shoulder, others small 
dots only.”5 Another writer, speaking of the Australian aborigines 
in general, says: ‘ They also tattoo, which is a most painful opera- 
tion. In some tribes the whole back and part of the chest are 
covered, and the women are also tattooed, but not to the same 

i 

1 Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and 
Kurnai, p. 66, note *; E. M. Curr, 
The Australian Race, ii. 468, 475. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, Native Zrzbes 
of Central Australia, pp. 41-433 t., 
Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 

pp. 54-56. 

3 W. E. Roth, Ethnological Studies 
among the North- West-Central Queens- 
land Aborigines, pp. 114 sq. 

4 E. J. Eyre, Journals of Expeditions - 

of Discovery into Central Australia, 
(London, 1845), ii. 333. 
6 E. J. Eyre, of. cét. ii, 335. 

In some 
Australian 
tribes the 
cutting of 
the scars 
isan 
initiatory 
ceremony 
performed 
on young 
men about 
pubert;. 

200 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

extent. Among others, the men only have a single row, high up 
on the back. The operation is always performed by a man, and 
consists in making a number of broad and deep gashes in the 
flesh ; those on the men are generally about an inch and a half in 
length. It is astonishing how stoically this horrible operation is 
borne. I once saw a young man undergoing the operation, 
and he bore it with the greatest fortitude, although his back was 
literally cut to pieces. By some process, with which I am not 
acquainted, the cut, when healed, protrudes half an inch from the 
skin, forming large lumps, which are considered a great orna- 
ment.” ? 

Although in some tribes these elaborate body-marks are now 
regarded as purely ornamental, it is difficult to suppose that they 
have always been so. It seems more likely that the decorative 
effect of the scars was an after-thought, and that in submitting to 
the severe pain of being hacked and gashed in this cruel fashion the 
savage was originally impelled by some more powerful motive than 
the wish to improve his personal appearance. This suspicion is 
confirmed by observing that in some tribes the cutting of the 
gashes forms an important part of the initiatory ceremonies through 
which every lad must pass before he ranks as a full-grown man, and 
that in these tribes a sort of mystic importance appears to be 
attached to the scars in relation to women. ‘Thus in the Port 
Lincoln tribes of South Australia the last and most important of the 
initiatory rites consisted jn giving the novice a new name and 
carving the marks on his back. This part of the ceremony has 
been described as follows: “Everything being prepared, several 
men open veins in their lower arms, while the young men are 
raised to swallow the first drops of the blood. They are then 
directed to kneel on their hands and knees, so as to give a 
horizontal position to their backs, which are covered all over with 
blood: as soon as this is sufficiently coagulated, one person marks 
with his thumb the places in the blood where the incisions are to 
be made, namely, one in the middle of the neck, and two rows 
from the shoulders down to the hips, at intervals of about a third 
of an inch betweeh each cut. These are named A@anka, and are 
ever after held in such veneration, that it would be deemed a great 
profanation to allude to them in the presence of women. Each 
incision requires several cuts with the biunt chips of quartz to 
make them deep enough, and is then carefully drawn apart; yet 
the poor feliows do not shrink, or utter a sound ; but I have seen 
their friends so overcome by sympathy with their pain, that they 
made attempts to stop the cruel proceedings, which was of course 
not allowed by the other men. During the cutting, which is 
performed with astonishing expedition, as many of the men as can 

1 A. A. C. Le Souéf, in R. Brough Smyth's Aborigines of Victoria, ii. 296. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 201 

find room crowd around the youths, repeating in a subdued tone, 
but very rapidly, the following formula :— 

“ Kauwaka kanya marra marra 
Karndo kanya marra marra 
Pilbirri kanya marra marra. 

“This incantation, which is derived from their ancestors, is 
apparently void of any coherent sense; the object of its repetition, 
however, is to alleviate the pain of the young men, and to prevent 
dangerous consequences from the dreadful lacerations.” It 
should be observed that these tribes practise circumcision as the 
second initiatory rite to which all youths must be subjected in 
their progress to manhood; yet even circumcision is deemed of 
less importance than the cutting of these cruel gashes in the bodies 
of the young men.? 

Again, among the Dieri the initiatory rite of making the cuts in Dieri 

the backs of the novices was subsequent to the rite of circumcision 
and presumably was deemed not less important, though in this 

tribe the young men received their new names at circumcision, not of novices 

at the cutting of the gashes. “The next ceremony, following 

circumcision,” says Mr. S. Gason, ‘is that now to be described. cision, 

A young man, without previous warning, is taken out of the camp 
by the old men, whereon the women set up crying, and so continue 
for almost half the night. On the succeeding morning at sunrise, 
the men (young and old), excepting his father and elder brothers, 
surround him, directing him to close his eyes. One of the old men 
then binds another old man round his arm, near the shoulder, with 
string, pretty tightly, and with a sharp piece of flint lances the main 
artery of the arm, about an inch above the elbow, causing an 
instant flow of blood, which is permitted to play on the young man 
until his whole frame is covered with blood. As soon as the old 
man becomes exhausted from loss of blood, another is operated on, 
and so on two or three others in succession, until the young man 
becomes quite stiff and sore from the great quantity of blood 
adhering to his person. The next stage in the ceremony is much 
worse for the young man. He is told to lie with his face down, 
when one or two young men cut him on the neck and shoulders 
with a sharp flint, about a sixteenth of an inch in depth, in from 
six to twelve places, which incisions create scars, which until death 
show that he has gone through the HViyaroo.”® A Dieri man 

1 C, W. Schiirmann, ‘‘ The Abori- 
ginal Tribes of Port Lincoln,” Mazdve 
Tribes of South Australia, pp. 232 sg. 
Compare A. W. Howitt, Wative Tribes 
of South-East Australia, pp. 669 sq. 

2C. W. Schiirmann, of. cét. pp. 
228-231. These tribes also practise 

subincision, ‘‘ though without any par- 
ticular ceremony” (C. W. Schiirmann, 
op. cit. p. 231). 

3S. Gason, ‘*The Manners and 
Customs of the Dieyerie Tribe of 
Australian Aborigines,” MWateve Tribes 
of South Australia, p. 270. Compare 

Custom of 
tattooing 
women but 
not men. 

202 TOTEMISNM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

points with pride to these scars. Until they are healed, he may 
not turn his face to a woman nor eat in her presence.! 

It seems likely that in many other tribes the raising of these 
scars or cicatrices on the body similarly formed at one time or 
another a rite of initiation which was practised on young men at 
puberty, either alone or in addition to other bodily mutilations, 
such as circumcision, subincision, and the extraction of teeth. 
Probably the ultimate explanation of all these worse than needless 
tortures, which savages inflict on each other and submit to with a 
misplaced heroism, is to be sought in the same direction, namely, 
in the ideas which primitive man has formed of the nature of 
puberty. But, as I have already repeatedly pointed out, these 
ideas remain for us civilised men very obscure. 

P. 29.—The women alone tattoo.—In some parts of New Guinea 
the women are tattooed on many parts of their bodies, but the men 
are scarcely or not at all tattooed.2, In Tubetube, a small island 
off the south-eastern extremity of New Guinea, “of old no male 
was tattooed except for sickness. Women, on the other hand, were 
always tattooed profusely, and the reason given for this is that it 
makes the girl look nice and accentuates her good skin. A girl’s 
face would be tattooed some time before puberty but usually after 
her nose had been pierced, the scalp and neck apparently not being 
touched. Nothing more is done until the girl reaches puberty, 
when the chest, belly, flanks, arms and hands are tattooed 
after the first catamenia' ceases.”* Among the natives of the 
Admiralty Islands tattooing is almost entirely confined to the 
women, with whom it is universal. They “are tattooed with rings 
round the eyes and all over the face, and in diagonal lines over the 
upper part of the front of the body, the lines crossing one another 
so as to form a series of lozenge-shaped spaces.” * Amongst the 

A. W. Howitt, Native Tribes of South- 
Last Australia, pp. 658 sq. 

1 A.W. Howitt, of. ct. p. 659. 

2 O. Finsch, Neu-Guinea und seine 
Bewohner (Bremen{ 1865), p. 1393 
Moresby, in Journal of the R. Geo- 
graphical Soctety, xliv. (1874) pp. 7, 
123 Wyat Gill, 47d. p. 243 Journal 
of the R. Geographical Society, xl\v. 
(1875) p. 167 ; O. C. Stone, ** Vescrip- 
tion of the Country and Natives of Port 
Moresby and Neighbourhood, New 
Guinea,” zb¢d. xlvi. (1876) pp. 58 
sg.; W. G. Lawes, ‘‘ Notes on New 
Guinea and its Inhabitants,” Proceed- 
ings of the R. Geographical Society, 
1880, pp. 607, 614; Dr. Comrie, 
** Anthropological Notes on New 

Guinea,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, vi, (1877) p. 110; W. Y. 
Turner, ‘On the Ethnology of the 
Motu,” zbzd. vii. (1878) p. 481; W. 
G. Lawes, ‘ Ethnological Noteés on 
the Motu, Koitapu and Koiari Tribes 
of New Guinea,” zd7d. p. 370; C. 
Hager, Aaiser Wilhelms-Land (Leip- 
sic, 72.4.) p. 92; 0. S. Stone, 4 
Few Months in New Guinea (London, 
1880), pp. 78 sg. 3 C. G. Seligmann, 
The Melanesians of British New 
Guinea (Cambridge, 1910), p. 73. 

3 C. G. Seligmann, Zhe Afelanesians 
of British New Guinea (Cambridge, 
1910), p. 493. 

4H. N. Moseley, “On the In- 
habitants of the Admiralty Islands,” 

VOL, I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 203 

natives of Siara (a district in the south of New Treland) and the 
neighbouring islands of St. John and Caens nore but the married 
women are tattooed, and the operation is performed only by women,! 
Similarly in Fiji the women alone are tattooed and the marks for the 
most part are imprinted on a broad bend round the loins and 
thighs, these being the parts of the body hidden by the “ku, a 
fringed waist-band which is worn short before marriage but is much 
lengthened after the birth of the first child. However, young 
Fijian women have barbed lines tattooed also on their hands and 
fingers ; and middle-aged women have blue patches at the corners 
of the mouth. The custom of tattooing is said to have been ordained 
by the god Ndengei and its neglect is punished after death ; for in 
the other world the ghost of an untattooed woman is chased by the 
ghosts of tattooed women with sharp shells in their hands, as if to 
do to her spirit what should have been done to her body in life. 
So strong was this superstition in former days that when a girl died 
before she was tattooed her friends would sometimes paint the blue 
lines on her corpse in order to deceive the priest and escape the 
anger of the gods. The operation of tattooing is performed only by 
women.? In some of the Chin tribes of Burma all the women have 
their faces tattooed. The operation is begun in childhood and is 
gradually completed, sometimes not for a good many years. The 
pattern differs with the tribes. Men are not tattooed at all. 
A Chin woman’s beauty is estimated by her tattooing. The origin 
of the custom is still uncertain, but as it is followed only by the 
tribes who border on or are near to the Burmese, it has been 
suggested that the first intention was to protect the women from 
being carried off, or to allow them to be easily discovered if they 
had been stolen away.2 According to a Chinese writer, it isa custom 
of the Li, the aborigines of the island of Hainan, that a woman’s face 
should be tattooed just before marriage according to a pattern 
prescribed by her husband, who has received it from his ancestors ; 
not the least deviation from the traditional pattern is allowed, lest 
the husband’s ancestors should not be able to recognise his wife 
after death.* 

Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
vi, (1877) p. 401. 

1 R. Parkinson, Dretssig Jahre in 
der Stidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 304 
sg. Compare A. J. Duffield, ‘*On 
the Natives of New Ireland,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xv. 
(1886) p. 117: ‘*The tattooing and 
cuttings on the flesh were entirely 
confined to women and the head men, 
The tattooing is abundant at the 
corners of the eyes and mouth.” 

2T. Williams, 772 and the Fijians, 

Second Edition (London, 1860), i, 
1603; Ch. Wilkes, Zhe United States 
Exploring Expedition, New Edition 
(New York, 1851), iii, 3553; Zhe 
United States Exploring Expedition, 
Ethnography and Philology, by Horatio 
Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), p. 63. 

3 (Sir) J. George Scott and J. P. 
Hardiman, Gazetteer of Upper Burma 
and the Shan States, Part i. vol. i. 
(Rangoon, 1900), p. 466. 

4 (Sir) J. G. Scott, France and 
Tongking (London, 1885), p- 348. 

Aino 
women 
tattooed, 
but not 
the men. 

Women 
alone 
tattooed in 
some wild 
tribes of 
Bengal and 
Assam. 

204 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

Among the Ainos the women are tattooed but not the men. 
The parts of the body thus marked are the lips, the lower arms, the 
back of the hands, and in some districts the forehead between the 
eyebrows. The tattooing of the upper lip gives an Aino woman the 
appearance of wearing a moustache with the points turned up on 
her cheeks. This ornamentation or disfigurement of the mouth is 
begun early, often in a girl’s sixth year, and is added to from time to 
time but not completed till marriage. The tattooing of the hands and 
arms is done at a single sitting, not before the fourteenth year of 
the girl’s life. The operation is performed by old women.! The 
tattooing of an Aino woman’s lips is never finished till she has been 
betrothed ; when it is complete, ‘all men know that she is either a 
betrothed or married woman.” If a woman marries without being 
properly tattooed, she commits a great sin and when she dies she 
will go straight to hell, where the demons will at once do all the 
tattooing with very large knives at a single sitting. Mr. Batchelor 
was told that the intention of the tattoo marks is to frighten away 
the demon of disease, and that when an epidemic is raging in a 
village, all the women should tattoo each other in order to repel the 
foul fiend. Moreover, when the eyes of old women are growing 
dim, they should improve their failing sight by tattooing their 
mouths and hands over again.® 

The custom of tattooing the women but not the men prevails 
among a number of the wild tribes of Bengal and Assam. Thus, 
the faces of the Khyen women “are tattooed to a most disfiguring 
extent, and they have a tradition that the practice was resorted to 
in order to conceal the natura] beauty for which they are so renowned, 
that their maidens were carried off by the dominant race in lieu of 
tribute. Figures of animals are sometimes imprinted on their flesh 
as ornaments.”4 The Juang women tattoo three strokes on the 
forehead just over the nose and three on each of the temples.® 
Among the Kharrias “the women are all tattooed with the marks 
on the forehead and temples common to so many of these tribes.” 
The marks consist of three parallel lines on the forehead, and two 
on each temple. The Birhor women are tattooed on their chest, 
arms, and ankles, but not on their faces.? “The Oraon women 

1B. Scheube, Die Aznos, p. 6. 
Compare A. S. Bickmore, ‘*Some 
Notes on the Ainos,” Zvassactions of 
the Ethnological Society of London, 
New Series, vii. (£869) p. 18; Com- 
mander H. C. St. John, ‘* The Ainos,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
ii. (1873) p. 249; ¢a., Motes and Sketches 
Srom the Wild Coasts of Nipon (Edin- 
burgh, 1880), p. 22; H. von Siebold, 
Studien tiber die Ainos (Berlin, 1881), 
p- 15; Lieut. Holland, ‘’The Ainos,” 

JSotrnal of the A uthropological Institute, 
iii. (1874) pp. 2375g.; Rev. J. Batchelor, 
The Ainu and their Folklore (London, 

19O1), pp. 20 59g. 
* Rev. J. Bachelor, of, cz#. p. 24. 

3 Rev. J. Batchelor, of. cit. p. 23. 

4 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 
logy of Bengal, p. 114. 

5 E. T. Dalton of. cit. p. 157. 

8 E. T. Dalton, of. cit. p. 165. 

7 E. T. Dalton, of. c#t. p. 219. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 205 

are all tattooed in childhood with the three mats on the brow and 
two on each temple that distinguish a majority of the Munda 
females. . . . Girls when adult, or nearly so, have themselves further 
tattooed on the arms and back.”! Amongst the wild Naga tribes 
of Assam the women are commonly tattooed on their legs, some- 
times also on their faces, breasts, stomachs, and arms. In some of 
these tribes the men tattoo themselves little or not at all ; in others, 
however, a man tattoos a mark on his body for every human head 
which he has taken.2 Among the Chukchees, in the extreme Chuckchee 
north-east of Asia, women are commonly tattooed with a vertical hha 
line on each side of the nose and with several vertical lines on the tattooed. 
chin. Childless women tattoo on both cheeks three equidistant 
lines running all the way around. This is considered to be a charm 
against sterility. Chukchee men are not tattooed, except in the 
Eskimo villages and the nearest Chukchee settlements, where a 
great many of them have two small marks tattooed on both cheeks 
near the mouth.® 

Eskimo women are tattooed with lines on their faces, most Eskimo 
commonly on their chins but sometimes also on other parts of their women 
bodies. such as the neck, breast, shoulders, arms, and legs. Among ee 
the Eskimo of Hudson Bay and Poirft Barrow the operation is ; 
performed on a girl at puberty. Among the Eskimo of Point 
Barrow men are sometimes tattooed as a mark of distinction, for 
example, to indicate that they have taken whales. The custom of 
tattooing the women seems to prevail among almost all the Eskimo 
tribes from Greenland to Bering Strait* In some tribes of Cali- 
fornian Indians, such as the Karok and Patawat, the women tattoo 
three narrow leaf-shaped marks on their chins ;° in tribes of the 

1 E. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 
logy of Bengal, p. 251. 

2 Lieut.-Colonel R. G. Woodthorpe, 
** Notes on the Wild Tribes inhabiting 
the so-called Naga Hills,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xi. (1882) 
Ppp. 201,'204, 206, 207 5g., 209; S. 
E, Peale, ‘‘The Nagas and Neigh- 
bouring Tribes,” Journal of the Anthro- 
pological Institute, iii. (1874) Pp. 477 3 
E. A. Gait, Census of India, 1891, 
Assam, Report, vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) 
PP. 243, 245 sg. 

3 W. Bogoras, The Chukchee (Ley- 
den and New York, 1904-1909), p. 
254 (Memoir of the American Museum 
of Natural History), Amongst the 
Koryaks also some women tattoo their 
faces as a charm against barrenness. 
See W. Jochelson, Zhe Aoryak (Ley- 
den and New York, 1908), p. 46 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 

Memoir of the American Museum of 
Natural History). 

4D. Crantz, Aistory of Greenland, 
(London, 1767), i. 138; C. F. Hall, 
Life with the Esquimaux (London, 
1864), ii. 315 3 F. Boas, ‘¢ The Central 
Eskimo,” Sixth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1888), p. 561; J. Murduch, ‘‘The Point 
Barrow Eskimo,” Winth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1892), pp. 138-140; L. M. 
Turner, ‘*The Hudson Bay Eskimo, 
Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1894), pp. 
207 sg. ; E. W. Nelson, ‘‘ The Eskimo 
about Bering Strait,” Zighkteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Part i, (Washing- 
ton, 1899) pp. 50-52. 

5 S. Powers, Zribes of California, 
pp. 20, 96. 

In some 
Californian 
tribes the 
women 
alone are 
tattooed, 

In some 
African 
tribes the 
women 
alone are 
tattooed, 

206 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

Coast Range the women often have a rude figure of a tree tattooed 
on the abdomen and breast.1. Among the Matooals of California 
the women tattoo nearly all over their faces, and the men also have 
a round spot tattooed in the middle of their forehead. Old 
pioneers in California “hold that the reason why the women alone 
tattoo in all other tribes is that in case they are taken captives, 
their own people may be able to recognize them when there comes 
an opportunity of ransom. There are two facts which give some 
color of probability to this reasoning. One is that the California 
Indians are rent into such infinitesimal divisions, any one of which 
may be arrayed in deadly feud against another at any moment, that 
the slight differences in their dialects would not suffice to dis- 
tinguish the captive squaws. A second is that the squaws almost 
never attempt any ornamental tattooing, but adhere closely to the 
plain regulation-mark of the tribe.” 2 

Among the Nilotic tribes of Kavirondo, in British East Africa, 
the women are tattooed on the chest and stomach with thin curved 
lines of dots on each side reaching round to near the spine. The 
men are not tattooed.’ Similarly among the Wakikuya of Eastern 
Africa tattooing is confined to the women. The Kimbunda men 
of West Africa tattoo no part of their bodies, but “the Kimbunda 
women are wont to tattoo, not those parts of the body which 
remain uncovered, namely the face and arms, but those pagts 
which nature commands to conceal, especially about the genitals, in 
the region of the groin and lower part of the stomach, also one or 
both buttocks, often also one or both shoulder-blades.” The opera- 
tion is usually performed soon after marriage.5 The Mayombe 
women of Loango are tattooed, mostly with geometrical figures on 
both sides of the navel, sometimes up to the breast. But the 
Mayombe men are not tattooed, though they are often marked with 
scars caused by cupping or scarification.6 Amongst the Duallas of 
Cameroon the bodies of the women are covered with tattooing, 
whereas the men only tattoo a few lines on their faces; indeed 
some men are not tattooed at all.’ Amongst the Amazulus tattoo- 
ing or rather scarification is sometimes met with, but only on 
women. ‘The comnion pattern consists of two squares meeting at 
their angles. It is incised on one side of the pelvic region, towards 

1S. Powers, Zribes of California, 
pp. 148, 242. 

2 S. Powers, of. ci/. p. 109. 

3-H. E. O'Neill, in Proceedings of 
the R. Geographical Soctety, 1882, 
Pp. 7433; C. W. Hobley, Zasterz 
Uganda (London, 1902), p. 31. 

4 J. M. Hildebrandt, ‘‘Ethno- 
graphische Notizen itiber Wakamba 
und jhre Nachbarn,” Zedtschrift fur 

Ethnologie, ». (1878) p. 351. 

5 L, Magyar, Ressen in Stid-Afrika 
tn den Jahren 1849 Us 1857 (Buda- 
Pesth and Leipsic, 1859), pp. 341 sg. 

6 P. Giissfeldt, Die Loango Expedi- 
tion (Leipsic, 1879), p. 107. 

7 E. Reclus, Nouvelle Géographie 
Oniverselle, xiii. 693 Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, x. (1881) pp. 
468 sg. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 207 * 
the loins; young girls so marked fetch a hiphes price in the 
marriage market.! 

On the other hand in some tribes it is the men alone who are In some 
tattooed. This is true of the Tongans,? the Samoans,’ some tribes tribes the 
of South-Western New Guinea, many Dyak tribes of Borneo,’ the ae. ann 
Khyyoungtha, a hill tribe of Chittagong,® and the Dinkas of the tattooed. 
Upper Nile.’ Among the Dinkas the pattern consists of ten lines 
radiating from the base of the nose and traversing the forehead 
and temples.® 

When we observe how often the custom of tattooing women is 
observed at puberty or marriage, we may surmise that its original 
intention was not to beautify the body, but to guard against those 
mysterious dangers which apparently the savage apprehends at 
that period of life. The practice of tattooing the faces of women 
as a charm against barrenness® points in the same direction. But 
as to the exact nature of the dangers which the savage associates 
with puberty, and as to how the various mutilations inflicted on the 
youth of both sexes are supposed to guard against them, we are 
still totally in the dark. 

P. 30. Each wears a helmet representing his totem.—In 
antiquity the Cimbrian cavalry wore helmets fashioned in the 
likeness of the heads of animals, with nodding plumes above them, 
whith added to the apparent stature of the big men as they bestrode 
their horses and charged down in their glittering iron cuirasses, 
covering their breasts with their white shields, while they plied their 
long heavy broadswords among the Roman ranks.!° But there is 
no evidence that the animals on their helmets represented the 
totems of these dashing cavaliers. Norsemen sometimes wore on 

1A. Delegorgue, Voyage dans Life in the Forests of the Far East, 

PAfrigue Australe (Paris, 1847), ii. 
228. 

2 T. Williams, Fiji and the Fijians, 
Second Edition (London, 1860), i. 160 
5q. 
3 G. Turner, Samoa (London, 1884), 
pp. 55 59. 

4G, A. Wilken, Handletding voor 
de vergelijkende Voikenkunde van 
Nederlandsch - Indié (Leyden, 1893), 
p. 250. 

5 C. J. Temminck, Coup Wail sur 
les Possessions Néerlandatses dans PInde 
Archipelagigue (Leyden, 1846-1849), 
ii, 352, 3533 S. Miiller, Aedzen en 
Onderzoekening in den Indtschen Archi- 
fel (Amsterdam, 1857), ii. 259; M. 
T. HH. Perelaer, Zthnographische 
Beschrijving der Dajaks (Za\t-Bommel, 
1870), pp. 92-94; Spenser St. John, 

Second Edition (London, 1863), i. 55. 
On the other hand in the tribes of Cen- 
tral Borneo both men and women are 
tattooed. See A. W. Nieuwenhuis, 
Quer durch Borneo (Leyden, 1904- 
1907), i. 78, 275, 449 597., ii. 38; and 
for a full account of tattooing in Borneo, 
so far as it is known, see C. Hose and 
R. Shelford, ‘ Materials for a Study 
of Tatu in Borneo,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxvi. (1906) 
pp. 60-91, with Plates vi. -xiii. 

6 T. H. Lewin, Wild Races of South- 
Eastern India (London, 1870), pp. 
116 sg. 

7G. Schweinfurth, Zhe Heart of 
Africa (London, 1878), i. 50. 

8 G. Schweinfurth, c. 

® See above, p. 205, with note 5, 

10 Plutarch, J/arzus, 25. 

Men dis- 
guised as 
animals. 

Ceremonial 

208 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

the top of their helmets a complete figure of a boar as the symbol 
of the great god Frey.? 

P. 31. The human child is disguised as a wolf to cheat its 
supernatural foes.—Among the Central Eskimo, when a man falls 
ill, the medicine-men will sometimes change his name in order to 
ward off the disease, or they will consecrate him as a dog to the 
goddess Sedna. In the latter case the man takes a dog’s name 
and must wear a dog’s harness over his inner fur-jacket for the rest 
of his life.2 The Bedouins regard the ass, especially the wild ass, 
as a very robust animal, immune to disease.. Hence when he has to 
enter a plague-stricken town, a Bedouin will sometimes pretend to 
be an ass, creeping on all fours and braying ten times. After that 
he believes himself quite safe ; the plague will think that he is an 
ass indeed and that it would be labour in vain to attack him.® 
When one Karok Indian has killed another, “he frequently barks 
like a coyote in the belief that he will thereby be endued with so 
much of that animal’s cunning that he will be abie to elude the 
punishment due to his crime.”* Such practices are quite in- 
dependent of totemism. 

P. 32.—A custom of wrapping infants at birth in a bearskin.— 
In the south of Iceland it is believed that if a child is born on a 
bearskin, he will be healthy and strong and will, like the polar bear, 
be insensible to cold. The belief rests on the principles of sym- 
pathetic magic and has no ¢onnection with totemism. 

P. 32. He is born again from a cow.—The curious ceremony 

birth from described in the text is observed, for the reasons mentioned, in the 

a cow. 

Himalayan districts of the North-West Provinces of India.6 Some- 
times the ceremony is softened by merely placing the unlucky 
infant in a basket before a good milch cow with a calf and allowing 
the calf to lick the child, “by which operation the noxious qualities 
which the child has derived from its birth are removed.”? Again, 
a person who has lost caste may be reinstated in it by passing 
several times under a cow’s belly, which is probably a symbol of 

1 P, Hermann, Nordische Mythologie 
(Leipsic, 1903), p. 207. 

2 F, Boas, ‘* Die Sagen der Baffin- 
land Eskimos,” Verhkandlungen der 
Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, 
Lthnologie, und Urgeschichte, 1885, 
p. (164) (appended to Zeztschrift fur 
Ethnologie, xvii.) ; id. ‘The Central 
Eskimo,” Sixth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1888), p. 612. 

3 J. Wellhausen, este Arabischen 
fleidentums, Zweite Ausgabe (Berlin, 
1897), pp. 162 sg. 

4S. Powers, TZribes of California 
(Washington, 1877), p. 37. 

5 M. Bartels, ‘‘ Islandischer Brauch 
und Volksglaube in Bezug auf die 
Nachkommenschaft,” Zedtschrift gtr 
Ethnologie, xxxii. (1900) p. 67. 

6 E. T. Atkinson, Zhe Hima- 
layan Districts of the North-West 
Provinces of India, ii, (Allahabad, 
1884) p. 914. 

7 Alexander Mackintosh, Account of 
the Origin and Present Condition of the 
Tribe of Ramoosies (Bombay, 1833), 
p- 124. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 209 

being born again from it.) The passage through a metal image of This 

a cow in imitation of birth from the animal is resorted to in India pretence of 
either in order to restore a person to a caste which he has forfeited rine 
by misconduct or to raise him to a higher caste than the one to is intended 
which by his natural birth he belongs. When the two Brahmans to restorea 
whom Ragoba sent to England returned to India, it was decided ots 
that they must have defiled themselves by contact with the gentiles he has 
and that in order to cleanse them thoroughly from the taint they forfeited or 
had contracted it was necessary that they should be born again. ;° 76° 
For the purpose of the new birth it is laid down that an image of a higher | 
woman or of a cow shall be made of pure gold, and that the sinner caste. 
shall be passed through the usual channel in order to emerge from 

it, like a new-born babe, in a state of innocence. But as a statue 

of pure gold and of the proper size would be exceedingly expensive, 

it is enough to make an image of the sacred yonz in gold and 

to let the offender creep through it. This was done; the two 
Brahmans solemnly crawled through the aperture, and so were 

happily restored to the communion of the faithful.2 “It is on 

record that the Tanjore Nayakar, having betrayed Madura and 

suffered for it, was told by his Brahman advisers that he had better 

be born again. So a colossal cow was cast in bronze, and the 
Nayakar shut up inside. The wife of his Brahman guru acted as 

nurse, received him in her arms, rocked him on her knees, and 

caressed him on her breast, and he tried to cry like a baby.”$ 

Again, the Maharajah of Travancore is by birth a Sudra, but he can 

and does overcome this natural defect by being born again as a 
Brahman from a golden cow or a golden water-lily. The golden 

vessel, whether in the shape of a cow or of a water-lily, is half filled 

with water and the five products of a cow, to wit, milk, curd, butter, 

urine, and dung. The prince enters the vessel, the lid is clapped 

down on him, he ducks five times in the precious compound, and 

remains for about ten minutes absorbed in holy meditation, while 

the Brahmans chant prayers and hymns. Then he comes forth 
dripping, a new, a regenerate man to prostrate himself at the feet of 

the idol and to receive on his head the magnificent crown of 
Travancore. He has now been born again like the Brahmans ; it 

is therefore his high privilege to be present when these holy men 

are eating their dinners and to share in their repast. But the 
members of his family may no longer eat with him ; he has risen 

far above them by the rite of the new birth. Amongst the Ovambo 

1 J. A. Dubois, Afeurs, institutions 
et cérémonies des peuples de 0 Inde 
(Paris, 1825), i. 42. 

2 Captain F. Wilford, “On Mount 
Caucasus,” Asiatic Researches, vi. 
(Londdn, 1801) pp. §37 5g. (8vo 
edition). 

VOL. IV 

3 FE. Thurston, Ethnographic Notes 
in Southern India (Madras, 1906), pp. 
271 Sg. 

4 Rev. S. Mateer, Zhe Land of 
Charity (London, 1871), pp. 169, 
172; North-Indian Notes and Queries, 
iii, p. 215, § 465. 

P 

The 
custom of 
marrying 
persons to 
trees is 
often 
resorted to 
in India 
for the 
purpose of 
averting 
some 
threatened 
danger. 

210 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

of South-West Africa a remedy for sickness consists in killing and 
flaying a cow, piercing the flanks in the region of the heart, and 
helping the patient to squeeze his way through the reeking carcase.1 
But it does not appear whether this bloody passage is regarded as a 
new birth. 

P. 32. Marriage ceremonies.—-There is no evidence or probability 
that any of the marriage ceremonies described in the text are in any 
way related to totemism. Someé of them may. possibly be intended 
to fertilise the young couple.2 This may have been the intention 
of the ancient Hindoo ceremony of seating bride and bridegroom 
at marriage on a red bull’s hide.* There is no reason to connect 
such a ceremony with totemism. However, “the Vaydas of Cutch 
worship the monkey god whom they consider to be their ancestor, 
and to please him in their marriage ceremony, the bridegroom goes 
to the bride’s house dressed up as a monkey and there leaps about 
in monkey fashion.” And amongst the Bhils the totems are 
worshipped especially at marriage.5 

P. 32. An Italian bride smeared the doorposts of her new 
home with wolf’s fat—In Algeria a bride smears the doorposts of 
her new home with butter.® 

P. 32. Marrying the bride and bridegroom to trees before they 
are married to each other.—There is no ground for connecting 
this custom with totemism. Much more probable is the view 
suggested by Mr. W. Crooke that the custom “is based on the 
desire to bring the wedded pair into intimate connexion with the 
reproductive powers of nature” ;’ in other words, that the ceremony 
is a rite of fertilisation intended to ensure the birth of children. 
Yet there are numerous facts which tend to shew that in India the 
custom of marrying persons to trees is intended to avert evil conse- 
quences from the bride or bridegroom. Many examples of such 
customs have been collected by Mr. Crooke.8 Thus in the Punjab 
a Hindoo cannot be legally married a third time; but there is, 

1 (South African) Folk-Lore Journal, 
li, (1880) p. 73. Compare E. Casalis, 
The Basutos (London, 1861), p. 256: 
‘«Certain tribes, after havingslaughtered 
the victim, pierce it through and 
through, and cause the person who is 
to be purified to pass between the 
pieces.” 

2 As to such fertilisation ceremonies 
see above, vol. ii. pp. 256-263; E. S. 
Hartland, Primitive Paternity (Lon- 
don, 1909), i. 30 sgq.- 

3 The Grihya-Sutras, translated by 
H. Oldenberg, Part i. p. 383, Part 
li, pp. 193 sg. (Sacred Books of the 
East, vols. xxix. and xxx.). 

4 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-Lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), ii. 154. 

5 See below, pp. 292 sgq. 

6 Villot, Aleurs, coutumes et in- 
stitutions des indigines de Algerie 
(Algieis, 1888), p. 105. 

7 W. Crooke, ‘‘ The Hilt Tribes of 
the Central Indian Hills,” Journal of 
the Anthropological Institute, xxviii. 
(1899) p. 242. Compare z@., Popular 
Religion and Folk-Lore of Northern 
India (Westminster, 1896), ii, 121. 

8 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-Lore of Northern India, ii. 115 

5Gq. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 211 

curiously enough, no objection whatever to his: being married a 
fourth time. Hence if he wishes to take to himself a third wife, 
he circumvents the law by being first married to a Babul tree 
(Acacia Arabica) or to the Akh plant (Asclepia gigantea), so that the 
woman whom he afterwards marries is counted his fourth wife and 
the evil consequences of marrying for a third time are avoided.! 
Sometimes the vegetable bride to which the gay widower is thus 
married for the purpose of evading the law is supposed to die soon 
after the marriage ; which clearly shews the risk which a human 
bride would have run by wedding the ill-omened bridegroom.? 
Again, in Oudh it is deemed very unlucky to marry a couple if the 
tuling stars of the young man form a more powerful combination 
than those of the young woman ; but the difficulty can be avoided 
by marrying the girl first to a peepul tree (/icus religiosa)3 In the 
Himalayas when the conjunction of the planets portends misfortune 
at a marriage, or when on account of some bodily or mental defect 
nobody is willing to marry him or her, the luckless or unattractive 
boy or girl is first wedded to an earthen pot, the marriage-knot 
being tied in the literal sense by a string which unites the neck of 
the bridegroom or bride to the neck of the pot ; while the dedi- 
catory formula sets forth that the ceremony is undertaken in order 
“to counteract the malign influence of the adverse planets or of the 
bodily or mental blemish of the husband or wife. Here the 
custom of marrying an unlucky person to a pot is clearly equivalent 
to the custom of marrying him or her to a peepul tree; the one and 
the other are plainly intended to divert the threatened misfortune 
from a human being to an inanimate object, whether a tree or a 
pot. Similarly, in some parts of the Punjab if a man has lost two 
or three wives in succession he marries a bird before he marries 
another human wife,’ obviously with the intention of breaking his 
run of bad luck. In Madras men are often married to plantain 
trees for the following reason. Among orthodox Hindoos a 
younger brother may not marry before an elder brother. But it 
may be that the elder brother is deaf, dumb, blind, a cripple, or 
otherwise so maimed that nobody will give him his daughter to 
wife. How then can the younger brother marry? The difficulty 
is overcome by marrying the blind, lame, deaf, or otherwise 
defective elder brother to a plantain tree with all the usual 

1 W., Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-Lore of Northern India, ii. 115 3 
Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. p. 42, 
§ 252; (Sir) D. C. J. Ibbetson, 
Report on the Revision of Settlement of 
the Panipat Tahstl and Karnal Par- 
ganah of the Karnal District (Allaha- 
bad, 1883), p. 155. 

2 W. Crooke, of. cit. ii. 116. 

3 W. Crooke, /.c. 

4 E. T. Atkinson, 7hke Himalayan 
Districts of the North-Western Pro- 
vinces of India, ii, (Allahabad, 1884) 
p- 913; W. Crooke, op. cé?t. ii. 117. 

5 North Indian Notes and Queries, 
i. p. 15, § 110; W. Crooke, of. cit. 
ii, 119. 

Custom of 
marrying 
people to 
trees in 
India. 

212 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

formalities of a wedding. Then the Brahman priest fells the 
plantain tree and the whole family is plunged into mourning for the 
vegetable bride thus cut off in her prime. So the elder brother is 
now a widower and his younger brother is free to wed.1 Once 
more, amongst the Gadariyas, a shepherd caste of the North-West 
Provinces of India, if a girl has a curl of hair which resembles a 
female snake, she is first married to a camel-thorn bush, apparently 
in order that her serpent-nature may discharge its venom on the 
bush rather than on her bridegroom. And if a bachelor marries a 
widow and she bears him a daughter,,before he gives away his 
daughter in marriage, he goes through a form of marriage with a 
tree for the sake of annulling the evil influence which is supposed 
to emanate from the marriage of a bachelor with a widow.2 The 
intention of all such ceremonies, as Mr. Crooke has pointed out,’ 
seems to be to avert some threatened evil from the bride or bride- 
groom or from both and to transfer it to a plant, an animal, or a 
thing. Thus the customs in question fall under the head of those 
widespread transferences of evil of which the custom of the scape- 
goat is the most familiar example. Yet Mr. Crooke may very well 
be right in thinking that the custom, practised by some of the wild 
hill-tribes of India, of making bride and bridegroom clasp a tree 
or tying them to it before marriage, springs from an entirely 
different order of ideas and is, in short, a fertilisation ceremony.> 
In any case, as I have said, it seems to have nothing to do with 
totemism. 

P. 34. Dancing girls of Goa are married to daggers, ete.—The 
Uriyas of Ganjam have to marry their daughters before the period 
of puberty, and if a suitable husband is not to be found, they will 
fulfil their obligation by marrying the girl toan arrow.® Sometimes a 
bachelor who wishes to marry a widow is first wedded to a ring or 
a pitcher instead of to a plant.” 

P. 34, note ® The old Egyptian custom... of dressing a 
woman as a bride, etc.—In the canal of Cairo it used to be 
customary to erect every year a round pillar of earth called “the 
bride” (’azooseh), which was regularly swept away by the fising 
waters of the Nile. “It is believed that the custom of forming 
this ’avooseh originated from an ancient superstitious usage which is 
mentioned by Arab authors, and among them by El-Makreezee. 

1 Indian Notes and Queries, iv. p. 4 See The Golden Bough, Second 
105, § 396. Edition, iii. 1 sgg. 

2 W. Crooke, Tribes and Castes of 5 W. Crooke, op. cit. ii. 120, 121. 
the North-Western Provinces and 6 «« Notes on Marriage Customs in 
Oudh, ii. 363. the Madras Presidency,” Zhe /udian 

3 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and Antiquary, xxv. (1896) p. 145. 
Folk-Lore of Northern India (West- 7 Panjab Notes and Queries, iii, p. 

minster, 1896), ii, 120. 4, § 12. 

+ 

VOL, I 

NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 213 

This historian relates that in the year of the gonquest of Egypt by 
the Arabs, Amr Ibn-El’A’s, the Arab gengral, was told that the 
Egyptians were accustomed at the period wher. the Nile began to 
rise to deck a young yirgin in gay apparel, and throw her into the 
river as a sacrifice, to obtain a plentiful inundation. This barbarous 
custom, it is said, he abolished.” ! 

P. 34, note © Legends like those of Andromeda and Hesione.— 
Examples of such tales might easily be multiplied. Their essence 
is the marriage of a woman to a water-spirit, and the tales probably 
reflect a real custom of sacrificing a woman to a water-spirit to be 
his bride.? 

P. 35. Egyptian queens were sometimes buried in cow-shaped 
sarcophaguses.—This was probably done to place the dead queens 
under the protection of Isis, or perhaps rather to identify them with 
the goddess, who was herself sometimes represented by the image 
of a cow and in art regularly appears wearing horns on her head.® 
Some of the Solomon Islanders, who worship sharks, deposit the 
dead bodies of chiefs and the skulls of ordinary men in wooden 
images of sharks, which stand in their temples or ¢amdu-houses.* 

P. 35. Men of the Sun totem are buried with their heads Custom of 
towards the sunrise.—Similarly among the Battas of Sumatra men burying 
of different totems are buriéd with their heads in different directions,® porees 
but the reasons for these differences are not always manifest. On heads to 
the analogy of the Hot-Wind totem and the Sun totem among the certain 
Wotjoballuk we may conjecture that the direction in which the body Pouts 
was buried was the direction in which the totem was supposed especi- compass. 
ally to reside, so that the intention of interring the bodies in these 
positions may have been to enable the released spirits of the dead 
to rejoin their totems. It might be worth while to collect similar 
rules of burial among other peoples. In antiquity the Athenians 
buried their dead with the heads to the west, while the Megarians 
buried theirs with the heads to the east.6 In Korat, a province of 
French Tonquin, persons who die a natural death are buried in 

the sun’s course with their heads to the west; but persons who 

1 E. W. Lane, Alanners and Customs 
of the Modern Egyptians (Paisley, n.d.), 
ch, xxvi. p. 500. 

2 See my note on Pausanias, ix. 26. 

7 (vol. v. pp. 143-145); and my 
Lettures on the Early History of the 

Kingshif (London, 1905), pp. 179 
$9q- 

3 See my Adonis, Attis, Osiris, 
Second Edition (London, 1907), pp. 
300, 319. 

4 H. B. Guppy, Zhe Solomon Islands 

and their Natives (London, 1887), pp- 
53, 79 5G 

5 See above, vol. ii. p. 100. 

6 Plutarch, Solon, 10, @dmrovot de 
Mevyapets rpds Ew rods vexpods or pépovress 
"AOnvato. d¢ mpos éowépav. The ex- 
pression is ambiguous, but I under- 
stand it in the sense I have indicated. 
According to Aelian (Far, Hist. vii. 
19), the Athenians buried their dead 
turned towards the west, but the 
Megarians followed no rule in the 
matter. 

214 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, 1 

perish by violence and women who die in childbed are buried 
athwart the sun’s course with their heads to the north.) Such 
by a belief CUStoms naturally furnish no indication of totemism ; more probably 
inaland they depend on the ideas which each people has formed of the 
- the dead direction in which lies the land of the dead, some races associating 
in the west, it with the rising and others with the setting sun. More commonly, 
where the it would seem, the souls are thought to descend with the great 
sun goes luminary as he sinks in a blaze of glory in the fiery west. Thus 
down. —_ some aborigines of Victoria thought that the spirits of the dead go 

towards the setting sun.2 The Woiworung or Wurunjerri tribe of 
Victoria believed that the world of the dead, which they called 
ngamat, lay beyond the western edge of the earth, and that the 
bright hues of sunset were caused by the souls of the dead going 
out and in or ascending up the golden pathway to heaven. Some 
aborigines of New South Wales in burying their dead took great 
care to lay the body in the grave in such a position that the sun 
might look on it as he passed ; they even cut down for that purpose 
every shrub that could obstruct the view.4 Among the Battas of 
Sumatra a burial regularly takes place at noon. The coffin is set 
crosswise over the open grave, the assembled people crouch down, 
and a solemn silence ensues. Then the lid of the coffin is lifted 
off, and the son or other chief mourner, raising his hand, 
addresses the dead man as follows: “ Now father, you see the sun 
for the last time; you will see it no more”; or “Look your 
last upon the sun; you will never see it again. Sleep sound.” ® 
Perhaps the original intention of this ceremony was to enable 
the spirit of the dead to follow the westering sun to his place 
of rest. We are told that some of the Calchaqui Indians ‘of 
Argentina opened the eyes of their dead that they might sed the 
way to the other world. For a similar reason, perhaps, some of 
the savages of Tonquin open the eyes of the dead for a few 

Burial 
customs 
determined 

1 &, Aymonier, Voyage dans le 
Laos, ii. (Paris, 1897) p. 327. In 
his earlier work, Motes sur le Laos 
(Paris, 1885), p. 268, the writer re- 

the English Colony in New South 
Wales (London, 1804), p. 390; G. 
Barrington, Zhe History of New South 
Wales (London, 1802), p. 27. 6 

verses the statement as to the position 
of the bodies. But his later and rather 
more detailed statement is to be pre- 
ferred, 

2 W. Stanbridge, ‘* Tribes in the 
Central Part of Victoria,” 7ransactions 
of the Ethnological Society of London, 
New Series, i. (1861) p. 299. 

3 A, W. Howitt, in Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xiii. (1884) 
p. 187, xvi. (1887) p. 41; zd@., Natzve 
Tribes of South-East Australia, p. 
438. 

4 Lieut.-Colonel Collins, Account of 

5 F. Junghuhn, Die Batalander auf 
Sumatra (Berlin, 1847), ii. 1413 W. 
A. Henny, “ Bijdrage tot de Kennis 
der Bataklanden,” 7ijdschrift voor 
Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xvii. (1868) pp. 29 59.3; Joachim 
Freiherr von Brenner, Besuch bet den 
Kannibalen Sumatras (Wiirzburg, 
1894), pp. 235 59. 

6 Pedro de Angelis, Coleccion de 
Obras y Documentos relativos a la 
Historia antigua y moderna de las 
Provincias del Rio de la Plata, ii. 
(Buenos-Ayres, 1836) p. 30. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS . 215 

moments before they shut the lid of the coffin down on him, “in 
order that he may see the sky.” The natives of Mangaia in the 
Pacific believe that the souls of the dead congregate on a bluff 
which faces towards the setting sun. Thence, as the day wears to 
evening, the mournful procession passes over a row of rocks or 
stepping stones to the outer edge of the reef, where the surf breaks 
eternally. Them as the glowing orb sinks into the sea, they flit 
down 
The line of light that plays 
Along the smooth wave toward the burning west, 

to sink with the sun into the nether world, but not like him to 
return again The Karok Indians of California believe that 
for the blessed dead there is a Happy Western Land beyond 
the great water, and the path which leads to it they call the Path 
of the Roses? , 

P. 36. Ceremonies at Puberty.—The statements in the text as 
to the relation of totemism to scars and other mutilations of the 
person must be corrected by what I have said above. Nor is it 
true, as I now believe, to say that “the vundameniat rules of tat2m 
society are rules regulating marriage”; for this assu 
exogamy is an integral part of totemism, whereas: the e e 
tends to shew that the two institutions were in their origin quite 
distinct, although in most totemic peoples they have been accident- 
ally united. I have already pointed out that, so long as we are 
ignorant of the views which savages take of the nature of puberty, 
we cannot expect to understand the meaning of the rites with which 
they celebrate the attainment by both sexes of the power of repro- 
ducing the species.6 Hence I now attach little weight to the 
speculations on this subject in the text. 

P. 38. Kasia maidens dance at the new moon in March.— 
According to other accounts this annual dance of the Kasias or 
Khasis takes place in the late spring, generally i in May. The girls, 
richly clad in party-coloured silks, wearing crowns of gold or silver 
on.their heads, their persons blazing with jewelry, dance demurely 
in a circle with mincing steps and downcast eyes. In the middle 
of the circle squat the musicians eliciting a loud barbaric music from 
droning bagpipes, clashing cymbals, and thunderous drums, and 
drawing fresh and fresh inspiration from an enormous punch-bowl 
of rice-beer which stands beside them. Outside the decorous circle 

1 Pinabel, ‘‘Notes sur quelques 1870); pp. 155-159- 

peuplades sauvages dépendant du 3S. Powers, Z72bes of California 
Tong-King,” Bulletin de la Société de (Washington, 1877), P- 34. 

Géographie (Paris), VIIm® Série, v. 4 See above, pp. 198 sgg. 

(1884) p. 429. 5 See above, pp. 8 599- 

2 Rev. W. W. Gill, ALéhs and & See above, PPp- 194, 202, 207, 
Songs of the South Pacific (London, also vol. iii. p. 453+ 

Sgok @ 

Dances of 
Kasia 
maids and 
bachelors. 

216 4 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, I 

Dancesat Of the maidens goes whirling round and round the giddy circle of 

puberty. 

» 

Hunters 
disguised 

“jn skins of 

animals, 

the bachelors, rigged out in old uniforms, frock-coats, ladies’ jackets, 
plumes, necklaces and tea-cosies, jigging, hopping, leaping, whoop- 
ing themselves hoarse, brandishing knives, fly-flappers, and blue 
cotton umbrellas in wild confusion. Higher and higher rises the 
music, faster and more furious grows the dance, till the punch-bowl 
producing its natural consequences the musicians drop off one after 
the other to sleep, and the war-whoors of the dancers subside into 
doleful grunts and groans. Many matches are made at these annual 
Khasi balls.1_ Among the Barotse on the Zambesi girls on reaching 
puberty dance for weeks together, always about midnight, to the 
accompaniment of songs and castanets.2 Among the Suzees and 
Mandingoes of Sierra-Leone girls are circumcised at puberty. Every 
year during the dry season, on the first appearance of a new moon, 
the damsels of each town who are to be circumcised are taken into 
a wood and kept there in strict seclusion for a moon and a day, 
charms being placed on every path to prevent intrusion. There 
the operation is performed by an old woman. Afterwards the 
girls go round the town in procession and dance and sing before 

e rincipal person’: house till they receive a present. When 
OP: of dances is completed, the young women are given in 

Wage to their betrothed husbands.® 

P. 40. The savage disguises himself in the animal’s skin, etc.— 
The Bushmen of South Africa were adepts in the art of stalking 
game in such disguises. We read that “when taking the field against 
the elephant, the hippopotamus, or rhinoceros, they appeared with 
the head and hide of a hartebeest over their shoulders, and whilst 
advancing towards their quarry through the long grass, would care- 
fully mimic all the actions of the animal they wished to represent. 
They appeared again in the spoils of the blesbok, with the head and 
wings of a vulture, the striped hide of the zebra, or they might be 
seen stalking in the guise of an ostrich.”* In the last of these dis- 
guises they wear light frames covered with ostrich feathers and 
carry the head and neck of an ostrich supported on a stick.5 
Similarly the Mambowe of South Africa stalk game “ by using the 
stratagem of a cap made of the skin of a leche’s or poku’s head, 

1 Lieut. E. H. Steel, ‘On the 2 E. Holub, Steben Jahre in Siid- 

Khasia Tribes,” Transactions of the 
Ethnological Society of London, New 
Series, vii. (1869) p. 309; Mrs. J. C. 
Murray-Aynsley, ‘‘Some Account of 
the Secular and Religious Dances of 
Certain Primitive Peoples in Asia and 
Africa,” Zhe Folk-Lore Journal, v. 
(1887) pp. 273-276; Major P. R. T. 
Gurdon, 7he Khasis (London, 1907), 
PP- 154-156. 

Afrika (Vienna, 1881), ii, 258. 

3 John Matthews, 4 Voyage to the 
River Sierra-Leone (London, 1791), 
PP. 70-73- 

4 G. W. Stow, The Native Races of 
South Africa (London, 1905), p. 82. 

5 Sir James Edward Alexander, Zx- 
pedition of Discovery into the Interior 
of Africa (London, 1838), ii. 145-147. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

217 
having the horns still attached, and another made so as to represent 
the upper white part of the crane called jabimu (A@icteru Senegalensis), 
with its long neck and beak above. With these on, they crawl 
through the grass; they can easily put up their heads so far as 
to see their prey without being recognised until they are within 
bowshot.”! The Somalis disguise themselves as ostriches in 
order to shoot or to catch and tame the bird.2, Some American 
Indiars+ used to disguise themselves as deer or wild turkeys in order 
to kill these creatures. The Eskimo clothe themselves in seal 
skins and snort like seals till they come within striking distance of 
the animals; * and in order to kill deer they muffle themselves in 
deer-skin coats and hoods and mimic the bellow of the deer when 
they call to each other.® 

P. 40. It is at initiation that the youth is solemnly for- 
bidden to eat of certain foods.—Amongst the Australian tribes such 
prohibitions are very common,® but they seem to be independent of 
totemism. Many of them come into operation before initiation 
and are not relaxed till long after it, sometimes not until the man 
or woman is well advanced in years. The penalties, real or 
imaginary, incurred by infringement of the ruies are not ci 
natural, being supposed to flow inevitably from the act itsel 
out human intervention. Amongst them are accidents and ill- 
sticcess in the chase, but for the most part they consist of certain 
bodily ailments or infirmities which appear to be purely fanciful. 
As a rule it is only the old men who are free to eat anything. For 
example, in some tribes of New South Wales youths at initiation 
were forbidden to eat eggs, fish, or any of the finer sorts of opossum 
or kangaroo. Their fare was therefore very poor, but as they grew 
older these restrictions were removed, and after passing middle age 
they might eat anything.? Again, among the natives of the Mary 
River and the dunya-bunya country in Queensland “ there was hardly 
any animal, from a human being to a giant fly, that was not con- 
sidered wholesome and lawful food to the elder men of the tribe. 
To midors, certain animals were proscribed as mundha. In the 
bunya season of 1875-76, bunyas were sundha to the females. The 
food prohibited to minors is porcupine, snakes, eels, fresh-water fish, 

1D. Livingstone, Afisstonary 
Travels and Researches in South 
Africa (London, 1857), p- 490. 

2 Ph. Paulitschke, ¢thnographie 
Nordost-Afrikas, die materielle Cultur 
der Dandkil, Galla und Somél (Berlin, 
1893), p. 229. 

3 Bossu, Mouveaux Voyages aux 
Indes Occidentales (Paris, 1768), ii. 52 
sq. 3 Langsdorff, Voyages and Travels 
(London, 1813), ii. 197. 

* H. Egede, 4 Description of Green- 
land, Second Edition (London, 1818), 
p. 106, 

6 Captain G. F. Lyon, Private 
Journal (London, 1824), p. 336. 

6 See above, pp. 176 sgg. 

7 Ch. Wilkes, Narrative -of the 
Onited States Exploring Expedition, 
New Edition, ii. (New York, 1851), p. 

194. 
SJ VBR aL, 

Foods 
prohibited 
to youthsat 
initiation. 

Such pro- 

hibitions of sufficient. 

food may 
be based 
on super- 
stition 
rather 
than on 
selfishness. 

> 

Super- 
Stitious 
abstinences 
from 

218 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

kangaroo injured in the chase, the eggs of the emu and scrub 
turkey, and the flying fox. Indulgence in forbidden foods is 
supposed to be punished with sickness and cancerous sores.”} It 
has been suggested that these prohibitions have been laid upon the 
young by the old either for the purpose of reserving the best of the 
food for themselves, or in order to prevent the extinction of certain 
species of edible animals.” 

But it may be questioned whether these explanations are 
In regard to the latter of the two motives suggested it 
seems very unlikely that improvident savages such as the Australians, 
who never store up food for future use, should be so far-seeing as 
to guard against the extinction of the animals on which they sub- 
sist. And with regard to the theory that these numerous taboos 
have been imposed by the older people on their juniors from purely 
selfish motives, and have been upheld by superstitious terrors which 
the seniors artfully impressed on the minds of their dupes, it may 
well be doubted whether the Australian aborigines are capable of 
conceiving or executing so elaborate a system of fraud. I piefer to 
suppose that the prohibitions in question are really based on mis- 

sep beliefs as to the ill-effect of certain foods in certain circum- 
, especially at particular times of life and above all at 

puberty. If we understood the conception which the savage has 
formed of the nature of puberty, we might also understand why 
on the one hand he forbids some foods to young people at this 
critical period, and why on the other hand he permits food of 
any kind to be eaten by old people, that is, by persons who have 
lost the power of reproducing their species. For it is probably that 
mysterious power which the savage is mainly concerned to guard 
and fence about by these rules of diet. In short, it seems likely that 
the prohibition of certain foods to young people is often founded 
rather on superstition than on selfishness. 

Certainly in their diet the Australian aborigines practise many 
abstinences which appear to be purely superstitious and which can 
hardly be explained by a theory that the practitioners have been 

1 E. M. Curr, 7he Australian Race, 
iii. 159. Compare R. Brough Smyth, 
The Aborigines of Victoria, i. 234: 
‘¢The old men are privileged to eat 
every kind of food that it is lawful for 
any of their tribe to eat.” A. W. 
Howitt, “*On some Australian Cere- 
monies of Initiation,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xiii. (1884) 
p. 456: “In some of the tribes, eg., 
the Wolgal, these food rules only 
become relaxed gradually, so that it is 
the old man only who is free to use 
every kind of animal food.” 

2 Rev. G. Taplin, ‘‘The Narrinyeri,” 
Native Tribes of South Australia, p. 
16; R. Brough Smyth, Zhe Aborigines 
of Victoria, i, 234 (quoted above, p. 
177), 238; Spencer and Gillen, Native 
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 471, 
‘© Tue idea throughout is evidently that 
which obtains so largely in savage tribes 
of reserving the best things for the use 
of the elders, and, more especially, of 
the elder men”; ad¢., Worthern Tribes 
of Central Australia, pp. 611, 612, 
613. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 219 

beguiled or bullied into them by designing persons who profit by certain 
the simplicity of their dupes. Thus, for example, among the tribes foods 

about the Nogoa River in Southern Queensland “ certain restrictions 

among the 
Australian 

respecting the use of food exist. Old people, for instance, are the aborigines. 

only persons allowed to eat the flesh of the emu. Other articles of 
food are forbidden to a man whose brother has recently died, but 
this custom does not extend to sisters. A father, on the death of 
a child, male or female, abstains from eating iguanas, opossums, 
and snakes, of the male sex, but nothing of the kind occurs on the 
death of a wife. This prohibition of animals of a particular sex is 
widely prevalent in Australia.”} Similarly among the natives of the 
Mary River district in Southern Queensland the flesh of certain 
animals was forbidden to persons in mourning.2 Again, in some 

Men- 

Australian tribes menstruous women might not partake of certain struous 

foods ; and in this case the prohibition, like other taboos laid on 
women at such times, seems to have been purely superstitious. 
Thus among the natives of the Murray River menstruous women 
had to refrain not merely from eating fish but from going near 2 
river or crossing it in a canoe, because it was believed that if they 
did any of these things they would frighten the fish. The Arunta 
suppose that if a woman at one of her monthly per re (8 
gather certain bulbs, which form a staple article of dicWWOr both 
men and women, the supply of the bulb would fail.4 

With these examples before us, which might doubtless be easily 
added to, we need not doubt that the old Australian aborigines 
themselves implicitly believe in many of the absurd reasons which 
are alleged for debarring young people from certain viands. Thus 
in the Encounter Bay tribe old men appropriated to themselves the 
roes of fishes, and it was said and believed that if women, young 
men, or children ate of that dainty they would grow prematurely 
old. The natives about King George’s Sound in South-West 
Australia “have some superstitious notions in regard to peculiar 
food for different ages and sexes. Thus girls, after eleven or 
twelve years of age, seldom eat bandicoot, such foods being con- 
sidered a preventive to breeding ; young men will not eat zailots or 
warlits (black eagle), or they will not have a fine beard ; such food 
will also influence their success in the chace ; and although kangaroos 
may abound, they will seldom see them, and always miss them when 
they attempt to spear them. I believe that it is not until the age 
of thirty that they may eat indiscriminately.”® The Kulin of the 

1 E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 

iii. 91. p- 615. 
2 E. M. Curr, of. cit. iii, 159. 5 H. E. Meyer, ‘‘ Manners and 
3 R. Brough Smyth, Aborigines of | Customs of the Aborigines of the En- 
Victoria, i. 236. counter Bay Tribe,” Native Tribes of 

* Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes South Australia, p. 187. 
of Central Australia, p. 473; id, § Scott Nind, “ Description of the 

women 
forbidden 
to eat 
certain 
foods. 

a 

Australian 
super- 
Stitions as 
to food. 

Australian 
super- 
stitions as 
to food. 

220 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, I 

Goulburn River, in South-Eastern Australia, “believed that if the 
novice ate the spiny ant-eater or the black duck, he would be killed 
by the thunder. If he ate of the female of the opossum or native 
bear, he was liable to fall when climbing trees, and so on for other 
offences.” 1 In the tribe which occupied the Main Dividing Range 
between the Cape and Belyando Rivers “the young men and 
women are forbidden to eat certain sorts of food, such as the emu, 
swan, scrub and plain turkeys, and the eggs of these birds, The 
eel, the black-headed snake, and other animals are also on the 
schedule of forbidden foods. The reason assigned by the old folks 
for these restrictions is, that the richness of these foods would kill 
the young, and so persuaded are the young of the truth of this 
assertion, that Mr. MacGlashan is convinced they would rather die of 
hunger than infringe their law. They call this law 4nagana, which 
means ‘forbidden.’”2 In the Arunta tribe an uncircumcised boy. 
is forbidden to eat many animals or parts of animals, particularly 
kangaroo tail, the wild turkey and its eggs, the female bandicoot, 
large lizards, emu fat, all kinds of parrots and cockatoos, the large 
quail and its eggs, the eagle-hawk, the wild cat, the podargus 
and its eggs; and va:ious penalties, such as premature age and 
Fecanggs aeceding to death at circumcision, are denounced against 
him f tractions of the rules. Some of these imaginary pains 
consist of various bodily deformities, such as a large mouth and a 
hole in the chin, which may on the principle of sympathetic magic 
be suggested by similar peculiarities in the tabooed animals? Again, 
in the interval between circumcision and subincision, and indeed 
until the wound caused by the second of these operations has com- 
pletely healed, a young Arunta man must abstain from eating 
snakes, opossums, bandicoots, echidna, lizards, mound birds and 
their eggs, wild turkeys and their eggs, eagle-hawks and their eggs. 
Any infraction of these rules is thought to retard his recovery and 
inflame his wounds.* Similarly Arunta girls and young women 
until they have borne a child, or until their breasts begin to be 
pendent, are forbidden to eat female bandicoot, large lizards, the 
large quail and its eggs, the wild cat, kangaroo tail, emu fat, 
cockatoos and parrots of all kinds, echidna, and the brown hawk 
(Hieracidea orientalis). The penalties supposed to be incurred by 
breaches of the rules resemble those which overtake the men, 
except that some of the ailments and infirmities are peculiar to 
women, such as absence of milk from the breasts. Women 

Natives of King George’s Sound (Swan spp. 41 5g. 
River) and Adjoining Country,” Journal 2 E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, 
of the R. Geographical Society, i, iii. 20. 

(1832) p. 37. 3 Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 
1 A. W. Howitt, ‘(On Australian 0f Central Australia, pp. 471 sg. 
Medicine Men,” Journal of the An- 4 Spencer and Gillen, vf. cét. p. 

thropological Institute, xvi. (1887) 470. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 221 

believe that if they ate old brown hawks their sons would be 
afflicted with varicose veins on the forehead. Further, a woman 
may not eat opossum, large carpet snake, large lizard, nor fat 
of any sort during the time that elapses between the circumcision 
and the subincision of her son; for were she to partake of any 
of these foods, the Arunta think that it would retard her son’s 
recovery.! These last prohibitions clearly rest on an imaginary 
bond of magic sympathy between the mother and her son. In 
the Kaitish tribe young men may not eat emu, snake, porcu- 

Australian 
super- 
stitions as 
to food. 

“pine, wild cat, eagle-hawk, or large lizards; if they do, it is . 

believed that their bodies will swell up and their hair will turn 
prematurely grey. The restrictions laid on young women are still 
more numerous. Among the foods forbidden to them are acacia 
seed, emu eggs, the wild turkey and its eggs, the wild dog, big 
snakes, echidna, big lizards, wild cat, eagle-hawk, kites, big rats, 
rabbit bandicoots, and fish. Infractions of these taboos are sup- 
posed to entail various bodily infirmities, such as sore throat, swollen 
cheeks, swollen head, swollen body, emaciation, sores on the head, 
and sores on the legs. The restrictions with regard to the food 
of women are said to be much the same through all of the 
Central tribes ; everywhere apparently the women strictly abstaj 
from eating the brown hawk, lest they should have no mifSM their 
breasts ; some people think that the eating of the brown hawk 
causes the breasts to wither up, others on the contrary affirm that 
it makes them swell up and burst. Very old women among the 
Kaitish are freed from these restrictions? In the Warramunga 
tribe young men are gradually released from these taboos as they 
grow older, but a2 man is usually well on in middle age before he 
may eat such things as wild turkey, rabbit bandicoot, and emu. 
In the same tribe there is a general rule that nobody may eat eagle- 
hawks, because it is said these birds batten on the bodies of dead 
natives. In the Binbinga tribe the newly initiated boy may not 
eat snake, female kangaroo, wallaby, female emu, turtle, big lizards, 
big fish, female bandicoot, native companion, jadiru, black duck, 
dingo, turkey and its eggs, pigeon, and yams. All of these things are 
tabooed to him till his whiskers are grown. Finally, he takes a 
snake and other offerings of food to an old man, his wife’s father, 
who first puts the snake round his own neck and then touches the 
lad’s mouth with it. After that the young man may eat snakes.* 
The view that the extensive prohibitions of food enjoined on 
young people of both sexes in Australia are in the main dictated 
by superstition rather than by the calculating selfishness of their 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 3 Spencer and Gillen, of. cit. 
of Central Australia, pp. 472 sq. p. 612, 

2 Spencer and Gillen, Verthern 4 Spencer and Gillen, of. cit. p. 
Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 611 sg. 613. 

eo 4 

222 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

Super- elders, may perhaps be confirmed by the observation that in other 
stitious —_ parts of the world it is precisely the young people and women who 
abstinences : : ‘ 

Gan are most free, and the grown men the most restricted, in their 

certain diet. For example, in some Dyak tribes of Borneo women, boys, 
foods. and sometimes old men are free to eat certain foods which are 
forbidden, from motives of superstition, to men in the prime of life. 

Among the Dyaks of Melintam and Njawan women and children 

may eat the flesh of apes, deer, and crocodiles, but from the time 

that boys are circumcised they may no longer partake of these 

viands. It used to be thought that any man who ate of these 

animals would go mad.2- Among the Melanesians of the Duke 

of York Group and the adjoining parts of New Britain and New 

Ireland “a singular custom prevails here with regard to the sons of 

many chiefs. About the time of their attaining the age of puberty 

they are taken into the bush, where a large house is built for them 

and their attendants. Here they remain for several months, and 

during this time they are well fed with pork, turtle, shark, and 
anything else they please. They are then initiated into certain 
ceremonies, and after this they never again taste either pork, turtle, 

«. or shark during the remainder of their lives, So scrupulous are 
Os on this inatter, that I have known a young man to suffer 
Ae ; “hunger rather than eat a piece of taro which had been 
cooked in the same oven with a piece of pork.”% Amongst the 
Namaquas boys under puberty are free to partake of hares, but 
after they have attained to puberty and have been initiated, they 
are forbidden to eat hare’s flesh or even to come into contact with 
a fire at which it has been cooked. A man who eats the forbidden 
food is not uncommonly banished from the village, though he may 
be admitted to it again on the payment of a fine. The reason 
which the Namaquas give for this custom is that the animal is the 
origin of death among men. For once on a time, the hare was 
charged by the moon to run to mankind and tell them, “ As I die 
and am renewed, so shall you also be renewed.” ‘The hare ran as 
he was bid, but instead of saying, “ As I die and am renewed,” he 
perversely and of malice prepense said, “As I die and perish,,so 
shall you.” So old Namaquas say that they hate the hare for 
his evil tidings and will not eat his flesh.t Amongst the Baele of 
Ennedi, a district of the eastern Soudan, after boys have been 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 203-205. and New Ireland,” Journal of the R. 
2 J. M. van Barckel, “Jets over de Geographical Society, x\vii. (1877) p. 

‘ : 3 148. 
Dajaks van Melintam en Njawan,” er 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- Ex ae Ji of onion pram 
te HOGER ME EXE ARCS LY SERS Fa teriast of Africa (London, 1838), i. 
33h 29- 169; C. J. Andersson, Lake Neamt, 
5 Rev. G. Brown, ‘‘ Notes on the Second Edition (London, 1856), pp. 
Duke of York Group, New Britain, 328 sg. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 223 

circumcised they may no longer eat fowls and other birds, fish, and 
eggs. In neighbouring districts of the Soudan these foods are 
similarly deemed unsuitable for grown men. But the women of 
Ennedi are free to partake of these viands,? 

P. 41. The Kurnai youth is not allowed to eat the female 
of any animal, etc.—The Kurnai rules have since been stated by 
Dr. A. W. Howitt more fully. He says:—‘“The rules as to food 
animals are as follows: The novice may not eat the female of any 
animal, nor the emu, the porcupine, the conger-eel, nor the spiny 
ant-eater ; but he may eat the males of the common opossum, the 
ringtail opossum, the. rock wallaby, the small scrub wallaby, the 
bush-rat, the bandicoot, the rabbit-rat, the brushtail, and the flying- 
mouse. He becomes free of the flesh of the forbidden animals 
by degrees. This freedom is given him by one of the old men 
suddenly and unexpectedly smearing some of the cooked fat over 
his face.” 2 

P. 42, note 3, Superstitious abstinence from salt.—The custom Super- 
of abstaining from salt on certain solemn occasions has been Stitious 
practised by many peoples, but there seems to be no reason for con- eicineta 
necting it with totemism. One of the occasions on which the ; 
abstinence has been commonly practised is mourning for a deathy 
Thus, according to the rules of ancient Hindoo ritual, mourners 
should eat no food containing salt for three nights.2 The Juangs, 

a wild hill-tribe of Bengal, abstain from salt and flesh for three 
days when they are in mourning.* In Loango the widow of a dead 
prince is bound to sleep on the ground and to eat no salted food.® 
Mourners in Central Africa sometimes refrain from salt, warm food, 
and beer.6 In the Karnal District of North-West India worshippers 
of the Sun God (Suraj Devata) eat no salt on his sacred day 
Sunday.’ One of the sacred books of the Hindoos prescribes that 
no salt should be eaten on the tenth day of the moon.® In the 
month of Saon (July-August) crowds of women in Bihar call them- 
selves the wives of the snake-god Nag and go out begging for two 
and a half days, during which they neither sleep under a roof 
nor,eat salt.2 Barren wonien among the Aroras in India sometimes 

1 G. Nachtigal, Sahara und Sudan, 
ii. 178 sg. 

2 A. W. Howitt, Native Tribes of 
South-East Australia, p. 633. 

3 Monier Williams, Religious Life 
and Thought in India (London, 1883), 
p- 283. : 

4. T. Dalton, Descriptive Ethno- 
logy of Bengal, p. 158. 

5 A. Bastian, Dee deutsche Expedt- 
tion an der Loango-Kiiste, i. 167. 

6 Rev. Duff Macdonald, Africana 
(London, 1882), i, 110. The writer 

does not name the tribes who observe 
this custom. 

7 (Sir) D. C. J. Ibbetson, Report 
on the Revision of Settlement of the 
Pantpat Tahsil and Karnal Parganah 
of the Karnal District (A\ahabad, 
1883), p. 147. 

8 J. A. Dubois, J/eurs, znstitutions 
et cérémonies des peuples de [ Inde, ii. 
525. The book in which this rule is 
laid down is the Vishxu-Purana. 

9 G. A. Grierson, Bikar Peasant 
Life (Calcutta, 1885), pp. 404 sg. 

224 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 1 

abstain from salt during the four rainy months,! apparently in the 
hope of thereby obtaining offspring. The Mohaves, an Indian 
tribe of North America, never ate salted meat for the next moon 
after the coming of a prisoner among them.? A Brazilian Indian, 
one of Mr. A. R. Wallace’s hunters, “caught a fine cock of the 
rock, and gave it to his wife to feed, but the poor woman was 
obliged to live herself on cassava-bread and fruits, and abstain 
entirely from all animal food, peppers, and salt, which it was 
believed would cause the bird to die.”3 In Peru a candidate 
for the priesthood had to renounce the use of salt for a year.* 
Among the Dards the priest of a certain goddess must purify 
himself for an annual ceremony by refraining for seven days from 
salt, onions, beer, and other unholy food.6 The Egyptian priests 
avoided salt when they were in a state of ceremonial purity.® 
Among the Arhuaco Indians of South America the medicine men 
may eat no salt all their lives, but in other respects their diet is 
more generous than that of their fellows.’ 

Often abstinence from salt is combined with the practice of 
nied chastity. Thus it was a rule of ancient Hindoo ritual that for 
with the three nights after a husband has brought his bride home, the 
“piactke-»f couple should sleep on the ground, remain chaste, and eat no salt. 
chastity. “@7her the Rajah of Long Wahou in Borneo has a son born to him, 

he must for five months sleep alone and take'no salt with his food: 
he is also forbidden to smoke and to chew si7##.2 Amongst some 
of the Dyaks of Borneo men who have returned successful from a 
. head-hunting expedition have to keep apart and abstain from a 
variety of things for several days; in particular they may not have 
intercourse with women, nor eat salt or fish with bones, nor touch 
iron.!° In the East Indian island of Nias the men who dig a 
pitfall for game have to observe a number of superstitious rules, 
the intention of which is partly to avoid giving umbrage to the 
beasts, partly to prevent the sides of the pit from falling in. Thus 
they are forbidden to eat salt, to bathe, and to scratch themselves 
in the pit; and the night after they have dug it they must have no 

Abstinence 
from salt 

1 Panjab Notes and Queries, ii. p. 
59, § 362. 

* H. H. Bancroft, Native Races of 
the Pacific States, i. 520 note 4!, As 
to the Mohaves see above, vol. iii. pp. 
247-250. 

3 A. R. Wallace, Narrative of 
Travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro 
(London, 1889), p. 349. 

4 A. Bastian, Die Culturlander des 
Alten America (Berlin, 1878), i. 479. 

5 Major J. Biddulph, 7ribes of the 
Hindoo Koosh (Calcutta, 1880), p. 51. 

6 Plutarch, Quaestiones Conviviales, 

vill. 8. 2; 2d., De Iside et Ostride; 5. 

7 W. Sievers, Reise in der Sierra 
Nevada de Santa Marta (VLeipsic, 
1887), p. 94. 

8 The Grikya Sutras, translated by 
H. Olcerberg, Part i. p. 357, Part 
ii, p. 267 (Sacred Books of the East, 
vols. xxix., xxx.). 

® Carl Bock, 7e Head Hunters of 
Borneo, p. 223. 

10S. W. Tromp, “ Uit de Salasila 
van Koetei,” Bijdragen tot de Taal- 
Land- en Volkenkunde van WNeder- 
landsch-Indié, xxxvii. (1888) p. 74. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 225 
intercourse with women.' Among the Creek or Muskogee Indians abstinence 
of North America men who had been woynced in war were from salt 
confined in a small hut at a distance from the village and had to se 
stay there for the space of four moons, keeping strictly apart and practice of 
leading a very abstemious life; in particular they had to abstain chastity. 
from salt and from women. To avert the risk of incontinence, 

which, it was believed, would have delayed the cure, each of the 
wounded warriors was waited upon by an old superannuated 

woman. “But what is yet more surprising in their physical, or 

t ther theological regimen, is, that the physician is so religiously 
cautious of not admitting polluted persons to visit any of his 
patients, lest the defilement should retard the cure, or spoil the 
warriors, that before he introduces any man, even any of their 

priests, who are married according to the law, he obliges him to 

assert either by a double affirmative, or by two negatives, that he 

has not known even his own wife, in the space of the last natural 

day.”2 When in the year 1765 a party of Chickasaw Indians 
returned home with two French scalps, the men had to remain 
secluded in the sweat-house for three days and nights fasting and 
purifying themselves with warm lotions and aspersions of the 
button-snake root. Meantime their women had to stand through 
the long frosty nights, from evening to morning, in two rowsgie~i 
each other, one on each side of the door, singing for a m: 
more together in a soft shrill voice to a solemn moving a 
then remaining profoundly silent for ten minutes, till they 2 
renewed the plaintive tune. During all this time they might hs 
no intercourse with their husbands and might neither eat nor touc' 
salt. Again, at the solemn annual festival of the Busk, when the 
first-fruits of the earth were offered and the new fire kindled, Creek 
men and women had for three days to remain strictly chaste and 
to abstain rigidly from all food, but more particularly from salt,* 
In the solemn religious fasts observed by the semi-civilised Indians 
of Mexico, Central America, and Peru it seems to have been a 
common, perhaps a general, rule that the people should practise 
continence and eat no salt and no pepper.® For example, from the 

1 J. W. Thomas, ‘ De jacht op het 
eiland Nias,” Z7ijdschrift voor Indische 
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde, xxvi. 
(1880) pp. 276 sg. 

2 James Adair, History of the 
American Indians (London, 1775), Pp 
125. 

3 James Adair, of. cit. pp. 164-166. 

‘a. A. MGillivray, in H.R. 
Schooleraft’s /ndian Tribes of the United 
States, v. 268. 

5 A.de Herrera, 7he Gesteral History 
of the Vast Continent and Islands of 

VOL, IV 

America, translated by Captain John 
Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iii. 270, 
iv. 342, 3493; Oviedo, Aistoive du 
Nicaragua (Paris, 1840), pps 228 sg. 
(Ternaux-Compans, Voyages, relations 
et mémoires originaux, etc.); Diego 
de Landa, Relation des choses de 
Yucatan (Paris, 1864), pp. 278, 2793 
Acosta, Natural and Moral History of 

the Indies, translated by C. R. Mark- 

ham (London, 1880), ii. 339, 376 59. ; 
Garcilasso de la Vega, #irst Fart 9 
the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas, 

Q 

226 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

Abstinence 
from salt 
combined 
with the 
practice of 
chastity. 

time that they sowed the maize till the time that they reaped it, the 
Indians of Nicaragua lived chastely and abstemiously, sleeping 
apart from their wives, eating no salt, and drinking neither chicha 
nor cocoa.! Similarly among the Peruvian Indians bride and 
bridegroom fasted for two days before marriage, eating no salt, no 
pepper, and no flesh, and drinking none of the native wine.” 
Every eight years the Mexicans celebrated a festival which was 
preceded by a fast of eight days. During this fast they ate nothing 
but maize-bread (¢amad//i) baked without salt and drank nothing but 
pure water. It was believed that if any one broke the fast, even in 
secret, God would punish him with leprosy. The reason which 
they assigned for this abstinence was singular. They said that the 
purpose of the fast observed on this occasion was to allow their 
means of subsistence to enjoy a period of repose ; for they alleged 
that in ordinary times bread, which was their staple food, was 
fatigued by the admixture of salt and other spices, which humbled 
it and made it feel old. So they fasted from salt and other dainties 
in order to give back to the bread its lost youth. At the festival 
to which the fast was a prelude all the gods and goddesses were 
supposed to dance. Hence in the carnival or masked ball, which 
formed the chief feature of the celebration, there appeared a 
throng of dancers disguised as birds, beasts, butterflies, 
d beetles ; while others garbed themselves as costermongers, 
ellers, lepers, and so forth. Round and round the image of 
god Tlaloc circled the giddy dance, some of the dancers 
ing desperate efforts to swallow living water-snakes and frogs, 
hich they had picked up in their mouths from a tank at the feet 
of the image.® 

This frequent association of abstinence from salt and abstinence 
from women is curious. The Nyanja-speaking peoples of British 
Central Africa extract salt from grass, and when a party of the 
people has gone to make salt, all the people in the village must 
observe strict continence until the return of the salt-makers. When 
the party returns, they must steal into the village by night without 
being seen by anybody. After that one of the village elders sleeps 
with his wife. She then cooks a relish and puts some of the new- 
made salt into it. This relish is handed round to the salt-makers, 
who rub it on their feet and under their armpits.+ Similarly the 

translated by C. R. Markham, vol. ii. 
p. 130; P. de Cieza de Leon, /ravels, 
translated by C. R, Markham (London, 
1864), pp. 296 sg. 

1 Oviedo, Histoire du Nicaragua 
(Paris, 1840), pp. 228 sg. - 

2 A. de Herrera, The General History 
of the Vast Continent and Islands of 
America, translated by Captain John 

Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iv. 342. 

3 Sahagun, Histoire générale des 
choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne, traduite 
par D. Jourdain et R. Simeon (Paris, 
1880), pp. 170 sg. As to famallé 
(maize-bread) see zd. p. 20, note 4, 

4 R. Sutherland Rattray, Sone Folk- 
lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja 
(London, 1907), pp. 191 sg. 

VOL. 1 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 227 

workers in the salt-pans near Siphoum in French Tonquin must 

abstain from all sexual relations in the plac¢ where they are at 

work. However, in savage society the same rule of continence is Contin- 

observed in other industrial operations than the manufacture of ®ce 
observed 

salt. For example, in the Marquesas Islands a woman who is in certain 

making cocoa-nut oil must be chaste for five days, otherwise she industrial 

could extract no oil from the nuts.2 Among the natives of Port operations. 

Moresby in New Guinea it is a rule that when a party goes on a 

trading voyage westward to procure arrowroot, the leader has to 

observe strict continence, else the canoe would sink and all the 

arrowroot be lost. In ancient Arabia the men who were engaged 

in collecting incense from the trees might not pollute themselves 

with women or with funerals4 Amongst the Masai the brewers 

of poison and of honey-wine must observe strict continence, else it 

is supposed that the poison and the honey-wine would be spoiled.® 

These and many similar cases of continence practised from super- 

stitious motives by savages rest on certain primitive ideas of the 

physical influence of sexual intercourse, which we do not as yet 

fully understand. 

P. 42. A Carib ceremony.—With this ceremony we may compare 
an initiatory rite observed by the Andaman Islanders. The friends 
of the young man or young woman who is being initiated at puberty 
hunt and kill a wild boar or a wild sow according to the sex of the 
novice. The chief presses the carcase of the animal heavily on the 
shoulders, back, and limbs of the novice as he sits on the ground. 
“This is in token of his hereafter becoming, or proving himself to 
be, courageous and strong.” The carcase is then cut up, the fat is 
melted and poured over the novice and rubbed into his person.® 
Amongst the Arunta uncircumcised lads are often struck on the 
calf of the leg with the leg-bone of an eagle-hawk, because this is 
supposed to impart strength to the boy’s leg.”? In these and many 
similar customs which might be cited® the valuable properties of 
the animal are supposed to be transferred to human beings by 
external application. But the customs appear to be quite in- 
dependent of totemism. 

P. 43.—The youths at initiation sleep on the graves of their 
ancestors.—Speaking of the initiatory rights of the Australian 
aborigines a writer says: “On another occasion a young man who 
followed the occupation of a fisherman, told me that he was com- 

1 &, Aymonier, Motes sur le Laos 6 E, H. Man, 7he Aboriginal In- 

rene, 1885), p. 141. 
2G. H. von Langsdorff, Reise um 
aie Welt (Frankfort, 1812), i. 119 59. 
3G, Turner, Saoa (London, 1884), 
PP: 349 57- 
4 Pliny, Mat. Hist, xii. 54. 
5 See above, vol. ii, pp. 410 sg. 

habitants of the Andaman Islands 
(London, n.d.), p. 66. 

7 Spencer and Gillen, Mative Tribes 
of Central Australia, p. 472. 

8 For some other examples see Zhe 
Golden Bough, Second Edition, ii. 

364 5g. 

Pretence of some secret societies in North America.® 

new birth 
at circum- 
cision. 

Custom of 
plucking 
out the 
hair and 
beards of 
youths at 
initiation, 

228 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 1 
pelled to lie for two nights on the grave of one of his ancestors, 
who had also been a fisherman of some note ; by this means he was 
supposed to inherit all the good qualities of his predecessor.” } 
Among the Niska Indians of North-West America the novice 
resorted to a grave, took out a corpse, and lay with it all night 
wrapt in a blanket.” 

P. 43. In some of the Victorian tribes no person related to the 
youth by blood can interfere or assist in his initiation.—In the 
Peake River tribe of South Australia none of a boy’s relations are 
present when he is being circumcised; they are supposed not to 
know that the operation is taking place.® 

P. 43. The Australian ceremony at initiation of pretending to 
recall a dead man to life.—A pretence of killing a man and bring- 
ing him to life again is a common ceremony of initiation among 
many peoples. Elsewhere I have collected examples of it* We 
have seen that it forms a prominent part in the initiation rites of 
The Kikuyu of British 
East Africa “have a curious custom which requires that every boy 
just before circumcision must be born again. The mother stands 
up with the boy crouching at her feet, she pretends to go through 
all the labour pains and the boy on being reborn cries like a babe 
and is washed. He lives on milk for some days afterwards.”® In 
the rites of initiation I do not remember to have met with another 
equally clear imitation of a new birth for the novice. Buta pretence 
of being born again has formed part of a rite of adoption among 
some peoples ;7 and we have seen that in India it is practised as 
a mode of averting ill-luck or of raising a person either to a higher 
rank or to one which he has for some reason forfeited.® 

P. 44, note*, The plucking of the hair from the pubes or incipient 
beard of the youth at initiation. —This custom seems to have been 
widely diffused among the southern and eastern tribes of Australia. 
Thus among the tribes in the neighbourhood of Adelaide the hair 
of the pubes of novices was plucked out by operators of both sexes 
and various ages, even little children taking part in the work. 
When the hair had been pulled out, it was carefully rolled up in 

1j. F. Mann, ‘‘Notes on the (appended to Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
Aborigines of Australia,” Proceedings x.) 

of the Geographical Soctety of Austral- 
asia, New South Wales and Victorian 
Branches, i. (1885) p. 44. 

2 See above, vol, iii. p. 542. 

3 R. Schomburgk, ‘Uber einige 
Sitten und Gebriuche der tief im 
innern Siidaustraliens, am Peake-Flusse 
und dessen Umgebung hausenden 
Stamme,” Verhandlungen der Berliner 
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethno- 
logie und Urgeschichte, 1879, P..(235) 

4 The Golden Bough, Second Edition, 
iii, 422 sgg. 

5 See above, vol. iii. pp. 462 sgg., 
487 s9., 489 597.5 505, §42, 546. 

6 Extract from a letter of Mr. A. C. 
Hollis to me. Mr. Hollis’s authority 
is Dr. T. W. W. Crawford of the Kenia 
Medical Mission. 

% The Golden Bough, Second Edition, 
i, 21 sg. 

8 See above, pp. 208 s¢. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 229 

green boughs, the hair of each novice being kept separately, and 
the packets were given to a wise man to be properly disposed of.+ 
Amongst the Narrinyeri of South Australia the matted hair of the 
novices was combed or rather torn out with the point of a spear, 
and their moustaches and a great part of their beards plucked 
up by the roots. The lads were then besmeared from the crown of 
their head to their feet with a mixture of oil and red ochre? In 
the Encounter Bay tribe of South Australia all the hair was singed 
or plucked out from the bodies of the novices except the hair of 
the head and beard; and then their whole bodies, with the 
exception of their faces, were rubbed over with grease and red 
ochre. Among the tribes of South-West Victoria all the hairs of 
the beard were plucked out from the faces of novices at initiation. 
Some of the tribes on the Murray River tore out the hair or 
down from the chins of the young men who were being initiated.® 
In the Moorundi tribe, about 180 miles up the Murray River, boys 
at initiation had the hair plucked from their bodies; the men who 
performed the operation were chosen from a distant tribe.6 Among 
the Maraura-speaking tribes of the Lower Darling River the novice 
was stretched on the ground and all the hair was plucked from his 
cheeks and chin and given to his mother, who was present, crying 
and lamenting.’ And with regard to the aborigines of the Darling~’ 
River in general we are told that “the hair of the youth who is 
being initiated is cut short on his head and pulled out of his face, 
and red ochre, mixed with emu fat, smeared over his body; he 
wears a necklace of twisted opossum hair.”® The Tongaranka, a 
tribe of the Itchumundi nation, to the west of the Darling River, 
depilated the private parts of the novices at initiation.? Among 
the tribes of the Paroo and Warrego Rivers in South Queensland 
the custom was to pluck out by the roots all the hairs of the 
novice’s body.!° The natives of the Mary River district in South 
Queensland shaved off the hair from all parts of the body but the 
head." Similarly in Fiji at initiation the heads of novices were 

1 FE. J. Eyre, Journals of Expeditions 
of Discovery into Central Australia 
(London, 1845), ii. 338. 

2 Rev. G. Taplin, ‘‘The Narrin- 
yeri,” Native Tribes of South Australia, 
p- 173; ed. in E. M, Curr’s Zhe 
elustralian Race, ii. 254 sg. 

3 Rev. H. E. A. Meyer, ‘‘ Manners 
and Customs of the Aborigines of the 
Encounter Bay Tribe,” Native Tribes 
of South Australia, p. 188. 

+ J. Dawson, Australian Aborigines, 
p. 30. 

5 R. Brough Smith, Adorigines of 
Victoria, i. 65. 

6G. F. Angas, Savage Life and 
Scenes in Australia and New Zealand, 
i. 98. 

7 A.W. Howitt, Native Tribes of 
South-East Australia, p. 675. 

8 F. Bonney, ‘*On Some Customs 
of the Aborigines of the River Darling, 
New South Wales,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xiii. (1884) 
p- 128. 

9 A.W. Howitt, Wative Tribes of 
South-East Australia, p. 675. 

0 E.M. Curr, The Australian Race, 
iii, p. 273. 

NE. M. Curr, of. cit. ili, 167. 

The re- 
moval of 
the hair of 
novices at 
initiation 
‘was per- 
haps to 
assimilate 
them to 
new-born 
babes. 

Robertson 
Smith’s 
theory of a 
totem 
sacrament. 

230 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 
shaved clean, and it is said that their shaven heads was an indica- 
tion of childhood, 

The meaning of this custom of removing the hair, especially 
the hair of the pubes and beard, of lads at initiation is not clear. 
But wherever the novice is supposed to be born again by means of 
these initiatory rites, it would be perfectly natural to remove the 
hair from his body, especially from these particular parts of it, in 
order to increase his resemblance to a new-born babe. For even 
the savage mind could hardly fail to be struck by the incongruity of 
a young man with a beard pretending to be a tender infant. The 
Australian practice of smearing the lads all over with red ochre may 
be an attempt to assimilate them still more closely to newly born 
infants, the red ochre being a substitute for blood; and the ‘same 
may perhaps be said of the corresponding South African practice of 
daubing the novices all over with white clay just after they have 
been circumcised,? for the new-born children of black races are at 
first reddish brown and soon turn slaty grey.? It is possible that 
the ancient Greek custom of polling the beards or the hair of 
youths and maidens at puberty or before marriage and dedicating 
the shorn locks to a god or goddess, a hero or a heroine,* may have 
been a survival of a similar pretence of a new birth at this critical 
time of life. Even the monkish tonsure may perhaps be remotely 
connected with the same primitive practice. 

P. 44. Connected with this mimic death and revival of a clans- 
man appears to be the real death and supposed revival of the totem 
itself.—With regard to what follows in the text I desire the reader 
particularly to observe, first, that there is no clear evidence that 
any of the slain animals are totems; and, second, that none of the 
slain animals are eaten by the worshippers. The instances cited, 
therefore, furnish no solid basis for a theory of what has been called 
a totem sacrament. That theory was a creation of my brilliant and 
revered friend the late W. Robertson Smith. For many years it 
remained a theory and nothing more, without a single positive 

1 Rev. L. Fison, ‘*The Nanga, or white boys by Europeans. . . . After 

Sacred Stone Enclosure, of Wainimala, 
Fiji,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xiv. (1885) pp. 20, 23. 

* Rev. J. Macdonald, ‘‘ Manners, 
Customs, and Religions of South 
African Tribes,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xix. (1890) 
pp. 268 sg.; J. Stewart, Lovedale, 
South Africa (Edinburgh, 1894), pp. 
105 5g.: ‘¢ They are covered from head 
to foot with white clay, which makes 
them look as if they were whitewashed. 
This gives them a very ghastly appear- 
ance, and they are commonly called the 

several weeks, the white clay is washed 
off in the nearest river, red clay takes 
its place, and a new avoss or blanket 
is given to each. All the old clothing, 
such as it is, is also burned. The lads 
are then assembled to receive advice 
and instruction from the old men as to 
their new duties. They are now to act 
as men, being acknowledged as such.” 

3 E. B. Tylor, Anthropology (Lon- 
don, 1881), p. 67- 

4 See my article ‘Artemis and 
Hippolytus,” Zhe Fortnightly Review, 
December 1904, pp. 982, 985 59. 

voL.r NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 231 

instance of such a sacrament being known to support it. Then Totem 
came the great discoveries of Messrs. Spencer dnd Gillen in Central sacrament 
Australia, which made an era in the study of primitive man. pene 
Amongst the many new facts which their admirable investigations 
brought to light was a custom which may in a sense be called a 

totem sacrament. For they found that the members of totem 

clans in Central Australia, while they generally abstain from eating 

their totemic. animals or plants, nevertheless do at certain times 
partake of them as part of a solemn ritual for the multiplica- 

tion of these animals or plants. When the totem is an edible 

animal or plant, the members of each totemic clan are bound to 
perform magical ceremonies (¢z¢ichiuma) for the increase of their 

totems, in order that the animals and plants may be eaten by the 

rest of the community, although not as a rule by the performers 
themselves, who have these animals or plants for their totems. 

And that the ceremonies may accomplish their object successfully, 

it is deemed essential that the members of each totemic clan should 

eat a little of their totem ; to eat none of it or to eat too much would 

equally defeat the aim of those magical rites which are designed to 

ensure a supply of food, both animal and vegetable, for the tribe.} 

Thus a totem sacrament of a sort has been discovered among But the + 
the tribes of Central Australia, and “Robertson Smith’s wonderful rele 
intuition—almost prevision—has been strikingly confirmed after Hrenic 
the lapse of years. Yet what we have found is not precisely what sacrament 
he expected. The sacrament he had in his mind was a religious ‘s magical, 
rite; the sacrament we have found is a magical ceremony. He iigious 
thought that the slain animal was regarded as divine, and never 
killed except to furnish the mystic meal; as a matter of fact, the 
animals partaken of sacramentally by the Central Australians are in 
no sense treated as divine, and though they are not as a rule killed 
and eaten by the men and women whose totems they are, neverthe- 
less they are habitually killed and eaten by all the other members 
of the community ; indeed, the evidence goes to show that at an 
earlier time they were commonly eaten also by the persons whose 
totems they were, nay, even that such persons partook of them more 
freely, and were supposed to have a better right to do so than any 
one else. The object of the real totem sacrament which Messrs. 
Spencer and Gillen have discovered is not to attain to a mystical 
community with a deity, but simply to ensure a plentiful supply of 
food for the rest of the community by means of sorcery. In short, 
what we have found is not religion, but that which was first the pre- 
decessor, and afterwards the hated rival of religion ; I mean magic.” 2 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Wative Tribes 283-327. See also above, vol. i. pp. 
of Central Australia (London, 1899), 102-112, 183-186, 214-242. 
pp. 167-211 ; 2d., Northern Tribes of 2 J. G. Frazer, ‘‘on some Cere- 
Central Australia (London, 1904), pp. monies of the Central Australian 

_ Zuni cere, 
mony of 
bringing 
back the 
turtles and 
killing 
them, 

232 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

The only other apparent instance of what may be called a 
totem sacrament with which Iam acquainted is the one which is 
reported by Mr. N. W. Thomas from West Africa But his 
report is brief, and it seems desirable to obtain fuller particulars of the 
custom before we can definitely assign it a place in the very short 

list of totem sacraments. 

P. 44.—Some Californian Indians killed the buzzard, and then 
buried and mourned over it.—However, there is no evidence or 
probability that the buzzard was their totem. Totemism appears 
not to have been practised by any tribe of Californian Indians.? 

P. 44. A Zufii ceremony described by an eye-witness, Mr. 
Cushing.—The ceremony of bringing the tortoises or turtles to the 
village of Zui has been described much more fully by a later 
writer, Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson. It forms part of the 
elaborate ritual observed by these Indians at the midsummer 
solstice, when the sacred fire is kindled. Envoys are sent to fetch 
“their otherselves, the tortoises,” from the sacred lake Kothlu- 
walawa, to which the souls of the dead are supposed to go. When 
the creatures have thus been solemnly brought to Zuni, they are 
placed in a bowl of water near the middle of the floor, and ritual 
dances are performed beside them. “After the ceremonial the 
tortoises are taken home by those who caught them and are hung 
by their necks to the rafters till morning, when they are thrown 
into pots of boiling water. The eggs are considered a great 
delicacy. The meat is seldom touched except as a medicine, 
which is a curative for cutaneous diseases. Part of the meat is 
deposited in the river, with Aokakwa (white shell beads) and 
turquoise beads, as offerings to the Council of the Gods.” 4 

As the lake from which the turtles are brought is the place to 
which the souls of the departed are supposed to repair, Mrs. 
Stevenson’s account confirms the interpretation which I had 
independently given of the ceremony. I pointed out that the 
Zufis believe in their transmigration or transformation at death 
into their totemic animals, and that the tortoise or turtle is reported 
by one authority to be a Zufi totem. Hence the intention of 
killing the turtles in which, according to Mr. Cushing’s account, 
the souls of dead kinsfolk are supposed to be incarnate, is 

Tribes,” Proceedings of the Australasian 
Association for the Advancement of 
Science (Melbourne, 1901), pp. 316 sg. 
Elsewhere I have pointed out on how 
very slender a basis the theory of a 
totem sacrament has been built. See 
The Golden Bough, Second Edition 
(London, 1900), vol. i. pp. xviii. sg. 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 589 sg. 

2 See above, vol. iii. pp. I sg. 

3 See above, vol. iii. pp. 237 59. 

4 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
“The Zufii Indians,” Zwenty-third 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnolagy (Washington, 
1904), pp. 153-161. As to Kothlu- 
walawa, the lake of the dead, from 
which the turtles are brought, see 
above, vol. iii, p. 233 n.?. 

VoL. 1 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 233 

apparently “to keep up a communication with the other world 
in which the souls of the departed are believed to be assembled 
in the form of turtles. It is a common belief that the spirits of 
the dead return occasionally to their old homes; and accordingly 
the unseen visitors are welcomed and feasted by the living, and 
then sent upon their way. In the Zufi ceremony the dead are 
fetched home in the form of turtles, and the killing of the turtles is 
the way of sending back the souls to the spirit-land.” ! 

This interpretation of the Zufii custom of killing the turtles 
supersedes the one which, following W. Robertson Smith, I formerly 
suggested with some hesitation, namely, that it might be a piacular 
sacrifice in which the god dies for his people.? But a doubt 
remains whether the ceremony is totemic or not; for though the 
turtle or tortoise is included in the list of Zufi totems given by 
Captain J. G. Bourke, it is not included in the lists given by Mr. 
Cushing and Mrs. Stevenson.® { 

P, 60. Phratries . . . subphratries.—With Howitt and Fison 
I now prefer to call these exogamous divisions by the names of 
/classes and subclasses. Pe 

P. 63, note 5, The custom . . . of imposing silence on women for Silence im- 
a long time after marriage.—We have seen that among the tribes of Posed on 
South-West Victoria, where husband and wife always spoke different paces 
languages, the newly married couple were not allowed to speak to 
each other for two moons after marriage, and that if during this 
time they needed to converse with one another the communication 
had to be made through friends. Elsewhere we meet with some 
scattered indications of an apparently widespread custom, which 
forbade a wife to speak to any one but her husband until she had 
given birth to a child. Thus with regard to the Taveta of British 
East Africa we read: “ One singular custom of theirs in connection 
with marriage I must relate. Brides are set apart for the first year 
as something almost too good for earth. They are dressed, adorned, 
physicked, and pampered in every way, almost like goddesses. 
They are screened from vulgar sight, exempted from all household 
duties, and prohibited from all social intercourse with all of the 
other sex except their husbands. They are never left alone, are 
accompanied by some one wherever they may wish td go, and are 
not permitted to exert themselves in the least ; even in their short 
walks they creep at a snail’s pace, lest they should overstrain their 
muscles. Two of these celestial beings were permitted to visit me. 
Both were very elaborately got up and in precisely the same manner. 

1 The Golden Bough, Second Edition —_Oszris, Second Edition (London, 1907), 
(London, 1900), ii. 374. The belief pp. 301-318. 
in the periodical return of the dead to 2 See above, vol. i. p. 45. 
their old homes is illustrated with 3 See above, vol. iii. p. 216. 
many examples in my -4donis, Afttis, 4 See above, vol. i pp. 466, 468. 

Silence of 
Armenian 
brides. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

234 
Around the head was worn a band of parti-coloured beads, to which 
was attached a half-moon of bead-work in front, so as to fall down 
over the forehead. Below this, fastened round the temples, fell a 
veil of iron chain, hanging to below the lips in closely arranged 
lengths. . . . They honoured me only with their eyes ; they did not 
let me hear the mellow harmony of their voices. They had to see 
and be seen, but not to be heard or spoken to. Brides are treated 
in this manner until they present their husbands with a son or 
daughter, or the hope of such a desired event has passed away.” ! 
A similar custom is reported of Armenian brides. “ Young 
girls go unveiled, bareheaded, wherever they please, the young men 
may woo them openly, and marriages founded on affection are 
common. But it is different with the young wife. The ‘Yes’ 
before the bridal altar is for a time the last word she is heard to 
speak! From that time on she appears everywhere, even in the 
house, deeply veiled, especially with the lower part of the face, the 
mouth, quite hidden, even the eyes behind the veil. No one sees 
her in the street, even to church she goes only twice a year, at 
Easter and Christmas, under a deep veil; if a stranger enters the 
house or the garden, she hides herself immediately. With no one 
may she speak even one word, not with her own father and 
brother! She speaks only with her husband, when she is alone 
with him! With all other persons in the house she may communi- 
cate only by pantomime.? In this dumbness, which is enjoined by 
custom, she persists till she has given birth to her first child. From 
that time on she is again gradually emancipated ; she speaks with 
the new-born child, then her husband’s mother is the first person 
with whom she talks ; after some time she may speak with her own 
mother; then the turn comes for her husband’s sister, and then 
also for her own sisters. Next she begins to converse with the 
young girls of the house, but all very softly in whispers, that none 
of the men may hear! Only after six or more years is she fully 
emancipated and her education complete. Nevertheless it is not 
proper that she should ever speak with strange men, or that they 

should see her unveiled.” 3 

I Charles New, Life, Handerings 
and Labours in Eastern Africa (Lon- 
don, 1873), pp. 360 sg. This enforced 
silence of Taveta brides is not men- 
tioned by Mr. A. C. Hollis in his 
account of the Taveta marriage customs 
(‘* Taveta Customs,” Journal of the 
African Society, No. 1, October 1901, 
pp: 113-117). Perhaps the custom has 
fallen into disuse since Mr. New wrote. 

2 «T saw to my great astonishment 
that these pantomimes were the same 
that may often be seen as a game also 

with us among young people, especially 
girls : signs are made with the hands, 
the fingers, by laying them over each 
other, by crossing the fingers or setting 
them side by side, etc., so to indicate 
letters or syllables. . What to us 
now seems an arbitrary, childish in- 
vention may ultimately have a deep 
historical significance ! ” (Haxthausen’s 
note). 

3 A. Freiherr von Haxthausen, 
Transhkaukasta (Leipsic, 1856), i. 200 
Sq- 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 235 

The Ossetes of the Caucasus observe a similar custom. With Women 
them also custom enjoins the strictest reserye on a young wife Malai 
until she has borne a child. Till then she may not exchange 4a fo, pi 
word with any one but her husband; even with her parents and time after 
brothers and sisters she speaks only in pantomime. But as soon ™@TAst 
as she has given birth to a child, or, if she remains childless, after 
four years she is completely emancipated from the rule of silence.? 
Among the South Slavs it is said that in old times a bride wore 
her veil till the birth of her first child, and that all this time she 
did not speak to her father-in-law or mother-in-law.2 In Albania it 
is contrary to all good manners for a bride to chat with her husband 
in presence of others, even of her husband’s parents, until she has 
given birth to a child. Elsewhere we meet with similar rules of 
prolonged silence imposed on brides without mention of the relief 
afforded by the birth of a child. Thus we read that among the 
Abchasses of the Western Caucasus a bride speaks with no one for 
some months after her marriage ; then she begins to converse with 
the younger mernbers of the household and of the village, afterwards 
with older people, and last of all with her father-in-law and mother- 
in-law. Another traveller in the Caucasus says that for a year 
from the day of her marriage a Tartar bride is not allowed to speak 
a word louder than a whisper, not even with her own parents ; but 
after the lapse of a year a feast is held, and then she recovers the 
full use of her tongue.® In the island of Peru, one of the Gilbert 
Group in the South Pacific, it was a custom “to prohibit a married 
woman, for years after marriage, from looking at or speaking to any 
one but her husband. When she went anywhere she covered 
herself up with a mat, made on purpose, and which was so folded 
in Corean style as to leave but a small hole in front for her to see 
the road before her. Any man observing her coming along would 
get out of the way till she passed. Any deviation from the rule 
would lead to jealousy and its revengeful consequences.”® In 
Sardinia a similar custom of silence used to be imposed on lovers 
before marriage, as we learn from the following account: “The 
proeess of courtship in Sardinia was until a few years ago carried 
on in an exceptionally singular manner. The lovers were not 
permitted to meet either privately or in society, and if a meeting 
should accidentally occur, they recognised each other as distant 
acquaintances, neither shaking hands nor holding converse together. 

The only communication between them was conducted through the 
medium of the ‘deaf and dumb’ alphabet, the lady performer 

1 Von Haxthausen, 7rarshaukasta, 4N. v. Seidlitz (Tiflis), ‘‘ Die 
ii, 23. Abchasen,” Globus, Ixvi. (1894) p. 41. 
2 F. S. Krauss, Sztte und Brauch 6 Edmund Spencer, 7Zrazvels in 

dey Siidslaven (Vienna, 1885), p. 450. Czrcass¢a (London, 1837), ii. 138. 
3 J. G. von Hahn, l/banestsche 6 G. Turner, Samoa (London, 1884), 
Studien (Jena, 1854), i. 147. p- 298. 

Young 
wives for- 
bidden to 
speak with 
their 
husbands, 

The silence 
imposed 
on women 
after 
marriage 
has prob. 
ably its 
root in 
somesupcr- 
stition, 

236 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

hanging over the balcony, or half hidden by the curtain of her 
room, and the gentleman standing below; this process was con- 
tinued very often for several hours, the rapidity and dexterity, as 
also the patience and perseverance, exhibited on these occasions 
being truly marvellous. Courtship after this fashion has been 
known to be protracted for years.” ! 

‘In the preceding cases the young wife, though she is forbidden 
to converse with other people, is allowed to speak to her husband. 
But in some African tribes she may not even do this. Thus among 
the Wabemba, to the west of Lake Tanganyika, “a young married 
woman refuses at first to speak and especially to eat in presence 
of her husband. This situation is prolonged in proportion to the 
high rank of the husband. The observation of this respectful 
silence is called Austmbila. However, there is something artful in 
the silence, for the husband must give his wife a present (Azsiku/a) 
to untie her tongue. Sometimes, indeed often, the present is 
not enough and must be repeated twice or thrice. This is called 
kuliana.”* Similarly, among the Wahorohoro “in the early days 
of marriage the wife remains absolutely dumb in presence of her 
husband ; and just as among the Wabemba the husband must 
give her a present in order to hear her voice.” 3 

What is the meaning of the rule of silence thus imposed on 
lovers before marriage or on brides after it? The example of the 
tribes of South-West Victoria supplies at least a possible explanation; 
for among them husband and wife always belonged to tribes speak- 
ing different languages, the pair continued to speak each his and 
her own language even after marriage, and both before marriage 
and for two months after it they were forbidden to converse with 
each other at all.4 Thus it is suggested that the enforced silence 
may be only a formal acknowledgment of the difference of language 
between husband and wife and the consequent difficulty which they 
have in communicating with each other. In support of this 
explanation it might perhaps be urged that the custom in question 
appears to be especially prevalent among the peoples of the 
Caucasus, who belong to many different races and speak many 
different tongues, and amongst whom therefore it may often happen 
that husband and wife are unable to speak or understand each 
other’s languages. Yet it seems very doubtful whether this ex- 
planation suffices for all the instances I have cited. How, for 
example, can it be supposed to apply to the Gilbert Islands in the 
South Pacific, where probably no speech but Polynesian was ever 
heard till the advent of Europeans? More prebably the silence of 

‘1 R. Tennant, Sardinia and its Re- graphiques sur quelques Peuplades du 
sources (Rome and London, 1885), p. Zanganika (Brussels, 1905), pp. 17 sq. 
232. 3 Ch. Delhaise, of. ct. p, 36. 

2 Ch. Delhaise, Motes ethno- 4 See above, vol. i. pp. 466-468. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

237 

the wife till her first child is born rests on some superstitious belief 
touching her first pregnancy which as yet w¢ do not understand. 

This view is to a certain extent confirmed by the parallel rule of Parallel 
silence which many peoples impose on widows, and sometimes on Mle of 
widowers, for a considerable time after their bereavement ; for there S)°R°°. 5 
is clear evidence that the silence of the widow or widower springs by widows. 
from a superstitious fear of attracting the dangerous attentions of 

the ghost of the deceased spouse.’ But if a widow is tongue-tied 

by superstition, so may be the wife, though the particular super- 
stition may be different. In the Warramunga tribe of Central 
Australia the custom of silence after a death is observed by many 

other women besides the widow; all the time they are under the 

ban, these women converse silently with each other on their fingers, 

and become so expert in the gesture language and so accustomed 

to it that some of them never resume the use of their tongue, but 

prefer to talk on their fingers, hands, and arms for the rest of their | 
days.2- Thus the substitution of the gesture language for speech 

occurs among some races at three of the most important periods of 

a woman’s career, at her wooing, her early wedded life, and her 
widowhood. Probably in all three cases the motive for conduct so 
opposed to the natural instincts of women is superstition. 

P. 64. Amongst the Caribs the language of the men differed to 
some extent from that of the women.—This remarkable peculiarity 
is shared by several other South American languages, though it has 
been oftenest noted among the Caribs.3 The differences between 

1 See the evidence collected by me 
in my note, ‘*The Silent Widow,” in 
Transactions of the Third International 
Congress for the History of Religions 
(Oxford, 1908), i. 256-258. To the 
examples there cited I will add another 
from the Indians of California : 
* Around Auburn, a devoted widow 
never speaks, on any occasion or upon 
any pretext, for several months, some- 
times a year or more, after the death of 
her husband, Of this singular fact I 
had ocular demonstration. Elsewhere, 
as on the American River, she speaks 
only in a whisper for several months ” 
(S. Powers, Zribes of California, p. 
327). 

2 Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes 
of Central Australia, pp. 500 sg. ; zd., 
Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 
PP. 525 59. 

3 As to the differences between the 
modes of speech of men and women in 
the Carib language see J. B. du Tertre, 
Histoire generale des Isles de S. 

Christophe, de la Guadeloupe, de la 
Martinique et autres dans ? Amerique 
(Paris, 1654), p. 462; De Rochefort, 
Histoire naturelle et morale des Antilles 
(Rotterdam, 1665), pp. 349 sg.; De 
la Borde, ‘Relation de Porigine, 
moeurs, coustumes, religion, gyerres 
et voyages des Caraibes, sauvages des 
Isles Antilles de TAmerique,” in 
Recueil de divers voyages faits en 
afrique et en PAmerigue gui n'ont 
point esté encore publies (Paris, 1684), 
pp. 4, 39; Labat, Moreau Voyage 
aux Isles de TP Amerique, Nouvelle 
Edition (Paris, 1742), vi. 127 sg., 1293 
Lafitau, A/eurs des sauvages anteri- 
guains (Paris, 1724), i. 55; A. von 
Humboldt, Aetse ix die Aguinoctial- 
Gegenden des neuen Continents, in 
deutscher Bearbeitung, von H. Hauff 
(Stuttgart, 1874), iv. 204 sg.3; F. A. 
Ober, Camps in the Caribbees (Edin- 
burgh, 1880), pp. 100 sg. ; J. N. Rat, 
‘‘ The Carib Language as now spoken in 
Dominica, West Indies,” Journal of the 

238 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

VOL. I 

Difference the speech of the sexes in these tribes extend both to the vocabulary 

of language and to the grammatical terminations, 

between 
men and 
women. 

Australian 

tradition of various tribal divisions.— 

the origin 
of the 

Eaglehawk call JVooralie—beings that existed a very long time ago. 
and Crow name a man who is very old Nooralpily. 

exogamous 
classes. 

is uncertain. 

How they are to be explained 

They appear not to correspond at all to the differences 

which have been observed between the speech of men and women 
in some Caffre languages; for whereas the Caffre differences are 
based on a superstitious avoidance of certain words and syllables by 
the women and vary from one woman to another,} there is no 
evidence that the American differences originate in that way, and 
they seem to be constant for all the men and women of a tribe. I 
have conjectured that differences between the speech of the sexes, 
such as we find in South America, but hardly, if at all, anywhere 
else,? may account for the origin of grammatical gender in language, 
feminine terminations perhaps representing the speech of women 

and masculine terminations the speech of men.3 

But it cannot be 

said that there is much evidence to support the hypothesis. 
P. 64. Native Australian traditions as to the origin of these 

“The aborigines of the northern parts 

of Victoria say that the world was created by beings whom they 

They 
They believe that the 

beings who created all things had severally the form of the Crow 

and the Eagle. 

There was continual war between these two beings, 

but peace was made at length. They agreed that the Murray 
blacks should be divided into two classes—the Jak-guarra or 
Eaglehawk, and the A7i/parra or Crow. The conflict that was 
waged between the rival powers is thus preserved in song :— 

Anthropological Institute, xxvii. (1898), 
pp. 311 sg.3; C. Sapper, ‘* Mittel- 
americanische Caraiben,” Jternatio- 
males Archiv fiir Ethnographie, x. 
(1897), pp. 57 sg. As to other 
South American languages in which 
analogous. differences between the 
speech of men and women have been 
observed, see Dobrizhoffer, Historia de 
Abiponibus (Vienna, 1784), ii. 1933 
F. de Azara, Voyages dans 2? Amérique 
méridionale (Paris, 1809), ii. 106 sg. ; 
A. WOrbigny, L’ Homme américain 
(Paris, 1839), i. 153, ii. 135, 163; R. 
Schomburgk, Retsenin Britisch-Guiana 
(Leipsic, 1847-1848), i. 227; C. F. 
Phil. von Martius, Beitrdge zur Ethno- 
graphie und Sprachenkunde Amerikas, 
sumal Brasiltens, i. (Leipsic, 1867), 
pp. 106 sg., 704; P. Ehrenreich, 
**Materialien zur Sprachenkunde Brasi- 

liens,” Zedtschrift fiir Ethnologie, xxvi. 
(1894), pp. 23-50; Th. Koch, ‘ Die 
Guaikuru-Gruppe,” Aittedlungen der 
anthropologtischen Gesellschaft in Wien 
(1903), pp. 16 sg. 

1 See Zhe Golden Bough, Second 
Edition, i. 413 sg. 

2 In the Tenggerese language, 
spoken in the Tenger mountains ot 
Eastern Java, the women say Jugsum 
and the men say Reang for ‘I,” the 
first personal pronoun singular. See 
J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, “Die Téng- 
géresen, ein alter javanische Volks- 
stamm,” Bzjdragen tot de Taal- Land- 
en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch- 
Lndié, \iti. (1901) p. 94. 

3 J. G. Frazer, ‘A Suggestion as to 
the Origin of Gender in Language,” 
The Fortnightly Review, January 

1900, pp. 79-90. 

VoL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 239 

Thinj-amt _ bathkee mako ; 
Knee strike Crow ; 
Nato-panda Kambe-ar tora; 
Spear father of him. 

The meaning of which is: ‘Strike the Crow on the knee; I will 
spear his father.’ The war was maintained with great vigour for a 
length of time. The Crow took every possible advantage of his 
nobler foe, the Eagle; but the latter generally had ample revenge 
for injuries and insults. Out of their enmities and final agreement 
arose the two classes, and thence a law governing marriages amongst 
these classes.” 4 

This tradition is notable because it relates that the division 
of a tribe into two exogamous classes, Eaglehawk and Crow, 
arose through the reconciliation of two hostile beings. The 
division of a tribe into two classes Afwkwara (Mak-quarra) and 
Kilpara (Kilparra) extended over a great part of New South 
Wales.2 The account of their origin which I have just quoted 
shews that the names mean Eaglehawk and Crow respectively ; so 
that this large group of tribes must be added to those whose 
exogamous classes or phratries are named after animals? The 
natives of the Lower Darling River had a tradition that their 
ancestor arrived on the banks of the river, which were then unin- 
habited, with two wives called respectively Mukwara (Mookwara) 
and Kilpara (Keelpara) ; that the sons of Mukwara took to wife the 
daughters of Kilpara, and that the children of the marriage, taking 
their names from their mothers, were called Kilparas; while con- 
versely the sons of Kilpara took to wife the daughters of Mukwara, 
and the children of the marriage, taking their name from their 
mothers, were called Mukwaras. Afterwards, so runs the tradition, 
the two classes were subdivided, the Mukwaras into Kangaroos and 
Opossums, and the Kilparas into Emus and Ducks; and henceforth, 
for example, a Kilpara man of the Emu subdivision could not: 
marry any Mukwara woman indiscriminately, but only such as 
belonged to the proper subdivision. That, the natives said, was 
the -origin of their exogamous classes and subclasses, and of the 
laws which regulated their marriage ever afterwards.* In this 
tradition the origin of the subclasses is explained, with great 
probability, by a subdivision of each of the original classes. The 
old law which divided the Woiworung tribe into two classes, Eagle- 
hawk and Crow, was said to have been brought by the wizards from 
Bunjil, the headman in the sky.5 

1 R. Brough Smyth, Zhe Aborigines N. Lockhart, cited by E. M. Curr, 

of Victoria, i. 423 sg. The Australian Race, ii, 165 5g. 
2 See above, vol. i. pp. 380-392, 5 A. W. Howitt, “‘On some Aus- 
3 See above, vol. i. p. 417. tralian Beliefs,” Journal of the Anthro- 

4 The tradition is reported by C.G. pological Institute, xiii. (1884) p. 195. 

Theory of 
a racial 
difference 
between 
the Eagle- 
hawk and 
Crow 
classes. 

240 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

In regard to the diffusion of exogamous classes named after 
the eagle-hawk and the crow, it is to be observed that they are 
found in at least two other tribes (the Ngarigo and Wolgal tribes of 
South-Eastern New South Wales), whose native names for the two 
birds are quite different! Arguing from the wide distribution of 
exogamous classes named after the eagle-hawk and crow in South- 
East Australia, and also from the native myths and superstitions 
which cluster round the birds, the Rev. John Mathew suggested 
that “the eaglehawk and the crow represent two distinct races of 
men which once contested for the possession of Australia, the taller, 
more powerful and more fierce ‘eaglehawk’ race overcoming and 
in places exterminating the weaker, more scantily equipped sable 
‘crows.’”? But there seems to be no sufficient evidence of any 
racial distinction between the exogamous divisions of the Australian 
aborigines ; and, as I have already pointed out, it appears to be 
far more probable that these divisions arose by subdivision than by 
amalgamation.? 

P. 67. In Bengal... Mr. Risley . .. and his coadjutors 
have found no tribe with female descent, etc.—In the text I refer 
to the Kasias (Khasis) of Assam as an exception which appeared 
to have escaped the attention of (Sir) H. H. Risley. But I was in 
error. Although Assam, the home of the Khasis, was included in 
Bengal when Col. Dalton composed: his Descriptive Ethnology of 
Bengal, it had ceased to belong. to it before Sir Herbert Risley 
wrote. Hence the mother-kin of the Khasis formed no exception 
to the general proposition laid down by him as to the universal 
prevalence of father-kin in Bengal. My mistake was courteously 
corrected by Sir Herbert Risley.* 

P. 69. In some Australian tribes sons take their totem from their 
father and daughters from their mother.—This statement is not 
well founded and is probably quite incorrect. As to the Dieri I 
was misled by a statement of S. Gason, who appears to have been, 
in error on this point.® As to the Ikula or Morning Star tribe the 
account in the text has not been repeated by Dr.,A. W. Howitt in 
his book and is probably erroneous.® : : 

P. 71. A transition from female to male descent.—Amongst 
the Melanesians who practise the system of mother-kin or female 
descent, Dr. Codrington has recorded some customs which seem to 
mark a transition to father-kin or male descent. The customs in 
question are observed at the birth of a first-born son. “ At Araga, 

As to Bunjil see A. W. Howitt, Mative Aborigines (London, 1899), p. 19. 

Tribes of South-East Australia, pp. 3 See above, vol. i, pp. 282 sgg. 
489 599. ; * See also above, vol. ii. p. 318, 
1 See above, vol. i, pp. 393 sg. note 3. 

2 Rev. John Mathew, Zaglehawk 5 See above, vol. i. p. 345 note! 
and Crow, a Study of the Australian 6 See above, vol. i. p. 473, note? 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

241 
Pentecost Island, a first-born son remains ten days in the house in Transition 
which he was born, during which time the father’s kinsmen take from 
food to the mother. On the tenth day they bring nothing, but the Monerki" 
father gives them food and mats, which count as money, in as kin effected 
great quantity as he can afford. They, the kin of the father and by buying 
therefore not kin of the infant, on that day perform a certain roti Na 
ceremony called Auhuni; they lay upon the infant’s head mats mother’s 
and the strings with which pigs are tied, and the father tells them fmily. 
that he accepts this as a sign that hereafter they will feed and help 

his son. There is clearly in this a movement towards the patriarchal 

system, a recognition of the tie of blood through the father and of 

duties that follow from it. Another sign of the same advance of 

the father’s right is to be seen in the very different custom that 
prevails in the Banks’ Islands on the birth of a first-born son ; there 

is raised upon that event, a noisy and playful fight, vaga/o, after 

which the father buys off the assailants with payment of money to 

the other veve,! to the kinsmen that is of the child and his mother. 

It is hardly possible to be mistaken in taking this fight to be 

a ceremonial, if playful, assertion of the claim of the mother’s 
kinsfolk to the child as one of themselves, and the father’s payment 

to be the quieting of their claim and the securing of his own 
position as head of his own family.”2 In both these cases the 
members of the father’s class (veve) establish a claim to the child by 

making presents to the members of the mother’s class, to whom the 

boy belongs by birth ; not to put too fine a point on it, they buy 

the child from his kinsmen. In short the transition from mother- 

kin to father-kin is here made very simply by purchase. Similarly 

among the Sakalava of Madagascar, “the marriage feast being over, 

the young husband, in order to secure an absolute right to his wife 

and the first child, but especially the child, makes a present of an : 

ox to his wife’s parents, and a further present of four yards of cloth 
or a large bag of rice to each of her nearest relatives. These must 
be presented before his wife gives birth to her first child, as they 
are regarded as the payment necessary to secure the child for 
himself, and if not made in proper time, he loses his right to be 
considered the father of the child, which then belongs to his 
father-in-law and mother-in-law.” ? 

1 It may be remembered that in the 
Banks’ Islands the people are divided 
into two exogamous classes, each of 
which is called a veve. See vol. ii. 
pp. 69 sg. 

2 R. H. Codrington, Zhe Alelan- 
estans (Oxford, 1891), pp. 230 sg. 
In New Ireland the birth of a first- 
born child is celebrated by sham fights 
between men and women, the men 

stones, clods, or anything hard that 
comes to hand. After exchanging 
some shrewd knocks they separate 
with laughter and jests. See R. 
Parkinson, Dreissig Jahre in der Stidsee 
(Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 269 sg. Per- 
haps these sham fights may be a relic 
of contests between the father’s clan 
and the mother’s clan for possession of 
the child. 

armed with cudgels, the women with Walen, ‘* The Sakalava,” Zhe 
VOL. IV ViBRa, R 
6 4x, oF 

Blood- 
covenant 
between 
husband 
and wife at 
marriage. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

242 

P. 72. Smearing bride and bridegroom with each other’s blood.— 
This custom is practised by the Birhors, a hill tribe of the Munda 
stock in India. At marriage “the only ceremony is drawing blood 
from the little fingers of the bridegroom and bride, and with this 
the ¢i/ak is given to each by marks made above the clavicle.” 
Among the Basutos, on the morning after the consummation of the 
marriage the medicine-man scratches husband and wife on the 
inner side of the elbow, hand, foot, and knee, takes the blood 
from the husband’s wounds and smears it on the wounds of his 
wife, and similarly takes the wife’s blood and smears it on the 
wounds of her husband.2 Similarly among the Herero at marriage 
the mother of the bridegroom makes some cuts with a knife in the 
thighs of both the wedded pair, and rubs the man’s blood over the 
woman’s cuts and the woman’s blood over the man’s? Such 
customs are clearly examples of the common ceremony known as 
the blood-covenant, whereby people are made of one blood in the 
most literal sense by putting some of the blood of each into the 
body of the other. But it is obvious that such a rite may be used 
just as well to transfer the husband to the wife’s clan as to transfer 
the wife to the husband’s ; hence it might serve as a stepping-stone 
from father-kin to mother-kin quite as easily as a stepping-stone 
from mother-kin to father-kin. We cannot, therefore, assume, 
wherever we find the ceremony, that it is practised with the inten- 
tion of altering the line of descent, still less that it is intended to 
alter it in one direction only, namely from maternal descent to 
paternal descent. { 

In some parts of Polynesia, curiously enough, it was the blood 
of the mothers of the married pair which was mingled at marriage. 
‘Qn some occasions, the female relatives cut their faces and brows 
with the instrument set with shark’s teeth, received the flowing blood 
on a piece of native cloth, and deposited the cloth, sprinkled with 
the mingled blood of the mothers of the married pair, at the feet 
of the bride.” 4 

P. 72. If the husband gives nothing, the children of the 
marriage belong to the wife’s family.—One of the commonest, as 
it is one of the easiest, modes of effecting a change of descent 
from the maternal to the paternal line would seem to be the 
purchase of the wife; for when she has been bought and paid for, 
any children whom she may bear are, in virtue of that payment, 

Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar 
Magazine, No. 8 (Christmas, 1884), 
PP. 53 5¢- 

1E. T. Dalton, Descriptive LEth- 
nology of Bengal, p. 220, 

2H. Griitzner, “Uber die Ge- 
braéuche der Basutho,” Verhandlungen 
der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthro- 

pologte, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte, 
1877, p. 77 (appended to the Zectschrift 
fiir Ethnologte, ix.). 

3 J. Irle, Die Herero (Giitersloh, 
1906), p. 154. 

4 W. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 
Second Edition, i. (London, 1832) p. 
272. 

‘ 

an independent household of his own. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 243 

regarded as the property of the purchaser, her husband, whether he Change 
is the actual father of the children or not. Thus for example with from 
regard to the natives of the Lower Congo w¢ read “a few other ™tcmal 

Pi Z to paternal 
examples of native manners and customs may be of interest. I descent 
will give one concerning inheritance, which is rather curious. It orn 
has already been said that descent is reckoned through females ; jj" 

the meaning of this may not be clear to all. If a man die, the father-kin) 
bulk of his property goes to his sister’s son, not to his son; the effected by 
reason being that of the blood-relationship of the nephew there can ee 
be no doubt, but the descent of the son may be questioned. The ana with 
nephew is, therefore, looked on as a nearer relative than the son, her the 
and he is the heir, and should he die, more grief is felt than in the ehildren, 
case of the son. A strange exception is made when a man marries 
a slave of his: the son then ranks first in this case, as the natives 
say that he is not only presumably the next-of-kin by birth, but also 
by purchase, as the mother belonged to the father.”! Similarly 
among the Kimbunda “sons begotten in marriage are regarded as, 
the property, not of their father, but of their maternal uncle; and 
their own father, even so long as they are minors and under his 
protection, has no power over them. Also the sons are not the 
heirs of their father but of their uncle, and the latter can dispose of 
them with unlimited authority, even to the extent of selling them 
in case of necessity. Only the children born of slave women are 
regarded as really the property of their father and are also his 
heirs.” 2 

A similar distinction between the children of a wife who has Custom of 
been paid for and the children of a wife who has not been paid for ere 
seems to prevail widely among the peoples of the Indian Archi- cnivdren in 
pelago; there, also, the children of a purchased wife belong to the the indian 
father, but the children of an unpaid-for wife belong to herself and Archi- 
to her family. Thus among the Alfoors or aborigines of Halmahera, Berne: 
when the bridal price has not been paid, the wife continues fo live 
in her parents’ house ; the impecunious husband takes up his abode 
with them, and all his services go to the advantage of his wife: But as 
soon- as he has paid the price, his wife becomes his legal property 
and he may either take her to live with his own parents or set up 
Further, we are told, ‘ the 
conception of legal property is extended also to the children. 
Those whom he begets by the woman before the payment of the 

1R. C. Phillips, “The Lower 
Congo, a Sociological Study,” Journal 

as far as Kinsembo ” (zd. p. 214). 
Compare A. Bastian, Dre deutsche , 

of the Anthropological Institute, xvii. 
(1888) pp. 229 sg. The parts of 
Africa referred to in this paper are 
“‘the Congo River, from about Vivi 
downwards to the mouth, and the coast 
northwards to Loango, and southwards 

Expedition an der Loango-Kiiste, 
165. 

2 Ladislaus Magyar, Redsen in Stia- 
Afrika in den Jahren 1849 bis 185 
(Buda-Pesth and Leipsic, 1859), p- 
284. 

244 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

bridal price (4es?) do not belong to the father, but are the property 
of the mother.”! So in Ceram, if a man has not paid for his wife 
he lives in her house as a member of her family and the children 
remain with her parents.2 In the Timor Laut islands, also, so 
long as the bridal price is not fully paid, the wife has the right 
to stay with her parents and is not completely subject to her 
husband. It is a great advantage to him to pay the price of 
his wife in full before she bears a child, for he thus obtains entire 
power over her and a right to all her children.? Similarly among 
the Battas of Sumatra, if a man cannot pay for his wife he goes 
to live with her family and works for them till he is able to 
discharge the debt. Sometimes he stays with them till a daughter 
of his is grown up and given in marriage ; whereupon with the sum 
of. money he receives for her he pays the debt which he has 
long owed for her mother, his wife. But should he never succeed 
in meeting the obligations he incurred at marriage, then when 
he dies the children belong to the mother or, if she is dead, to her 
family.* 
Effect of Thus it seems probable that in communities organised on the 
wealth in system of mother-kin a general increase of wealth may tend to 
fhechaege promote a change to father-kin, and that in two ways, both by 
from supplying a motive for the change and by furnishing the means to 
ee effect it. For the more property a man owns the more anxious he 
kin, will be to bequeath it to his children, and the easier it will be for 
him to do so by compensating those who under the system of 
mother-kin would have Keen the rightful heirs. 

In the Pp. 72 sg.—The couvade , . . is perhaps a fiction intended to 
‘hich kak transfer to the father those rights over the children, etc.—This 
been called View, though it has been held by Bachofen and other authorities of 
couvade repute, is almost certainly erroneous. It rests on what seems to be 
Reeder a misjnterpretation of the facts. For it assumes that the custom 
evidence Consists of a simulation of childbirth by the father in order that he 
that the may acquire those rights over his children which under a former 
crn ae system of mother-kin had been possessed by the mother and her 
have given family alone. But of such a custom not a single well-authenticated 

birth to the instance, so far/as I know, has been adduced.® The ancient Greek 

1 C, F. H. Campen, ‘De Alfoeren /andsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, 
van Halemahera,” Zijdschrift voor Tweede Serie, Deel iii. Afdeeling, 
Nederlandsch Indié, April 1883, pp. Meer uitgebreide Artikelen, No. 3 

286 sq. (Amsterdam, 1886), p. 472. 
2j. G. F. Riedel, De sluth- en 5 For examples of the couvade see 
hroesharige Rassen tusschen Selebes en especially E. B. Tylor, Researches into 
Papua, p. 132. the Early History of Mankind, Third 
3 J. G. F. Riedel, of. cit. p. 301. Edition (London, 1878), pp. 291 sgg. 3 

4 J. B. Neumann, ‘‘Het Pane- en H. Ploss, Das Kind in Brauch und 
Bila- Stroomgebied op het eiland Sitfe der Volker, Zweite Auflage (Leip- 
Sumatra,” Zidschrift van het Neder- sic, 1884), ii. 143 599. ; H. Ling Roth, 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

245 

poet Apollonius Rhodius did indeed affirm that among the Tibareni chita for 
of Pontus, when a woman had been delivered of a child, her the purpose 
husband lay groaning in bed with his head bandaged, while his wife cee 
prepared food and baths for him as if he had been the mother.! rights over 
The custom so described is most naturally interpreted as an it which 
imitation of childbirth enacted by the husband. But there is no ag 
evidence or probability that the poet had seen the ceremony which been en- 
he describes. It is more likely that he had only heard of it at joyed by 
second hand and misinterpreted it, as many people have mis- Hiemeter: 
interpreted similar customs since his time. Again, speaking of the 
Californian Indians, H. H. Bancroft says that “a curious custom 
prevails, which is, however, by no means peculiar to California. 

When child-birth overtakes the wife, the husband puts himself to 

bed, and there grunting and groaning he affects to suffer all the 

agonies of a woman in labor. Lying there, he is nursed and tended 

for some days by the women as carefully as though he were the 

actual sufferer.” 2 In this description the statement that the 
husband “grunting and groaning affects to suffer all the agonies of 

a woman in labor” is probably a pure addition of the writer, who 
compiled his account at second hand and does not pretend to have 

seen what he describes. Of the two authorities whom he cites in 

support of his description one at least says nothing about a simula- 

tion of childbirth by the husband.? Again, in one of the earliest 
accounts of the custom it is said that as soon as his wife has been 
delivered of a child, the Carib husband “ takes to his bed, complains, 

and acts like a woman in childbed.”4 And still more emphatically 

Du Tertre tells us that in these circumstances the Carib husband, 

“as if the pain of the wife had passed into the husband, begins to 

*©On the Signification of Couvade,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxii, (1893) pp. 204-241; E. S. 
Hartland, 7he Legend of Perseus, ii. 
(London, 1895) pp. 400-411. I have 
made a large collection of evidence on 
this subject, but must reserve it for 
another work. 

1 Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica, 
ii, 1011-1014. The expression used 
by the poet Aoerpa Aexwia, ‘* child-bed 
baths,” clearly implies that in the 
poet’s mind the man was treated as a 
mother. 

2-H. H. Bancroft, NMative Races of 
the Pacific States, i. 391. 

3M. Venegas, Natural and Civil 
History of California (London, 1759), 
i. 82. All that Venegas says of the 
husband is that he “lay in his cave, 

or stretched out at full length under a 
tree, affecting to be extremely weak 
and ill.” 

+ « Relation de l'Origine, Moeurs, 
Coustumes, Religion, Guerres et 
Voyages des Caraibes Sauvages des 
Isles Antilles de PAmerique, faite par 
le Sieur de la Borde, employé a la 
Conversion des Caraibes, estant avec 
le R. P. Simon Jesuite,” printed in 
Recueil de Divers Voyages faits en 
Afrique et en PAmerique, qui n'ont 
point esté encore publiez (Paris, 1684), p. 
32. De la Borde’s full description of 
the custom (pp. 32-34) agrees closely 
with that of Du Tertre (see the next 
note) and may be the original of it. 
We are not informed when De la 
Borde served as a missionary among 
the Caribs and wrote his description of 
them. 

The sup- 
posed pre- 
tence of 
childbirth 
by the 
father 
appears 

to bea 
mistake of 
observers, 

Moreover, 
the con- 
vade is 
practised 
by people 
who have 
mother- 
kin ; how 
then can 
it be a 
transition 
to father- 
kin? 

246 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

complain and to utter loud cries, just as if the child had been torn 
from his belly in small pieces.”! Yet even these expressions may 
only be the interpretation of the civilised observer; they do not 
“necessarily imply that the father actually pretended to play the 
part of the mother. This has been rightly remarked by Professor 
E. B. Tylor, who says with justice: “Nor is there much in these 
practices which can be construed as a pretence of maternity made 
by the father.” 2 

Thus no sufficient evidence has been adduced to shew that the 
couvade involves a simulation of childbirth on the part of the 
father; the theory that it does so appears to be supported neither 
by the practice nor by the statements of the natives themselves ; it 
is to all appearance an unwarranted assumption made by civilised 
persons who misunderstood what they saw or read about. The 
assumption and the misunderstanding are embodied in the German 
name for the custom, das Mannerkindbete. 

But if the couvade, so far as is known, does not imply any 
pretence of maternity on the part of the father, it can hardly be 
explained as an attempt to secure for the father under a system of 
father-kin those rights over the children which had previously been 
enjoyed by the mother under a system of mother-kin. That ex- 
planation appears indeed not only to be unsupported by the facts 
but actually to conflict with them. For according to it the custom 
should be found only among peoples who are either passing out of 
a system of mother-kin or have actually reached a system of father- 
kin ; whereas on the contrary some of the best attested examples of 
the custom occur among tribes who have mother-kin only. To 
quote Prof. Tylor again: “Still more adverse to Bachofen’s notion, 
is the fact that these Macusis [who practise the couvade], so far 
from reckoning the parentage as having been transferred to the 
father by the couvade, are actually among the tribes who do not 
reckon kinship on the father’s side, the child belonging to the 
mother’s clan. So among the Arawacs, though the father performs 
the couvade, this does not interfere with the rule that kinship goes 
by the mother.” ° On the whole, Bachofen’s theory that the couvade 
is a fiction intended to effect a transition from mother-kin to father- 

1 J. B. du Tertre, Atstozre Generale Seconde Edition (Rotterdam, 1665), 
des Isles de S. Christophe, de la was probably copied either from De 
Guadeloupe, de la Martinique et autres a Borde or from Du Tertre’s earlier 
dans PAmertque (Paris, 1654), pp. work. His language seems to agree 
412-415. This account was after- moreclosely with that of De la Borde ; 
wards repeated by Du Tertre in his thus he uses the same phrase ‘‘/azre 
Histoire Generale des Antilles, pub- accouche” **to act like a woman in 
lished at Paris in 1667, from which it childbed.” 
is commonly quoted by writers on the 2 E. B. Tylor, Researches into the 
couvade. The account of the custom arly History of Mankind, Third 
given by Rochefort in his Astotre Edition (London, 1878), p. 298. 
Naturelle et Morale des Hes Antilles, 3 E. B. Tylor, é.c. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 247 
kin may be safely set aside not only as unproyed but as inconsistent 
with the facts. 

The true explanation of the actually observed couvade has been The 
given by Professor E. B. Tylor,} and after him by Mr. E. §, customs 
Hartland.? In fact the custom is merely one of the innumerable S64 co 
cases of sympathetic magic. The father believes that there exists an appli- 
between him and his child a relation of such intimate physical cation of _ 
sympathy that whatever he does must simultaneously affect his cr ea 
offspring ; for example, if he exerts himself violently, the child will based on a 
be fatigued ; if he eats food that disagrees with him, the child will supposed 
be sick or have a pain in its stomach; and so on. This is not an phy He 
hypothesis. It is the actual belief of the savages, avowed by them sympathy 

in the plainest language again and again, and it fully explains the between 

father and 
custom. child. 

We have no right, therefore, to reject their testimony and 

to substitute for their explanation another which, far from explain- 

ing the facts, is actually contradicted by them.® 

The fact is that 

what in this custom seems extravagantly absurd to us seems 

perfectly simple and natural to the savage. 

1 E. B. Tylor, Researches into the 
Early History of Mankind, Third 
Edition (London, 1878), pp. 295 sgg. 
He rightly explains the custom by 
“‘the opinion that the connexion 
between father and child is not only, 
as we think, a mere relation of parent- 
age, affectiom, duty, but that their very 
bodies are joined by a physical bond, 
so that what is done to the one acts 
directly upon the other ” (pp. 295 5¢.), 
and he speaks of the couvade being 
‘*sympathetic magic” (p. 298). In 
this work Prof. Tylor justly rejected 
Bachofen’s theory of the couvade, 
assigning as his reasons for doing so 
practically the same grounds which 
I have put forward in the text. But 
he afterwards changed his mind and 
accepted Bachofen’s view. See E. B. 
Tylor, ‘On a Method of Investigat- 
ing the Development of Institutions,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xviii. (1889) pp. 254 sgg. 

2 E. S. Hartland, Zhe Legend of 
Perseus, it. 400 599. 

3 The theory of the couvade as a 
mark of transition from mother - kin 
to father-kin has now got into books 
and through them into the minds of 
observers, who interpret the facts 
accordingly. For example Dr. L. A. 
Waddell, after remarking that the Miris 
of the Brahmaputra valley are in a 

The idea that 

transition-stage from the maternal to 
the paternal form of society, proceeds 
as follows: ‘* They retain survivals of 
the maternal stage ; but appear only 
recently to have adopted the paternal. 
As if to emphasise the change and to 
show that the father has a direct 
relation to his child, the father is 
represented as a second mother and 
goes through the fiction of a mock- 
birth, the so-called couvade. He lies 
in bed for forty days, after the birth of 
his child ; and during this period he is 
fed as an invalid” (L. A. Waddell, 
“The Tribes of the Brahmaputra 
Valley,” Journal of the Asiati: Soctety 
of Bengal, \xix. Part iii. Calcutta, 1901, 
p. 3). In this passage the sentence 
“the father is represented as a second 
mother and goes through the fiction of 
a mock birth” appears to be only Dr. 
Waddell’s interpretation of the actual 
custom which he describes in the next 
sentence: ‘‘ He lies in bed for forty 
days, after the birth of his child; and 
during this period he is fed as an 
invalid.” There is nothing in this to 
justify the description of the custom as 
“the fiction of a mock birth.” Dr. 
Waddell is indeed right in saying that 
the custom proves a direct relation of 
the father to the child ; but he appears 
to be wrong in assuming the relation 
to be maternal. 

248 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

Firm belief persons and things act on each other at a distance is as firmly 

of savages 
in sym- 
pathetic 
magic and 
telepathy. 

Simulation 
of child- 
birth for 

believed by him as the multiplication table or the law of gravita- 
tion is by us. Sympathetic magic and telepathy are fundamental 
axioms of his thinking ; he as little doubts them as we doubt that 
two and two make four or that a stone unsupported will fall to 
the ground. To him there is nothing extraordinary or exceptional 
in the physical sympathy between a father and his newborn child ; 
he believes that sympathy of exactly the same kind exists between 

‘parted husband and wife, between friends at home and friends far 

away fishing, hunting, journeying, fighting ; and he not only holds 
the belief in the abstract but acts on it; for by the code of savage 
morality friends and relations are required so to regulate their 
conduct that their acts shall not injuriously affect the distant dear 
ones. Nor is this bond of physical sympathy supposed to exist 
merely between friends; it equally joins enemies, and the malig- 
nant arts of the sorcerer are based on it! All this is the merest 
commonplace to the savage. The astonishment which customs like 
tle couvade have excited in the mind of civilised man is merely 
a measure of his profound ignorance of primitive modes of thought. 
Happily this ignorance is being gradually dissipated by a wider and 
more exact study of savagery. 

While there is, so far as I am aware, no good evidence that the 
customs which have been classed under the head of couvade involve 

the purpose 4 Simulation of childbirth practised for the purpose of giving a 
of relieving father power over his children, such curious dramas have certainly 

a woman 
of her 
travail- 
pangs. 

been acted by men at childbirth, but with an entirely different 
intention, namely, for the sake of relieving the real mother of her 
pangs and transferring them, whether by sympathetic magic or 
otherwise, to the pretended mother. The following instances will 
make this clear. Among some of the Dyaks of Sarawak “should 
any difficulty occur in child delivery the manangs or medicine men 
are called in. One takes charge of the proceedings in the lying-in 
chamber, the remainder set themselves on the ruai or common 
verandah. The manang inside the room wraps a long loop of 
cloth around the woman, above the womb. A manang outside 
wraps his body around in the same manner, but first places within 
its fold a large stone corresponding to the position of the child 
in the mother’s womb. A long incantation is then sung by the 
manangs outside, while the one within the room strives with all his 
power to force the child downwards and so compel delivery. As 
soon as he has done so, he draws down upon it the loop of cloth 
and twists it tightly around the mother’s body, so as to prevent the 
upward return of the child. A shout from him proclaims to his 

1 T have illustrated the principles of | some length in Zhe Golden Bough, 
sympathetic magic, both in its benev- Second Edition, i. 9 sgq. 
olent and in its malevolent aspect, at 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 249 

‘companions on the ruai his success, and the manang who is for the 
occasion personating the mother, moves the loop of cloth contain- 

ing the stone which encircles his own body a stage downwards. 

And so the matter proceeds until the child is born.”! Again, in 

some parts of New Ireland, when a woman is in hard labour and a 
compassionate man desires to aid her delivery, he does not, as we 

might expect, repair to the bedchamber of the sufferer ; he betakes 

himself to the men’s clubhouse, lies down, feigns to be ill, and 

writhes in fictitious agony, whenever he hears the shrieks of the 

woman in childbed. The other men gather round him and make 

as if they would alleviate his pangs. This kindly meant farce lasts 

till the child is born.? 

In both these cases there is a deliberate simulation of child- The simu- 
birth for the purpose of facilitating a real birth. In both cases the lation of 
de of operation is sympathetic or imitative magic; the desired Childbirth 

— P gee i 7 BIC 5 need not be 
effect is thought to be brought about by imitating it. But there performed 
seems to be this distinction between them that in the first case the by the _ 
immediate object is to hasten the appearance of the child, in the ee 
second it is to relieve the woman’s pangs by transferring them to formed by 
the pretended mother. In both cases the pretended mother is a a stranger 
man, but in neither is he the woman’s husband. In the one he is oh tea bes 
a medicine-man hired for the occasion ; in the other he is a com- 
passionate neighbour who, touched with pity for the woman’s 
sufferings, tries in the true spirit of chivalry to relieve her by taking 

her heavy burden on himself. In Borneo an attempt is sometimes 

made to shift the travail-pains to an image; but the principle is 

the same. A little wooden figure is carved lying down in a little 

wooden house; it is supposed to suffer the throes of maternity 
vicariously.3 

In other cases the same notion of vicarious suffering appears to Some- 

be applied for the relief of women at the expense of their husbands, times, how- 
Thus in Gujarat there is worshipped a certain Mother Goddess poli Pre 
whose power “is exerted in a remarkable way for the benefit of pains are 
women after childbirth, Among a very low-caste set of basket- supposed 
makers (called Pomla) it is the usual practice of a wife to go about ees a 
her work immediately after delivery, as if nothing had happened. to the 
The presiding Mata of the tribe is supposed to transfer her weak- woman's 

ness to her husband, who takes to his bed and has to be supporte 

with good nourishing food.” 4 
districts of Southern India there 

1 F. W. Leggatt, quoted by H. Ling 
Roth, Zhe Natives of Sarawak and 
British North Borneo (London, 1896), 
i, 98 sg. 

2 R. Parkinson, Dretssig Jahre in 
der Stidsee (Stuttgart, 1907), p. 189. 

3 F. Grabowsky, ‘*Gebrauche der 

Again, in the Telugu-speaking 
is a wandering tribe of fortune- 

Dajaken Siidost- Borneos bei der 
Geburt,” Globus, Ixxii. (1897) p. 270. 
One of these figures is now in the 
Anthropological Museum at Berlin. 

4 Monier Williams, Religious Life 
and Thought in India (London, 1883), 
p. 229. 

d husband. 

This trans- 
ference of 
pains to the 
husband is 
quite a 
different 
custom 
from what 
has been 
called 
couvade. 

In Europe 
also 
attempts 
have often 
been made 
to shift the 
pains of 
childbirth 
from the 
mother to 
the father. 
Examples 
from 
Treland. 

250 F TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY ' voL.t 

tellers, swine-herds, and mat-makers called Erukalavandlu. Among 
them “directly the woman feels the birth-pangs, she informs her 
husband, who immediately takes some of her clothes, puts them on, 
places on his forehead the mark which the women usually place on 
theirs, retires into a dark room, where there is only a very dim 
lamp, and lies down on the bed, covering himself up with a long 
cloth. When the child is born, it is washed and placed on the cot 
beside the father. Assafoetida, jaggery, and other articles are then 
given, not to the mother, but to the father. During the days of 
ceremonial uncleanness the man is treated as the other Hindus 
treat their women on such occasions. He is not allowed to leave 
his bed, but has everything needful brought to him.”1! 

This last custom has been cited as an example of the couvade ; ? 
but it appears to differ in two important respects from the couvade 
as it is practised in South America. For whereas the South 
American couvade consists in a certain diet and regimen observed 
by the father for the sake of his child, the South Indian couvade, if 
we may Call it so, consists apparently in a simulation of childbirth 
enacted by the husband for the sake of his wife. For in the light 
of the preceding instances we may reasonably suppose that the 
intention of the South Indian custom is to relieve the wife by 
transferring the travail-pains to her husband. If that is so, two 
such different customs ought not to be confounded under the 
common name of couvade; and as the name of couvade may now 
by prescription be fairly claimed for the South American custom, 
that is, for the strict diet and regimen observed by a father for the 
sake of his child, another name should be found for the very 
different South Indian custom, that is, for the pretence of child- 
birth practised by the husband for the sake of his wife. 

If any doubt remains in the reader’s mind as to whether the 
South Indian husband who dresses in his wife’s clothes at child- 
birth does so for the purpose of relieving her pains, the doubt will 
probably be removed by comparing the similar customs. still 
practised in Europe with that expressed intention. Thus in Ireland 
“there is also a way by which the pains of maternity can be trans- 
ferred from thg woman to her husband. This secret is so jealously 
guarded that a correspondent in the west of Ireland, who had been 
asked to investigate the matter, was at last obliged to report: ‘In 
regard to putting the sickness on the father of a child, that is a 
well-known thing in this country, but after making every inquiry I 
could not make out how it is done. It is strictly private.’ It 
came out, however, in a chance conversation with a woman who, 

1 The Indian Antiquary, iii. (1874) the Anthropological Institute, xxii. 
p- 150. (1893) p. 2133 and by Mr. E. Thur- 

2 By Mr. H. Ling Roth, “On the ston, Ethnographic Notes in Southern 
Signification of Couvade,” Journal of India (Madras, 1906), p. 548, . 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS ‘ 251 

such an occasion. At a critical moment the nurse ‘hunted her 
out of the room,’ and then, taking the husband’s vest, she put it 
upon the sick woman. The child had hid behind the door in the 
next room and saw the whole operation, but was too far off to hear 
the words which were probably repeated at the same time. It is 
asserted by some that the husband’s consent must first be obtained, 
but the general opinion is that he feels all the pain, and even cries 
out with the agony, without being aware of the cause.”! The 
account thus given by Mr, James Mooney, now a distinguished 
member of the American Bureau of Ethnology, is confirmed by 
other testimony. Thus the local doctor of Kilkeiran and Carna, in 
South Connemara, reported in 1892 that a woman occasionally 
wears the coat of the father of the expected child, “with the idea 
that he should share in the pains of childbirth” ;2 and similarly 
Dr. C. R. Browne writes that in the counties of Tipperary and 
Limerick “women in childbirth often wear the trousers of the 
father of [the] child round the neck, the effect of which is supposed 
to be the lightening of the pains of labour. I have myself seen a 
case of this in Dublin, about two years ago.” 3 

Similarly in France, when a woman is in hard labour, it is an Attempts 
old custom to put her husband’s trousers on her “in order that she te ate 
may bring forth without pain” ;* and in Germany also they say Chndvirth 
that it greatly facilitates a woman’s delivery in childbed if she draws from the 
on her husband’s trousers.5 Esthonian women have a different way mother to 
of accomplishing the same object. “In the Werrosch a super- aac 
stition prevails that a woman can greatly relieve the pains of child- Germany, 
birth by drawing her husband into sympathy and making him aand | 
sharer of these sufferings. This is effected in the following way. Psthon'- 
On the marriage evening she gives him plenty of beer to drink 
seasoned with wild rosemary (Ledum palustre), that he may 
fall into a deep sleep. While he lies in this narcotic 
slumber, the woman must creep between his legs without his per- 
ceiving it (for if he wakes up, all the good of it is lost), and in that 
way the poor man gets his share of the future travail-pains.” Other 
Esthonian women seek to transfer their maternal pangs to a cock 
by killing the bird and pressing it, in the death-agony, to their 
persons. In that way they believe that they shift the worst of the 

when a child, had once been selected to ie upon a nurse on 

1 James Mooney, “The Medical 
Mythology of Ireland,” Proceedings of 

cit, p. 359. ; 
4 J. B. Thiers, Zrarté des Super- 

the American Philosophical Society, 
xxiv. (January to June, 1887) No. 125, 
p. 146. 

2 Quoted by Dr. A. C. Haddon, “A 
Batch of Irish Folk-lore,” Folk-/ore, iv. 

(1893) p. 357- 
*3 Quoted by Dr. A. C. Haddon, of. 

stitions (Paris, 1679), p. 327, *‘ Quand 
une femme est en mal denfant, luy faire 
mettre le haut de chausse de son mart, 
afin gwelle accouche sans douleur.” 

6 J. W. Wolf, Bettrage sur deutschen 
Afythologie, i. (Gottingen and Leipsic, 
1852) p. 251. 

252 : TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

pain to the deceased chanticleer, reserving only an insignificant 
Attempts portion of it for themselves! In Scotland similar attempts have 
to shift the been made to shift the pains of parturition to other people, whether 
pains of | men or women, to animals and to things. In the year 1591 a lady 
from the named Eufame Macalyane was tried for witchcraft, and among the 
mother to charges brought against her was that of resorting to enchantments 
the father caer char 7 
in Scot. for the purpose of relieving her agonies in childbed. It seems that 
land. with this intention she had placed a holed stone under her pillow, 
had tied a paper of enchanted powder in her hair, and in the actual 
throes had caused her husband’s shirt to be stripped from him, 
folded, and placed under the foot of the bed. These nefarious 
practices, we are informed, were so successful that at the birth of 
her first son her sickness was cast upon a dog, which ran away and 
was never seen again; and on the birth of her last son her “ natural 
and kindly pain was unnaturally cast upon the wanton cat in the 
house, whilk likewise was never seen thereafter.” However, her 
judges took good care that she never gave birth to another son ; 
for they burned her alive on the Castle-hill at Edinburgh.? Again, 
when Queen Mary was brought to bed of her son, afterwards James 
VI., in the Castle of Edinburgh, two other ladies, the Countess of 
Athole and the Lady Reirres, were in the same condition at the 
same time in the same place, and Lady Reirres complained “that 
she was never so troubled with no bairn that ever she bare, for the 
Lady Athole had cast all the pain of her child-birth upon her.” 3 
At Langholm in Dumfriesshire in the year 1772 the English 
traveller Pennant was shewn the place where several witches had 
suffered in the last century, and he adds: “This reminds me of a 
very singular belief that prevailed not many years ago in these 
parts ; nothing less than that the midwives had power of transferring 
part of the primaeval curse bestowed on our great first mother, from 
the good wife to her husband. I saw the reputed offspring of such 
a labour; who kindly came into the world without giving her 
mother the least uneasiness, while the poor husband was roaring 
with agony in his uncouth and unnatural pains.” 4 
Such Thus it appears that attempts to shift the pains of childbirth 
attempts from the mother to other persons or to animals, but especially 
to transfer . 
the pains to the husband, have been made in many parts of the world, not 
appear to least of all in Europe. The mode by which the shift is supposed 

rest on the j j 1 i 
prieiple-ok to be effected appears to be a simple application of sympathetic 
1 Boecler-Kreutzwald, Der Ehsten thetrials. I have modernised the spell- 
abergliubische Gebrauche, Weisen und ing. For other charges against Eufame 
Gewohnheiten (St. Petersburg, 1854), Macalyane, see zd. pp. 340-342. 
Pp. 47 sg. 3 J. G. Dalyell, of. cit. p. 132. 
2 J. G. Dalyell, The Darker Super- 4 Thomas Pennant, “A Tour in 
stitions of Scotland (Edinburgh, 1834), | Scotland, and Voyage to the Hebrides 
PP. 130 sg., 133. The quotations in in 1772,” in Pinkerton’s Voyages and 
the text are from the official records of Travels, iii, 211. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 253 

magic ; and the process belongs to that very numerous class of sympathetic 
superstitions which I have called the transference of evil and have magic. 
illustrated at some length elsewhere. However, in regard to some sie 
of the cases it may perhaps be doubted whether the dread of that a wish 
demons and the wish to deceive them has not its share in the trans- to deceive 
ference. Certainly women in childbed are supposed to be peculiarly ee ae 
obnoxious to the machinations of evil spirits, and many are the supposed 
precautions adopted to repel or outwit these dangerous, though to harass 
invisible, enemies. It may, therefore, be that the person, whether Gutaped 
the husband or another, who dresses or acts as the mother at the may also 
critical moment, is merely a dummy put up to draw the fire of the count for 
devils, while the real patient steals a2 march on them by giving Smchine 
birth to the child before they can discover the deceit that 
has been practised on them and hasten back, with ruffled 
temper, to the real scene of operations. For example, the Tagals 
of the Philippines believe that women at childbirth are the 
prey of two malignant spirits called Patianac and Osuang, who 
hunt in couples, one of them appearing as a dwarf, the other as 
a dog, a cat, or a bird. To protect women in their hour of 
need against these dreaded foes the people resort sometimes to 
craft, sometimes to intimidation, and sometimes to sheer physical 
force. Thus they bung up the doors and windows to prevent 
the ingress of the devils, till the poor patient is nearly stifled with 
heat and stench. They light fires all round the hut; they stuff 
mortar-pieces with powder to the muzzle and let them off again 
and again in the immediate neighbourhood of the sufferer; 
and the husband, stark naked and armed to the teeth, mounts 
the roof and there hews and slashes in the air like a man 
demented, while his sympathising friends, similarly equipped with 
swords, spears, and shields, and taking their time from him, attack 
the demons with such murderous fury, laying about them not only 
all round the house, but also underneath it (for the houses are 
raised on posts), that it is a chance if the poor devils escape with a 
whole skin from the cataract of cuts and thrusts. These are strong 
measures. Yet they do not exhaust the resources of the Tagals in 
their dealings with the unseen. Sometimes their mind misgives 
them that the expectant mother may not be wholly safe even within 
ating of blazing fires and flashing swords; so to put her out of 
harm’s way, when the pains begin, they will sometimes carry the 
sufferer softly into another house, where the devils, they hope, will 
not be able to find her.? 

For the same purpose the nomadic Turks of Central Asia beat 

1 The Golden Bough,Second Edition, und die religidsen Anschauungen der 
iii, 1-134. Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,” 
Mitthetluugen der (Wiener geograph- 

2 F, Blumentritt, ‘Der Ahnencultus —ischen Gesellschajt, 1882, pp. 178 sg. 

Protecting 
women in 
childbed 
fron. 
demons. 

Results of 
discussion. 

1. Under 
the name 
of couvade 
two quite 
distinct 
customs 
have 
commonly 
been con- 
founded. 

254 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

with sticks on the outside of a tent where a woman lies in childbed, 
and they shriek, howl, and fire off their guns continually to drive 
away the demon who is tormenting her. If the pains still continue 
after the child is born, they resort to a number of devices for putting 
an end to them. Thus they cause a horse with large bright eyes 
to touch the bosom of the sufferer in order to repel the devil, and 
for the same purpose they bring an owl into the tent and oblige it 
to hoot, or they put a bird of prey on her breast. Sometimes they 
pepper the woman with gooseberries, in the hope that the devil 
will stick to them and so drop off from her, or they burn the berries 
for the purpose of chasing him away with the foul smell. And for 
a like reason they bury a sword in the ground, edge upwards, under 
the place where the poor suffering head is lying; or a bard rushes 
into the tent and beats the woman lightly with a stick under the 
impression that the blows fall not on her but on the devil. 

Similar examples of attempts to relieve women in childbed by 
repelling or outwitting the evil spirits which are supposed to infest 
them at these critical times might be multiplied almost indefinitely. 
It is possible that such superstitions have played a part in the 
customs which are commonly grouped under the head of couvade.? 
But there seems to be no positive evidence that this is so; and in 
the absence of proof it is better perhaps to regard the pretence of 
childbirth by another person, whether the husband or another, as 
a simple case of the world-wide transference of evil by means of 
sympathetic magic. 

To sum up the results of the preceding discussion, which I 
hope to resume with far ampler materials in another work, I 
conclude that :— 

1. Under the general name of couvade two quite distinct 
customs, both connected with childbirth, have been commonly 
confounded. One of these customs consists of a strict diet and 
regimen observed by a father for the benefit of his newborn child, 
because the father is believed to be united to the child by such an 
intimate bond of physical sympathy that all his acts affect and may 
hurt or kill the tender infant. The other custom consists of a 
simulation of childbirth by a man, generally perhaps by the husband, 
practised for the benefit of the real mother, in order to relieve her 
of her pains by transferring them to the pretended mother. The 
difference between these customs in kind is obvious, and in accord- 
ance with their different intentions they are commonly observed 
at different times. The simulation of travail-pangs takes place 
simultaneously with the real pangs before the child is born. The 

1H. Vambery, Das Ttirkenvolk band’s keeping his bed was a trick 

(Leipsic, 1885), pp. 213 5g. played on the guileless devil, who 

mistook him for the real patient, See 

2 This was the view of Adolph A, Bastian, Zin Besuch in San Salva- 
Bastian. He thought that the hus- dor (Bremen, 1859), pp. 194-196. 

VoL. 1 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 255 

strict diet and regimen of the father begin only after the child is 
born; for it is only then that he betakes himself to his bed and 
subjects himself to the full rigour of his superstitious abstinences, 
though he has often for similar reasons to regulate his conduct 
during his wife’s pregnancy by many other rules which a civilised 
man would find sufficiently burdensome. It is strange that two 
customs so different in their intention and in the manner and time 
of their observance should have been confounded under the common 
name of couvade. If, however, writers on these subjects prefer to 
retain the one name for the two thinys, they should at least dis- 
tinguish the two things by specific epithets attached to the generic 
name. One, for example, might be called the prenatal and the 
other the post-natal couvade on the ground of the different times 
at which they are observed ; or the one might be called the dietetic 
couvade and the other the pseudo-maternal couvade on the ground 
of the different modes in which they are performed. 

2. Both customs are founded on the principle of sympathetic 
magic, though on different branches of it. The post-natal or dietetic 
couvade is founded on that branch of sympathetic magic’ which 
may be called contagious, because in it the effect is supposed to be 
produced by contact, real or imaginary. In this case the imaginary 
contact exists between father and child. The prenatal or pseudo- 
maternal couvade is founded on that branch of sympathetic magic 
which may be called homoeopathic or imitative, because in it the effect 
is supposed to be produced by imitation.!_ In this case the imita- 
tion is that of childbirth enacted by the father or somebody else. 

3. Neither the one custom nor the other, neither prenatal or 
dietetic couvade, nor post-natal or pseudo-maternal couvade, appears 
to have anything to do with an attempt to shift the custom of 
descent from the maternal to the paternal line, in other words, to 
initiate the change from mother-kin to father-kin. 

P. 73. The apparently widespread custom of men dressing as 
‘women and women as men at marriage.—On their wedding night 
Spartan brides were dressed in men’s clothes when they received 
the bridegroom on the marriage bed.2, Amongst the Egyptian Jews 
in the time of Maimonides the bridegroom was adorned as a woman 
and wore a woman’s garments, while the bride with a helmet on 
her head and a sword in ‘her hand led the wedding dance.? In 
some Brahman families of Southern India at marriage the bride is 
’ disguised as a boy and another girl is dressed up to represent the 
bride.t In the elaborate marriage ceremonies observed by the 

1 As to sympathetic magic and its 3 Sepp, <Altbayerischer Sagenschatz 
two branches see further my Lectures (Munich, 1876), p. 232. 
on the Early History of the Kingship 4 E. Thurston, Ethnographic Notes 
(London, 1905), pp. 37 59g. tn Southern India (Madras, 1906), 
2 Plutarch, Lycurgus, 15. p- 3. 

2. Both 
customs are 
founded on 
sympathetic 
magic. 

3. Neither 
custom has 
anything to 
do with a 
change 
from 
mother- 
kin to 
father-kin, 
Exchange 
of clothes 
between 
bride and 
bride- 
groom at 
marriage. 

Exchange 
of clothes 
between 
men and 
women 
(other than 
the bride- 
groom and 
bride) at 
marriage. 

256 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, I 
people of Southern Celebes the bridegroom at one stage of the 
proceedings puts on the garments which have just been put off by 
the bride.? 

Sometimes it is not the principals but the assistants at a marriage 
who appear disguised in the costume of the other sex. Thus 
among the Wasambara of East Africa the chief bridesmaid is 
dressed as a man and carries a sword and a gun.2, Among the 
western Somali tribes, while the bride and bridegroom are shut up 
in the nuptial chamber, seven young bachelors and seven maidens 
assemble in the house. A man appointed for the purpose performs 
a mock marriage over these young people, wedding them in pairs, 
and the mock wife must obey the mock husband. Sometimes the 
couples exchange garments, the young men dressing as women and 
the young women as men. “The girls dress up their partners, 
using padding to make the disguise as complete as possible ; and 
then, assuming all the airs of husbands, they flog their partners 
with horsewhips, and order them about in the same manner as they 
themselves had been treated by the young men.” These frolics last 
seven days, at the end of which the seven bachelors and the seven 
maids are paid a dollar a head by the bridegroom and the bride.® 
In Torwal, of the Hindo Koosh, the bridegroom’s party is accom- 
panied by men dressed as women, who dance and jest, and the 
whole village takes part in the entertainment of the bridegroom’s 
friends. At a Hindoo wedding in Bihar a man disguised as a 
woman approaches the marriage party with a jar of water and says 
that he is a woman of Assam come to give away the bride.® 
Among the Chamars and other low castes of Northern India boys at 
marriage dress up as women and perform a rude and sometimes 
unseemly dance. Among the Modh Brahmans of Gujarat at a 
wedding the bridegroom’s maternal uncle dresses himself up as a 
Jhanda or Pathan fakir, whose ghost is dangerous, in woman’s 
clothes from head to waist and in men’s clothes from the waist 
downwards, rubs his face with oil, daubs it with red powder, and in 
this impressive costume accompanies the bridal pair to a spot where 
two roads meet, which is always haunted ground, and there he 
waits till the qouple offer food to the goddess of the place.® 

Similar exchanges of costume between men and women are practised 

» _ 

1B. F. Matthes, Biuragen tot de 
Ethnologie van Zuid - Celebes (The 
Hague, 1875), P- 35- 

2J. P. Farler, ‘*The Usambara 
Country, in East Africa,” Proceedings 
of the R. Geographical Society, New 
Series, i. (1879) p. 92. 

3 Captain J. S. King, ‘‘ Notes on 
the Folk-lore and some Social Customs 
of the Western Somali Tribes,” Zhe 

Folk-lore Journal, vi. (1888) pp. 121 
5g. ! 
# Major J. Biddulph, Z77zbes of the 
Hindoo Koosh (Calcutta, 1880), p. 80; 
compare 7d. p. 78. 

6 G. A. Grierson, Bhar Peasant 
Life (Calcutta, 1885), p. 365. 

6 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-lore of Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), ii. 8, 

4 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

257 
at marriage in various parts of Europe. At Kukus in Bulgaria a 
girl puts on the bridegroom’s robes, claps a fez cn her head, and ~ 
thus disguised as a man leads the wedding dance.1. Sometimes in 
Upper Brittany on the day after a wedding young men disguise 
themselves as girls and girls disguise themselves as young men.” 
In the Samerberg district of Bavaria a bearded man in woman’s 
clothes is palmed off as the bride on the bridegroom; he is known 
as “the Wild Bride.”? Similarly at an Esthonian wedding the 
bride’s brother, or some other young man, dresses up in woman’s 
garments and tries to pass himself off on the bridegroom as the 
bride ;* and it is an Esthonian marriage custom to place the bride- 
groom’s hat on the head of the bride.® 

What is the meaning of these curious interchanges of costume The most 
between men and women at marriage ? In the text I have suggested Probable 
that the pretended exchange of sex between the bridegroom and Snr 
the bride may have been designed to give the husband those rights inter- 
over the children which had formerly been possessed by the wife, in changes 
other words, that the intention was to effect a transition from an hemes 
old system of mother-kin to a new system of father-kin. This men and 
explanation might perhaps suffice for the cases in which the women at 
disguise is confined to the married couple, but it could hardly 4) °° 
apply to the cases in which the disguise is worn by other persons. they are 
And the same may be said of another suggested explanation, disguises 
namely, that the dressing of the bride in male attire is a charm pacar . 
to secure the birth of male offspring,® for that would not bride and 
account for the disguise of the bridegroom as a woman nor bridegroom 
for the exchange of costume between men and women other pe 
than the bridegroom and bride. On the whole the most prob- who lie 
able explanation of these disguises at marriage is that they are in wait 
intended to deceive the malignant and envious spirits who lie in © *™ 
wait for the happy pair at this season. For this theory would 
explain the assumption of male or female costume, especially the 
costume of the bridegroom or bride, by other persons than the 
principals at the ceremony. Persons so disguised may be supposed 
to serve as dummies to attract the attention of thedemons and so allow 
the real bride and bridegroom to escape unnoticed. This is in sub- 
stance the theory of Mr. W. Crooke, who conjectures that “some one 

1 F. S. Krauss, Sztte und Brauch 5 L. von Schroeder, of. cé¢. pp. 

der Stidslaven (Vienna, 1885), p. 438. 

2 P. Sébillot, Costumes populaires 
dela Haute-Bretagne (Paris, 1886), p. 
138. 

3 Von Diiringsfeld, Hochsettsbzech 
(Leipsic, 1871), p. 126. 

4 L. von Schroeder, Die Hochzeits- 
briuche der Esten (Berlin, 1888), p. 
218 ; compare zd, p. 220. 

VOL. IV 

95 5g. 

6 Adonis, <Aitts, Ostris, Second 
Edition (London, 1907), p. 434. Inow 
sce that the same motive for dressing 
women as men at marriage had previ- 
ously been suggested by the Hon. J. 
Abercromby. See his article, ‘*An 
Amazonian Custom in the Caucasus,” 
Folk-Lore, ii. (1891) pp- 179-181. 

$s 

Custom of 
the False 
Bride. 

Masai lads 
dressed 

as girls 
after 
circum- 
cision, 

258 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY vot, I 
assumes the part of the bride in order to divert on himself from her 
the envious glance of the Evil Eye.”! He points out very justly that 
this theory would explain the common European custom known as 
the False Bride, which consists of an attempt to palm off on the 
bridegroom some one else, whether a man or a woman, disguised so 
as to resemble the bride.2 The Somali custom, described above,? 
lends itself particularly to this explanation; for the seven mock- 
married couples who keep up the pretence of marriage for seven 
days after the wedding may very well, quite apart from the inter- 
change of clothes between them, be designed to divert the attention 
of malignant spirits from the real bride and bridegroom, who are 
actually closeted with each other in the bridal chamber. That 
they are believed to render a service to the married pair is manifest, 
for they are paid by the bride and bridegroom for what they have 
done at the end of the seven days. The payment of mock-married 
pairs would be superfiuous and meaningless if their performance 
was nothing more than an outburst of youthful gaiety on a festive 
occasion. Further, this explanation of the interchange of dress 
between the sexes at marriage is confirmed, as Mr. Crooke has 
pointed out, by the parallel custom of disguising young boys as girls ; 
for the intention of this last custom appears unquestionably to be 
to avert the Evil Eye. But the exchange of dress between men 
and women is a custom which has been practised under many 
different circumstances and probably from many different motives.® 

P. 73. In Central [rather Eastern] Africa a Masai dresses as a 
girl for a month after marriage.—On this subject Mr. A. C. Hollis, 
one of our, best authorities on the Masai, writes to me as follows ; 
“The Masai do not dress as girls a month before marriage, 
as stated by Thomson, but Masai boys dress as women for a 
month immediately after circumcision. A similar custom is 
followed by the Kikuyu and by the Nandi-Lumbwa group. 
Amongst the latter group girls when about to be circumcised 
dress as warriors.” The custom in regard to Masai boys 
is this. When they have been circumcised they are called 
Sipolio (recluse). “They remain at home for four days, and bows 
are prepared for them. They then sally forth and shoot at the 
young girls, their arrows being blocked with a piece of honey-comb 
so that they cannot penetrate into the girls’ bodies. They also shoot 

1 W. Crooke, Popular Religion and 
Folk-Lore tn Northern India (West- 
minster, 1896), ii. 8. 

.4 W. Crooke, of. cit. ii. 8 As to 
the widespread custom of dressing boys 
as girls, see my article ‘‘ Achilles at 

2 W. Crooke, Zc. As to the custom, 
compare Miss Gertrude M. Godden, 
“The False Bride,” Fo/k-Lore, iv. 

(1893) yp. 142-148. 
3 See above, p. 256. 

Scyros,” Zhe Classical Review, vii. 
(1893) pp. 292 sg. ; 

6 IT have dealt with some particular 
cases of the custom in my <ddonzs, 
Artis, Ostris, Second Edition, pp. 428- 

434. 

VOL, I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 259, 

small birds, which they wear round their heads fogether with ostrich 
feathers. The Sipolio like to appear-as wonjen and wear surutya 
earrings and garments reaching to the ground. They also paint 
their faces with chalk. When they have all recovered, they are 
shaved again and become II-barnot (the shaved ones). They then 
discard the long garments and wear warriors’ skins and ornaments. 
After this their hair is allowed to grow, and as soon as it has grown 
long enough to plait, they are called I]-muran (warriors).” } 

P. 73. The transference of the child to the father’s clan may Ceremonies 
be the object of a ceremony observed by the Todas.—The ceremony in the 
in question has been described more fully in another part of this ae 
book.2 There is little or nothing in it to favour the view that its pregnancy. 
intention is to transfer the child to the father’s clan. As an 
alternative theory I have suggested that the ceremony may be 
designed to fertilise or impregnate the woman.’ To this explana- ' 
tion of the custom it may reasonably be objected that being 
observed in the seventh month of pregnancy the ceremony is too 
late to be regarded as one of impregnation, since indeed many 
children are born in that month. This objection tells forcibly and 
perhaps fatally against the theory in question. Ceremonies have 
commonly been observed in the seventh month of a woman’s 
pregnancy by other peoples besides the Todas, but their intention 
seems to be to ensure a safe delivery, whether by keeping off 
demons, by manipulating the woman’s body, or in other ways. In 
Java a curious feature of the ceremonies on this occasion is a mock 
birth carried out on the person of the pregnant woman. The part 
of the baby is played by a weaver’s shuttle and that of the after- 
birth by an egg. When the shuttle drops to the ground, an old 
woman takes it up in her arms, dandles it like a baby, and says, 
*©Oh, what a dear little child! Oh, what a beautiful little child!” 

1 A. C. Hollis, Zhe Afasad (Oxford, 
1905), p. 298. 

2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 256 sgg. 
The ceremony has also been described 
by Mr. J. W. Breeks, in his Account 
of the Primitive Tribes and Monu- 
ments of the Nilagiris (London, 1873), 
p- 19. His account is less detailed 
than the one in the text but agrees 
substantially with it. 

3 Above, vol. ii. pp. 258 sgq. 

4 For examples of these ceremonies 
see Sahagun, Azstotre générale des 
choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne, tradutte 
par D. Jourdanet et R. Simeon (Paris, 
1880), pp. 424-431 3; Zhe Grihya- 
Sutras, translated by H. Oldenberg, 
Part i. (Oxford, 1886) pp. 47 sgq. 

(Sacred Books of the East, xxix.); S. 
Mateer, ative Life in Travancore 
(London, 1883), pp. 48, 113, 118 5g. 3 
Jagor, ‘‘ Einige Sklaven-Kasten in 
Malabar,” Verhand/ungen der Berliner 
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethno- 
logie, und Urgeschichte, 1878, p. 239 
(appended to the Zettschrift fiir Ethno- 
logie, x.); B. F. Matthes, Bzjdragen 
tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes (The 
Hague, 1875), pp. 48 sgg.3 ‘De 
Leenvorstendom Boni,” 7jdschrift voor 
Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, 
xv. (1865) pp. 57 sg.; T. Stamford 
Raffles, History of Java (London, 
1817), i. 316, 322 59. 

& See the description of the cus- 
tom in Zhe Golden Bough, Second 
Edition, i. 20. To the authorities 

Badaga 
ceremony 
in the 
seventh 
month of 
pregnancy. 

Cannibal- 
ism in 
Australia. 

Both 
friends 
and foes 
are eaten, 
but the 
custom 
of eating 
friends 
seems 

to be the 
commoner. 

260 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

Manifestly this little drama is intended to facilitate the real birth 
by simulating it; the ceremony is an example of sympathetic 
or imitative magic. 

In the seventh month of a woman’s pregnancy the Badagas of 
the Neilgherry Hills observe a ceremony which has been described 
as a second marriage ceremony in confirmation of the first. The 
husband asks his father-in-law, “Shall I bind this cord round the 
neck of your daughter?” As soon as “ Yes” is said, the cord is 
fastened round her neck and then after a few minutes taken off. 
Before the couple are set two vessels, into one of which the relations 
of the husband put money, while the relations of the wife put it into 
the other. A feast of milk and vegetables follows.1 It is possible, 
therefore, that the ceremony observed by the Todas in the seventh 
month of pregnancy is also an old marriage ceremony, as Dr. Rivers 
has suggested ;? and if that were so the interpretation of it as a rite 
of impregnation would not be wholly excluded. 

P. 73. As a rule, perhaps, members of the same totem clan do 
not eat each other.—Definite information on this subject seems to 
be almost entirely wanting, so that no general rule can be laid down. 
In the Mukjarawaint tribe of Victoria a man who transgressed the 
marriage laws was killed and eaten by men of his own totemic clan.3 
But this is the only case I remember to have met with in which it is 
definitely affirmed that people ate a man of their own totem. On 
the other hand there seems to be little or no evidence that they were 
forbidden to do so. It wasa common custom among the Australian 
aborigines to eat the members of their own tribe who were either 
slain in battle or died a natural death. And, besides that, in times 
of famine children were often killed and devoured by their relations 
and friends. Enemies killed in war were eaten by some tribes, but 
the practice of eating friends and relations appears to have been 
more frequent ; indeed it is affirmed of some tribes that while they 
ate their friends they refused to eat their enemies. In the 

there cited may be added C. F. L£thnologie und Urgeschichte, 1876, pp. 

Winter, ‘ Instellingen, Gewoonten en 
Gebruiken der (a ht te Soerakarta,”’ 
Tijdschrift voor Néerlands Indie 
(Batavia, 1843), Eerste Deel, pp. 691- 
694; J. Knebel, ‘*Varia Javanica,” 
Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- 
ex Volkenkunde, xliv. (1901) p. 36. In 
the former of these accounts the places 
of the shuttle and the egg are taken by 
two coco-nuts; in the latter account 
the simulation of birth does not come 
clearly out. 

1 Jagor, ‘‘Uber die Badagas im 
Nilgiri-Gebirge,” Verhandlungen der 
Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, 

200 sg. (appended to Zettschrift fur 
Ethnologte, viii.). 

2 See above, vol. ii, p. 258. 

3 A. W. Howitt, Native Tribes of 
South-East Australia, p. 247. See 
above, vol. i. p. 461. 

4 J. D. Lang, Queensiand (London, 
1861), pp. 354-360, 388 sg.; R. 
Brough Smyth, Adorigines of Victoria, 
i. xxxvil. sy., 244-247; J. Dawson, 
Australian Aborigines, p. 673; W. 
Ridley, A@m/aroz, p. 160; R. Schom- 
burgk, in Verhandlungen der Berliner 
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethno- 
logie und Urgeschichte, 1879, p- (237) 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 261 

Binbinga tribe, who eat their dead, the body ig cut up, roasted and 
eaten by men of the other exogamous cldss or moiety. For 
example, if the deceased was a Tjurulum man, his carcase is 
devoured by Tjuanaku, Tjulantjuka, Paliarinji, and Pungarinji men, 
who together make up that moiety of the tribe to which the 
Tjurulum subclass does not belong. ‘No woman of the tribe is 
allowed to partake of human flesh! In the Mara and Anula tribes 
the flesh may be eaten by members of both the exogamous classes 
or moieties. “In the case of an Anula woman, whose body was 
eaten a short time ago, the following took place. The woman 
belonged to the Wialia division of the tribe, and her body was dis- 
embowelled by a Roumburia man. Those present during the rite 
and participating in it were four in number; two of them were her 
tribal fathers, belonging therefore to the Wialia group—that is, to 
her own moiety of the tribe; the other two were her mother’s 
brothers, and therefore Roumburia men belonging to the half of the 
tribe to which she did not belong. The woman’s totem was 
Barramunda (a fresh-water fish); the tribal fathers’, wild dog; the 
mother’s two brothers were respectively alligator and night-hawk ; so 
that it will be clearly seen that the rite of eating the flesh of a dead 
person is in no way concerned with the totem group. In another 
instance—that of the eating of an Anula man who was a Roumburia 
—the body was disembowelled by an Urtalia man who was the 
mother’s brother of the deceased; the other men present and 
participating were one Wialia, two Urtalia, and one Awukaria.” ? 
Hence in neither of the cases thus described by Messrs. Spencer 
and Gillen was the flesh of the dead partaken of by persons of his 
or her own totem clan. Whether this exclusion of persons of the 
same totem from the cannibal repast was accidental or prescribed 
by custom, does not appear. 

The motives which induce the members of an Australian tribe Motives 
to eat the bodies of their own dead are various. Often the motive of the 
. z : -_ Australian 
is sheer hunger, and under the pressure of this powerful incentive aborigines 
it would seem that infants are commonly the first victims. We are for eating 

told:that in hard summers the Kaura tribe near Adelaide used to pial fad 
en he 

(appended to Zettschrift fiir Ethnologie, 
xi.); E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian 
Race, i, 89, 290, 370, 380, 422, ii. 
18, 119, 159, 179, 322, 331 5g., 341 
59-5 346, 351, 361, 371, 376, 390, 
393, 400, 403, 404, 408, 427, 428, 
432, 449, 465, 474, iii. 36, 121, 138, 
144, 147, 159, 166, 353, 5453 W.E. 
Roth, Zthnological Studies among the 
North-\West-Central Queensland Abori- 
gines, p. 166; A. W. Howitt, Native 
Tribes of South-East Australia, pp. 
750-756. For statements that friends 

but not foes are eaten see J. D. Lang, 
op. cit. p. 3593; J. Dawson and W, 
Ridley, /icc.; E. M. Curr, of. cit. ii. 
449; A. W. Howitt, of. ett. p. 753. 

1 Spencer and Gillen, Northern 
Tribes of Central Australia, p. 548. 
As to the classes and subclasses of the 
Binbinga tribe, see above, vol. i. p. 
2609. 

2 Spencer and Gillen, of. cét. pp. 
548 sg. As to the classes and sub- 
classes of the Anula tribe, see above, 
vol. i. p. 271. . 

Sometimes 
the 
Australian 
aborigines 
eat their 
dead kins- 
folk from 
motives 
of respect 
and 
affection. 

262 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

devour all the new-born infants. The Mungerra tribe in Queens- 
land, when sorely pinched by famine, have been known to kill and 
eat some of their female children.2_ Sometimes the motive assigned 
for the practice is affection. Thus among the tribes on Moreton Bay 
in New South Wales it is said to have been customary for parents 
to partake of the flesh of their dead children “as a token of grief 
and affection for the deceased.” The well-informed Mr. James 
Dawson, speaking of the tribes of South-West Victoria, says: “ There 
is not the slightest doubt that the eating of human flesh is practised 
by the aborigines, but only as a mark of affectionate respect, in 
solemn service of mourning for the dead. The flesh of enemies is 
never eaten, nor of members of other tribes. The bodies of 
relatives of either sex, who have lost their lives by violence, are 
alone partaken of ; and even then only if the body is not mangled, 
or unhealthy, or in poor condition, or in a putrid state. The body 
is divided among the adult relatives—with the exception of nursing 
or pregnant women—and the flesh of every part is roasted and 
eaten but the vitals and intestines, which are burned with the 
bones. If the body be much contused, or if it have been pierced 
by more than three spears, it is considered too much mangled to 
be eaten. The body of a woman who has had children is not 
eaten. When a child over four or five years of age is killed 
accidentally, or by one spear wound only, all the relatives eat of it 
except the brothers and sisters. The flesh of a healthy, fat, young 
woman is considered the best; and the palms of the hands are 
considered the most delicate portions. On remarking to the 
aborigines that the eating of the whole of the flesh of a dead body 
by the relatives had the appearance of their making a meal of it, 
they said that an ordinary-sized body afforded to each of numerous 
adult relatives only a mere tasting; and that it was eaten with no 
desire to gratify or appease the appetite, but only as a symbol of 
respect and regret for the dead.”* Evidence to the same effect 
was given by a convict Davies as to some Queensland tribes 
with whom he had lived. He said that with the exception of 
the bodies of old people the dead were regularly eaten by the 
survivors, whether they had fallen in battle or died a natural death ; 
it was an immemorial custom and a sacred duty with them to 
devour the corpses of their departed relatives and friends; but 
their enemies slain in battle they would not eat. The Tangara 
carry their dead about with them, and whenever they feel sorrow for 
their death, they eat some of the flesh, till nothing remains but the 

1 A, W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of Scenes in Australia and New Zealand, 

South-East Australia, p. 749. i. 73. 
4 ; : a3 
2 ELM. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, Pp o meee A ne US 
ii. 465 5 compare zd. p. 351. 5 J. D. Lang, Queensland (London, 

3G. F. Angas, Savage Life and 1861), Pp» 355s 359 59. 

VOL. 1 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 263 
bones.!_ When a child dies, the aborigines of the Peake River in 
South Australia eat it, saying that unless they did so they would 
always grieve for it. They give the head to the mother, and the 
children in the camp also get some of the flesh to make them grow. 
They also eat different parts of men and women who die, particularly 
those parts in which their best abilities are supposed to reside.? 
Some of the Kamilaroi placed their dead in trees, kindled fires 
under them, and sat down to catch the droppings of the fat, hoping 
thus to acquire the courage and strength, for example, of the 
deceased warrior. Others ate the heart and liver of their dead for 
the same purpose. They did not eat enemies slain in battle.§ 
Sometimes parents would kill their newborn baby and give its flesh 
to their older children to eat forthe purpose of strengthening them. 
This was done, for example, in the Wotjobaluk and Luritcha tribes,‘ 
Among some of the tribes on the Darling River, before a body was 
buried it used to be customary to cut off a piece of flesh from the 
thigh, if it was a child, or from the stomach, if it was an adult. 
The severed flesh was then taken from the grave to the camp, dried 
in the sun, chopped up small, and distributed among the relations 
and friends of the deceased. Some of them used the gobbet to 
make a charm called yountoo; others sucked it to get strength and 
courage ; and others again threw it into the river to bring a flood 
and fish, when both were wanted.® 

Amongst the Dieri, when a dead body had been lowered into Practice 
its last resting-place, a man, who was no relation of the deceased, ete 
stepped into the grave and proceeded to cut off all the fat that to eating 
adhered to the muscles of the face, thighs, arms and stomach. This their dead 
he handed round to the mourners to be swallowed by them. The "¢!@tions. 
reason they gave for the practice was that the nearest relations 
might forget the departed and not be continually weeping. “The 
order in which they partake of their dead relatives is this :—-The 
mother eats of her children. The children eat of their mother. 
Brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law eat of each other. Uncles, aunts, 
nephews, nieces, grandchildren, grandfathers, and grandmothers eat 
of each other. But the father does not eat of his offspring, or the 

' A.W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of 
South-East Australia, p. 751. 

4 W. E. Stanbridge, ‘‘ Tribes in the 
Central Part of Victoria,” Transactions 

2 R. Schomburgk (of Adelaide), 
‘Uber einige Sitten und Gebrauche 
der tief im innern Siidaustraliens, am 
Peake-Flusse und dessen Umgebung 
hausenden Stamme,” Verhandlungen 
der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthro- 
pologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte, 
1879, p- (237) (appended to Zeitschrift 
fiir Ethnologie, xi.). 

3 Rev. W. Ridley, Aami/aroi (Syd- 
ney, 1875), p. 160, 

of the Ethnological Society of London, 
New Series, i. (London, 1861) p. 289; 
A. W. Howitt, Vative Tribes of South- 
East Australia, pp. 749, 750; Spencer 
and Gillen, Mative Tribes of Central 
Australia, p. 475. 

5 F. Bonney, ‘‘On some Customs 
of the Aborigines of the River Darling, 
New South Wales,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xiii. (1884) 

pp- 134, 135. 

Custom 
of eating 
dead 
enemies. 

Although 
exogamous 
classes or 
phratries 
sometimes 
bear 
animal 
names, 
they seem 
not to be 
totemic. 

é 
” 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

264 
offspring of the sire. After eating of the dead the men paint them- 
selves with charcoal and fat, marking a black ring round the mouth. 
This distinguishing mark is called Munamuroomuroo. The women 
do likewise, besides painting two white stripes on their arms, which 
marks distinguish those who have partaken of the late deceased ; 
the other men smearing themselves all over with white clay, to 
testify their grief.” Thus in the Dieri tribe women as well as 
men partook of the bodies of the dead. However, in some tribes 
women were forbidden to eat human flesh.? 

Among the Australian tribes which ate their slain enemies the 
favourite joints seem to have been the arms and the legs, the 
hands and the feet.2 The Theddora and Ngarigo thought that they 
acquired the courage and other qualities of the enemies whom they 
had eaten.t The Luritcha, who eat their enemies, take great care 
to destroy the bones and especially the skulls ; otherwise they think 
that the bones will come together, and that the dead men will arise 
and pursue with their vengeance the foes who have devoured them.® 

P. 76. Some phratries, both in America and Australia, bear the 
names of animals.—From this and other indications I have inferred 
in the text that the Australian phratries and subphratries (classes 
and subclasses) were formerly totemic clans, and that as phratries 
and subphratries (classes and subclasses) they may have retained 
their totems after they had been subdivided into totem clans proper. 
The evidence now seems to me altogether inadequate to support 
this inference, which I withdraw accordingly. In this view I 
entirely agree with the mature judgment of Dr. A. W. Howitt, who 
in like manner had formerly inclined to the opinion that the 
phratries or classes may once have been totemic clans.6 On the 

1S. Gason, ** The Dieyeri Tribe,” 
Native Tribes of South Australia, p. 
274. Compare A, W. Howitt, Madive 
Tribes of South-East Australia, pp. 
448 sg., 751. 

2 E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, 
ii. 179, 3323 Spencer and Gillen, 
Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 
p- 548. It has been suggested by Mr. 
E. S. Hartland (Primitive Paternity, 
i, 231 sg.) that one motive for eating 
dead friends may have been to ensure 
their rebirth. This motive could hardly 
operate in tribes which forbid women 
to partake of human flesh. 

3 A. W. Howitt, Mative Tribes of 
South-East Australia, pp. 751, 752 3 
E. M. Curr, Zhe Australian Race, iii. 
545- 
4 A. W. Howitt, of. ctt. p. 752. 

5 Spencer and Gillen, Wative Tribes 

of Central Australia, Pp. 475. 

6 Dr. A. W. Howitt writes thus 
(Fotk-Lore, xvii. 1906, p. 110): ** Mr. 
Hartland quotes a passage in one of my 
earlier papers to the effect that in my 
opinion the exogamous moieties of the 
Australian tribes were originally totem 
clans. I did incline, many years back, 
to this belief, but the wider knowledge 
of later years has so far altered my 
opinion, that I consider the weight of 
evidence to be against it.* With regard 
to the Port Mackay tribe in Queensland 
(see vol. i. pp. 77 5g.) the evidence for 
the existence of phratric and subphratric 
totems seems altogether insufficient. 
The evidence for the phratric totems 
consists of a single statement of Mr. 
Bridgman that ‘‘the symbol of the 
Yoongaroo division is the alligator and 
of the Wootarvo the kangaroo ” (Fison 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 265 

whole the Australian evidence points to the tonclusion that the 
phratries and subphratries, or classes and stibclasses, are social 
divisions of an entirely different order from the totemic clans. As 
I have already pointed out, they seem to be of iater origin than the 
totemic clans and to have been deliberately instituted for the 
purpose of regulating marriage, with which the totemic clans had 
previously nothing to do.! When the exogamous divisions were 
introduced, it was convenient, though not absolutely necessary, to 
have names for them ;2 and these names would naturally be significant 
of something, for it is very unlikely that they would be new words 
arbitrarily coined for the purpose. Among them the names of 
animals and plants would probably figure, since on animals and 
plants, the sources of their food-supply, the minds of the natives are 
constantly dwelling. It is no wonder, therefore, that the names of 
some Australian phratries or classes should be those of animals; the 
wonder rather is that among so many Australian names of phratries 
or classes so few should be known to be those of animals. But 
the mere designation of such divisions by the names of animals by 
no means proves that the eponymous animals are totems. A special sometimes 
reason for naming any particular phratry after an animal or plant the animal 
might very well be, as has been suggested by Dr. Washington PPO’ 
Matthews,? the existence within it of an important totemic clan of exogamous 
that name; the phratry or class would thus be named after one of class or 
its members, the whole after the part, as happens not infrequently. Laat 
Thus the inference that, whenever we meet with a phratry or class porrowed 
bearing the same name as one of its totemic clans, the clan has from one 
arisen by subdivision of the phratry and has taken its name from nae 
it, is not necessarily right; it may be on the contrary that the cians 
phratry or class has borrowed its name from the clan. Another included 
way in which phratries or classes might come to bear the names of "de it. 
animals and so to simulate totemic clans may be, as Professor 
Baldwin Spencer has suggested, through the extinction of all the 

totems except two, one in each of the phratries or classes, so that 
henceforth the totemic clan would coincide with the phratry or 

class. This, as he says, may have happened to the Wurunjerri 

tribe. In point of fact, both in North-Central Australia and in 

and Howitt, Kamtlarot and Kurnai, 
p- 40); and the evidence for the totems 
of the subphratries in like manner rests 
on the single statement of Mr. W. 
Chatfield (Fison and Howitt, of. vt. p. 
41), whose evidence on another subject 
has been doubted by guod authorities. 
See above, p.199. Mr. Chatfield’s state- 
ment is repeated by Mr. E. M. Curr, 
The Australian Race, ii. 468. 

1 See above, vol. i. 162 sg., 251 5g., 
257 599., 272 599. 

2 I have already pointed out that 
both in Australia and Melanesia some 
of the exogamous divisions have no 
special names. See above, vol. i. pp. 
265 sq. ; vol. ii. p. 70. 

3 See above, vol. ii. pp. 243 sg. 

4 Prof. Baldwin Spencer’s suggestion 
is mentioned by Dr. A. W. Howitt in 
Folk-Lore, xvii. (1906) p. 110. As to 
the Wurunjerri tribe, see above, vol. i. 
PP- 435, 437- 

266 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

Queensland we have found evidence of the extinction of the 
totemic clans and their absorption in the exogamous classes or. 
phratries, with the accompanying transference of the old totemic 
taboos from the clans to the classes.! 

P. 81. The growth, maturity, and decay of totems.—The 
theory here suggested of the growth and decay of totems must be 
corrected by the preceding note, in which I have pointed out that 
there is no sufficient proof of the existence of phratric and 
subphratric totems. Nor is it at all clear that subtotems are 
undeveloped totems ; indeed the relation. between the two things 
is very obscure. Subtotems are found elsewhere than in Australia,” 
but it is only in Australia, apparently, that an attempt has been 
made to classify the whole of nature under the exogamous phratries 
or clans. 

The P. 93. Here, then, . . . the scientific inquirer might reasonably 
Central —_ expect to find the savage in his very lowest depths, etc.—In this 
Australian : é 
aborigines, Somewhat too rhetorically coloured passage’ I do not intend to 
like all suggest that the Central Australian aborigines are in the condition 
eae of absolutely primitive humanity. Far from it. I believe that even 
are __ the lowest of existing savages, amongst whom I reckon the tribes of 
primitive Central Australia, have in respect of intelligence, morality, and the 
see arts of life advanced immeasurably beyond the absolutely primitive 
not inan Condition of humanity, and that the interval which divides them 
absolute, from civilised men is probably far less than the interval which 
sense. divides them from truly primitive men, that is, from men as they 
were when they emerged from a much lower form of animal life. 
It is only in a relative, not in an absolute, sense that we can 
speak of the Australian or of any other known race as primitive ; 
but the usage of the language perfectly justifies us in employing the 
word in such a sense to distinguish the ruder from the more highly 
developed races of man. Indeed we have no synonym for the 
word in English, and if we drop it in deference to ap absurd 
misunderstanding we cripple ourselves by the sacrifice of an 
indispensable term. Were we to abstain from using every word 
which dunces have misunderstood or sophists misrepresented, we 
should be reduced to absolute silence, for there is hardly a word 
which has not been thus perverted.3 

P. 96. An immemorial sanctuary within which outlawed and 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 527 sg. I have already given my reasons for 
2 For example, see above, vol. ii, regarding the tribes of Central Australia 
pp. 14-16, 30 sg., 48 57. as, on the whole, not only the most 

3 On the use and abuse of the term _ primitive savages of that continent but 
primitive as applied to savages I may also as the most primitive race of men 
refer the reader to my remarks in 7%e about whom we possess accurate in- 
Scope of Social Anthropology (London, formation. See above, vol. i. pp. 314- 
1908), pp. 7-9. In the present work 339, 342 s9- 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 267 

desperate men have found safety.—Since this sketch of the 
-development of sanctuaries or asylums in primitive society 
was written, the subject has been handled by Dr. Albert Hell- 
wig in two treatises, to which I may refer the reader for further 
details,? 

P. 97. In Upolu, one of the Samoan Islands, etce.—The right Right of 
of sanctuary seems to have been more highly developed in Hawaii, sanctuary 
where there were certain sacred enclosures called puhonuas, which" Howal- 
have been described as Cities of Refuge. “These puhonuas,” we 
are told, “were the Hawaiian cities of refuge, and afforded an 
inviolable sanctuary to the guilty fugitive who, when flying from the 
avenging spear, was so favoured as to enter their precincts. This 
had several wide entrances, some on the side next the sea, the 
others facing the mountains. Hither the manslayer, the man who 
had broken a tabu, or failed in the observance of its rigid require- { 
ments, the thief, and even the murderer, fled from his incensed 
pursuers, and was secure. To whomsoever he belonged, and from 
whatever part he came, he was equally certain of admittance, 
though liable to be pursued even to the gates of the enclosure. 
Happily for him, those gates were perpetually open ; and as soon as 
the fugitive had entered, he repaired to the presence of the idol, 
and made a short ejaculatory address, expressive of his obligations 
to him in reaching the place with security. Whenever war was 
proclaimed, and during the period of actual hostilities, a white flag 
was unfurled on the top of a tall spear, at each end of the enclosure, 
and, until the conclusion of peace, waved the symbol of hope to 
those who, vanquished in fight, might flee thither for protection. 

It was fixed a short distance from the walls on the outside, and to 
the spot on which this banner was unfurled, the victorious warrior 
might chase his routed foes; but here, he must himself fall back ; 
, beyond it he must not advance one step, on pain of forfeiting his 
life. The priests, and their adherents, would immediately put to 
death any one who should have the temerity to follow or molest 
thgse who were once within the pale of the pahu tabu [sacred 
enclosure]; and, as they expressed it, under the shade or pro- 
tection of Keave, the tutelar deity of the place. In one part of the 
enclosure, houses were formerly erected for the priests, and others 
for the refugees, who, after a certain time, or at the cessation of 
war, were dismissed by the priests, and returned unmolested to their 
dwellings and families; no one venturing to injure those who, 
when they fled to the gods, had been by them protected. We 
could not learn the length of time it was necessary for them to 
remain in the pukonua; but it did not appear to be more than 

1A. Hellwig, Das Asylrecht der — trige sur Asylrecht von Oveanien (Stutt- 
Naturvilker (Berlin, 1903); 7a@., Bei- gart, 1906). 

Sanctuaries 
on the 
GoldCoast. 

Ceremonies 
over dead 
animals to 
disenchant 
them. 

268 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, I 

two or three days. After that, they either attached themselves to 
the service of the priests, or returned to their homes.” ! 

One of these sanctuaries which Mr. Ellis examined at Honaunau 
is described by him as capacious and capable of containing a vast 
multitude of people. It was more than seven hundred feet long 
and four hundred feet wide; the walls were twelve feet high and 
fifteen feet thick. In time of war the old men, women, and 
children used to be left within it, while the warriors went out to 
fight.? 

P. 100. In Western Africa . . . sanctuaries, etc.—Among the 
Ga people of the Gold Coast every tribal fetish has the right to 
protect its suppliants. Slaves or freemen in distress may flee to it 
and find sanctuary. The fugitive says, “ Hear, priest, I give myself 
to the fetish. If you let anybody wrench me away, you will die.” 
After that the pursuer will not molest him. Such fugitives, when 
they have taken sanctuary, are not free; they are regarded as the 
clients or servants of the fetish-priest and of the king of the town. 
The king uses them as messengers, drummers, and so forth ; the 
priest makes them lay out and cultivate his gardens, fetch wood, 
and serve him in other ways. When a fetish is famous, like Lakpa 
in La, there are many such refugees. They are called “fence 
people,” because once a year they must make a new fence round 
the fetish-house ; but they need not always dwell in its immediate 
neighbourhood. 

P. 129. Whenever one of these creatures is killed a ceremony 
has to be performed over it, ete.—With this ceremony we may 
compare the ceremonies performed by the Malays over the game 
which they have killed, for the purpose of expelling the evil spirit 
or mischief (4ad/) which is thought to lurk in certain species of wild 
animals. Amongst the animals and birds supposed to be haunted 
or possessed by this evil spirit are deer, the mouse-deer (Zragulus), 
the wild pig, all monkeys (except gibbons), monitor lizards, certain 
snakes and crocodiles, the vulture, the stork, the jungle fowl 
(Gallus gallus), and the quail. The elephant, the rhinoceros, and 
the tapir have nd dad in the strict sense of the word, but they have 
a kuang, which comes to much the same thing. If any of these 
creatures is killed without the evil spirit or mischief (4ad/) being 
cast out of the carcase, it is believed that all who are in at the death 
will be affected by a singular malady; for either they go mad and 
imitate the habits of the dead animal, or certain parts of their 
bodies are transformed into a likeness of the beast. Thus, if the 
creature that has been killed is a jungle fowl, the sufferer will crow 

TW. Ellis, Polynesian Researches, 3B. Struck, **Zur Kenntniss des 
Second Edition, iv. (London, 1836) pp. | Gastammes (Goldkiiste),” G/odes, xcili. 
167 sq. (1908) p. 31. 

2 W. Ellis, of. ez, iv. 168. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 269 

and flap his arms like the fowl, and sometimes feathers may also 
grow on his arms. If the animal killed is a deer, he will butt at 
people with his head down, just like a stag, and in extreme cases 
antlers may sprout from his forehead and his feet may be cloven, 
like the hoofs of deer. Hence to prevent these painful con- 
sequences by casting the evil spirit out of the game is a necessary 
part of every master-huntsman’s business. But few are adepts in 
the entire art of exorcism ; for the manner of casting out the spirits 
varies according as the animal is a mammal, a bird, or a reptile. 
The most usual way is to stroke the body of the creature before or 
after death with a branch of a tree, while the enchanter utters a 
spell! When the Zufi Indians hunt a deer for the purpose of 
making a ceremonial mask out of its skin, the animal has to be killed 
with certain solemn rites, in particular it must be smothered, not 
shot ; and amongst these Indians “a portion of all game, whether it 
is used for ceremonial purposes or otherwise, is offered to the Beast 
Gods, with prayers that they will intercede with the Sun Father 
and the Council of the Gods.”? But these rites and customs 
appear to have no connection with totemism. 

P. 158. He thinks that the child enters into the woman at Ignorance 

the time when she first feels it stirring in her womb.—A similar ciriciae 
ignorance as to the true moment of conception is displayed by Central 
some of the natives of Central Borneo, who rank far higher than Borneo 
the Australian aborigines in mental endowments and material oad 
culture. Thus we are told that “the Bahau have only a very moment 
imperfect notion of the length of a normal pregnancy ; they assume of con- 
that it lasts only four or five months, that is, so long as they can ©éPtion. 
perceive the external symptoms on the woman. As this ignorance 
appeared to be scarcely credible, I instituted enquiries on the 
subject in various neighbourhoods, as a result of which I observed 
that the many miscarriages and premature births, as well as the very 
prevalent venereal diseases, had contributed to this false notion. 
Also the natives are not aware that the testicles are necessary to 
procreation ; for they think that their castrated hounds, to which 
the bitches are not wholly indifferent, can beget offspring.”3 It 
seems probable that many other savage tribes are equally ignorant 
of the moment and process of impregnation, and that they therefore 
may imagine it to begin only from the time when it is sufficiently 
advanced to manifest itself either by internal symptoms to the 
woman herself or by external symptoms to observers. 

1 Nelson Annandale, ‘‘ Primitive 2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
Beliefs and Customs of the Patani ‘‘The Zuiii Indians,” Twenty-third 
Fishermen,” Fasciculé Malayenses, An- Annual Report of the Bureau of 
thropology, Part i. (April, 1903) pp. lmerican Ethnology (Washington, 
100-104. See further W. W. Skeat, 1904), pp. 439-441. 

Malay Magic (London, 1900), pp. 3 A. W. Nieuwenhuis, Quer durch 
155 59.5 177 59., 427 sgq. Borneo, i. (Leyden, 1904) pp. 444 sy- 

Food 
regarded 
asa 

cause of 
pregnancy. 

Deliberate 

270 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

P. 159. Amongst the objects on which her fancy might pitch 
as the cause of her pregnancy we may suppose that the last food 
she had eaten would often be one.—The tribes of the Cairns 
district in North Queensland actually believe that the acceptance 
of food from a man by a woman is the cause of conception! In 
like manner “ some of the aboriginal tribes of Malaya still hold the 
belief that the souls of men are incarnate in the form of birds and 
are born into the world through the birds being eaten by women. 
A theory of the same kind seems to underly the curiously important 
part played in Malay romance by the ‘longings’ (sdam) of pregnant 
women.” 2 TI have already suggested that the longings of pregnant 
women may have had a large share in the origin of totemism 
by inducing mothers ¢o identify their offspring with the things for 
which they had longed in their pregnancy and so to determine their 
children’s totems. It is even possible that these whims may be 
partly responsible for the existence of subtotems ; since it is con- 
ceivable that a woman may often have enjoined her child to respect 
a number of animals, plants, or other objects on which her maternal 
heart had been set in the critical period. 

P. 163, note, This observation . . . was communicated 
by me to my friend Dr. A. W. Howitt.—JIn point of fact Dr. 
Howitt had himself made the same observation quite independently 
many years before, though at the time of my communication 
he and I had both forgotten it. The credit of the discovery, 
which is of the utmost importance for the understanding of 
the marriage system of the Australian aborigines, belongs to Dr. 
Howitt alone.* 

P. 163. They were deliberately devised and adopted as a means 

institution of preventing the marriage, etc.—It appears that the Khonds of 

of exogamy 

among the 
Khonds. 

India at the present time occasionally lay interdicts on the inter- 
marriage of two neighbouring tribes, whenever they think that 
through a prolonged practice of intermarriage between the two 
communities husbands and wives are apt to be too nearly related 
to each other by blood: in other words, they deliberately institute a 
new exogamous group. On this subject Mr. J. E. Friend-Pereira 
writes as follows: “ An essential condition of marriage is that the 
contracting parties be not of the same tribe or sept; and even 
when they are of different tribes or septs, consanguinity up to the 
seventh generation is strictly prohibited. As there are no pro- 
fessional bards or genealogists among them, they resort to an 
ingenious device to guard against marriages within the forbidden 
degrees. When a neighbouring tribe, from which they have been 

1 See above, vol. i. p. 577- 3 See above, pp. 64 599. ° ; 
2. R. J. Wilkinson, .Valay Beliefs 4 See above, vol. i. pp. 261 note ®, 
{London and Leyden, 1906), p. 46. 285 note}, 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 271 

in the habit of procuring wives, begins to show signs of blood 
relationship in the course of time, a ban is placed on further 
marriages, and the two tribes, as is becoming among kinsmen, 
enter into a closer bond of friendship which is to last for fourteen 
generations. After that lapse of time a general council of the 
elders of the tribes is held, the interdict is removed, and 
intermarriage is once more resumed, to continue for another 
indefinite period.”! It deserves to be noted that among the 
Khonds the regulation of intermarriage and the maintenance 
of exogamy between neighbouring groups appears to be in the 
hands of the councils of elders. This supports the opinion 
that among the Australian aborigines also the institution of 
exogamy has been created and upheld by the elders assembled 
in council.? 

P. 279. The aborigines of Australia ... entertain a deep Division 
horror of incest, that is, of just those marriages which the °f opinion 
exogamous segmentations of the community are fitted to preclude, {Ons th 
—This statement is too general. It applies universally to those aborigines 
marriages of brothers with sisters and of parents with children 4s to the 
which the segmentation of the community first into two and after- ee 
wards into four exogamous divisions was designed to prevent ; but cousins. 
it does not apply universally to the marriage of certain first cousins, 

namely the children of a brother and of a sister; for though some 
Australian tribes disapproved of and forbade the marriage of all 
first cousins without exception, others, for example the Urabunna, 
not only allow the marriage of these particular first cousins, the 
children of a brother and of a sister respectively, but regard them 
as the most natural and appropriate of all. Thus in Australia, as 
eisewhere, the incest line wavers in respect to first cousins; in 
some tribes it includes all marriages of first cousins ; in other tribes 
it distinguishes between them, placing some within and others 
without the ban. A similar difference in the treatment of first 
cousin marriages occurs in many other peoples besides the Australian ; 
for whereas some rigidly interdict them all, others not only permit 
but-enjoin the marriage of those first cousins who are the children 
of a brother and of a sister respectively.? 

P. 281. External nature certainly acts on him, but he reacts 
on it, and his history is the resultant of that action and reaction, 
etc.—The same thought, which I have here expressed from the 
point of view of human history, has been expressed quite in- 

1 J. E. Friend-Pereira, ‘‘Marriage ii. pp. 304 sgg. 
Customs of the Khonds,” Journal of 
the Asiatic Soctety of Bengal, vol. \xxi. 
Part ii, Anthropology, etc. (Calcutta, 
1903), p. 18. As to the exogamous 3 See above, pp. 108, 120; and the 
divisions of the Khonds, see above, vol. _ references in the Index, s.z. ‘* Cousins.” 

. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 352-356, 
402. 

Influence 
of the 
environ- 
ment 

on the 
organism. 

Recogni- 
tion of the 
simplest 
relation- 
ships 

by the 
founders of 
exogamy. 

272 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY: VOL. I 

dependently by Professor J. Y. Simpson from the point of view of 
biology in language which agrees almost verbally with mine. He 
says: “Finally, we are unable to forget the dominating réle of the 
environment in all development: without its stimuli the inherited 
organization of the living creature would not work itself out. The 
living form is at any moment the resultant of external stimuli acting 
upon its inherited organization. This has been experimentally 
proved time and again: a normal development is the response 
to normal conditions. The development is thus educed, and it 
may be modified by the environment; but the fundamental 
character and cause of it lie in the inherited organization. The 
developing organism and its environment react the one upon the 
other independently ; yet in virtue of its adaptiveness fhe organism 
continually sets itself free from the control of the environment and 
proves itself the more constant of the two. Separation of the two 
is practically impossible; we are almost compelled to consider 
the organism and its environment as a single.system undergoing 
change.” ! 

P. 288. If we assume . . . that the founders of exogamy in 
Australia recognised the classificatory system of relationship, and 
the classificatory system of relationship only, etc,—This statement 
is too absolute. I assume that the founders of exogamy recognised 
the simplest social and consanguineous relationships, namely, the 
cohabitation of a man with a woman, the relationship of a mother 
to her children, and thé relationship of brothers and sisters, the 
children of the same mother, to each other; and that they 
extended these simple relationships into the classificatory relation- 
ships by arranging all the men and women of the community into 
one or other of two exogamous and intermarrying classes. The 
cardinal relationship, on which the whole classificatory system 
hinged, was the relation of husband and wife or, to put it more 
generally, the cohabitation of a man with a woman.? 

P. 397. The Kamilaroi type of social organisation, etce.— 
Speaking of the Kamilaroi marriage system another writer says: 
“It is also a cutious arrangement in these tribes that every man in 
any one class is supposed to have marital rights over every woman 
in the class with which he can marry ; thus every Ipai regards every 
Kubbitha woman as his wife zz posse. Hence a young man of the 
Ipai class, as soon as by tribal ceremonies he has acquired the right 
to marry, may go to the abode of a family of Kubbitha girls and 
say to one of them, in the presence of her parents, Vgaa coolaid 
harramulla yaralla, ‘1 wife will take by and by.’ His demand thus 

1 Professor J. Y. Simpson, article ii. (Edinburgh, 1909) p. 634. 
“Biology,” in Dr. J. Hastings’s 
Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics, 2 See above, pp. 112 sg, 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 273 

made cannot be refused, and the parents must keep the girl until 
he comes to take her as his wife.” } 

P. 404. A woman might neither speak with nor look at her Custom of 
daughter's husband.—In some of the tribes of New South Wales, Baaetg 
particularly it would seem among the Kamilaroi, if a man had a man and 
spoken to his wife’s mother he had to leave the camp and pitch his his wife's 
rude shelter of branches and bark at a distance from it. There peat 
he had to remain in seclusion till the taint contracted by talking to ; 
his mother-in-law might be supposed to be purged or worn away.? 
Among the Arunta of Central Australia a man has to avoid not 
only his actual mother-in-law but also all the women who belong to 
her subclass, and similarly a woman has to avoid not only her actual 
son-in-law but also all the men who belong to his subclass. On 
this subject Mr. F. J. Gillen tells us that “no man may speak to, 
look at, or go anywhere near a woman of the class to which the 
mother of his wife, or wives, belongs. All women of this class are 
mitra to him. The same law applies to the woman—that is to say, 
she must not speak to, look at, or go near any man of the class 
from which the husband of a daughter would be drawn, This law 
is strictly carried out even now. A man or woman miira to each 
other will make a detour of half a mile rather than risk getting 
within distinguishing distance of the features.”% “There is a 
very extraordinary custom prevailing among the Watchandies 
(and perhaps among other tribes) whereby a newly married man 
is not permitted to look on his mother-in-law (aévacurra) for a 
certain ‘space of time. When she approaches he is obliged to 
retire, and should he not perceive her as she comes towards 
him, one of his fellows warns him of the fact and of the direction 
in which she is, and thereupon he retires in the opposite direction, 
without looking towards her, hiding himself behind a bush or 
a tree until it pleases her to go away, of which event he is im- 
mediately apprised by his comrades. Iwas not able to learn the 
origin of this custom, or the penalties entailed on those who 
infringe it.” 4 

- P. 405. An obligation rested on the men of the same subclass 
and totem as the victim to avenge his death.—Similarly of the 
tribes of New South Wales we are told that “when a blood feud 
has to be atoned, the whole totem (say, black-snake) of the aggressor 

1 John Fraser, ‘*The Aborigines of and Melbourne, 1896) p. 164. From 

New South Wales,” Journal and Pro- 
ceedings of the Royal Society of New 
South Wales, xvi, (1882) p. 222. 

2 John Fraser, op. ¢zt. p. 224. 

3 F. J. Gillen, in Report on the Work 
of the Horn Scientific Expedition to 
Central Australia, Part iv. (London 

VOL. IV 

* 

the context it appears that by ‘‘ class” 
Mr. Gillen here means any one of the 
four subclasses Panunga, Purula, 
Bulthara, and Kumara. 

4 A. Oldfield, ‘On the Aborigines 
of Australia,” Zvransactions of the 
Ethnological Society of London, New 
Series, iii. (1865) p. 251. 

T 

Wives 
obtained 
by the 
exchange 
of sisters 
or other 
female 
relatives. 

274 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 

meets the totem (say, bandicoot) of the victim ; champions are 
selected to represent each side as above, and the remainder of the 
men of these totems are spectators.” ? 

P. 409. This custom of exchanging sisters, etc.—The custom 
of obtaining a wife by giving a sister or other female relative in 
exchange was widespread among the Australian aborigines. Speak- 
ing of the natives of the Lower Murray and Lower Darling Rivers 
a writer observes: “‘ Polygamy is allowed to any extent, and this 
law is generally taken advantage of by those who chance to be rich 
in sisters, daughters, or female wards, to give in exchange for wives. 
No man can get a wife unless he has a sister, ward, or daughter, 
whom he can give in exchange. Fathers of grown-up sons frequently 
exchange their daughters for wives, not for their sons, however, but 
for themselves, even although they already have two or three. Cases 
of this kind are indeed very hard for the sons, but being aboriginal 
law they must bear it as best they can, and that too without murmur; 
and to make the matter harder still to bear, the elders of a tribe 
will not allow the young men to go off to other tribes to steal wives 
for themselves, as such measures would be the certain means of 
entailing endless feuds with their accompanying bloodshed, in the 
attempts that would surely be made with the view of recovering 
the abducted women. Young men, therefore, not having any 
female relatives or wards under their control must, as a consequence 
of the aboriginal law om the subject, live all their lives in single 
blessedness, unless they choose to take up with some withered old 
hags whom nobody owns, merely for the purpose of having their 
fires cared for, their water-vessels filled, and their baggage carried 
from camp to camp.” ? 

P. 501. In Africa . . . the custom of polyandry is apparently 
unknown.—This is a mistake. Polyandry is practised by the 
Bahima and Baziba of Central Africa. 

P. 503. Australia, where the husband regularly goes to live 
with her husband's people.—However, according to Mr. Aldridge, 
of Maryborough! Queensland, “when a man marries a woman from 
a distant locality, he goes to her tribelet and identifies himself with 
her people. This is a rule with very few exceptions. Of course, I 
speak of them as they were in their wild state. He becomes part 
of and one of the family. In the event of a war expedition, the 
daughter’s husband acts as a blood-relation, and will fight and kill 

1 John Fraser, ‘‘ The Aborigines of | and Riverine Depression of the Lower 
New South Wales,” Journal and Pro- Murray, Lower Murrumbidgee, Lower 
ceedings of the Royal Society of New Lachline, and Lower Darling,” Jozrnal 
South Wales, xvi. (1882) p. 226. and Proceedings of the Royal Society of 

2 Peter Beveridge, ‘‘Of the Abori- Mew South Wales, xvii. (1883) p- 23- 
gines inhabiting the great Lacustrine 3 See above, vol. ii. p. 538. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 275 

his own blood-relations if blows are struck by his wife’s relations. 
I have seen a father and son fighting under these circumstances, 
and the son would most certainly have killed his father if others 

had not interfered.” 1 

1 Quoted by Professor E. B. Tylor, 
“On a Method of Investigating the 
Development of Institutions,” Journal 

of the Anthropological Institute, xviii. - 

(1889) pp. 250 sg. I regret that in 

arguing against Prof. Tylor’s view 
(vol. i. pp. 503 5g.) I overlooked this 
statement of Mr. Aldridge, though it 
was quoted by Prof. Tylor in the 
paper to which I referred. 

The two 
races of 
New 
Guinea, the 
Papuans 
and the 
Melan- 
esians. 

Totemism 
of the 
Eastern 
Melanesians 
or Massim 

NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

VOLUME II 

P. 46. Totemism in South-Eastern New Guinea.—The evidence 
for the practice of totemism in South-Eastern New Guinea and 
the neighbouring islands has now been published more fully by Dr. 
C. G. Seligmann. I will here supplement the account given in the 
text by some further particulars drawn from his book.? 

Dr. Seligmann tells us that New Guinea is inhabited by two 
entirely different races of men, the Papuans in the west and the 
Melanesians in the east. The Papuans of the west are a congeries 
of frizzly-haired and often mop-headed peoples of a dark chocolate 
or sooty brown’ complexion, with high heads, long arched noses, 
prominent brow-ridges, and receding foreheads. The Melanesians 
are smaller and of a lighter complexion, with shorter noses, less 
prominent brow-ridges, and rounded, not retreating foreheads ; 
their hair, like that of the Papuans, is frizzly. Further, Dr. Selig- 
mann distinguishes the Melanesians of New Guinea into two 
branches, a Western and an Eastern. The Western Melanesians 
border on the Papuans at Cape Possession and extend thence 
eastward to Orangerie Bay. They seem to have absorbed some 
Papuan elements by admixture with the aborigines whom they 
probably found in possession of the country when they immigrated 
into it from the east ; indeed many of them, for example the Koita 
near Port Moresby, still speak Papuan languages. The Eastern 
Melanesians or Massim, as Dr. Seligmann calls them, occupy ,the 
south-eastern extremity of British New Guinea from Cape Nelson 
on the north and Orangerie Bay on the south, and they are also 
spread over the adjacent archipelagoes, including the Louisiade 
Archipelago, the Trobriand Islands, the Marshall Bennet Islands, 
and Murua or Woodiark Islands.? ; 

The most characteristic feature in the culture of the Eastern 
Melanesians or Massim is the existence of a peculiar form of 
totemism with maternal descent. The members of each clan have 
as totems a series of associated animals belonging to different 

1C. G. Seligmann, M.D., Zhe (Cambridge, 1910). 
Melanesians of British New Guinea 2 C. G. Seligmann, of. cit. pp. 1-7. 

276 

VOL, 11 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 277 

classes of the organic kingdom ; ordinarily thése linked totems, as 
Dr. Seligmann calls them, are a bird, a fish, 4 snake, and a plant. 
But a four-footed vertebrate, such as the monitor lizard or the 
crocodile, may be added to each series of linked totems, while one 
of the orders of the animal kingdom, which ought to be represented 
in the series of linked totems, may be absent in a particular place. 
Towards the north-western borders of the district the typical 
arrangement of the totems into a linked series of living organisms 
has disappeared and rocks may be added to the list of totems, and 
in these parts the snake totem is particularly important ; indeed the 
snake is here sometimes regarded as the creator of the world. On 
the whole, however, throughout the area occupied by the Eastern 
Melanesians or Massim the most important totems are the birds, 
and the first question commonly put to a stranger is, “What is 
your bird?” In old days the rule of exogamy was strictly observed 
by the totemic clans, but at present it is being disregarded.} 

The totemic system of the Eastern Melanesians, so far as it is 
practised at Wagawaga on Milne Bay and in Tubetube, a small 
island of the Engineer Group off the eastern extremity of New 
Guinea, has already been described* and nothing further need 
be said on the subject. But it may be well to give some particulars 
as to the totemism of these Eastern Melanesians or Massim in 
other places. 

Thus at Bartle Bay, on the northern coast of British New Totemism 
Guinea, there are three communities called respectively Wamira, A Herds 
Wedau, and Gelaria, each of which is divided into a number of Ney 
totemic and exogamous clans with descent in the female line. ‘The Guinea. 
Wamira communities comprise twenty-one clans each, while the 
Gelaria community comprises only three. Each clan has usually a 
series of linked totems. Thus, for example, in the Wamira com- 
munity the Mara clan has for its totems the white pigeon and the 
mountain bird; the Iriki clan has for its totems the cockerel, the 
blue pigeon, and a red poisonous snake (é77kie?) ; the Tanibolanai 
clan has for its totems the lizard, the sea-gull, and the quail; the 
Radava clan has for its totems the cassowary, a snake (gadad?), and 
a fish ; the Inagabadi clan has for its totems the cassowary, a snake 
(gabadt), and two kinds of fish ; the Iaronai clan has for its totems 
the white pig, the quail, the crow, and the eel; the Vava and Gebai 
clans have each for their totems a hawk, a small bird, and the 
shark ; and the Garuboi clan has for its totems the crow, a snake 
(garuboi), a fish, and a bird. In the Wedau community the 
Garuboi clan has for its totems the moon and a snake (garudotet) ; 
the Iriki clan has for its totems the cockerel, the blue pigeon, and 
a snake (irikie?) ; the Manibolonai clan has for its totems the sea- 

1C. G. Seligmann, The Melanesians of British New Guinea, pp. 9 sg. 
2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 46-55. 

Exogamous 
classes at 
Bartle Bay 
in New 
Guinea, 
Respect 
shewn for 
the totem. 

278 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 1 

gull, the quail, a sea bird, and a snake; the Aurana clan has for its 
totems the sea-hawk, the hawk, and the cockerel ; the Bouni clan 
has for its totems a sea .fish, a freshwater fish, and a bird; the 
Derama clan has for its totems the lizard, the quail, the sea-gull, 
and a sea bird ; the Diguma clan has for its totems the alligator, a 
bird, and a snake; the Lavarata clan has for its totems a tree and 
two stones; and the Gora clan has for its totems the sun and a 
parrot. In the Gelaria community the Garuboi clan has for its 
totems a constrictor snake (garwéo/) and the hornbill; the Girimoa 
clan has for its totems a constrictor snake (garudoz), the hornbill, 
and the pig; and the Elewa clan has for its totems the dog and 
the pigeon. 

Further, these totemic clans are grouped in exogamous classes 
or phratries. Six such exogamous classes or phratries are recorded 
for the Wamira, nine for the Wedau, and two for the Gelaria.* 
Though the clans are inherited from the mother, a man is forbidden 
to marry into his father’s clan as well as into his own ; the rule of 
exogamy is absolute. A man will not eat the flesh of his totemic 
animal, though in some cases he may kill it. Further, he will not 
eat or injure his father’s totem. If a man sees his totem snake 
lying on the path, he will go round it to avoid touching it. But 
the natives deny that their totems help them ; the only exception to 
this rule is the Elewa clan of the Gelaria community, who have the 
dog for their chief totem. They think that their dogs help them, 
and that strange dogs will not bite them. They are fond of the 
animal, and bury a dead dog if they find it. A Wamira man of 
the Logaloga clan will kill his totemic bird, the red parrot, and he 
will wear its feathers, but he will not eat the bird. An Janibolanai 
man will not kill or eat the monitor lizard, his most important 
totem, but he will use a drum, the tympanum of which is formed of 
the lizard’s skin. An Jaronai man will keep white pigs, his totem, 
though he will not eat them. A Lavarata man, who has the 
modewa tree for his totem, will not use the wood of the tree as fuel, 
One Wedau clan which has a stone for one of its totems will boil 
chips of the sacred stone and drink the water in order to. get 
strength in war; people come from far and near to drink the in- 
vigorating beverage.* The Wamira word for a totem is éariaua, a 
term which they apply to any supernatural or uncanny agency, 
including white men. They speak of the totemic animal, reptile, 
or bird as the father or grandfather of the family.5 

In battle a man would avoid men of his own totem on the other 
side and would not throw spears at them. “He would recognize 

1 C, G. Seligmann, Zhe A/elanesians 4 C. G. Seligmann, of. czt. pp. 450- 
of British New Guinea, pp. 446-450. 452. 
2C. G. Seligmann, of. cé#. pp. 
437-439. 5 C. G. Seligmann, of. ct, p. 446, 
3 C. G. Seligmann, of. cz. p. 447. | quoting the Rev. Copland King. 

VOL. I NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 279 

his clansmen by their gya (lit. nose), probably méaning face, having 
previously met them at the feasts given for miles around, for no 
distinctive clan badge is worn in battle.”! Perhaps among these 
people, as among the Baganda,? each totemic clan has its own 
physical type which an experienced eye can recognise at once. 

About thirty-five miles west of Bartle Bay is the Mukaua com- Totemism 

munity, occupying six settlements separated from each other by not 3 ee 
more than two hundred yards. Four of the settlements are hamlets Be 
containing households of only one totemic clan. The remaining 
two settlements contain two clans each; but the houses of each 
clan, though they are built close together, are held to form separate 
hamlets, each with its own name and headman. Each clan has its 
totem or totems, which children inherit from their father. The 
totems of the Murimuri clan are the Goura pigeon, the crow, five 
kinds of fish, a clam, and a cephalopod. The totems of the 
Wairapia clan are the dog, the cuscus, the bandicoot, a fish, a 
large lizard (perhaps the Varanus sp.), and two kinds of banana. 
The Kaiwunu clan has for its totem a fish of the same name 
(Raiwunu). The Inauboana clan has for its totems the turtle, a 
constrictor snake, and two kinds of fish. The Yabayabata clan 
has for its totems the red parrot, a cephalopod, a fish (perhaps 
a kind of sea-perch), and a kind of banana. ‘The Kaukepo clan 
has for its totems the flying fox, a constrictor snake, the turtle, the 
dugong, and the donugegadara, which is perhaps a small whale. 
The clan Natuwosa has for its totems the turtle, a lizard, the sting 
ray, and another kind of fish. The Mukaua people do not kill or 
eat their totems, but they use feathers of their totemic birds. If a 
man who has the monitor lizard or the cuscus for his totem kills 
one of these animals, the headman is very angry and the culprit 
himself suffers from boils. If a man catches his totemic fish by 
accident, he will not return it to the water; but a man of another 
totem will disengage the fish from the hook and eat it. -A man 
who has bananas for his totem may plant them and pick the fruit 
for other people, although he may not himself partake of it.? 

*Some four miles to the east of the Mukaua community is the Totemism 
Bogaboga community, who speak the same language and observe ee 
the same customs. The Bogaboga are divided into five totemic i ea 
clans. Among the totems are birds, fish, bananas, forest trees, Guinea. 
and a prominent mountain, which is the chief totem of the Kibiris 
clan. People who have trees for their totems may not fell or 
injure the trees, nor may they use the wood for building houses or 
canoes, nor for burning. People who have the mountain for their 
totem may not look at it or set foot on it. Boils are believed to 

1 C. G, Seligmann, The Alelanestans 3C. G. Seligmann, of. cit. pp. 
of British New Guinea, p. 451. 740-742, from information furnished 
2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 505 59. by Mr. E. L. Giblin. 

Totemism 
among 
the Kubiri 
at Cape 
Nelson, 

Totemism 
in the 
Trobriand 
Islands. 

280 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. II 

break out on people who eat their totemic fish. A Bogaboga man 
made the following statement as to certain totemic charms which 
he made use of: “ Each one of my fish-totems has a spell (sara) 
named after it, and when I am fishing if I see a fish that in any 
way reminds me of that fish [z.e. the totem fish] in its appearance, 
movement or colour, I use the spell of that fish [#e. of that totem 
fish], and then am sure to catch successfully and to spear straight: 
In fighting I would pray to the muara of the manubada [the fish- 
hawk] so that just as it darts down from the sky and never misses 
its prey, so will my spear dart straightly and pierce deeply. When 
on a raid I would repeat the muara of the kisakisa [a hawk] so 
that even as it snatches meat from a man’s hand or from a cooking- 
pot, so may I snatch or seize my spoil from the place of the 
enemy.” ! 

Still further to the west, at Cape Nelson, “totemism is well 
developed among the Kubiri. The crocodile is a totem and its 
intercession is sought by placing food in the rivers for it to eat. 
The more common customs of totemism are in full force. The 
crocodile clan has many subsidiary totems; these include two shell- 
fish, because their shells are like the scales of the crocodile, three 
freshwater fish, because the crocodile feeds on them, a variety of 
taro, and a kind of banana which has the same name as the croco- 
dile and which is used to feed it. Even subsidiary totems may not 
be eaten, and in some cases they may not be touched.” 2 

From this brief but interesting notice of Kubiri totemism. it 
would seem that the system is developing into a religion, since the 
totemic crocodile is propitiated by offerings of food. Further, we | 
learn some of the causes which give rise to subsidiary totems. It 
appears that anything connected with the principal totem, such as 
the animals which it feeds on, or anything that resembles it in 
appearance, or anything, however different, which bears the same 
name, may thereby acquire a sacred character and become a 
subsidiary totem. 

So much for totemism among the Massim or Eastern Melan- 
esians on the mainland of New Guinea, A similar system of linked 
totems is in vogue among the people of the same stock who inhabit 
the archipelagoes immediately to the east of that great island. 

Thus the natives of the Trobriand Islands are divided into four 
totemic and exogamous clans, the names of which, with their linked 
totems, are as follows :— 

1 C. G, Seligmann, The A/e/anestans _sq., quoting Dr. Strong. We have 

of British New Guinea, pp. 740, 742 seen that totemism is practised among 
Sq. the Kworafi of Cape Nelson. See 

2 C. G. Seligmann, of. cé#. pp. 743 above, vol. ii, p. 55. 

vou. 1 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 281 

i 

Name of Cian. Bird Totem. Animal Totem. Fish Totem. | Plant Totem. 
Malasi - | pigeon. . | pig. . | P mawa . | Aatzaula 
Lukuba =. fish-hawk =. | dog”s—«tj . | ? mamila meku 
Lukosisiga . , green parrot. | crocodile . | ? atsoa . gtrigirt 

¢ Lokulobuta | lory . . | monitor lizard | ? mwaluya . butir 

{ 

Of these totems the birds are in every clan of paramount import- 
ance. Doubts exist as to the fish totems, which in any case are 
unimportant by comparison with the other totems... A man ought 
not to eat his totemic bird; if he breaks the rule, his stomach will 
swell and he may die. However, even this fundamental rule is 
now breaking down under foreign influence. Some people who 
have the pig for one of their totems think that if they ate wild pigs, 
their stomachs would swell up. Others would eat tame black pigs, 
but not yellowish-brown pigs, because that, they say, is the colour 
of man. Some men of the Malasi clan keep pigs, their totem ; and 
throughout the Trobriand Islands the pig is well treated.2 The 
totemic clans are exogamous, in other words, no man may marry a 
woman of his own totem. However, the rule is now being relaxed. 
In the old days a man was also forbidden to marry a woman of his 
father’s totemic clan. Some men also refrain from eating their 
father’s totemic birds and fish. But contact with white traders is 
rapidly wearing away the scruples of the natives on these points.$ 

The natives of the Trobriand Islands have the classificatory The classi- 
.system of relationship. Thus in the generation above his own a fcatory 
man applies the same term, Zama, to his father, to his father’s brothers, he 
and to the husbands of his mother’s sisters. He applies the same ship in the 
term, zza, to his mother, to his mother’s sisters, to the wives of his Trobriand 
father’s brothers, and to the wives of his mother’s brothers. _In his /$!"4s- 
own generation a man applies the same term, /uguza, to his sisters 
and to his female cousins, the daughters either of his father’s 
brothers or of his mother’s sisters. He applies the same term, ¢va, 
to his elder brother, to his elder sister, to his cousin, the child 
é..ner of his father’s brother or of his mother’s sister, and also to 
his wife’s sister. A woman applies the same term, ‘va, to her hus- 
band’s brothers. A man applies the same term, Jwada, to his 
younger brother, to his younger sister, to his male cousin, the son 
either of his father’s brother or of his mother’s sister, and also to 
his wife’s sister and to her husband. A woman applies the same 
term, dwada, to her husband’s brother and to his wife. In the 
generation below his own a man applies the same term, /a?u, to his 

1 C. G. Seligmann, 7he Alelanestans 2 C. G. Seligmann, of. cit. pp. 680 
of British New Guinea, pp. 677 59 

59. POG, Seligmann, of. cit. p. 683. 

Totemism 
in the 
Marshall 
Bennet 
Islands. 

Totemism 
in Murua 

or 
Woodlark 
Islands. 

282 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. II 

own child, to his brother’s child, and also to the child of his mother’s 
brother! This last application suggests that a man has, or used to 
have, access to the wife of his mother’s brother, since he applies 
the same term to her child that he applies to his own. We have 
seen that a similar implication is conveyed by classificatory terms 
in Mota, Uganda, and some tribes of North American Indians.” 

A similar system of totemism prevails in the Marshall Bennet 
Islands to the east of the Trobriands. Of the linked totems the 
birds are the most important, next to them perhaps come the fish 
totems, and after them the plant totems. The snake totems are 
insignificant ; indeed some clans are said to have no snake totems. 
Further, certain four-footed vertebrates, the dog, the pig, and the 
large monitor lizards are totem animals on some, if not all, of the 
islands. On Gawa there are five clans with the fish-hawk, the 
pigeon, the frigate-bird, the lory, and a bird called ¢arakaka for 
their chief totems. On Iwa there are four clans with the fish-hawk, 
the pigeon, the frigate-bird, and the lory for their chief totems. In 
each island one particular clan is recognised as traditionally the 
strongest and most influential. In Gawa the dominant clan is the 
Fish-hawk clan ; in Iwa it is the Pigeon clan. Men will not eat 
or injure their totemic birds and fishes. The objection to coming 
into contact with the totem fish is carried so far that a married man 
or woman will not bring his or her spouse’s fish into the house, but 
will cook and eat it on the beach. A man will not injure his 
totemic plant, but if it proves troublesome in his garden he might 
ask a man of another totem to cut it down for him. Every one 
shews nearly the same respect for his father’s totemic animals 
that he shews for his own. No one will kill or eat his father’s bird 
and fish totems, nor will he uproot or injure his father’s totemic 
plant. The totemic clans are still strictly exogamous. No man 
marries a woman of his own totem, and in the old days no man or 
woman would marry into his or her father’s totemic clan. The 
origin of the totemic clans is explained in Iwa by a legend that 
each clan came out of a different hole in the ground bringing with 
it the totemic animals, while the totemic plants grew near the holes 
from which they emerged.? In the Trobriand Islands the origin of 
the totemic clans is set forth in a similar legend.* 

A system of linked totems is found also in Murua or Woodlark 
Island, to the east of the Marshall Bennet Islands. Among the 
linked totems are the Torres Straits pigeon and a large fish called 
gudowara; the scarlet lory and the turtle; the fish-hawk and the 
rock-cod ; the cockatoo and a large red fish called dighosara; the 

1 C.G. Seligmann, Zhe Alelanestans estans of British New Guinea, pp» 
of British New Guinea, p. 707. 684-688. 

2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 510 59. 4C. G. Seligmann, of. ctt. p- 

2C. G. Seligmann, 7%e .Velan- 679. 

VOL, IT as NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 283 

crow and the shark ; the flying fox and a big predatory fish called 
gagatu; the megapod and the dugong; the blue pigeon and a 
snake ; the frigate-bird and the crocodile. There is some difference 
of opinion as to how a man should treat his totem bird, but no one 
will hesitate to kill and eat his totem fish. On the other hand, no 
one will kill, eat, or in any way come into contact with his father’s 
totem bird or fish, if he can help it; and no one will marry into 
his father’s totemic clan. The name for a totemic clan is man,1 
Again, a system of linked totems prevails in the Louisiades, an Totemism 
archipelago situated some way to the south-east of New Guinea ; in the 
but details of the system are wanting. Every person has a number /°usiades. 
ystem are wanting very perso s a numbe 
of linked totems, which may consist of one or more birds with a 
fish, a snake, and often a tree. One of the bird totems is more 
important than the others. The place of the fish totem may be 
taken by a turtle or alligator, and the place of the snake totem is 
sometimes taken by a lizard. There seems to be no grouping of 
the clans in classes or phratries in any of the islands of the 
Louisiades.? 

P. 47. Totemism at Wagawaga.—At Wagawaga, in South- Mutual 
eastern New Guinea, and in the neighbouring small island of avoidance 
Tubetube, relations by marriage observe some of those customs of aie 
ceremonial avoidance of which we have met with so many examples teiace at 
among totemic and exogamous peoples. Many such relations may Wagawaga 
not mention each other’s names. Thus, a man may not mention aia 
the name of his daughter-in-law, and she may not mention his. : 
Husband and wife are also forbidden to utter each other’s names, 
and so are brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law. But the restriction 
is not limited to persons of different sexes ; for brothers-in-law will 
not mention each other’s names, nor will a father-in-law and a son- 
in-law. Further, “the majority of connections by marriage who 
are of opposite sexes and between whom there is a name avoidance 
also avoid coming into contact with each other. A man would Avoidance 
most rigidly avoid talking to a sister of his wife whether he met of a wife's 
her alone or in the company of others. If he met her alone he *St*™ 
would avoid coming near her at all; if this were impossible, as 
when meeting on a jungle track, brother-in-law and sister-in-law 
would turn their backs to each other in passing and one, usually 
the woman, would step aside into the bush. A man avoids his avoidance 
mother-in-law less rigidly than his wife’s sisters, although if he meets of a wife's 
her alone he treats her in the same way, and even in public does ™°" 
not usually enter her house unless he is living there. In his own 
house he may talk to her a little, and he may eat food she has 
cooked, but he does not take the pot containing food directly from ° 
her. Father-in-law and daughter-in-law avoid each other very much 

1. G, Seligmann, The Alelanesians of British New Guinea, pp. 689-691. - 
2 C. G. Seligmann, of. cét. pp. 736 59. 

The Kaya- 
Kaya of 
Dutch 
New 
Guinea. 

284 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. II 

as do mother-in-law and son-in-law. A man does not avoid his 
brothers’ wives.” This custom of rigidly avoiding a wife’s sisters 
can hardly be explained otherwise than as a precaution intended to 
prevent an improper intimacy between a man and his sisters-in-law. 

P. 59. The Tugeri or Kaya-Kaya . . . are reported to have a 
complicated totemic system.—The Kaya-Kaya are a large tribe, 
numbering many thousands, who inhabit the southern coast of 
Dutch New Guinea from Merauke westward as far at least as the 
village of Makaling. They are a tall, slender, but muscular race 
with long hooked noses and a light-brown skin. Their staple food 
is sago, but they also plant bananas, yams, and taro. These planta- 
tions are very carefully kept, and in the low swampy lands, which 
skirt the coast, channels are cut at right angles to each other for 
the purpose of running off the flood water. The first work of laying 
out a new plantation is done by the men; afterwards the women 
keep it in order. Many coco-nut palms are planted near the 
villages and along the coast. The only domestic animals bred by 
the Kaya-Kaya are pigs and dogs; but dogs were quite unknown to 
the tribe before they came into contact with Europeans. Game is 
plentiful and is much hunted. The favourite quarry is the wild 
boar and a large species of wallaby ; but crocodiles, cassowaries, 
and many marsh birds are also killed and eaten.” 

The houses of the Kaya-Kaya are built on the ground, not 
raised on piles, All the male inhabitants of a village live and sleep 
together in a few men’s houses (axmdnga safé), which generally 
stand at each end of the village. Between them in a row are the 
women’s houses (d:bti safd), a house for every mother, her children, 
and female relatives. Thus the number of the women’s houses 
corresponds roughly to the number of the families. . The unmarried 
men (ezvd/) sleep in the men’s houses, but must pass the day in 
the 4ofad, which is a bachelor’s club-house outside of the village. 
The men may not enter the women’s houses, and the women may 
not enter the men’s houses.* 

Every year when the weather is favourable the Kaya-Kaya 
make joint raids into the territory of neighbouring tribes to carry 
off human heads. Before they behead a prisoner they ask him 
his name; then having decapitated him they leave the trunk 
weltering in its blood and carry back the dripping head to the 
village. They eat the brain and the tongue, and having mummified 
the head or stripped it of the flesh they hang it up in one of the 

1 C.G. Seligmann, 7he Alelanesians naturwissenschaftlichen Alasse der 
of British New Guinea (Cambridge, Adaiserlichen Akademie der Wissen- 
1910), pp. 485 sg. schaften (Vienna), cxv. (1906) pp. 

2 R. Poch, ‘‘Vierter Bericht iiber 895 s¢., 897 sy. 
meine Reise nach Neu - Guinea,” 

Sttzungsberichte der mathematisch- 3 R. Poch, of. cé#t. p. 899. 

VOL, Il NOTES AND CORRECTION: 285 

men’s houses. The man who took the head bestows the name of 
the slain man on a child who is his next of kin. Children for 
whom no head has been cut off have no name.! 

From time to time great festivals are held, to which many Maskea 

hundreds of people come from neighbouring villages. On these dances. 
occasions dances are danced in which the dancers wear masks 
representing various animals. The occasions of such festivals are Bull- 
the successful issue of a head-hunt, the initiation of young men, fo@Frers. 
a marriage, a good harvest, and so on. The Kaya-Kaya are 
acquainted with the bull-roarer, which they call sosom, They give 
the same name Sosom to a mythical giant, who is supposed to 
appear every year with the south-east monsoon. When he comes, 
a festival is held in his honour and bull-roarers are swung. 
Women may not see the bull-roarers, or they would die. Boys are 
presented to the giant and he kills them, but brings them to life 
again.” 

The Kaya-Kaya are divided into totemic and exogamous clans Totemic 
with descent in the paternal line; in other words, no man may sara 

> : aya 
marry a woman of his own clan, and children take their totem Kaya, 
from their father. Some of the clans include totemic subclans. 
Both animals and plants figure among the totems. The following 
is the list of the Kaya-Kaya clans and subclans, so far as they 
were ascertained by Mr. R. Poch:— 

1. The Gépsi or Coco-nut-palm people: to them belong the 
Kiué-boan or Descendants of the Crocodile. 

2. The Afahise or Sago-palm people: to them belong the 
Gat-boan or Descendants of the Dog. 

3. The Kakise or Cassowary people: to them belong the 
Samkdke or Kangaroo people, and the Zakdéf-doan or the Fire 
people, so called because they set fire to the grass in hunting. 

4. The Bragdése or the Yam people: to them belong the 
Kidib-boan or Descendants of the Eagle. 

5. The Diwarek or the Djamboe people (djamboe is a Malay 
word applied to an apple-like tree-fruit): to them belong the Sofé- 
boan*or Potatoe people, and the Azda-boan or Descendants of a 
certain Fish (German Weunjisch). 

6. The Basise or the Pig people. 

7. The Wibartk or the Lizard people. 

The Gépsi or Coco-nut-palm people enjoy a high reputation, but 
on the strength of it they are not entitled to order the Sago-palm 
people about. Marriage between the clans is regulated by custom ; 
thus it is said that the Coco-nut-palm man is the husband of the 

1 R, Poch, * Vierter Bericht iiber Adzser/ichen Akademie der Wissen- 
meine Reise nach Neu-Guinea,” schaften (Vienna), cxv. (1906) p. 901. 
Sitaungsterichte der mathematisch- 
naturwissenschaftlichen Klasse der 2 R. Poch, of. cit. pp. 9OT, 902. 

Mutual 
avoidance 
of brothers 
and sisters 
in the 
New 
Hebrides 
and New 
Caledonia. 

286 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. II 

Sago-palm woman. Each clan is forbidden to eat certain foods. 
Thus the Coco-nut-palm people may eat coco-nuts, but not the 
flying squirrel (Pefaurus), which lives in these palms. The Sago 
people may eat sago, but not dogs, because they are descended 
from a dog. A man’s wife and children abstain from the same 
food from which he abstains.! 

Thus finding totemism practised by a large tribe in Dutch 
New Guinea we may reasonably surmise that it is practised by 
many more tribes of the same region, though the existence of the 
institution appears to have escaped the notice of the Dutch. 

P. 65. The New Caledonians have apparently the classificatory 
system of relationship.—Another writer tells us that among the 
New Caledonians “the uncle takes the place of the father and is 
also designated by the word ‘papa,’ and similarly the aunt is 
designated by the word ‘mamma,’ the native term for ‘papa’ being 
éaba, and the native term for ‘mamma’ being gnagna.” ® 

P. 77. Rules of avoidance . . . between brothers and sisters.— 
On this custom in the New Hebrides another writer (Father A. 
Deniau) observes : “ At Malo brother and sister never eat together 
and never go in each other’s company. If a sister is in a gathering 
and her brother afterwards appears there, she escapes or, if she 
cannot, she goes to a distance, squats on her heels, with her back 
turned and her eyes cast down to the ground, till her brother has 
disappeared. If by chance she meets him on the path, she throws 
herself aside, with her face turned in the opposite direction and 
her eyes lowered. If it is absolutely necessary that brothers and 
sisters should communicate with each other, they may do so only 
through the medium of a third person.”® Similarly in New 
Caledonia brothers and sisters “are very fond of each other. The 
brother will everywhere protect his sister, but will never speak to 
her ; on the contrary he shuns every occasion of being with her. 
He is completely separated from her by his education and he never 
addresses a word to her. I could not learn the cause of this 
custom.” 4 ; 

P. 96.—Dr. Rivers omitted to enquire whether a man may or may 
not marry a woman who has the same conceptional totem as himself. 
—Since the passage in the text was printed Dr. W. H. R, Rivers 
has learned from his correspondent in Melanesia that, just as I had 

1 R. Péch, ‘* Vierter Bericht iiber 3 Father A. Deniau, ‘‘ Croyances 

meine Reise nach Neu-Guinea,” religieuses et mceurs des indigénes de 
Sitzungsberichte der mathematisch- Yile Malo (Nouvelles Hebrides) a 
naturwissenschaftlichen Klasse der Yarrivée des missionaires en 1887,” Les 

Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissen- Missions catholiques, xxxiil. (1901) p. 

schaften (Vienna), cxv. (1906) p. 900. 

2 L. Moncelon, in Bulletins de la 
Société a? Anthropologie de Parts, Troi- 
sitme Série, ix. (1886) p. 366. 

358. 
4 Glaumont, ‘‘ Usages, moeurs et 
coutumes des Néo-Calédoniens,” Reve 
a’ ethnographie, vii. (1889) p. 84- 

VOL. 11 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 287 

conjectured, two persons who have the same conceptional totem Parallel 
are free to marry each other. Thus all the inferences which I had between 
provisionally drawn from my conjectural anticipation of this informa- aaa 
tion are confirmed. The resemblances between the conceptional totemism 
totemism of the Banks’ Islanders and that of the Central Australians of the 
are hence very close indeed. In neither people are the totems caine 
hereditary ; in both they are determined for each individual by the ana that 
fancy of his or her pregnant mother, who imagines that she has ee 
conceived through the entrance into her of a spirit without any weet ctians, 
help from the male sex. But of the two systems the Melanesian 

is the more primitive; indeed it answers exactly to what I had 
postulated on theoretical grounds as the absolutely primitive type 

of totemism.! For whereas the Australian mother imagines that 

what has entered her womb is a human spirit with an animal or 

plant for its totem, the Melanesian mother imagines that what has 
entered her womb is a spirit animal or spirit plant, and when her 

child is born she identifies it with the spirit animal or spirit plant 

which she had conceived. Further, while both peoples have a strict 

system of exogamous classes, neither of them applies the rule of 
exogamy to their totems; among the Melanesians, as among the 
Central Australians, a man is quite free to marry a woman who has 

the same conceptional totem as himself. The reason why both 
peoples, while adhering strictly to the rule of exogamy as regards 

the classes, do not apply the rule to their totems is very simple, as 

1 have already explained.2) When totems are not inherited but 
determined fortuitously by the fancies of pregnant women, the 
application to them of the rule of exogamy could not effect what 
exogamy was designed to effect, namely, the prevention of the 
marriage of near kin. Hence in the Banks’ Islands as in Central 
Australia the institutions of totemism and exogamy exist in- 
dependently side by side without mingling with or in any way 
affecting each other. In both places the exogamous class is a 

totally different thing from the totemic group or clan. Here we 

have pure totemism and pure exogamy. 

P. 183. They are divided into a large number of exogamous Exogamous 
families or clans.—Another Micronesian people who are divided ‘!@nsin the 
‘ oe Mortlock 

.Iinto exogamous clans are the Mortlock Islanders. Their islands j.1anas, 
form ‘part of the Caroline Group. Each clan traces its descent 
from a single ancestress and is hereditary in the female line. No 
man may marry or have sexual intercourse with a woman of his 
own clan. A breach of this rule is regarded as incest of the most 
heinous sort to be expiated only by death. Every member of the 
criminal’s clan would avenge such an outrage. Each clan has its 
own lands, which are sometimes in different islands. The social 
1 See vol. i. pp. 157 599. 
2 Vol. i. pp. 165 sg., vol. ii. pp. 96 5g., vol. iv. pp. 127 sg. 

288 © TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 11 

Exogamous head of the clan is the oldest woman, who is treated with particular 

clans in the 
Mortlock 
Islands. 

Separation 
of husband 
and wife 
in the 
family life 
of the 
Malays 

of South 
Sumatra. 

respect ; the political head of the clan is the oldest man of the 
oldest family. When a chief dies, he is succeeded by his brother 
or other nearest male relation. Men and women of the same clan 
are kept strictly apart ; all the traditional laws and customs of the 
islanders, we. are told, aim at making impossible the near approach 
of the two sexes to each other in the same clan. Hence a brother 
and sister never sleep in the same house. The brother sleeps in 
the large men’s house (/e/); the sister sleeps in her mother’s hut 
(¢m). In the presence of her husband a woman may not stand 
beside her brother while he sits, and she may not touch him with 
her hand. If she sees him sitting on the shore and he refuses to 
rise at her bidding, she must pass him in a stooping attitude. It is 
only in the earliest years of childhood that brothers and sisters are 
allowed to play together. As the mer of each clan have to seek 
their wives or other female consorts in a different clan, they are 
almost always absent from home. And as the children never 
belong to their father’s clan but always to their mother’s, it follows 
that in a war between the clans fathers and sons may be arrayed 
against each other. On the other hand, if two warriors meet in a 
fight and learn that they are members of the same clan, they will 
not hurt each other. In short, the whole social system of the 
Mortlock Islanders is built up on these exogamous clans with descent 
in the maternal linet | 

P. 193. A woman at marriage remains in her mother’s family 
and her mother’s house, where she is visited by her husband.—A 
social system under which husband and wife live all their lives long 
apart from each other in separate families and in separate houses 
is so alien to our habits that it may be well to illustrate it a little 
more fully. Apparently within the East Indian Archipelago this 
remarkable arrangement prevails only in Sumatra among some 
Malay peoples who practise exogamy and mother-kin.2 The follow- 
ing is the account given of the custom by the late Professor G. A. 
Wilken, one of the best authorities on Malay institutions. Speaking 
of the custom of tracing descent in the female line, which he calls 
by the common but inappropriate name of matriarchate, Wilken 
observes: ® “There are only a few peoples among whom this, 
institution is preserved intact. Amongst them are the Malays of 
South Sumatra, with whom exclusive descent in the female line lies 
at the foundation of their social life. The children of the daughters 
therefore belong to the family, but the children of the sons do not. 

1 J. Kubary, ‘‘Die Bewohner der 2G. A. Wilken, Handleiding voor 
Mortlock-Inseln,” Alittheilungen der de vergelijkende WVolkenkunde van 
geographischen Gesellschaft in Ham- Nederlandsch-Indié (Leyden, 1893), p- 
burg, 1878-79, pp. 21-29, 37 (separate 325. 
reprint). 3G. A. Wilken, of. cit. pp. 323 5¢ 

VOL II. NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 289 

The family is propagated through the woman; she is heir. A 
necessary consequence of this is that at her marriage the woman 
remains in the family, in the household, to which she belongs ; that 
is, she remains with her brothers and sisters. In fact, she does not 
even quit the house in which she was born and grew up. But the 
husband also on his side remains at marriage, like his wife, in his 
family and similarly does not quit the family dwelling. Thus 
marriage does not bring with it cohabitation ; in truth even then 
man and wife live apart. Their wedded life manifests itself only 
in the form of visits which the husband pays to his wife. That is, 
he goes to his wife by day, helps her in her work at the rice-fields, 
and shares with her‘the noontide meal. At least that is the 
procedure in the honeymoon. Afterwards the visits by day grow 
rarer, and the husband comes now and then at evening to her house 
and stays there, if he is a faithful spouse, till the next morning. 
Thus what we have to bear in mind is that husband and wife do 
not live together nor form a common household, but that each of 
them stays in his or her family and household with his or her 
brothers and sisters and forms with them a single household. So 
the household consists not of husband, wife, and children, but of 
brothers, sisters, and sisters’ children. At the head of the house- The 
hold stands the eldest brother and wields authority also over his ee 
sisters’ children in as much as they belong to the household. The frotner 
maternal uncle, the mama, is in respect of his rights and duties the the head 
proper father also of his sisters’ children, the Zamanakan. of the 

‘The father, in as much as he does not belong to the household, saa 
has nothing to say to his children. In his turn he also, at least if 
he is an, eldest brother, stands at the head of the household 
composed of his brothers and sisters and his sisters’ children. On 
the death of the eldest brother the next brother becomes head of 
the household, and so on till all the brothers are dead. Then the 
household is broken up. Each sister with her children then forms 
a new household, and when she dies the children again form a 
household with the eldest son at their head. Thus the house- 
hold does not always consist of brothers, sisters, and sisters’ 
children ; sometimes it consists of a mother with her children, 
Yet the first is the normal household, the second only a transitional 
one. Properly speaking a woman, if she is married and has 
children, belongs to two households, namely, to the household of 
her brothers and sisters and to the nascent household of her 
children. The latter remains in a state of abeyance so long as 
the former exists; it only comes into independent being when 
the other, through the death of all the brothers, has ceased to 
exist. 

“With this institution the right of inheritance is bound up. In 
the first place it is to be remarked that in marriage there is no such 

VOL. IV U 

No com- 
munity 
of goods 
between 
husband 
and wife. 

Children 
do not 
inherit 
from their 
father, but 
he may 
make pre- 
sents to 
them in his 
lifetime. 

Marriage 
customs 
in the 
Poggi 
Islands. 

290 ZTOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. II 

thing as community of goods between husband and wife. From 
the nature of the case such a community is impossible, since 
husband and wife never form a single household but always 
belong to two different households. The goods of the husband 

‘pass at his death to his heirs and those of the wife to her heirs, 

But the heirs are, first, those who belong to the household of the 
testator. If the husband dies, his children do not inherit because 
they do not belong to his household ; but in the first place his 
brothers and sisters inherit, and failing them his sisters’ children, 
boys and girls alike. However, at the death of the wife it is her 
children, her sons and daughters, who inherit, and if there are 
none, then her brothers and sisters. Properly speaking it is only 
the women, whether daughters or sisters, who inherit; for the 
inheritance, the Zarta pusaka, which is not divided, serves primarily 
for the maintenance of the female members of the household, and 
the male members only get anything that remains over. Thus it 
is with great justice that the Sanscrit word gusaka has been applied 
in this connection and has only gradually acquired the meaning of 
inheritance. What we must therefore keep in view is, that as a 
logical consequence of the whole matriarchal constitution of the 
household the children do not inherit from their father. Indeed 
his household, his brothers and sisters, take good care that nothing 
of the estate which he has left goes to his children. As soon as 
the father is dead, his relations, the heirs, hasten to his wife’s house 
to demand the goods which may have been bequeathed by the 
deceased. Only by gifts in his lifetime can a father do anything 
for his children. However, a custom has gradually grown up in 
many places, that a father may dispose of the half of his property 
in gifts for the good of his children. But in order to be legally 
valid such a gift (4éahk) must be made in presence of brothers, 
sisters, and witnesses. If this formality is omitted, it is quite 
certain that at the death the gift will be reclaimed to the last 
farthing.” 

P. 213. One such report reaches us from the Poggi or Pageh 
Islands.—Some account of the Poggi Islanders is given by a Mr. 
John Crisp, who visited them from Sumatra in 1792. Though he 
testifies to the loose sexual relations which prevail among the 
unmarried, his evidence by no means confirms the statement that 
marriage is unknown in the islands. He says: “In matriages, the 
matter is settled between the parents of the young persons, and 
when agreed upon, the young man goes to the house of the bride, 
and takes her home ; on this occasion a hog is generally killed, and 
a feast made. Polygamy is not allowed. In cases of adultery, 
where the wife is the offender, the injured husband has a right to 
seize the effects of the paramour, and sometimes punishes his wife 
by cutting off her hair. When the husband offends, the wife has 

VOL. Ii NOTES AND CORRECTIONS : 291 

a right to quit him, and to return to her parents’ house ; but in this 
state of separation she is not allowed to marry another ; however, in 
both these cases, the matter is generally made up, and the parties 
reconciled ; and we were informed that instances of their occurrence 
were very unfrequent. Simple fornication between unmarried 
persons is neither a crime nor a disgrace: and a young woman is 
rather liked the better, and more desired in marriage, for having 
borne'a child ; sometimes they have two or three, when, upon a 
matriage taking place, the children are left with the parents of their 
mother,” 1 

The accounts of other observers who have visited these islands 
tell still more strongly against the statement that marriage is 
unknown among the natives. Thus H. von Rosenberg, a Dutch 
official and traveller, who visited the islands in 1852, says indeed 

“that “the intercourse between young men and girls is very free; 
if a girl is got with child, it in no way detracts from her good 
fame.” But he immediately adds that “marriage takes the form 
of monogamy; the man obtains a wife for himself from her 
parents by purchase or better by bartering articles worth from fifty 
to a hundred gulden. Under no circumstances is divorce per- 
mitted. Adultery is punished with the death of both the culprits. 
If the husband dies, the widow may only marry a widower, and 
reciprocally a widower may marry none but a widow. The 
Mentawis are much addicted to jealousy and will not tolerate 
prostitution.” 2 Another Dutch official, Mr. H. A. Mess, who visited 
the islands in 1869, has described the solemn marriage ceremony 
by which among these people, who are reported to be unacquainted 
with marriage, “bride and bridegroom proclaim that they are one 
till death and that till then they will be true to each other in life 
and in death.” 

With these testimonies before us we may safely dismiss as a 
fable the statement that marriage is unknown in. the Poggi Islands. 
It is strange that so learned and generally so well-informed a writer 
as the late Professor G. A. Wilken should have given currency to 
such a statement. 

P. 216. In Borneo... the Olo Ot (those of Koetei)... 
contract no marriage.—The writer whom elsewhere Prof. G. A. 

‘De Mentawei- 

1 John Crisp, ‘An Account of the 
Inhabitants of the Poggy Islands, lying 
off Sumatra,” <Astatick Researches, vi. 
(London, 1801) pp. 87 sg. (8vo edition). 

2-H. von Rosenberg, Der malayische 
Archipel (Leipsic, 1878), p. 199. 
Mentawi or Mantawi is the name of 
the whole chain of islands of which the 
Poggi or Pageh Islands are the southern 
part, 

3H. A. Mess, 
eilanden,” Zijdschrift voor Indische 
Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, xxvi. 
(1881) p. 91. However, the writer 
does not bear out H. von Rosen- 
berg’s view that among these islanders 
marriage is indissoluble ; for he says 
that custom permits a man at any time 
to put away his wife for any cause. 

Exogamous 

292 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 11 

Wilken cites as his authority for this statement! merely says: 
“The Orang Ot or Olo Ot carry on barter after the well known 
fashion of the Kooboo or Looboo in Sumatra and other similar 
primitive tribes in Celebes and elsewhere. They never shew them- 
selves to Europeans; all that we know of them is hearsay. The 
Koeteineese relate that their Ot do not contract marriage, have no 
dwellings, and_are hunted by them like the beasts of the wood.” ? 
It seems obvious that no weight whatever can be attached to such 
loose hearsay evidence. 

P. 219. The Bhils . . . are divided into many exogamous and 

and totemic totemic clans.—-A fuller list of the totemic clans of the Bhils has 

clans of 
the Bhils. 

Respect 
for the 
totem. 

lately been published in the Z¢hnographical Survey of India, from 
which J extract the following particulars. The tribe inhabits 
Western Malwa and the Vindhyan-Satpura region in the province .. 
known as Central India. The members of the tribe are dark 
skinned, of low stature, and often thickset. In 1901 the total 
numbers of the tribe were about 207,000. They are a wandering 
people, subsisting largely on jungle fruits and roots and some 
common grains. Their usual abode is a mere shed of bamboos 
and matting thatched with leaves and grass. A few of them have 
been induced to settle down in somewhat better huts and to till the 
ground.’ They are divided into no less than a hundred and twenty- 
two exogamous clans or septs. No man may marry a woman of 
his own clan or sept. “This prohibition is extended for three 
generations to any sept into which a man has already married. A 
man can also not marry into the sept from which his mother came for 
three generations, as the members of this sept are held to be brothers 
and sisters of such man. The same rule is exter ded to the septs 
of grandmothers, maternal and paternal.”* A man may marry two 
sisters.© The septs are totemic and “the usual reverence appears 
to be paid to any object which is regarded as a sept totem, it being 
never destroyed or injured. Nor is its effigy ever tattooed on 
the body.”® Among these totemic septs or clans may be noted 
the following :-—’ 

x. The Kanbi clan is said to be nicknamed after the anti or 
halam tree (Stephegyne parvifolia), because one of their ancestors 
climbed into it during the marriage ceremony. Members of the 
clan worship the 4a/am tree and will never cut it down. 

1G. A. Wilken, Over de Verwant- 3 The Ethnographical Survey of the 
schap en het Huwelijks- en Erfrecht bij Central India Agency, Monograph No. 
de Volken van het Maleische Ras(Am- 2, The Jungle Tribes of Malwa, by 
sterdam, 1893), p. 82 n.! (reprinted Captain C. E. Luard (Lucknow, 1909), 
from De Indische Gids for May 1883). pp. 17, 33, 34 37: 

2 C. A. L. M. Schwaner, Borneo, 4 Op. cit. pp. 18, 91-97. 
Beschrijving van het Stroomgebied van 5 Op. ctt. p. 19. 

den Barito (Amsterdam, 1853-1854), i- § Op. cit. p. 18. 
231. 7 Op. cit. pp. 91-97- 

VOL. 1 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 293 

2. The Katija clan takes its name from the dagger. At the 
beginning of the daa ceremony a dagger is worshipped and is held 
by the bridegroom throughout the ceremony. 

3. The Kishori clan takes its name from the 4%ishori tree 
(Butea frondosa), which they worship at marriages. They never 
place its leaves on their heads. 

4. The Kodia clan is called after the cowrie shell, and no 
woman of the clan wears cowries. 

5. The Bhuria or Brown clan is said to have taken its name 
from an ancestor who went about covered with ashes. They 
worship a brown gourd and ashy coloured snakes, and they will 
neither eat such gourds nor kill such snakes. 

6. The Bilwal clan is named after the de/ tree (Aegle marmelos). 
They worship the de/ tree and draw omens from its leaves at 
marriages. 

/» The Ganawa clan is named after the ganiar tree (Cochlo- 
spermum gossypium). They worship it at marriages and never cut it. 

8. The Garwal clan takes its name from the lizard called garwad, 
An effigy off the lizard made of flour is worshipped at marriages, 
and the reall animal is never injured. 

9. The Pargi clan worships the land crab (4efd?) at marriages 
and draw onjens from it. They say that one of their ancestors 
was ages et saved by:a land crab. 

to. The Parmar clan worships the goad (farana), and they 
draw a figure of it in turmeric on a wall at marriage. 

11. The Chudadia clan is called after lac bangles (chuda). 
Lac bangles are worshipped at marriages, and no woman of the 
clan ever wears them. 

12. The Changod clan is named after a bull’s horn. They 
worship a bull’s Horn at weddings and never cut the horns of cattle. 

13. The Madda clan worships the earthenware dish called a 
taodt ; if one of these vessels is broken they carefully collect the 
pieces and bury them. 

14. The Palasia clan takes its name from the palasia (Lutea 
Jrondosa) tree, which they worship at marriages and never cut. 

15. The Bhagara clan is called after’ “pieces of bread” 
(hagra). Such broken pieces of bread are distributed to all at the 
end of a wedding. 

16. The Makwana clan is named after the spider (makwa). At . 
marriages an effigy is made of a spider out of flour and worshipped. 

17. The Mori clan derives its name from the peacock (sor). 
Members of this Peacock clan never molest the bird, and at a 
wedding they worship the effigy of a peacock. 

18. The Munia clan is called after the munj or motni tree (Odina 
lWodier), which they worship at marriage and refuse to injure. 

19. The Mena clan is named after mena kodra, a form of kodon 

Possible 
trace of 
concep- 
tional 
totemism. 

Totemism 
among the 
Porojas. 

The 
Ronas. 

294 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY — VOL. II 

(Pasapalum stoloniferum), which, eaten in excess, is said to cause a 
form of intoxication. Members of the clan nowadays never eat 
kodon, but they worship balls of it at marriage. 

20. The Suwaar clan is called after the wild boar. Members 
of this Boar clan never kill or eat pigs ; and at weddings they make 
an effigy of a pig out of flour and worship it. 

21. The Wakhla clan takes its name from the species of bat 
called a flying fox (Preropus medius). Members of this Bat clan 
never hurt these bats. 

22. The Jhala clan never sows wa/rt grain ; and they say that 
no member of the clan can eat the grain without suffering for it. 
They tell of a man who broke the taboo and whose body swelled in 
consequence, till he appeased his goddess with offering of war? 
grain. It seems that wa/r7 is not a particular kind of cereal but, - 
any kind of grain produced in ground which has been cleared vy 
burning down trees. 

From the preceding account we gather that the Bhils pay 
respect to their totems above all at marriage. Why that should be 
so is not clear. Can it be that we have here a trace of conceptional 
totemism, of a belief that the totem will enter into and impregnate 
the bride ? 

P. 230. Totemism in the Madras Presidency.—Some further 
evidence on this subject may be cited from Mr. Edgar Thurston’s 
valuable work on the ethnology of Southern India. The Porojas 
or Parjas are thrifty industrious cultivators, akin to the Khonds, 
among the hills of Ganjam and Vizagapatam.! They fall into 
several sections, among which are the Barang Jhodias, the Pengus, 
Khondis, Bondas, and Durs. ‘Among the Barang Jhodias, the 
gidda (vulture), dagh (tiger), and nag (cobra) are garded as totems, 
Among the Pengu, Khondi, and Dur divisions, the two last are 
apparently regarded as such, and, in addition to them, the Bonda 
Porojas have mandi (cow). In the Barang Jhodia, Pengu, and 
Kondhi divisions, it is customary for a man to marry his paternal 
aunt’s daughter, but he cannot claim her as a matter of right, 
for the principle of free love is recognised among them, The 
dhangada and dhangadi basa system, according to which bachelors 
and unmarried girls sleep in separate quarters in a village, is in 
force among the Porojas.”? A younger brother usually marries his 
elder brother’s widow.® 

The Ronas are a class of Oriya-speaking hill cultivators in 
Jeypore. They are supposed to be descended from Ranjit, the 
great warrior of Orissa. As examples of their clans or septs, which 
are presumably exogamous, Mr. Thurston cites Aora (sun), Bhag 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 2 E. Thurston, of. cz¢. vi. 210. 

Southern India (Madras, 1909), vi. 
207-210. 3 E. Thurston, of. c#t, vi. 215. 

VOL, II NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 295 

(tiger), ag (cobra), Khindudt (bear), and Matsya (fish). Among 
the Ronas it is customary for a man to marry the daughter of 
his father’s brother; and a younger brother usually marries his 
elder brother’s widow. 

The Saliyans are a Tamil-speaking class of weavers in Tanjore. The 
Contrary to the custom of Tamil castes they are divided into S*livans. 
exogamous clans or septs, which are apparently not totemic, though 
some of them are named after the black monkey (mandhi), the 
donkey (azhudhai), the frog (thavalai), and Euphorbia Tirucalli 
(Rallt).? 

The Togatas are Telugu weavers in the Cuddapah district. The 
Like many other Telugu castes, they are divided into exogamous Togatas, 
clans or septs, which take their names from, amongst other things, 
goat (meka/a), horse (gurram), indigo (ni/), cummin seed (ji/akara), 
and Chrysanthemum indicum (samantht).3 

The Toreyas are a Canarese class who live chiefly in the Tamil The 
districts: pf Coimbatore and Salem. Most of them are now culti- Torevas. 
vators, alsa of the betel vine (Piper dette). There are many 
exogamous, clans or septs among them, some of which observe 
totemic tabdos. Thus members of the Silver (4e//) clan may not 
wear toe-rings of silver; members of a clan, which takes its name 
(onne) from \he tree Prerocarpus marsupium, may not mark their 
foreheads with the juice from the trunk of that tree; and members 
of a clan, which takes its name (Auzha/) from a flute played by 
shepherd boys and snake charmers, must throw away the remains 
of their food if they hear the sound of the flute while they are at 
a meal. Members of the Snake (zaga) clan worship ant-hills at 
marriage, because ant-hills are the home of snakes.* 

The Tsakalas or Sakalas are the Washermen of the Telugu the 
country, and they also act as torch-bearers and palanquin-bearers. Tsakalas. 
Like other Telugu castes they are divided into exogamous clans or 
septs (intiperu). Members of the Gummad? clan do not cultivate 
or eat the fruit of the gummadi plant (Cucurbita maxima); mem- 
bers of the Magli pula clan (gotra) avoid the fruit of Pandanus 
JSasticularis; and members of the Zhamballa clan (gotra) may not 
eat sword beans (Canavalia ensiformis). A common clan is the 
Ant (chimala) clan 

P. 240. Yenuga, elephant.— Members of this Elephant (yenuga) 
clan will not touch ivory.® 

P. 322. A tribe of Assam . . . are the Garos.—A recent mono- 
graph on the Garos by Major A. Playfair confirms the view, which 

1 E. Thurston, Castes and Tribes of 4 E. Thurston, of, c@t, vii. 176 sg. 
Southern India (Madras, 1909), vi. 6 E, Thurston, of. cif, vile 197- 
256-258. ‘ SEs Oe . 

2 E. Thurston, of. ett. vi. 277 59. 199. 

3 E. Thurston, of. ctf, vii. 170, 172. 6 E. Thurston, of. ert. vii. 437- 

296 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 11 

Totemism [ have expressed in the text, that the Garo tribal subdivisions 
the Geros Called “ motherhoods” are totemic. According to Major Playfair, 
e Garos eae : ‘ 
of Assam, the Garos are divided into three exogamous septs or clans (Aatchis), 
which bear the names of Momin, Marak, and Sangma. The first 
of these clans is entirely confined to the branch of the Garos called 
the Akawes, who inhabit the whole of the northern hills and the 
plains at their foot; but the other two clans are distributed among 
all the geographical divisions of the tribe, no matter how much they 
may differ from one another in language and custom, The origin 
of the clans is obscure; at present they seem to be in process of 
subdividing into several new clans, which, however, have not yet 
attained independent rank. Further, the Garos are subdivided into 
a very large number of “ motherhoods,” of which the general name, 
according to Major Playfair, is machong. Descent of the “mother- . 
hoods” is naturally in the maternal line; a child belungs 
to its mother’s machong, not to that of its father, whose family 
indeed is barely recognised. The origin of many of these ‘ mother- 
hoods” appears to be totemic; for the members of some of them 
trace their descent from the totemic animal, though they do not 
appear to treat the creature with respect or reverence. Thus 
the Rangsan “ motherhood ” of the Marak clan has for its totem the 
bear. The members of the clan say that they are descended from 
a he-bear who married a Marak woman and they are called “ children 
of the bear.” Again, the Naringre-dokru “mothe hood” of the 
Momin clan has for its totem the dove. The members of the clan 
say that they are descended from a naughty girl, who stuck feathers 
all over her body with wax and thereupon was turned into a dove. 
Again, the Drokgre “motherhood” of the Marak clan have the hen 
for their totem, because their ancestress had a wonderful ornament 
which could cluck for all the world like a hen. Again, the Koknal 
or Basket ‘motherhood ” of the Sangma clan is so called because 
the ancestress or, as the Garos call her, the grandmother of the 
clan was carried off in a basket (40%) for the sake of her wealth ; 
for she was a very rich old woman. Some “ motherhoods” take 
their names from a stream or hill near which they settled. Whole 
families, we are told, probably broke away from their associates 
and formed new communities, assuming new names to distinguish 

them from the parent stock.! 
Female We have seen that among the Garos property descends through 
descent of women. On this subject Major Playfair writes: “The system 
oe which divides the Garo tribe into certain clans and ‘ motherhoods,’ 
the Garos. the members of which trace back their descent to a common 
ancestress, and which has laid down that descent in the clan shall be 
through the mother and not through the father, also provides that 

1 Major A. Playfair, 7ze Garos (London, 1909) pp. 64-66; as to the Akawes, 
see 7d. p. 59. 

VOL. II NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 297 
inheritance shall follow the same course, and shall be restricted to 
the female line. No man may possess property, unless he has 
acquired it by his own exertions. No man can inherit property 
under any circumstance whatever. 

“The law of inheritance may be briefly stated to be, that 
property once in a motherhood cannot pass out of it. A woman’s 
children are all of her machong [‘motherhood ’], and therefore it 
might ‘at first appear that her son would satisfy the rule; but he 
must marry a woman of another clan, and his children would be of 
their mother’s sept, so that, if he inherited his mother’s property, 
it would pass out of her sachong [‘motherhood’] in the second 
generation. The daughter must therefore inherit, and her daughter 
after her, or, failing issue, another woman of the clan appointed by 
some of its members. . . . 

‘In spite of the above rule, during the lifetime of a woman’s 
husband, he has full use of her property. He cannot will it away, 
but otherwise his authority with regard to it is unquestioned. For 
instance, 4 zokma {headman] is always looked upon as the owner 
of the lands of his village, and though he must have derived his 
rights through his wife, she is never considered, unless it is found 
convenient that her name should he mentioned in litigation. From 
this, it will be seen that matriarchy in the strict sense of the word 
does not exist among the Garos. A woman is merely the vehicle 
by which property descends from one generation to another.” ! 

P. 327. All the indications of totemism . . . in Assam.—To Totemism 
the tribes of Assam which exhibit traces of totemism are to be 2mong the 
added the Kacharis, a short, thickset race speaking a language of ey pace 
the Tibeto-Burman family, who inhabit the districts of Cachar 
Plains and North Cachar.2 They are industrious and skilful 
cultivators of the soil and raise abundant crops of rice. From Endogamy 
the investigations of the Rev. S. Endle, who lived amongst them for ° the 
many years‘%.nd khew them intimately, it appears that the Kacharis one: 
were formerly divided into very numerous totemic clans which, con- 
trary to the usual rule of totemism, were endogamous instead of 
exogamous. Some of the clans still exist, but the restrictions once 
placed on their intermarriage are no longer in force. Amongst the 
Kachari clans recorded by Mr. Endle are the following :—-* 

1. Swarga-arot, or the Heaven (swarga) folk. This clan is The 
deemed the highest of all. None of its members ever worked as nee 

1 Major A. Playfair, Zhe 
(London, 1909), pp. 71 sg. 

Gares_ tribe by the Rev. S. Endle, which 

will shortly be published by the 

2 Census of India, 1891, Assam, vy 
E. A. Gait, vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) 
pp. 159, 227. 

3 This account of the Kachari clans 
is derived from a monograph on the 

Government of Eastern Bengal. I 
am indebted to the kindness of Col. 
Pp. R. T. Gurdon and Mr. J. D. 
Anderson for permission to read and 
make extracts from the manuscript. 

The 
Earth folk. 

The 

Tiger folk. 
Mourning 
for a tiger. 

The 
Sesamum 
folk. 

The 
Leech folk. 

The 
Jute folk. 

The 

298 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. II 

cultivators. They devoted themselves to the service of religion 
and were supported by the offerings of the faithful. 

2. Basumati-arot or the Earth (éasumati) folk, The members 
of this clan enjoy a privilege peculiar to themselves in being allowed 
to bury their dead without buying the ground for a grave or for the 
erection of a funeral pyre. . 

3. Mosa-aroi or the Tiger (mosa) folk. The members of this 
clan claim kindred with the tiger, and when a village inhabited by 
them hears of the death of a tiger in the neighbourhood, all the 
people must mourn. The period of mourning is indeed short, 
seldom exceeding twenty-four hours, but it is strictly observed, for 
no solid food whatever may be partaken of during its continuance. 
At the end of the mourning the floor and walls of every house 
must be carefully smeared with a compound of mud and cow-dung ; 
all articles of clothing and all household utensils made of brass 
must be thoroughly cleansed in running water; and all earthenware 
vessels, except such as are new and have never been used for 
cooking, must be broken and thrown away. Then one of the 
elders of the community, acting as deort (minister) solemnly 
distributes the “water of peace” (santi jal) to be drunk by all 
in turn; and the buildings themselves, as well as all articles of 
clothing and so forth, are freely sprinkled with the same holy 
water. The solemnity ends with the sacrifice of a fowl or pig, 
which is partaken of by all in common. 

4. Khangkhlo-aroi or the Kangkhlo folk. Kangkhlo is apparently 
the name of a jungle grass of which the Kacharis are very fond. 
It is used freely both at religious ceremonies and at merry-makings. 

5. Stbing-arot or the Sesamum (siding) folk. This clan is said 
to have been the only one which in the olden days was allowed to 
cultivate the sesamum plant. The members of the clan still hold 
the plant in special honour. 

6. Gandret-arot or the Leech (gandret) folk, This clan holds 
the leech in high regard and may not under ordinary circumstances 
kill it, But at certain religious ceremonials, for example, at 
purification after a death in the family, its members are required 
to chew a leech with vegetables for a certain limited period, though 
apparently only once in a lifetime. 

7. Narze-arot or the Jute (mdérze) folk. This clan held jute in 
special honour, and at great religious ceremonies members of the 
clan were bound to chew a certain quantity of jute. 

8. Ding-arot or the Bamboo-water-vessel (dinga) folk. The 
members of this clan are said to have formerly earned their liveli- 
hood by making these bamboo water-vessels. 

9. Got-bdri-aroi or the Areca-palm (got) folk. The clan was 

Areca-palm formerly devoted to the cultivation of the areca, of which perhaps 

folk. 

they held the monopoly. 

‘ 

VOL, II NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 299 

10. Bdénhbdrd-roi or the Bamboo-grove (Janfibart) folk. Near The 
many Kachari villages there is a sacred bamboo grove, where the Bamboo- 
gods are worshipped at certain seasons, Sroreaeht 

11. Dhehkidbéri-arot or the Fern (dhekid) folk. The totem of The 
the clan was probably the fern, which is still sometimes used in the Fer folk. 
preparation of the fatfké spirit. 

12. Madmaré-roi or the Mao-fish folk. 

13. Kherkhatha-rot or the Squirrel (Aerkefua) folk. They are The 
said to be a low caste. One of their functions is to cut the horns Squirrel 
of cattle. foe 

Similar clans with corresponding names are found among the 
Meches, a people closely akin to the Kacharis,! But unlike the 

‘ clans of the Kacharis the clans of the Meches are exogamous. 
The most important of them are the Tiger clan, the Bamboo clan. 
the Water clan, the Betel-nut clan, and the Heaven clan.? 

But it is among the Dimasa of the North Cachar Hills and the Exogamous 
Hojais of the Nowgong district that the subdivision into clans clans of the 
seems to attain its highest development. In this portion of the Dims 
Kachari or Bara race some eighty clans are recognised, of which 
forty are known as men’s clans (sengfang) and forty as women’s 
clans (zi#/z).3 All the members of these clans eat and drink freely 
together and are, or were, all strictly exogamous. The only clan Endogamy 
exempt from this strict rule of exogamy was the so-called royal = is 
clan known as the Black Earth Folk (Hé-chum-sd), all the members “% “#"- 
of which were, obliged to marry within their own clan. We have 
seen that similarly in Africa royal clans are not infrequently endo- 
gamous.* The rule of marriage in the other-clans seems to be 
that no man may marry into his mother’s clan, and that no woman 
may marry into her father’s clan. It is explained as follows by 
Mr. Soppitt, who calls the clans sects: “To give an example, one 
male sect is called Hasungsa, and one female sect Sagaodi. A 
Hasungsa marrying a Sagaodi, the male issue are Hasungsas and 
the female Sagaodis. The sons, Hasungsas, cannot marry any 
woman of the mother’s caste or sect. In the same manner, the 
daughter can marry no man of her father’s sect. Thus, though no 
blood tie exists, in many cases a marriage between certain persons 
is impossible, simply from the bar of sect. On the other hand, 
cousin-marriage is allowed. An example will best illustrate this: 

Two brothers, Hasungsas, marry women of the Pasaidi and Sagaodi 
sect, and have as issue a: daughter and a boy. The boy will be a 

Hasungsa and the girl Sagaodi. These first cousins cannot marry, 
«a 
1 As to the Meches, see Census of there are forty men’s clans and forty- 

India, 1891, Assam, by FE. A. Gait, two women’s clans. See Census of 

vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) p. 228. India, 1891, Assam, by E. A. Gait, 
2 From the Rev. S. Endle’s manu- vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) p. 226. 
script. 4 See above, vol. ii. pp. 523 59., 

3 According to another account 538, 581 sg., 628. 

The 
sororate 
and 
levirate. 

Communal 
house for 
young 
people of 
both sexes 
among 

the hill 
tribes of 
Assam. 

300 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. I 
both fathers having been Hasungsa. But allowing the first cousins 
marry Bangali wife and Rajiung husband, respectively, their children 
are Hasungsa (the boy) and Sagaodi, and may contract marriage 
ties, the male having no Sagaodi sect in his family. The term 
Semfong is used to denote the members of one of the sects.”! 
From this account we gather that first cousins, the children of two 
brothers, are forbidden to marry each other; but that second 
cousins, the children of a male first cousin and of a female first 
cousin, may marry each other. 

Asa rule the Kacharis are a strictly monogamous race, chaste 
before marriage and faithful to their spouses after it. A widower 
may marry his deceased wife’s younger sister, but not her elder 
sister. Similarly a widow may marry her deceased husband’s,’ 
younger brother, but not his elder brother.2 “The matriarchate 
is unknown, and the father is an extremely good-natured and easy- 
going head of a contented and simple family. The tribes are 
mostly endogamous, if the expression can be used of people who 
marry very much as European peasants do. There is no child- 
marriage, and prenuptial chastity is the rule rather than the 
exception. There are signs to show that marriage by capture was 
once the rule; but nowadays marriages are the result of an elope- 
ment, followed by the payment of a fine to the girl’s relatives, or 
of a definite arrangement between the parents of the young people, 
which results in a present offered to the bride’s parents, or else a 
term of service on the bridegroom’s part in his father-in-law’s 
house.” 8 

P. 328. Large common houses in which the unmarried men 
pass the night.—Sometimes in the Naga and other hill tribes of 
Assam and its neighbourhood there are communal houses for 
unmarried girls as well as for bachelors. A Naga village or town 
will sometimes contain as many as eight or ten communal houses 
or pahs, as they are called by some tribes, for the bachelors, and 
four or five such houses for the girls. The houses of the girls are 

1 Census of India, 1891, Assam, by 
E. A. Gait, vol. i. (Shillong, 1892) 
p. 226. From this account we infer 
that a men’s clan or sect includes only 

Dr. J. Wastings’s Lycyclopedia of 
Religion and Ethics, ii. (Edinburgh, 
1909) p. 754. ‘The term ‘‘ Bodo” is 
a generic name applied to all peoples 

men, and that a women’s clan or sect 
includes only women. But Mr. Endle’s 
account, given above (p. 299), seems 
to imply that each clan includes both 
sexes ; at least this must be true of the 
royal clan, which is endogamous. The 
subject deserves further investigation. 

2 From the Rev. S. Endle’s manu- 
script. 

3 J. D. Anderson, s.v, * Bodos,” in 

speaking the Tibetan-Burman group of 
languages. So Mr. Anderson’s re- 
marks, which I have quoted in the 
text, apply to other tribes besides the 
Kacharis. To the list of clans Mr.# 
Anderson adds the Szjz-@rzz or Cactus 
{stjuz) clan. The cactus (the £yx- 
phorbia) is sacred. It grows in the 
courtyard of every Kachari family. 
See Census of India, 1891, Assam, by 
E. A, Gait, i. 224. 

VOL. II NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 301 
looked after by an old woman ; they are strictly tabooed to married 
women. Where the institution of these communal houses exists 
for the unmarried youth, the most complete license is reported to 
prevail between the sexes up to the time cf marriage, and this 
license is not merely connived at, it is recognised by public opinion. 
No value is placed on youthful chastity ; sexual morality in our sense 
of the word only begins with marriage, but after marriage infidelity 
is said to be very rare. Nevertheless children are very seldom born 
until after marriage ; should several girls be found with child, their 
nuptials are arranged for and ail parties are generally content. The 
communal houses or barracks of the bachelors always stand at the 
entrance to the village and serve as guard-houses ; guards are set 
here by day and night and keep tally of all the men who leave the 
village or return to it. In the unsettled condition of the country 
such precautions are, or used to be, necessary to prevent sudden 
attacks by neighbouring enemies.! 

P. 347. Hints of totemism and exogamy ... in Asia.—To Exogamous 

the exogamous peoples of Asia mentioned in the text should be Peoples 

: of Asia. 
added the Circassians, Ossetes, Ostyaks, and apparently the 
Kalmucks, as J. F. McLennan and Dr. Westermarck have already 
pointed out.? 

Thus in regard to the Circassians we read: “The Circassian Exogamy' 
word for the societies or fraternities is //eésk, which signifies also Cie bid 
‘seeds.’ The tradition with regard to them is, that the members 
of each all sprang from the same stock or ancestry ; and thus they 
may be considered as so many septs or clans, with this peculiarity 
—that, like seeds, all are considered equal. These cousins-german, 
or members of the same fraternity, are not only themselves inter- 
dicted from intermarrying, but their serfs too must wed with the 
serfs of another fraternity; and where, as is generally the case, 
many fraternities enter into one general bond, this law, in regard 
to marriage, must be observed by all. All who are thus bound 
together have the privilege of visiting the family-houses of each 
other on the footing of brothers, which seems to me only to make 
matters worse, unless they can all bring their minds to look upon 
the females of their fraternity as their very sisters, otherwise this 
privilege of entrée must be the source of many a hopeless or 
criminal passion. We have here under our eyes a proof that such 
consequences must proceed from the prohibition. The confidential 
dependant or steward of our host here is a tokav who fled to his 

1S. E. Peal, ‘On the Aforong as duinde (Berlin, 1902), pp. 278 sgq. 

Studies in 

possibly a Relic of Pre-marriage Com- 
munism,” Journal of the Anthropo- 
logical Institute, xxii. (1893) pp. 244, 
248 5g., 253-255, 259 sg. Compare 
H. Schurtz, Altersklassen und Manner- 

2jJ. ¥F. McLennan, 
Anctent History (London, 1886), pp- 
52 sgg. 3 E. Westermarck, History of 
Human Marriage (London, 1891), pp- 
305 5g. 

Incest 
formerly 
punished 
with death. 

Exogamy 
among the 
Ossetes. 

Exogamy 
among the 
Ostyaks. 

Exogamy 
among the 
Kalmucks, 

302 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, It 

protection from Notwhatsh ; because, having fallen in love with 
and married a woman of his own fraternity, he had become liable 
to punishment for this infraction of Circassian law. Yet his 
fraternity contained perhaps several thousand members. Formerly 
such a marriage was looked upon as incest, and punished by 
drowning ; now a fine of two hundred oxen, and restitution of the 
wife to her parents, are only exacted. The breaches of this law 
therefore are not now uncommon.” ! 

The Ossetes of the Caucasus are divided into families or clans, 
each of which traces its descent from a male ancestor and bears a 
common name. These clans appear to be exogamous, for we are 
told that “the father may marry his daughter-in-law, the brother 
may marry his sister-in-law, the son may marry his mother’s sister; 
in that there is nothing illegitimate or contrary to custom. But to 
marry a wife of the same clan and name, were she even in the 
remotest degree related, is reckoned by the Ossetes to be i scest.” 2 

The writer who records these customs of the Ossetes adds: “It 
is highly remarkable that precisely the same customs and ideas as 
to relationship prevail among the Ostyak people. They also never 
marry a woman of their father’s kin, never a woman of the same 
family name; but they may marry even a step-mother, a step- 
daughter, or a step-sister; indeed they have a specially partiality 
for the last of these marriages.” $ 

The practice of the Kalmucks is described by J. F. McLennan 
as follows: “It appears that they have two systems of marriage 
law; one for the common people, and one for the nobles, or 
princely class. The common people, we are told by Bergmann, 
enter into no unions in which the parties are not distant from one 
another by three or four degrees: but how the degrees are counted 
we are not informed. We are told that they have great abhorrence 
for the marriages of near relatives, and have a proverb—‘The 
great folk and dogs know no relationship,’-—which Bergmann says is 
due to members of the princely class sometimes marrying sisters-in- 
law. We find, however, that these sisters-in-law are uniformly 
women of an entirely different stock from their husbands—different, 
or what is taken for different. For no man of the princely class . . . 
in any of the tribes can marry a woman of his own tribe or nation. 
Not only must his wife be a noble, but she must be a noble of a 
different stock. For princely marriages, says Bergmann, ‘the bride 
is chosen from another people’s stock—among the Derbets from 
the Torgot stock; and among the Torgots from the Derbet 
stock; and so on.’ Here, then, we have the principle of 

LJ. S. Bell, Journal of a Residence (Leipsic, 1856), ii. 26 sg. 
in Circassia (London, 1840), i. 347 3 Von Haxthausen, of. cit. ii. 27 
Sq. note*, citing as his authority Miiller, 
2 Von Haxthausen, 7ranskaukasia Der ugrische Volksstamm, i. 308. 

VOL, 1 NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 303 
exogamy in full force in regard to the marriages of the governing 
classes,” 4 : 

Pp. 36757. Mutual avoidance between persons related bymarriage Mutual 

is observed by the Herero.—As an example of the care with which a ee 
Herero avoids his future mother-in-law we are told that once when tions by 
a missionary was preaching at a kraal, the future mother-in-law of marriage 
one of his hearers hove in sight. At this apparition the young man Fons ae. 
flung himself to the ground, and his friends hastily covered him up , 
with skins, under which he had to lie sweating till his formidable 
relative withdrew.2 A few other examples of similar customs of 
avoidance observed by various African tribes may be added here. 
Amongst the Amapondas “it is considered highly indelicate for a 
woman to marry a man of the same kraal to which she belongs, or 
for a married woman to look on the face of any of her husband’s 
male relations. If she observes any of these relations approaching, 
she turns aside, or hides herself until they have passed.”* Amongst 
the Matabele a married woman may neither speak to nor even look 
at her husband’s father, and her husband must be equally reserved 
towards his wife’s mother.4 A similar reserve is practised by the 
tribes of the Tanganyika plateau. Amongst the Angoni it would 
be a gross breach of etiquette if a man were to enter his son-in-law’s 
house ; he may come within ten paces of the door, but no nearer. 
A woman may not even approach her son-in-law’s house, and she is 
never allowed to speak to him. Should they meet accidentally on 
a path, the son-in-law gives way and makes a circuit to avoid 
encountering his mother-in-law face to face.6 Among the Donaglas 
a husband after marriage “lives in his wife’s house for a year, with- 
out being allowed to see his mother-in-law, with whom he enters 
into relations only on the birth of his first son.” ? 

P. 377. The Bawenda are a Bantu people.—The religion of the Religion 
Bawenda has been described by other writers, but their accounts r the 
‘ <. 4e é * i Z awenda, 
contain no clear indications of totemism. The Rev. E. Gottschling 
says that “the Bawenda have their nameless Jfodzimo (God), which 
is nothing else but the totality of the good souls of their ancestors, 
who have not been va/ot, with the founder of their tribe as head, 

1J. KF. McLennan, Studies in 3 Andrew Steedman, Wanderings 

Ancient History (London, 1886), pp. 
52 sg. McLennan’s authority is B. 
Bergmann, Nomadische Streifereien 
unter den Kalmiiken in den Jahren 
1802 und 18037 (Riga, 1804-1805), 
iii. 145 sg., a passage of which the sub- 
stance is correctly conveyed in the text, 

2 G, Viehe, ‘* Some Customs of the 
Ovaherero,” (South African) folk-love 
Journal, vol. i. (1879) pp. 46 sg. ; 1H. 
Schinz, Deztsch - Stidwest-Afrika, p. 
172. 

and Adventures in the Interior of 
Southern Africa (London, 1835), i. 
241 sg. 

4 L. Decle, 7hree Years in Savage 
Africa (London, 1898), p. 159. 

5 L. Decle, of. czt. p. 294. 

6 «The Angoni-Zulus,” British 
Central Africa Gasette, No. 86, April 
3oth, 1898, p. 2. 

7 G. Casati, Tex Years in Equatoria 
(London and New York, 1891), i. 69. 

Question of 

Bechuana 
exogamy. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, II 

304 
and the ruling chief as living representative. Besides this Modzimo, 
of which the plural is Vadzimo, meaning the single souls of their 
ancestors, they also have AMedzimo, another plural of Modzimo, 
which denotes the many objects on earth which have been made 
the visible representative of the ancestors of each clan and family. 
These Jedzimo, into which sometimes the Vadzimo return, are 
either cattle, goats, sheep, or weapons and tools of old dead ancestors, 
as for instance a dzemée (kaffir-hoe), a pfumo (assegai), a fzanga 
(war-axe), a mbado (axe) and other tools. Even shrubs, flowers, 
or rushes may be created Aledzimo.”+ It might be rash to infer 
that these AZedzimo are totems. 

P.-378. Whether the tribes are also exogamous is not stated 
by the authorities I have consulted.—However, speaking of the 
Bechuana tribes, Captain C. R. Conder observes: ‘ Levirate 
marriage exists as among the Zulus, and exogamy seems the 
common practice, resulting in a great mixture of tribal relations.” 2 
But not much weight can be attached to this vague and hesitating 
statement. The question whether the Bechuana tribes or clans are 

. exogamous or not must still be regarded as open. 

Zulu super- 
stitions 
as to food. 

P. 381. Superstitious prejudices against eating certain foods. 
—According to another writer, among the foods which Zulu 
prejudice or superstition rejects are wild boar, rhinoceros, and 
especially fish. A special term of contempt (omphogazane) is 
applied to persons who have partaken of these forbidden viands. 
Further, the Zulus think that any man who made use of the inner 
fat of the elan (Bose/aphis oreas) would infallibly lose his virility. 
Moreover, a woman would fear to let her husband come near her, 
if she knew that he had so much as touched with his finger a 
python, a crocodile, or a hyena.? Again, the great African horn- 
bill (Buceros africanus) and the crowned crane (Balearica pavonina) 
are both deemed sacred by the Caffres ; and if a man has killed 
one of these birds, he must sacrifice a calf or a young ox by way of 
expiation.* But these superstitions, being apparently common to 
whole tribes, are probably quite independent of totemism. 

P. 441. The hyena . . . most tribes of East Africa hold that 

1 Rev, E. Gottschling, ‘*The 
Bawenda,” Journal of the Anthro- 

Present Condition of the Native Tribes 
in Bechuanaland,” Journal of the 

pological Institute, xxxv. (1905) pp. 
378 sg. As to these Bawenda talis- 
mans, supposed to contain ancestral 
spirits, see further an article, ‘* Das 
Volk der Vawenda, Auszug aus dem 
Bericht des Missionar Beuster,” Zezt- 
schrift der Gesellschaft fir Erdkunde 
zu Berlin, xiv. (1879) p- 238. 

2 Captain C. R. Conder, ‘The 

Anthropological Institute, xvi, (1887) 
p. 85. 

3 A. Delegorgue, Voyage dans 
LP Afrique Australe (Paris, 1847), ii. 
225 9. 

4 Andrew Steedman, Wanderings 
and Adventures in the Interior of 
Southern Africa (London, 1835), i. 
236. 

VOL. U NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 305 

animal in respect or fear.—The Bageshu on Mount Elgon and the 
Wanyamwezi to the south of the Victoria Nyanza are in the habit 
of throwing out their dead to the hyznas. Hence they both 
regard these animals as sacred, and the cry of a hyzna in the 
evening is often said to be the voice of the last person who died. 
The Wanyamwezi say that they could not kill a hyzena, because 
they do not know whether the creature might not be a relation of 
theirs, an aunt, or a grandmother, or what not.! But this general 
reverence for a species of animal, because it is supposed to lodge 
the souls of the dead, is not by itself totemism. 

P. 469. The Queen Sister (Lubuga) has also her own establish- The 

ment... she rules her own people and is called a king.—The remark- oe 
oe P . . . ister 

able position occupied by the Queen Sister in Uganda has its parallel among the 
among the Barotse or Marotse, an important Bantu tribe on the Barotse. 
Upper Zambesi. In the Barotse country, we read, ‘there are two 
capitals, Lealouyi and Nalolo. The first of these, a large village of 
about three thousand inhabitants, is the residence of the king 
Leouanika; Nalolo is the residence of the king’s eldest sister. 
Like him, she has the title of smorvena, which means ‘lord,’ ‘king,’ 
or ‘queen,’ without distinction of sex. She is sometimes also 
called mokouae or ‘princess,’ a general term applicable to all 
the women of the royal family, but the mokouae of Nalolo is 
the most important of all. She alone reigns in concert with 
the king and shares with him the title of morvena. The same 
honours that are paid to him are paid to her, and she keeps 
the same state. Like him, she has her hota, where she sits 
surrounded by her councillors and chiefs of the tribe. Lastly, she 
also receives taxes from the most distant parts of the kingdom. 
Both of them have handsome rectangular houses, very large and 
high, which form conspicuous features of the landscape.” 2 

The existence of this double kingship, a male kingship and a Double 
female kingship, in two important Bantu peoples is very remarkable, kingship. 
all the more so, as the writer observes, because in Africa woman 
generally occupies an inferior position, Yet among the Barotse 
“this queen is quite independent of her brother. In fact there are 
two kingdoms quite distinct from each other. But they are closely 
united, and it often happens that persons are transferred from the 
service of the king to that of the queen, or reciprocally. Many 
sons of the chiefs bred at the court of Lealouyi have become vassals 
of the queen, or on the contrary young people of Nalolo are sent to 
the king. Messengers are constantly coming and going between 
the two capitals, in order that the king and queen may be kept in- 
formed of what is happening in the country. Finally, most of the 

1 From information given me by the 2 E. Béguin, Les Afa-votsé (Lau- 
Rev. John Roscoe. sanne and Fontaines, 1903), p. 12. 

VOL. IV x 

The 
Prince 
Consort. 

Worship 
of the 
dead kings 
of the 
Barotse, 

The king's 
tomb. 

The king's 
prophet. 

306 ZTOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. Il 

families at the two capitals are related to each other and often pay 
each other visits.” ? 

The Queen Sister has a husband chosen by herself, who ranks 
as Prince Consort. He is her representative and man of business ; 
he must salute her humbly like a slave, and when she goes out he 
walks behind her. Formerly he might not even sit on the same 
mat with her or share her meals ; but of late years the rigour of the 
custom has been somewhat relaxed, and the “son-in-law of the 
nation,” as the Queen Sister’s husband is called, has not to put up 
with so many affronts as in past days.? 

The high rank thus assigned to the king’s sister in the polity of 
the Barotse as in the polity of the Baganda seems to point to a 
system of mother-kin, whether present or past ; and we have seen 
that among the Baganda vestiges of mother-kin may still be 
detected.$ 

P. 469. The royal tomb (mula/o) is the abode of the king’s 
ghost.—With the worship which the Baganda pay to their dead 
kings we may compare the similar worship which the Barotse or 
Marotse of the Upper Zambesi River pay to their departed monarchs. 
The Barotse recognise a supreme deity called Niambe, who is 
supposed to reside in the sun, but they reserve their devotions 
chiefly for the inferior deities, the so-called ditino, the spirits of 
their dead kings, whose tombs may be seen near the villages which 
they inhabited in their life. Each tomb stands in a grove of beautiful 
trees and is encircled by a tall palisade of pointed stakes, covered 
with fine mats. Such anyenclosure is sacred; the people are for- 
bidden to enter it lest they should disturb and annoy the ghost of 
the dead king who sleeps there in his grave. But the inhabitants 
of the nearest village are charged with the duty of keeping the tomb 
and the enclosure in good order, repairing the palisade, and 
replacing the mats when they are worn out. Oncea month, at the 
new moon, the women sweep not only the grave and the enclosure 
but the whole village. The guardian of the tomb is at the same 
time a priest ; he acts as intermediary between the god and the 
people who come to pray tohim.. He bears the title of Ngomboti ; 
he alone has the right to enter the sacred enclosure ; the profane 
multitude must Stand at a respectful distance. Even the king 

himself, when he comes to consult one of his ancestors, is forbidden 

to set foot on the holy ground. In presence of the god or, as they 
call him, the Master of the Tomb, the monarch must bear himself 
like a slave in the presence of his master. He kneels down near 
the entrance, claps his hands, and gives the royal salute ; and from 
within the enclosure the priest returns the salute just as the king 
himself, when he holds his court, returns the salute of his subjects. 
1 E, Béguin, Les Ma-Rotsé (Lau- 2 E. Béguin, of. cét. p. 101, 
sanne and Fontaines, 1903), pp. 100 sy. 3 See above, vol. ili, pp. 512 sg. 

VOL. II NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 307 

Then the suppliant, whether king or commoner, makes his petition 

to the deity and deposits his offering ; for no man may pray to the 

god with empty hands. Inside the enclosure, close to the entrance, 

is a hole which is supposed to serve as a channel of communication 

with the spirit of the deified king. In it the offerings are placed. Offerings 
Often they consist of milk which is poured into the hole; and the to the _ 
faster it drains away and is absorbed, the more favourable is the god 4°84 *ings. 
supposed to be to the petitioner. When the offerings are more 

solid and durable, such as flesh, cloths, and glass beads, they become 

the property of the priest after having been allowed to lie for a 
decent time beside the sacred orifice of the tomb. The spirits of The spirits 
the dead kings are thus consulted on matters of public concern as of the 
well as by private individuals touching their own affairs. If a war puieiee 
is to be waged, if a plague is raging among the people or a murrain oracles. 
among the cattle, if the land is parched with drought, in short if 

any danger threatens or any calamity has afflicted the country, 
recourse is had to these local gods, dwelling each in his shady 

grove, not far from the abodes of the living. They are near, but 

the great god in heaven is far away. What wonder, therefore, that 

their help is often sought while he is neglected? Their history is 
remembered ; men tell of the doughty deeds they did in their life- 

time ; why should they not be able to succour their votaries now that 

they have put on immortality? All over the country these temple- 

tombs may be seen. They serve as historical monuments to recall 

to the people the annals of their country. One of the most popular 

of the royal shrines is near Senanga at the southern end of the great 

plain of the Barotse. Voyagers who go down the Zambesi do not 

fail to pay their devotions at the shrine, that the god of the place 

may make their voyage to prosper and may guard the frail canoe 

from shipwreck in the rush and roar of the rapids ; and when they 

return in safety they repair again to the sacred spot to deposit a 
thank-offering for the protection of the deity.? 

‘ P. 5313. In the history of institutions the authority of the 
maternal uncle. . . . as a rule precedes that of the father.—This 
view is not novel. Dr. Westermarck has discussed it, and has 
attempted, not very successfully, to shew how the position of 
authority occupied by the maternal uncle in early society is con- 
sistent with his theory of a primitive patriarchal family.” 

P. 523. The king regularly marrying his own sister.—The Marriage 
custom of marrying their sisters appears to be common with African eas 
kings. Thus with regard to Kasongo, the king of Una, it is eae thar 
reported by Commander V. L. Cameron that “his principal wife sisters. 
and the four or five ranking next to her are all of royal blood, being 

1E. Béguin, Les Ala-Rotsé (Lau- 2 E, Westermarck, History of Human 
sanne and Fontaines, 1903), pp. 118- Afarriage (London, 1891), pp- 39 
123. S9q. 

Totemism 
among the 
Bushongo 
or Bakuba. 

308 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. 1, 

either his sisters or first-cousins ; and amongst his harem are to be 
found his step-mothers, aunts, sisters, nieces, cousins, and, still more 
horrible, his own children.”1_ And the same traveller tells us of 
another chief whose principal wife was his sister.? 

P. 625. The Bakuba or Bushongo Tribe.—Fuller details as to 
the totemic system of this and kindred tribes have since been 
furnished to me through the kindness of Mr. T. A. Joyce of the 
British Museum. The Bushongo (incorrectly called the Bakuba) 
tribe inhabits the Kasai District of the Congo Free State, I will 
subjoin Mr. Joyce’s account of Bushongo totemism in his own 
words :— 

“ An important institution is that of ¢4éna dari, which appears to 
be a decayed form of totemism. The word zima means a prohibi- 
tion, and the zixa dari must be distinguished from the zkina nyimt 
or Royal Prohibitions (analogous to our Ten Commandments), 
which are taught at the “4 mébu/a initiation ceremonies. The 
origin of the z4ina dari is said to be as follows. When Bumba (the 
Creator) had finished the work of creation, he travelled through 
the villages of men and pointed out to each some animal which he 
forbade the inhabitants to eat ; some villages were omitted, and the 
inhabitants of these in consequence have no zkina. His object in 
imposing these prohibitions is said to be ‘in order to teach men 
self-denial.’ If a man has as ima the leopard, he may neither eat 
leopards nor any animal killed by a leopard. At the same time 
the z4ina is not held sacred, since no particular respect is paid to it, 
and it may be killed by the individual who acknowledges it as his 
tkina. A man will indicate his zkéza in the following words: JZ? 
kweme kanya lotuma (supposing that his zAéza is the bird dotumu). 
These words belong to the obsolete Lumbila language, and their 
exact meaning is lost. Breach of the prohibition entails sickness 
and death. 

“The china bari is mherited from the father, and a wife will 
adopt the z4:na of her husband ; the z4zxa of the mother is observed 
to a certain extent, but not so strictly, and is certainly not trans- 
mitted further than one generation. The zkina of the myimi 
(paramount chief) is respected by all his subjects, and, of course, 
varies from ruler to ruler. The skin or feathers of the é#na may 
be worn as ornaments. 

* At the present day the inhabitants of a given village do not 
necessarily respect the same zdima, and the same ¢4iza occur in 
different villages and subtribes. There is no connection between 
the tribal name and the z&zna. 

“Tt was said at first that a man might marry a woman who had 

1V. L. Cameron, Across Africa 2 V. L. Cameron, of. cit. ii. 149. 
London, 1877), ii. 70. 

VOL. IT NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 309 

the same zkzza as himself, but further enquiries among the older Exogamy. 
folk elicited the fact that as recently as one generation ago such 
unions were absolutely forbidden. 

‘A man who has no z&ina dari is said to be ‘tike a wild beast 
which eats everything,’ and is not considered a pure-bred Bushongo. 

New e&zna are constituted even at the present day, and in the follow- Institution 
ing way. Suppose a hunter has killed a guinea-fowl, and a dispute of new 
arises relative to its distribution between him and his companions. one 
Perhaps he may fly into a rage and say, ‘Take the bird for your- 
selves, I will not touch it!’ and go off ina rage. Shortly after- 
wards he dies, and his ghost haunts the village, causing many 
deaths. The cause of the epidemic remains a mystery, until some 

old man will say, ‘It is the ghost of so-dnd-so, who died in anger 

over a guinea-fowl. Let us make the guinea-fowl za and refrain 

from eating its flesh.’ This is done, and the ghost ceases to 
trouble the village as long as the zkina is observed. 

“The inheritance of rank and property is in the female line, Inheritance 
not in the male line, as is the case with the ¢4éza. A man’s heir in °fProperty. 
the first instance is his eldest surviving brother ; in reversion, eldest 
surviving son of eldest sister by same father and mother ; in second 
reversion, eldest surviving sons of sisters in order lof age of latter, 
and so on.” 

P. 630. When a wife has borne two children, her husband Temporary 
deserts her and takes a new wife.—In antiquity a similar custom ™4™@s8es. 
is said to have been observed by the Tapyri, a Parthian tribe. 

Strabo reports that it was customary with them to give away a wife 
to another husband as soon as she had borne two or three children.! 

1 Strabo, xi. 9, 1. 

Anomalous 
terms for 
cousins 
in some 
North 
American 
Indian 
tribes, 
indicating 
extended 
marital 
rights. 

NOTES AND CORRECTIONS) 

VOLUME III 

P. 70. But in regard to cousins, the children of a brother and 
sister respectively, the Miami system presents a remarkable 
feature.—It will be seen from the text that under the Miami system 
and also under the Shawnee and Omaha systems! a man calls his 
female cousin, the daughter of his mother’s brother, “ my mother,” 
and she calls him “my son.” This is just the converse of what 
happens under the Minnetaree and Choctaw systems, under which 
aman calls his cousins, the children of his mother’s brother “my 
son” and “my daughter,” and they call him “my father.” Now 
we have seen 3 that these Minnetaree and Choctaw terms for cousins 
are intelligible on the hypothesis that among these tribes in former 
times, as among the Barongo at present, a man had marital rights 
over the wife of his mother’s brother, or, in other words, that a 
nephew might enjoy the wife of his maternal uncle, for in that case 
her children might actually be his. Or, to change the terms, a 
woman’s children might really be the offspring of her husband’s 
nephew (the son of his sister), since that nephew had the right of 
access to her. If that is so we may by analogy conjecture that 
the converse nomenclature for certain cousins among the Miamis, 
Shawnees, and Omahas is explicable by a converse custom, which 
permitted a man to exercise marital rights over his wife’s niece, 
the daughter of her brother, or, in other words, which placed a 
woman at the disposal of her paternal aunt’s (father’s sister’s) 
husband. Thus, whereas under the Minnetaree and Choctaw 
system a man was apparently allowed to enjoy the wife of his 
maternal uncle (mother’s brother), under the Miami, Shawnee, and 
Omaha system he was allowed to enjoy his wife’s niece, the daughter 
of her brother. Hence, if these extensions of marital rights can 
be described as an advantage, then in the former case the 
advantage was with the nephew at the expense of his maternal uncle ; 

1 See above, vol. iii. pp. 74, 116. ‘daughter ” which a man applies to 
* See above, vol. iii. pp. 149, 175 his cousins, the children of his mother’s 
sg. Withthe Minnetaree and Choctaw brother. See above, vol. iii. p. 165. 
systems the Creek system agrees so far 
as concerns the terms ‘‘son” and 3 See above, vol. ii. pp. 510 sg. 

310 

VOL. HI NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 3L1 

in the latter case the advantage was with the niece at the expense 
of her paternal aunt. In the one case a man was allowed access 
to a woman presumably in the generation above him ; in the other 
he was allowed access to a woman presumably in the generation 
below him. But it is possible that these curious names for cousins 
are to be explained otherwise: I have only indicated one possible 
solution of the problem. 

P. 155. Totemism among the Gulf Nations.—To the totemic Totemism 
tribes described under this head in the text are to be added the 2™°"¢ _ 
Yuchi Indians, of whom a full account has lately been published ),00! 
by Mr. F. G. Speck.! The following account of the tribe and its 
totemic system is derived from his book. 

The Yuchis formerly inhabited the banks of the Savannah The 
River, which now divides the States of Georgia and South Carolina. Yuchis. 
There they dwelt at an early time in contact with a southern band 
of Shawnees and near the seats of the Cherokees, the Catawbas, 
the Santees, and the Yamasis. These four tribes and the Yuchis 
all speak languages which differ fundamentally from each other. It 
is unusual to find five languages belonging to different stocks within 
so restricted an area on the eastern side of the Mississippi. After 
fruitless efforts to resist the pressure of the Creek confederacy the 
Yuchis finally made peace and joined the league.2 The remnant 
of the tribe, numbering about five hundred, is now settled with the 
rest of the Creek Indians, in the state of Oklahoma, whither they 
were removed in 1836.3 At all times, so far as tradition runs 
back, the Yuchis have been mainly tillers of the soil, living in 
settled villages and only hunting when the state of the crops 
allowed them to absent themselves from home for a while. Among 
the crops which they raised were corn, beans, sweet potatoes, 
melons, pumpkins, squashes, and tobacco. When the corn and 
other vegetables had been gathered in, they were stored for use 
in outhouses and cribs raised on posts. The principal animals 
hunted for their flesh were the deer, bison, bear, raccoon, opossum, 
rabbit, and squirrel; while the panther, wild cat, fox, wolf,” otter, 
beaver, and skunk were killed chiefly for the sake of their skins. 

The game animals were deemed very wise and very wary; in order 
to catch them it was needful to chant certain magic spells, of which 
the burdens were known to the shamans.* 

The Yuchis are or were divided into a considerable number of Totemic 
exogamous and totemic clans with descent in the maternal line: in clans 
other words, no man might marry a woman of his own totemic clan Saas 

1 Franck G. Speck, Ethnology of the 2F. G. Speck, Ethnology of the 
Fuchi Indians, Philadelphia, 1909 Yuchi Indians, p. 6. 
(University of Pennsylvania, Anthropo- . 
logical Publications of the University °F. G. Speck, op. ci. p. 9. 
luseum, vol. i. No. 1). 4 F. G. Speck, of. cit. pp. 18 sg, 

Descent 
from the 
totem. 

Respect 
for the 
totem. 

312 “ TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY vor. 1 

and children belonged to the clan of their mother, not of their 
father. The prohibition of marriage within the clan is very strict : 
a violation of the rule is regarded as incest. But a man is free to 
marry a woman of any clan but his own.! The names of twenty 
clans have been recorded as follows: —* 

1. Bear. 2. Wolf. 3. Deer. 4. Tortoise. 
5. Panther. 6. Wildcat. 7. Fox. 8. Wind. 
g. Fish. 10, Beaver. ir, Otter. 12, Raccoon, 
13. Skunk. 14. Opossum. 15. Rabbit. 16. Squirrel. 
17. Turkey. 18. Eagle. 19. Buzzard. 20. Snake. 

The account which Mr. Speck gives of the relationship in 
which the Yuchis believe themselves to stand to their totems is 
instructive and all the more valuable because, as I have had 
occasion repeatedly to point out, American writers on totemism 
so often say little or nothing about this fundamental side of the 
institution. I will therefore quote Mr. Speck’s explanations nearly 
entire. He says: “The members of each clan believe that they 
are the relatives and, in some vague way, the descendants of certain 
pre-existing animals whose names and identity they now bear. The 
animal ancestors are accordingly totemic. In regard to the living 
animals, they, too, are the earthly types and descendants of the 
pre-existing ones, hence, since they trace their descent from the 
same sources as the human clans, the two are consanguinely related. 

“ This brings the various clan groups into close relationship with 
various species of animals, 'and we find accordingly that the members 
of each clan will not do violence to wild animals having the form 
and name of their totem. For instance, the Bear clan never molest 
bears, but nevertheless they use commodities made from parts of 
the bear. Such things, of course, as bear hides, bear meat or 
whatever else may be useful, are obtained from other clans who have 
no taboo against killing bears. In the same way the Deer people 
use parts of the deer when they have occasion to, but do not 
directly take part in killing deer. In this way a sort of amnesty is 
maintained between the different clans and different kinds of 
animals, while thg blame for the injury of animals is shifted from 
one clan to the other. General use could consequently be made of 
the animal kingdom without obliging members of any clan to be the 
direct murderers of their animal relatives. 

“In common usage the clan is known collectively by its animal 
name: the men of the Panther clan calling themselves Panthers, 

those of the Fish clan, Fish, and so on through the list. ‘The 
1 F, G, Speck, Ethnology of the Speck’s informants were not agreed as 

Yuchi Indians, pp. 70, 71, 95. to the last three clans (the Eagle, the 
2 F. G. Speck, of. cit. p. 71. Myr. Buzzard, and the Snake), 

VOL. HI NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 313 

totemic animals are held in reverence, appealed to privately in 
various exigencies, and publicly worshipped during the annual 
ceremony. ... ; 

““The young man or boy in the course of his adolescence reaches Initiation 
a period when he is initiated into the rank of manhood in his Sous 
town. This event is connected with totemism. For from the time 
of his initiation he is believed to have acquired the protection of 
his clan totem. henceforth he stands in a totemic relation similar 
to the young man of the plains tribe who has obtained his 
‘medicine.’ Here in the Southeast, however, the ‘medicine’ is 
not represented by a concrete object, but is the guiding influence 
of a supernatural being. The earthly animals nevertheless are 
believed in many cases to possess wisdom which may be useful to 
human beings, so the different clans look to their animal relatives 
for aid in various directions. Among the tribes of the plains, how- 
ever, each man has an individual guardian spirit; which is not 
necessarily the same as his gens totem.” ? 

The foregoing account of Yuchi totemism suggests several Com- 
observations, While the blood relationship supposed to exist Parison of 
between the clanspeople and their totemic animals is typical of pesciet 
totemism, the cynical understanding between the clans to kill each with 
other’s totems for their mutual benefit is unusual, and reminds us Central 
of the practice of the Central Australian aborigines, who multiply risiring 
their totemic animals by magic in order that the creatures may be 
eaten by others.2 On the other hand, the appeals made to the 
totemic animals in time of need and the dances performed in their 
honour seem to indicate an incipient worship or religion of the 
totems. Lastly, the belief that a young man acquires the protection Resem- 
of his clan totem by means of initiation at puberty strongly yo of 
resembles, as Mr. Speck points out, the belief of many other iat to 
American Indians that a youth obtains a personal guardian spirit guardian 
of his own through dreams at puberty. The resemblance draws ‘pitits. 
still closer the analogy which we have already traced between the 
totem of the clan and the guardian spirit of the individual.3 

The dances in honour of the totems are danced by the Yuchis Totemic 
at the great annual festival which celebrates the ripening of the corn 42"ces. 
and the first solemn eating of the new fruits. In these dances the 
dancers mimick the actions and cries of their totemic animals and 
even seem to believe that for the time being they are identical with 
the creatures. However, no imitative costumes or masks are now 
used, nor could Mr. Speck ascertain that they ever had been in 
use. Other features of this yearly celebration are the observance The sacred 
of certain taboos, the kindling of a new and sacred fire, the scarifi- "ew fire. 
cation of men, the taking of an emetic, and the performance of the 

1 F, G. Speck, Ethnology of the 2 See vol. i. pp. 104 599- 
Vuchi Indians, pp. 79 Sq. 3 See above, vol. iii. pp. 450 s7¢- 

Classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
ship 
among the 
Yuchis. 

Clans 

of the 
Timucua 
Indians. 

Avoidance 
of a wife's 
relations. 

314 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. II 
ball game. A feast on the new corn follows the taking of the 
emetic.} 

From an incomplete list of kinship terms recorded by Mr. 
Speck we may gather that the Yuchis have the classificatory system 
of relationship. Thus a man calls his mother’s sister “my little 
mother”; he calls his father’s brother and also his mother’s brother 
“my little father”; and he calls his female cousin, the daughter of 
his mother’s sister, ‘ my sister.” 2 

P. 167. The Seminole Indians of Florida.—From the account 
of an old Franciscan monk, Francesco Pareja, who went to Florida 
in 1593 and founded the monastery of St. Helena to the north 
of St. Augustine, we learn that the Timucua Indians of that 
province were divided into stocks or clans which took their names 
variously from deer, fish, bears, pumas, fowls, the earth, the wind, 
and so forth.3 These stocks or clans were probably totemic. 

P. 361. The custom which obliges a man and his mother-in-law 
to avoid each other.—A few more instances of this custom as it is 
or was observed by various American tribes may be given here. 
Among the low savages of the Californian peninsula a man was not 
allowed for some time to look into the face of his mother-in-law or 
of his wife’s other near relations ; when these women were present, 
he had to step aside or hide himself Among the Indians of the 
Isla del Malhado in Florida a father-in-law and mother-in-law might 
not enter the house of their son-in-law, and he on his side might 
not appear before his father-in-law and his relations. If they met 
by accident they had to go apart to the distance of a bowshct, 
holding their heads down and their eyes turned to the earth. But 
a woman was free to converse with the father and mother of her 
husband. Among the Indians of Yucatan, if a betrothed man saw 
his future father-in-law or mother-in-law at a distance, he turned 
away as quickly as possible, believing that a meeting with them 
would prevent him from begetting children. The reason thus 
assigned for the custom of avoidance is remarkable and, so far as I 

remember, unique. 

1¥. G. Speck, Ethnology of the 
Yuchi Indians, pp. 1¥2-115. 

2 F. G. Speck, of. czt. p. 60. 

3 A.S. Gatschet, ** Volk und Sprach 
der Timucua,” Zeztschrift fiir Ethno- 
logte, ix. (1877) pp. 247 sg. 

4 J. Baegert, ‘*An Account of the 
Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Cali- 
fornian Peninsula,” Azzztual Report of 
the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian 
Lastitution for the year 1863, p. 368. 

5 Alvar Nufiez Cabeca de Vaca, 
Relation et Naufrages (Paris, 1837), 

Among the Arawaks of British Guiana a man 

pp. 109 sg. (in Ternaux-Compans’” 
Voyages, relations et mémoires origi- 
naux pour servir & Phistoire de la 
découverte de [ Amérique). The ori- 
ginal of this work was published in 
Spanish at Valladolid in 1555. Com- 
pare A. de Herrera, Zhe General 
History of the Vast Continent and 
Lslands of America, translated by Capt. 
John Stevens (London, 1725, 1726), 
iv. 34. 

6 Brasseur de Bourbourg, Histoire 
des nations ctviléistes du Mexique et de 
PAmérique-Centrale, ii, §2 sg. 

VOL. HI NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 355 
may never see the face of his wife’s mother. If she is in the house 
with him, they must be separated by a screen or partition-wall; if 
she travels with him in a canoe, she steps in first, in order that she 
may turn her back to him.1 Among the Caribs “the women never 
quit their father’s house, and in that they have an advantage over 
their husbands in as much as they may talk to all sorts of people, 
whereas the husband dare not converse with his wife’s relations, 
unless he is dispensed from this observance either by their tender 
age or by their intoxication. They shun meeting them and make 
great circuits for that purpose. If they are surprised in a place 
where they cannot help meeting, the person addressed turns his 
face another way so as not to be obliged to see the person, whose 
voice he is compelled to hear.”? Thus both among the Caribs 
and the Indians of the Isla del Malhado, while a man had to avoid 
the relations of his wife, a woman was free to converse with the 
relations of her husband. This confirms the observation that the 
taboo which separates a man from his mother-in-law is in general 
more stringent than the taboo which separates a woman from her 
father-in-law.® . 

P. 362. Instances of men united to their mothers, their sisters, Marriage 
or their daughters, . . . are far from rare.—Similarly of the Caribs of near kin 
it is said that “ they have no prohibited degree of consanguinity 27078 
among them: fathers have been known to marry their own , 
daughters, by whom they had children, and mothers to marry their 
sons. Though that is very rare, it is common enough to see two 
sisters, and sometimes a mother and daughter, married to the same 
man.” 4 

P. 519. The greatest misfortune of all is for a dancer to fall 
in the dance. . . . The unfortunate cannibal who fell in the dance 
used to be killed.—Similarly in West Africa “‘it is a bad omen for 
a dancer to slip and fall when performing before the king of 

1G. Klemm, <Al/gemeine Cultur- 
Geschichte der Menschheit (Leipsic, 
1843-1852), i 77. 

2 J. B.du Tertre, Histoire generale des 
Isles de S. Christophe, de la Guadeloupe, 
de la Martinique et autres dans [ Ame- 
rigque (Paris, 1654), p. 419. Asimilar, 
but rather briefer, account of the custom 
is given by De la Borde, who may 
have borrowed from Du Tertre. See 
De la Borde, ‘Relation de Porigine, 
moeurs, coustumes, religion, guerres 
et voyages des Caraibes, sauvages des 
Isles Antilles de PAmerique,” p. 56 
(in Recueil de divers voyages faits en 
Afrique et en PAmerique qui wont 

point esté encore publiex, Paris, 1684). 

3 See above, vol. ii. p. 77. 

4 J. B. du Tertre, Histotre generale 
des Isles de S. Christophe, de la 
Guadeloupe, de la Martinique et autres 
dans f Amerigue (Paris, 1654), p. 419. 
The evidence of De la Borde is similar. 
He says: ‘ They take their wives 
without distinction of relationship, for 
they mix with each other indifferently, 
like beasts. I have seen some who had 
their daughters for wives.” See De la 
Borde, ‘‘ Relation de Vorigine, etc., 
des Caraibes,” p. 19 (in Recueil de 
divers voyages faits en Afrique et en 
LAmerique, Paris, 1684). 

Marriage 
with a 
niece 
among the 
South 
American 
Indians. 

316 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL, II 

Dahomi, and, up to the reign of Gezo, any dancer who met with 
such an accident was put to death.” ! 

P. 575. The true and legitimate wives in this country are the 
daughters of their sisters.—Another old writer, speaking of the 
Brazilian Indians, says: “They are in the habit of marrying their 
nieces, the daughters of their brothers or of their sisters. They 
regard them as their legitimate wives: the father cannot refuse 
them, and no one else has a right to marry them.”? Another of 
the earliest writers on Brazil observes of the Indians that “the only 
degrees of consanguinity observed in marriage are these: none of 
them takes his mother, sister, or daughter to wife: the rest are not 
reckoned: a paternal uncle marries his niece, and so on.”? On 
the other hand, speaking of the Macusis of British Guiana, Sir R. 
Schomburgk observes: ‘The paternal uncle may never marry his 
niece, because that is regarded as a degree of relationship next to 
that of brother and sister; hence the paternal uncle is called papa 
just like the father. “On the other hand, everybody is allowed to 
marry his sister’s daughter, or his deceased brother’s wife, or his 
stepmother, when his father is dead.” 4 

tA. B. Ellis, Zhe Ewe-speaking originaux pour servir a Vhistoire de la 
Leoples of the Slave Coast (London, découverte de PAmérique). 

1890), p. 95. 3 J. Lerius, Méstoria navigationts in 
2 Pero de Magalhanes de Gandavo, Srasz//am (1586), p. 232. | 
Histoire de la Province de Sancta-Cruz 4 R. Schomburgk, Retsen in Britisch- 

(Paris, 1837), p. 115 (Ternaux-Com- Guana (Leipsic, 1847-1848), ii. 
pans, Voyages, relations, et mémotres 318. 

NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 

VOLUME IV 

P. 151, note 2, The Albanians are said to be exogamous.—The The _ 
part of Albania in which Miss M. Edith Durham reports exogamy en 
to be still practised lies to the north of Scutari and bears the name : 
of Maltsia e madhe or “the Great Mountain Land.” It is a wilder- 
ness of grey and barren rock, where there is little land that can be 
brought under cultivation, and where large tracts are dependent for 
their supply of water on rain alone. This rugged and sterile region 
is the home of five great tribes, the Hoti, Gruda, Kastrati, Skreli, 
and Kilmeni.! 

Miss Durham’s account of exogamy as it is practised by these Miss M. E. 
tribes runs as follows :— relearn 

“The main fact is the tribe (fs). It has been both their Soeamy. 
strength and their weakness. Each tribe has a definite tale of among the 
origin. Descent is traced strictly through the male line, and the Albanians. 
tradition handed from father to son through memories undebauched 
by print. 

“The head of each jis is its hereditary standard-bearer, the 
Bariaktar. The office passes from father to son, or in default of 
son to the next heir male. ‘The standard is now a Turkish one. 

Only the Mirdites have a distinctive flag with a rayed-sun upon it. 

“Some large tribes are divided into groups, each with its own 
Bariaktar. A division thus marching under one standard (dariak) 
is called a dariak. Such a dbariak may be descended from a different 
stock from the rest of the tribe, or the division may have been made . 
for convenience when the tribe grew large. 

“The men and women descending from a common male 
ancestor, though very remote, regard one another as brother and 
sister, and marriage between them is forbidden as incestuous. 

Though the relationship be such that the Catholic Church per- 
mits marriage, it is regarded with such genuine horror that I have 

1 Miss M. Edith Durham, High Albania (London, 1909), p. 19. 
317 

318 TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY VOL. IV 

‘ 
Exogamy heard of but one instance where it was attempted or desired, when 
among the against tribal law. Even a native priest told me that a marriage 
Albanians. between cousins separated by twelve generations was to him a 
horrible idea, though the Church permitted it, ‘for really they are 
brothers and sisters.’ 
““The mountain men have professed Christianity for some fifteen 
centuries, but tribe usage is still stronger than Church law. A man 
marries and gives his daughter in marriage outside his tribe, except 
when that tribe contains members of a different stock, or when it 
has been divided into daviaks considered distant enough for inter- 
marriage. But in spite of this exogamy, it would appear that, 
through the female line, the race may have been fairly closely 
inbred. For a man does not go far for a wife, but usually takes 
one from the next tribe, unless that tribe be consanguineous. If 
not so debarred, he takes a wife thence and marries his daughter 
there. <Kastrati, for example, usually marries Hoti, and Hoti 
Kastrati. The bulk of the married women in one were born in 
the other. A perpetual interchange of women has gone on for 
some centuries.” 4 
The If this account of exogamy in Albania is correct, as we may 
occurrence assume it to be, some important consequences flow from it. So 
haba long as exogamy was known to be practised by the Hindoos alone 
widely . of all the peoples of the Aryan stock, it was possible to suppose, as 
separated JT have suggested,? that the institution may not have been native to 
ae them but may have been borrowed by their ancestors from the 
stock, dark-skinned aborigines of India among whom they settled, and 
namely, the among whom both exoganty and totemism would seem to have 
are ti been universally prevalent. But when we find exogamy practised 
Hindoos, to this day by a semi-barbarous people of Europe, the case is altered. 
renders it The Albanians are not in contact with any savages from whom 
ee they could have borrowed the institution. It would appear, 
gamy was therefore, that they must have inherited it from their remote 
at one time ancestors. And if they have done so, it becomes probable that 
abet ak the Hindoos have done so also. Now if two branches of the Aryan 
members stock so different and so remote from each other as the Hindoos of 
of the India and the Albanians of Turkey in Europe could both be proved 
Eni to have inherited phe practice of exogamy from their rude and 

distant progenitors ‘of a prehistoric age, it would become probable 

that exogamy had at one time been practised by all the other 

members of the great Aryan family ; and since, as I have already 

pointed out,? the institution of exogamy appears to have been in 

its origin a system of group marriage, which in turn displaced a 

previous custom of sexual promiscuity, it would follow that all the 

peoples of the Aryan family have at some period of their social 

1 Miss M. Edith Durham, “igh 2 See above, vol. ii. p. 330 
Albania (London, 1909), pp. 20 sg. 3 See above, vol. iv. pp. 137 5¢9- 

VOL. IV NOTES AND CORRECTIONS 319 

evolution passed through the stages of sexual promiscuity and 
group marriage before they reached the higher stage of monogamy 
and the prohibited degrees. But this is a subject on which further 
research into the matrimonial institutions of the Aryans may yet 
throw light. 

P. 298. The Leech folk . . . are required to chew a leech. The totem 
... The Jute folk . . . were bound to chew a certain quantity ®@cTame"". 
of jute-—These customs should apparently be added to the very 
few known instances of a totem sacrament.! 

1 See above, vol. i. p. 120, vol. ii. p. 590, vol. iv. pp. 230-232. 

INDEX 

VOL. IV 

INDEX 

Aaru and Babar archipelagoes, totemism | Agariyas, totemism among the, ii. 278 
in, i. 7, 11 5g. 
Ababua, their belief in transmigration, | Age-grades, iii. 548; among the Kaya- S 
ii, 391 ; totemism among the, 625, 626 Kaya, ii. 59 sgg.; taboos observed 
Abchasses, the, iv. 235 by members of, 413; among the 
Abenakis, totemism of the, iii. 45 sg. Masai, 412 5gg.; sexual communism 
Abercromby, Hon. J., iv. 257 2.6 between men and women of corre- 
Abhorrence of incest, i. 54, 164, 554; sponding, 41§ sy. ; among the Taveta, 
dates from savagery, iv. 154 419; among the Nandi, 445 sg. JS 
Abipones, male infanticide among the, | Age-groups, i. 180 
iv. 79 Agriculture, perhaps orginated in magic, 
Abomination (éuto), each exogamous i, 217 sg., iV. 19 5g. ; in New Guinea, ii. 
class has its special, ii. 103 sgg. 33: 35 Sy-, 40, 61, iv. 284; of the 
Abyssinia, forbidden foods in, i. 58 Oraons, ii. 285; of the Hos, 293; of 
Acagchemem Indians, iii. 403 : the Santals, 300; of the Khonds, 
Accessory totems, ii. 136. See also Sub- 303; of the Juangs, 314; of the 
sidiary totems Korwas, 315; of the Khasis, 319; 
Achewa, the, ii. 395, 398, 399 of the Meitheis, 326; of the Bechu- 
Achilpa (Wild Cat) people, tradition as anas, 369; of the Wahehe, 404; of 
to, i. 251 sg. the Taveta, 417; of the A-Kamba, 
Acholi, the, ii, 628 420; of the Suk, 427; of the Nandi, 
Acoma, Pueblo village, iii. 217 432; in Kavirondo, 447; of the 
Acorn dance, iii. 494 5g., 496 Siena, 549 sg.; of the Fantees, 555; 
Acorns as food, iii. 493, 495 5g. of Ewe-speaking peoples, 577; of 
Adair, James, iii. 161 sgg., 164, 172, American Indians, iii. 1, 2, 3, 30, 39, 
177, iv. 225; his theory of the 44, 45 5g-, 74 5g., 87 Sg., 120, 128, 
descent of the Redskins from the 135 sg., 146, 147, 158, 171, 172, 177, 
Jews, i. 99 180 sg., 183, 195, 199, 200, 204 sg., 
Address, terms of, ii. 50 242, 248, 262, 564 sg., 573, iv. 311 

Admiralty Islands, totemism in, ii. 133 | Ahirs, totems of the, ii. 230 
Ahts, guardian spirits among the, iii. v 

Sq. 
Adonis, Gardens of, i. 34 2.6 410 sg.; Wolf dance of the, 503 
Adultery, punishment of, i. 476, 554, | Ainos, descended from bear, i. 8, iv. 

573, ii. 410; not regarded as an 174; keep bears, eagles, etc., in cages, 

offence, 265 i. 15; reported totemism of the, ii. 
Adzi-anim, god of Tshi negroes, iv. 37. 348 2. ; women alone tattooed among 
legis of Athene, i. 32 the, iv. 204 
Aeschylus on father-kin, i. 382 Aitu, god, ii. 152 

/ Affinity between a clan and its totem, ii. | A-Kamba or Wakamba, the, ii, 420 

8 sg. : S9Qo 

V Africa, East and Central, totemism in, | Akawes, the, iv. 296 
ii. 394 syq. : A-Kikuyu, the, ii. 425 
nee South, totemism in, ii. 354 599. Alatunja, headman, i. 194, 327 
~—— West, totemism in, ii. 543 579. Albania, silence of brides in, iv. 235 
religion in, iv. 32 sgg. i proportion | Albanians, the, reported to be exogam- 
of the sexes in, 86 sg. ous, iv. 151 72.7, 317 sg. 

323 

324 

Albert, Lake, ii. 513 

Albert Nyanza, Lake, ii. 628 

Alcheringa of Central Australian abo- 
rigines, i. 93, 181, 188 sg. 

Aleuts, iii. 251 

Alfoors, the, ii. 185 

7 Algonkin Indians, Secret Societies of the, 

lil. 475 59g. 

speech, iii. 72 

tribes of the Atlantic, 
among the, iii. 39 sgg. 

Algonkins, the, iii. 46 sg.; guardian 
spirits among the, 372 sqg. 

Alice Springs, i. 190, 192, 194, 195 

Alps, the Australian, i. 315, 318 

Altaians, clans of the, i. 86 

Alternation of the totems between the 
subclasses, i. 408 sg., 419, 433 5g. 

Alvord, B., iv. 144 

Amalgamation of exogamous communi- 
ties, hypothesis of, i. 284 sg. 

Amapondas, the, iv. 303 

Ama-Xosa, traces of totemism among 
the, ii. 380 s¢q. 

Ama-Zulu, traces of totemism among 
the, ii, 380 sgg. 

Amazons of Dahomey, ii. 578 

Ambon (Amboyna), totemism in, i. 7, 11, 
86, ii. 197 

Ambrym, the volcano, ii. 63 

America, geographical diffusion of totem- 
ism in, i. 84 sg. 

Central, totemism among the In- 

dians of, iii. 551 sgg.; guardian spirits 

in, 443 599. 

North-West, races of, iii. 251 sq. ; 

natural features and climate of, 254 

sqg. ; Secret Societies of, 499 597. 

South, totemism among the Indians 
of, iii, 557 5979. 

American Bureau of Ethnology, iii. 93 
2.2, 240 

totemism 

Te Indians, individual totems or 

guardian spirits of the, i. 50 sg., iii. 
370 sqq. ; excess of women over men 
among the, iv. 84 

theory of totemism, iv. 48 

Ancestor of clan dressed as anima] or as 
a supernatural Weing, itt. 324 sy. 

Ancestor-worship in Fiji, ii. 148 2.? 

Ancestors personated in sacred cere- 
monies, i. 204; helped by animals, 
totemic or otherwise, ii. 187, 188, 199, 
200, 202, 210, 375 sg.; worship of 
eponymous, 327; as guardian spirits, 
453; as birds, iii. 324 syg. ; worship 
of, among the Bantu tribes, iv. 32 
59q. 

Andaman Islanders, initiation ceremony 
of the, iv. 227 

Andamanese, food prohibitions of the, 
i. 42; forbidden foods of the, 52 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Anderson, J. D., ii. 619 2.8, iv. 297 #.3, 
300 

Andersson, C. J., ii. 360 

Andromeda, i. 34 7.6 

Angamis, the, ii. 328 

Angass, the, ii, 598 

Anglos, the, ii. 579 

Angola and Congo, totemism in, ii. 
609 599. E 

Angoni, the, ii. 395; mutual avoidance 
of parents-ip-law and son-in-law 
among the, iv. 303 

Angoniland, totemism in Central, ii. 
394 599. 

Animal ancestors, i. 5 59g. 

guardians, ii. 627 </ 

names of some Australian classes 

or phratries, iv. 238 sgg., 264 sgy. 

spouses, iii. 33 

totemic, kept, iv. 278 

Animal-shaped mounds, i. 31 2.5 

Animals, apologies for killing, i. 10, 19 
Sq., ili. 67, 81; tests of kinship with, 
i. 20 sg. ; supposed to be in people's 
bodies, 26; dances imitative of, 37 
59qq., iii, 418; imitation of, i. 37 sgg. ; 
as incarnations of gods in Samoa, 81 
sg., ii. 153 sgg.; domestication of, i. 
87; assimilation of people to, ii. 92; 
ancestral ghosts in, 104 ; descent from, 
104 Sg., 197 5Y., 199, 200, 633, 637; 
transformations of deities into, 139 sq. ; 
gods incarnate in, 152 sg., 155, 156 
sqq., 167 sg., 169, 175 5g., 178; 
growing inside of people who have 
eaten them, 17 5g., 19, 160, 167, 
428 sg., 482, ii. 160; help given 
to ancestors by, 187, 188, 199, 200, 
202 ; local sacred, 583 s¢g., 590 599.; 
guardian spirits of, iii. 133 sy. ; parts iy 
of animals as guardian spirits, 412, 
417, 427, 451; language of, ger 5q.; 
worshipped, 577 s¢9- 

born of women, i. 16, ii. 56, 58 sg., 

610, 612; legends of, i. 7 sg. 

dances representing, iv. 285; 
mimicked by dancers, 313 
men disguised as, iv. 208, 216 

5g., 226 ; ceremonies performed over 
slain, 268 sg. 

sacred, in Congo, ii. 614 sg.; in 
Madagascar, 632 sgg.; kept in cap- 
tivity, iv. 175, buried, 175 sg. 
totemic, legends of descent from, 
i. 5 sgg.; not killed or eaten, 8 syq. ; 
not to be looked at, 11, 12, 13; fed 
or kept in captivity, 14 sg. ; mourned 
and buried, 15 sg.; not spoken of 
directly, 16; growing in people’s 
bodies, 17 5g., 19, 428 sq., 482, ii. 
160; appeasing the, i. 18; assimila- 
tion of people to, 25 sgg. ; dressing in 

INDEX 

skins of, 26; gods developed out of, 
ii. 139 sg. ; help given to ancestors by, 
375 5g. ; punishment for killing, 434 ; 
resemblance of people to, iii. 55 sg. ; 
apologies for killing, 67, 81; trans- 
formation into, 76; respect shewn for, 
310, 3114; artificial, 312. See also 
Ancestors 
Animals and plants, sacred, not all to 
be confounded with totems, iii. 195; 
Cherokee superstitions about, 186 sgg. 
Anjea, mythical being, i. 536 sg. 
Ankole, ii. 532 
Ant-eater, totem, ii. 428 
Ant-hills worshipped at marriage, iv. 
295 
Ant totem, ceremony of the, i. 207 
Antelope (Portax pictus) clan, ii. 301 
clan, ii. 489, 550 
By sicnrias ase sacred, iv. 37 
Anthrepomorphic gods developed out of 
totems, i. 82 
supernatural being in Australia, i. 
145 Sg., 151 Sg. 
Ants, driver, sacred, iv. 37 
Anula tribe, classes and totems of the, i. 
wv 237 1.1; exogamous classes of the, 
v'271 ; classificatory terms used by the, 
303 
Anyanja, the, ii. 395, 401 
Aos, the, ii, 328 
Apaches, sororate among the, iv. 142 
—~ and Navahoes, iii. 202, 241 sgq. ; 
~v exogamous clans of the, 243 s9q. 
Apes, sacred, ii. 205, 206 sg., 210, iv. 
175 
"APOdyyous ydpous, i. 63 2.5 
Apollonius Rhodius, iv. 245 
Apologies for killing animals, i. 10, 19 
sq., tii. 67, 84 
Appeasing the totem, Samoan mode of, 
i. 18, ii. 156, 157, 158, 160 
Appei family, origin of, ii. 567 sg. 
Apple-tree in marriage-ceremony, i. 33 
Arab remedy for hydrophobia, i. 133 
Arabs mourn for dead gazelle, i. 15 
Arakhs, totemism among the, ii. 221 
Arapahoes, the, iii. 1 2.1, 112; associa- 
tion of Warriors among the, 479 
sqgq.; Crazy Dance of the, 480, 
481 sg. ; sororate among the, iv. 142 
Sq. 
Araucanians or Moluches, traces of 
totemism among the, iii. 581 sg. 
Arawaks, descended from animals, i. 7; 
totemism among the, ili. 564 sg¢. 
Argive brides wear beards, i. 73 
Arhuacos, the, iii. 557 
“tri, personal totem, i. 535 5¢7-, 538, 539 
Arickarees, the, iii, 146; worship of 
corn-ear among, 144 5g.; Secret 
V Societies among, 490 5g. 

325 

Arizona, iii. 195, 196, 204, 206 

Arm-bone of dead, Warramunga cere- 
mony with, 1. 202 

Armenian brides, their custom of silence, 
lv. 234 

Armour god, iii. 396 sg. 

Arnot, F. S., ii. 624 sy. 

Arrows, girls married to, iv. 212 

Art, influence of totemism on, iv. 25, 
26 sq. 

Artemis, Arcadian, i. 38 2.5 ; Brauronian, 
ibid, 

Artemisia, i. 75 2.4 

Artificial monsters, novices brought 
back on, iii. §37 57.. 541, 542, 543 Sg. 

objects as totems, i. 25, 254, ii. 
221, 223, 231, 233, 234, 235, 237, 
239, 240, 243, 245, 247, 248, 250, 
251, 270, 271, 274, 280, 295, 296, 
297, 298, 301, 306, 309, 316; as 
guardian spirits, iii. 417, 420 ff 

Aru Archipelago, traces of totemism in 
the, ii, 200 sg. 

Arunta, the, do not observe totemic exo- 
gamy, i. 103; totemism of, 186 sgg. ; 
its resemblance to that of the Banks’ 
Islanders, ii. 94 sgg., iv. 9 sg.; for- 
bidden foods among the, 220 sg. ; 
avoidance of mother-in-law, etc., 
among the, 273; theory of conception 
among, i, 188 sg.; sacred dramatic 
ceremonies of, 205 sgg.; exogamous t 
classes of, 256 sqg., 259 sgq. ; rules of 
marriage and descent among, 259 5¢¢. ; 
classificatory terms used by, 297 sq. Jv 

nation, i. 186 7.2 

totem clans, why they are not 

exogamous, i, 259, ii. 97, iv. 127 5g. 

Aryan race in India, éxogamy in the, ii. vA 
330 

Aryan-speaking peoples, the classificatory wy 
system of relationship among the, ii. 
333 59. : ; Vv 

Aryans, question of totemism among 
the primitive, i. 86, iv. 13; question 
of exogamy among the, 151 sg., 318 sy. 

Ash Wednesday, burial of sardine on, i. 

15 7.8 

Ashantee, rule of succession to the ¥ 
throne of, ii, 564 sg. 

Ashantees, the, ii. 553, 555 5g. 

Ashe, R. P., it. 471 2.1 

Ashes of dead, iti. 270, 271 

Ashiwanni, Rain Priests, iii. 234 Sf 

Asia (apart from India), traces of totemism 
in, fi. 336 sgg. 

Ass, Bedouins imitate the, iv. 208 

Assam, women alone tattooed in some 
tribes of, iv. 204 sg.; totemism and 
exogamy in, ii. 318 sgq., iv. 295-300 

Assimilation of people to their totems, 4 
i. 29 syy., ii. 8 sg., iv. 179 5g.; of ¥ 

326 

J people to animals or plants, ii. 92; of 
men to their guardian spirits, iii. 387, 
400, 417, 426, 451 
Assiniboins, iii. 110; societies of the, 474 
Associated or linked totems, ii. 30 7., 
48 sg., 50 Sq., 52, 54 Sq. 
Associations, dancing, of North American 
Indians, i. 46 sg. 
religious, iii, 457, 547; of the 
Dacotas, i. 46 sg. See Societies 
\ Asuras, totemism among the, ii. 309 5g. 
Asylums or sanctuaries, iv. 266 sgq. ; 
develcpment of cities out of, i. 95 5¢¢.; 
in Australia, America, Africa, Borneo, 
etc., 96 syg. 
Atai, a sort of external soul, ii. 81 sgg. 
Athabaska, Lake, iii. 346 
Athabaskans, the, iii. 346 
Athapascan or Athabascan family of 
Indians, iii. 241, 252 
Athene, aegis of, i. 32 
Athenians, marriage with the half-sister 
among the ancient, ii. 602; burial 
custom of the, iv. 213 
Athens, wolf buried at, i. 15 5. 
Attic maidens dance as bears, i. 38 
Attiwandaronks, iii. 3 
Atua, god, ii. 167, 168, 179, 180, 181 
Augiid, totem, ii. 2, 19, 22, 23 
Australia, equivalence of the exogamous 
< divisions in, i. 63; totemism universal 
in, 84, iv. 11; its archaic type of 
animals and plants, i. 92; primitive 
character of the aborigines, 92 sg. ; 
¥ universal prevalence of magic in, 141 
sqg.; rudiments of religion in, 142 syq. 
Supreme Being reported in, 151 sy. 
Felix, i. 316, 318 ; 
/ North-East, totemism in, i. 515 syq. 
v¥ —— North-West, totemism in, i. 5675¢¢. 
South-Eastern, totemism in, i. 314 
5qgg. ; physical geography of, 314 599. ; 
decadence of tribes in, 340 
West, totemism in, i. 546 sgg. 
Australian aborigines, evidence of pro- 
gress among the, i. 154 5sg.; material 
and social progress among the, 320 
sgqg.; houses of the, 321 sgg. ; among 
the lowest of existing races, 342 sy. ; 
not degraded, 342 sg.; infanticide 
J among the, iv. 81 sy.; proportion of 
the sexes among the, 85 sg.; their body 
scars, 198 sgy.; cannibalism among 
the, 260 sgg. See also Central Aus- 
tralian 
-—— Alps, i. 315, 318 
marriage systems devised to pre- 
vent the marriage of near kin, iv. 
105 sgg. 112 599. 
rites of initiation at puberty, i. 
36 sg., 38 57., 40 599., 42 syy., iv. 180 
S9G., 217 S9qY., 227 594. 

Nu 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Australian savages not absolutely sa! 
tive, iv. 11 

tribes, exogamous classes of the, J 
i, 27% sgg.; generally at peace with 
each other, 284 

Australians, Western, 
birds, i. 7 

Avebury, Lord, his theory of totemism, 

descended from 

v 

iv. 44 

Avoidance, custom of mutual avoidance ) 
between near relations by blood or 
marriage adopted as a_ precaution 
against incest, i. 285 7.1, 503, 542, ii. 
77 597-1 131, 147 Sy., 189, 424, 623, 
638, iti, 112 5g., iv. 108 sgg., 284 ) 

— of blood, i. 49 

-—-— of cousins, ii. 130 5g., 508, 629, ¥ 
637 5g., iv. 109 

—— of daughter, ii. 189, 424 V 

—— of husband's father, ii. 189, 385, vy 
403, ili, 110, TIL, 112 Vv 

of husband’s maternal uncle, ii. 
630 

—- of husband's parents, ii, 124, 40% J 

of mother, ii. 77, 78, 189, 638 

—— of sister-in-law, the wife of wife's 
brother, ii. 388 

.— + of sister’s daughters, ii. 509 

—t- ofsisters, i. 542, 565 sg., ii. 77 sqy.. 
124, 13%, 147, 189, 343, 344, 638, 
iii. 245, 362, iv. 286, 288 

—— of wife's father, ii. 17, iij. 109, 110, 
IIT, 305 

——— of wife's grandmother, iii. 109 sg. 

——- of wife's mother, i, 285 7.1, 286 z., 
395: 404 597., 416 5g., 440, 451, 469.4 
492, 503, 506, 541, 565, 572, li. 17, 26, 
76 sqq., 117, 189, 368, 385, 400 5¢., 
403, 412, 424, 461, 508, 522, 62259., 
630, iii, 108 sgg., 136, 148, 247, 
277 5Sg., 305, 361 sg., 498, 583, iv. 
109, 273, 305, 314 Sy. 

of wife’s parents, ii, 124, 581, 630 

—— of wife's sister, iv. 283, 284 

~—— of relations by marriage, iv. 283, 
303 

Awa, totemic taboo, ii, 588 

Awa-Kisii, ii. 447 

Awa-Rimi, the, ii. 447 

Awa-Ware, the, ii. 447 

Axe clan, ii. 299 

Axes thrown at thunder-spirits, ii. 437 

Aye-aye, sacred, ii. 635 

Azande, the, ii. 628, 629 

Babacoote, sacred in Madagascar, ii. 
632, 633 

Babar Archipelago, 
i. 7, 11, ii, 199 59. 

Babembo, the, ii. 627, 629 

Babies fashioned out of mud, i. 536 59. 

totemism in the, 

! Babines, the, iti, 347 

INDEX 

Baboon clan, ii. 396 ; totem, 375. 378, 

428, 436 
J Bachelors’ club-houses, iv. 284. See also 

Club-houses 

Bachofen, J. J., i. 71 

Badagas, the, ii. 244, iv. 260 

Badges, totemic, i. 60, ii. 9 sg., 425, 
iii. 40, 65, 227; tribal, i. 28 5g., 36; 
of clans, ii. 43 sgy., 46; of the Haidas, 
iii, 28x sgy.; of Tlingit clans, iii. 
267 sgy. See also Crests 

Radris of Bengal, i. 11 

Baegert, J., iv. 143 

Ba-fioti, the, ii. 613, 615 

BRaganda, the, ii. 463 sgg.; their arts, 
465 sg.;yfgovernment, 467 syg. ; 

Vv totemism, .472 sgg. ; Welassificatory 
system of relationship, 509 sgg. ; their 
theory of conception without cohabita- 
tion, 507 sy., iii, 152, iv. 63 

—-¥ clans, their economic functions, iv. 
19 

religion of the, 
proportion of male and female births 
among the, 87 their opinion as to 
effect of breaking taboo, 156 
Kagdis, Wotemism among the, ii., 310 
Bageshu, the, ii. 451% sgg. ;Wexogamy 
among the, 452 sy.; hold hyzenas 
sacred, iv. 305 
Bahau, the, of Central Borneo, iv. 269 
Bahero, or Bairo, the, ii. 533, 535 
Bahima, the, ii: 532 sgg. ; their belief in 
transmigration, 392; customs in re- 
gard to cattle, 533 sgg. ;Ytotemism of 
« the, 535 sgy. Mpolyandry, 538 Moose 
sexual morality, 539 
Raiame, a mythical being, i.146, 148, 413 
Baiswar, totemism among the, ii. 279 
Bakalai or Bakele, their totemic descent, 
i. 8H rule of descent among the, 67; 
Vtotemism and exogamy among the, 
16, ii, 609 sgy. 
Bakedi, the, ii. 461 
Bakene, the, ii. 454 sgg.; 
among the, 456 
Bakondjo, the, ii. 627, 629 
Bakongs, the, ii. 208 
Bakuba or Bushongo, totemism among 
the, ii. 625, iv. 308 sg. 
Bakusu, the, ii. 627 
Balder, iti, 489 
Balele, the, ii, 628 
Ral, exogamous clan, ii. 233, 238, 250, 
276 
Balijas, totemism among the, ii. 233 
Balimo of the Basutos, i. 149 
Ball, masked, iv. 226 
totem, i. 25 
Halong, the, ii. 598 
Baluba, traces of totemism among the, 
ii, 624 sy. 

iv. 32 sgy. 3 

totemism 

327 

Balubare, national Baganda gods, iv. 
33, 34 

Bamboo, clan and totem, ii. 279, 296, 
gio 

Bammanas, the, ii. 543, 545 

Banana, cultivation of the, ii. 464 s¢.; 
impregnation of women by the flower 
of the, ii. 507, iv. 63 

Bandage on mouth, i. 19, ii. 160 

Bandicoot totem, i. 111 

Bands, dancing, of N. American Indians, 
i. 46 sg. See Associations and Societies 

Bangerang tribe, i. 437 

Banks’ Islands, amaniu of, i. 52; exo-Y 
gamous classes in the, ii. 69 sgg.; con- y 
ceptional totemism in, 89 sgg.; female , 
infanticide in the, iv. 80 

Banks’ Islanders, their totemism dnd Vv 
exogamy, iv. 9 sy. ; their conceptional, 
totemism, 59 sg., 287 

Banmanas (Bammanas), the, ii. 543 

Bants, totemism among the, ii. 233 

Bantu Kavirondo, the, ii. 447 

peoples, breeders of cattle, iv, 23 

tribes, totemism and exogamy 
probably at one time universal among 
the, ii, 360; Dr. G. McCall Theal’s “ 
theory of totemism, 388 sgg. ; religion 
of the, iv. 32 sgg.; of Kavirondo, 
proportion of the sexes among the, 
iv. 86 sg.; sororate among the,/ 
145 

Rantus, culture of the, i. 343 

Banyai, the, ii. 390 

Banyoro, totemism among the, ii. 513 
sqq.; marriage customs of the, 522 
sgg-; kings of the Banyoro, their rules 
of life and death, 526 sgy. ; sororateY 
among the, iv. 145 

Barais, totems of the, ii. 230 

Barcoo River, i. 367, 379 

Bari, the, ii. 628 

Bariak, a standard, iv. 317, 318 

Bariaktar, a standard-bearer, iv. 317 

Baringo District of British East Africa, 
ii. 426 

Bark-cloth makers, of the kings of 
Uganda, ii. 481 

Barkinji nation, i. 387, 389 

Barongo form of the classificatory system Vv 
of relationship, ii. 386 sgg. 

v 

Barotse, the, ii. 390 sg.; the Queen 
Sister among the, iv. 305 sg. ; worship 
of dead kings among the, 306 sg. 

Barren women, modes of fertilising, ii. 
259 

Barter, system of, iii. 262 

Bartle Bay, totemism at, iv. 277 599. 

Basedow, H., i. 576 %.* 

Basoga, the. ii. 457 s¢g.; totemism 
among the, 458 sgy. ; Sororate among 
the, iv. 145 

328 

Basoko, the, ii. 627 
Basutos, the, ii. 369; the Balimo of the, 
. i, 149 
Bat, sex totem, i. 47, 48; god, ii. 158, 
165; clan, ii. 558 
Bataks. See Battas 
Bates, Mrs. Daisy M., i. 560 sgg. 
Bateso, the, ii. 461 sgg.; totemism 
among the, 462 
Bath of Blood, ii. 608 
Batoka, the, i. 27 
Batoro, totemism among the, ii. 
59g. 
Battas or Bataks of Sumatra, totemism 
among the, i. 137 2.%, ii, 185 sgg. ; 
\ sororate among the, iv. 147 
. Bavili, the, ii. 613 
Baw-baw, Mount, i. 435 
Bawenda, traces of totemism aniong the, 
ii. 377; religion of the, iv. 303 sg. 
Bawgott, ii. 427. See Suk 
Baxbakualanuxsiwae, the Cannibal 
Spirit, iii. 435 57., 522, 524, 525, 531 
Baxus, iii. 517, 518; profane, 334 
Bean, clan and totem, ii. 310, 492 59. 
Bear, descent from, i. 5, 8; apologies 
for killing, 10, 19 sg., iii, 67, 81; 
cubs suckled by Aino women, i. 15; 
not spoken of directly, 16; feast 
offered to slain, 19 sg., iii, 67, 134; 
story of the man who married a bear, 
293 5g.; bears kept in cages by Ainos, 
i. 15; imitation of, 39 \ 
—— clan, iv. 312; character of, iii. 55; 
subdivision of, 57 
dance of Attic maidens, i. 38 
Bear's flesh offered to Indian corn, i. 
14 paw, descent from, iii. 67; bear- 
skin at birth, i. 32; medicine - man 
dressed in, 39 
Beardmore, Edward, ii. 25 
Beard plucked out at initiation, i. 467, 
484, iv. 228 sgq. 
Beards, false, worn by brides, i. 73 
Bearers of the kings of Uganda, ii. 
487 
Bearskin, children placed at birth on, iv. 
208 
Beauty and the Beast. type of tale, ii. 
206, 570, 589, iii. 64 
Beaver and snail, descent of Osages 
from, i. 5 sg., iii. 129 
Beaver wife, the, iii. 60 syg. 
Beavers, the, Indian tribe, iii. 346 
Bechuanas, totemism among the, i. 13, 
ii. 369 sgg.; totemic dances of, i. 37 
5g. ; said to be exogamous, iv. 304 
Bedias, totemism among the, ii. 294 
Bee, totem, ii. 242, 315, 428, 435 
clan, their power over bees, ii. 434 
Beena marriage, ii. 17 
Beer made of plantains, ii. 534 

53° 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Biamban, i. 146 

Biduelli tribe, i. 395 
Bilaspore, marriage of cousins in, ii. 224 
Bili Magga, totemism among the, ii. 274 
Biloxi, the, iii. 155 ; sororate among the, 

Bilqulas. 
Bina, taboos, ii. 614 
Binbinga, burial rites of the, i. 202 59.; 

Beetle Grub man who ate beetle grubs, 
i. 239 sy. 

Béguin, E., iv. 305 

Bell, J. S., iv. 301 sg. 

Bellabellas, the, a Kwakiut) tribe, iii. 
300, $32, 539, 545 

Bella Coolas, the, iii. 253; communities 
and crests of the, 339 sgg.; Secret 
Societies among the, 510 sgg. 

Bellamy, Dr., ii. 544 
Benefits conferred by totem, i. 22 sg. 
Bengal, totemism in, i. 10, 12, ii. 

284 J 

59q.; marriage to trees in, i. 32 5g. 

Berbers, the, ii. 601 

Bergmann, B., iv. 302 

Berriait tribe, i. 392 

Besthas, totemism among the, ii. 233 

5g., 272; sororate among the, iv. 146 

Betrothal, i. 372, 382, 393, 394, 395, 

499, 419, 424 59., 450, 460, 463, 467, 
473) 491, 541, 549, 552, 557, ii. 
463, ili. 244 

Betsileo, the, ii. 633, 634 59. 
Betsimisaraka, the, ii. 632, 633, 637, 

638 

Beveridge, P., iv. 81 2.1, 274 
Bhangi, exogamous clans among the, ii. vd 

279 

Bharias, totems of the, ii. 230 
Bhars, totemism among the, ii. 294 sg. 
Bhils or Bheels, totemism among the, AFF 

ii, 218 syg., iv. 292 syg. 

Bhondari, totemism among the, ii. 234 
Bhumij, the, ii. 

3II sgg.; totemism 

among the, 312 

iv. 149 
See Bella Coolas 

classificatory terms used by the, 302} 
nation, i. 186 2.2 

tribe, exogamous classes of the, i. 
268 sq. 

Binger, Captain, ii. 545 
Bingongina tribe, exogamous classes of 

the, i. 267 

Bini, totemism among the, ii. 587 sgq. 
Binjhias, totemism among the, ii. 313 
Bird, man married to aj i. 33 59., iv. 221 

box, sacred, iii. 145 7.1} 

clan, ii. 490 sg. 

mates of totems, i. 254 syy. 

of prey in Carib ceremony, i. 42 

Birds, ceremony to keep from corn, i. 

23, iii. 104; dances to imitate, 269 
“Birds,” name applied to totems, ii. 
132 

INDEX 

Birds of omen, ii. 206 

paramount totems, iv. 277, 281, 282 

VAirth, ceremonies at, i. 32 5g., 51, ii. 
152, iii. 103 sg.; from a cow, pre- 
tence of, i. 32, iv. 208 sg. ; new, at 
initiation, i. 44; individual totem 
(guardian spirit) acquired at, 51; 

3 J ceremony at, in Samoa, 71; of royal 
child, orgies at, ii. 638 sg.; of children, 
Minnetaree theory of, iii. 150 59. 

Birth-names of members of totem clans, 
i. 58 5g. 

stones, i. 192, 195, 196 

tests of animal kinship, i, 20 sg. 

/ Bisection of a community into exogamous 
divisions, i. 163, 166, 335; probably a 
widespread stage of social evolution, 
258, iv. 132 sg.; effect and intention 
of, i. 282 5g., iv. 106, 110 

Bismarck Archipelago, ii. 64 

Bite of crocodile, as test, i. 21 ; of snake 
as ordeal, 20, 21 ; of tiger as ordeal, 20 

Black Shoulder (Buffalo) clan of the 
Omahas, i. 5, 11, 26, 35, iii. 94 sg., 
104 

———- Snake totem of Warramunga, i. 
192 $9., 222 Sgy., 234 5g. 

snakes, magical ceremony for the 

multiplication of, i. 222 s¢g. 

Blackening the face to obtain visions, 

iil. 373, 376, 384, 387 

—— the teeth, custom of, iv. 185 

Blackfeet Indians, exogamy among the, 

| jit, 84 sg.; guardian spirits among the, 

«387 sgq.; secret societies of the, 475 
sgg.; excess of women among the, 

J iv. 84; sororate among the, 142 

Blacksmiths, chief of the, ii. 606 ; heredi- 

tary, ii. 497 
Blankets, iii. 260; as money, 262, 303, 
304 2.3 

Blazons, totemic, i. 29. See Crests 

Bleeding as a means to make rain, i. 75 

Blindness, taboos based on fear of, i. 
13 2.), iii, gt; the punishment for 
injuring a sacred animal, ii. 177 

Blood smeared on bodies of youths at 
initiation, i. 42; identified with life, 
42, 74 5g.; the life of the clan, 42 
a.8; given to sick to drink, 42 
2.8; Gond rajah smeared with blood 
of tribe, 43; ceremonial avoidance 
of, 49; drawn from body to seal 
compact, 50; smeared on bride and 
bridegroom at marriage, 72; blood, 
milk, and flesh the food of Masai 
warriors, ii. 414 ; bath of, 608 

Blood-covenant, i. 120, ii. 349, 350 59. ; 
at marriage, iv. 242 

Blood, covering novices with, iv. 200, 
201 

feud, i. 53 59-1 405, 440, 553, 

N 

329. 

ii. 475, 628 5y., iii, 38, 560 5g., 563; 
collective responsibility in, iv. 38 sg., J 
273 Sq. 

Biood, human, poured on stones in 
magical ceremony for multiplication 
of totems, i. 107, 108; used in 
magical ceremonies, 358, 360 

merstruous, magical virtues of, 

iv. 100, 102 

of clan, supposed sanctity of, iv. 

100 sg. 

of defloration 

exogamy, iv. 103 2.? 

of kin poured on corpse at burial, 
i. 75; not spilt on ground, 75 

—~ of sacrifice smeared on head of 
sacrificer, ii. 210, 213 

of tribesmen drunk by youths at 
initiation, i. 42, iv. 200 

Bloodsucker, totem, ii. 317 

Blue abominated by Yezidis, i. 25, iv. 

in relation to 

197 

Bluebuck or Duyker tribe of Bechuanas, 
ii. 374 sg. 

Boar clan, iv. 294 

figure of, on Norse helmets, iv. 
207 5g. 

Boas, Dr. Franz, iii, 263, 273, 283 s9., 
300, 311 59-, 315, 319, 326 %.}, 321, 
326 sy., 328 sgg., 339. 340 S¢., 341 2}, 
361, 412, 421 19., 434 59.. 499, 503 
59. 513 597., 538 sg., iv. 48 

Bodos, the, iv. 300 2. 

Body-marks, incised, of 
aborigines, iv. 198 sgg. 

Bogaboga community, totemism of the, 
iv. 279 sy. 

Bogaras, Waldemar, ii. 348 sgq. 

Boils the punishment for killing or eating 
the totem, i. 17, iii. 94, iv. 279 sg. 

Bombay Presidency, totemism in the, ii. 
275 599. 

Bone of eagle, drinking through, iii. 518, 
526 

Bones of dead powdered and swallowed, 

i. 75; of game, ceremony at breaking, 
486; of human victims of cannibals, 
treatment of, iii. 522 59., 525 sg. 

Bonnet totem, i. 25 

Bonny, monitor lizards worshipped at, 
ii, 591 

Bookoomuri, mythical beings, i. 385, 386 

Boomerang totem, i. 254 

Bora ceremony, i. 37 

Borneo, analogies to totemism in, ii. 
202 sgy. 

Bororos, tribe of Brazilian Indians, 
identify themselves with red macaws, 

i. 119, iii. 576; their ceremony at, 
killing certain fish, i. 129 sg. 

Boscana, Father Geronimo, i. 97, iii, 
404 ‘ 

Australian 

. Bougainville, 

330 

Bosch (Bush) negroes of Guiana, i. 17 

Bose, P. N., ii. 223 sg. 

Bossum or god, in Guinea, i. 72; fetish, 
4M. $73, 574 

Boswell, James, i. 382 fg. 

Hottadas, totemism among the, ii. 234 

totemism in, ii. 116, 
117 Sy. 

Boulder representing a mass of manna, 
i. 107 

Boulia District, i. 517 

Bourke, Captain J. G., iii. 196 2., 202 
n.1, 216 2.2, 220 2.°, 222, 229, 230, 
231, 246, 248, 249, 250 

Bow and arrow, Toda ceremony of the, 
in seventh month of pregnancy, i. 73, 
ii. 256 syg. 

Bowdich, E. T., ii. 565 

Bowing to totem, ii. 316 

Boyas, totemism among the, ii. 230 sg. 

Boys, laughing, a totem, i. 160 sg. 

Brahfo, god of Tshi negroes, iv. 37 

Brahmans, Kulin, their marriage customs, 
ii, 619 sg9. 

Brass, python worshipped at, ii. 591 

Brauronian Artemis, i. 38 72.5 

Brazil, Indians of, iii. 573 s¢q. 

preference for marriage with near 
relations among Indians of, iii. 575 
5g., iv. 316 

Breeders of fowls, horses, and cattle, 
their belief in the conveyance of 
maternal impressions to offspring, iv. 
66 sq. ' 

Brewers of honey:wine, continence ob- 
served by, ii. 411 

Bri-bris, iii. 551 sy., 553 5. 

Brick totem, ii. 221 

Bricks, sun-dried, iii. 203 

Bride of the Nile, i. 34 2.® 

the False, iv. 258 

the silent, i. 63 7.5 

Brides, silence imposed on, iv. 233 599. 

Brincker, H., ii. 366 

Brinton, D. G., iii. 41, 445 

British Columbia, Indians 
totemic carvings, i. 30 

Brother, totem spoken of as, i. 9, iv. 

of, their 

174 
4 Brother's daughter, marriage with, ii. 

12I sy., iv. 316 

x Brollies and sisters, prevention of mar- 
! 

\ 

riage of, iL 163, 166, 274, 275, 279, 
282, 285 2.1; two-class system devised 
to prevent the marriage of, 401 59., 
445; mutual avoidance of, 542, 565, 
ii. 77 599., 124, 13%, 147, 189, 343, 
344, 638, iii, 245, 362, iv. 286, 288; 
marriage of, ii. 541, 638, iii. 575 sg., 
§79 ; incest of, ii, 638; exogamy in- 
troduced to prevent the marriage of, 
iv. 104 sg., 107 59. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Brothers and sisters as joint husbands in 
group marriage, iv. 139 

Brothers, elder, of animal species, i. 82 ; 
names of brothers not mentioned by 
sisters, ii. 77; not united in group- 
marriage, 349, 350, 367 

Brothers-in-law, relations between, ii. 
17 ; forbidden to mention each other’s 
names, 124 sg., iv. 283; (husbands 
of sisters), close tie between, 351; 
and sisters-in-law, mutual avoidance 
of, 412 

Brotherhoods or confederacies in the Aru 
Archipelago, ii, 200 sg. 

Brown, A. R., iii. 371 2.) 

Rev. Dr. George, ii. 119, 122 sy., 
182 #., 1. 222 

Brown clan, iv. 293 

Budjan, personal totem, i. 412, 489 

Buffalo clan, ii. 231, 232, 233, 487 59., 
$57 5g. ; tribe of Bechuanas, 373 

—— dance, iii. 476 sg, 

masks worn in dances, iii. 138, 139 

——- Society, iii. 462 

Buffalo-tail clan, i. re, iii. 97 

Buffaloes, totemic taboos concerned with, 
i. rx sg. ; return of dead clanspeople 
to the, 35; sacred, of the Todas, ii. 
254; totems referring to, 428, 429, 
43°, 439, iii. 100, 118; pursuit of, 
69, 84, 88, 136, 138 sg.; traditions 
of descent from, i. 5, iii. 64, 95; 
ceremonies for attracting and multi- 
plying, 137 59¢. 

Bugilai, totemism among the, ii. 34 sg. 

Buka, totemism in, ii, 117, 118 

Bukoba, ii. 406 

Bulb (irriakura) totem, ceremony of 
the, i. 205 sg. 

Bulenda, totemic clan, ii. 546, 547 

Bull, totem, ii. 297 

dance, iii. 140 7.) 

Bull-roarers, i. 124, 413 7.1, 565, 
575 2.8, ii. 12, 34, 35, 38. 39, 57, 
436, iii, 230, 234, 235, 238, iv. 285 

Bull’s hide, bridal pair placed on a red, 
iv. 210 

Bulls, sacred, ii, 235 59. 

Bumba, the creator, iv. 308 

Bunjil, i. 146; (Eagle-hawk), 435 sgg. ; 
mythical headman, 352, 353; a name 
applied to old men, 494 

Buntamurra tribe, i. 432 599. 

Bunya-bunya, fruit of the, i. 443 

Bunya-bunya Mountains, i. 443 

Bureau of Ethnology, American, iii. 
93 2.2, 240 

Burial, temporary, i. 430; totemic, ii. 
190; at cross-reads, 507 57., iii. 152 ; 
alive, penalty for unlawful marriage, 
352 ode, 

customs, 1. 454 S¢., N. 51, Iv. 213 

v 
J 
v 

~ 

INDEX 

sqq.; in relation to disembodied spirits, 
i, 201 Sqq- 

Burial grounds of totemic clans, ii. 475, 
559; sleeping in, to obtain the dead 
as guardian spirits, iii. 420, 438 

of Egyptian Queens, i. 35 ; of mem- 

bers of totem clans, 75 sg. ; of totem, 

15 sg., ii. 30, 56, 127, iv. 278; of 

sacred owl, ii. 155 

of sacred animals, iv. 175 sg. 

‘Buried man,” a man who lives with 
his wife’s kindred, iii. 112 

‘Buried woman,” a woman who lives 
with her husband's kindred, iii. 112 

Burma, exogamy in, ii. 336 sg. 

Burned, not buried, corpses to be, iii. 
66 5g. 

Buru, exogamous clans in, ii. 198 5g. 

Bushbuck, a totem, ii. 402, 421 sg., 459, 
460; clan, 493 5g., 519 

Bush-cat clan, ij. 557, 572 

Bushmen reverence goats, i. 13; fear to 
mention lion, 16; hints of totemism 
among the, ii. 539 

their disguises in hunting, iv. 216 

Bush negroes of Surinam, traces of 
totemism among the, i. 17, iii. 572 

—— pig, totem, ii 438 

—— souls, ii. 594 sy. 

Bushongo or Bakuba, totemism among 
the, ii. 625, iv. 308 sy. 

Busk annual festival of the, iv. 225 

Busoga, ii. 454, 457 

Butha, contracted from Kumbatha, i. 
622.1 Sce Kumbo 

Buto, abomination, ii. 

Butterfly clan, i. 13 

god, ii, 159 

man, i. 18 

Butterflies, dead people in, ii. 81 

Buying wife and children, iv. 131 59. 
See also Wives 

Byington, Dr. Cyrus, iii. 174 

Buzzard ceremonially killed and buried, 
i. 16; totem, ii. 436, 441 

103 S99. 

Cabbages at marriage, i. 33 2.? 

Cabecars, the, ili, 551 

Caddos, the, iii. 1 7.", 180 sgg. 

Caens and St. John Islands, totemism in, 
ii. 132 sy. 

Caffre hunters, pantomime of, i. 39 

Cairns at which magical ceremonies are 
performed, i. 573 59. 

Calabar, sancturies or asylums in, i. roo 

negroes, their belief in external or 
bush souls, ii. 594 5g. 

Calf, unborn, a totem, ii. 403, 405 

California, totemism not found in, i. 84 

Californian Indians, descended from 
coyote, i. 6; their many subdivisions, 
29 2.3; totemism unknown to the, 

331 

iii, 1, 249; and to all Indians on 
the Pacific sloves of the Rocky Moun- 
tains, 2 ne; guardian spirits among 
the, 403 sgg.: sororate among the, iv. 
143; tattooing among the, 205 s¢. ; 
totemism not found among the, 232 

Californian tribe reverence the buzzard, - 
i, 16 

Callisto, i. 38 2.5 

Calves, taboos concerning, i. 12, ii. 97 

Cambridge Anthropological Expedition, 
ii. 1, 28, 29 

Cameron, A. L. P., i, 381 5g., 383 Sg, 
384 Sg. 

Cameron, V. L., iv. 307 sg. 

Cameroon, sacred animals in, ii. 596 syg. 

Camping, rules of, i. 75, 248; order of, 
iii. 93, 118, 120, 124 sg. 

Canarese language, ii. 227, 329 

Caniengas or Mohawks, iii. 4 

Cannibal Societies, iii, 511 sy., 515 5g., 
522 SYy., 537, 539 Sg» 542, 545 

Spirit, iii, 334, 515, 522 

Cannibalism, i. 73 sy., ii. 451, iv. 7 sg. ; 
in Australia, 260 sgy. 

ritualistic, iii. sor, 511, 515, 522, 
523, 535 $97-, $37, 542, $43; legends of 
origin of, 515 

Cannibals, purification of, iii, 512, 523, 
525; dances of, 524, 531; rules 
observed by, after eating human flesh, 
525 sg.; (Hamatsas), the, a Secret 
Society of the Kwakiutl, 521 s¢¢. 

Capitoline Hill, i. 95 

Cappellenia moluccana, ii. 197 

Captive, female, i. 403, 419, 476, 505 59. 

Capture at marriage, form of, iii. 582, 
iv. 72 

marriage by, iv. 300 

—— of wives, i. 426 sy., 450, 475, 476, 
54i 

—— of women a rare mode of obtaining 
wives in Australia, iv. 91 

Carib ceremony with bird of prey, i. 42 

Cariboo-eaters, the, iii. 346 

Caribs, i. 42 2.8; women's language 
among the, 64 2., iv. 237 sg. ; soro- 
rate among the, 144 sy.; avoidance 
of wife's relations among the, 315; 
marriage of near relations among the, 
315 

Carnival, an Indian, iii. 485 

Caroline Islands, traces of totemism in, 
ii. 176 sg. 

Carp, descent from, i. 5, iii. 67 ; clan of 
Outaouaks (Ottawas), i. 5, iti, 67 

Carpentaria, tribes of the Gulf of, i. 
228 

Carpet-snake clan, i, 182 

Carriers, the, an Indian tribe, iii. 347; 
totemic clans of the, 351; ‘‘ honorific 
totems” of the, 545 sy. 

332 

Carver, Captain J., iii. 75, 86 sg., 464 
$qq., iV. 4 

Carvings, totemic, i. 29 sgg., ii. 43, 525 
58, 126, ili. 267 sgg. 

Cassowary men, ii. 9, 11 

people, iv. 285 

Castes, hereditary professional, ii. 505 

Cat, skin of wild, prohibition to touch, 

i. 12; totem, ii. 220, 292, 296, 298 
Catlin, George, iii. 134, 135, 139, 180, 
39° 599. 

Cattle of the Bahima, ii, 533 sg. 

—— of the Herero, ii. 355; taboos re- 
lating to, observed by the Herero, 358, 
362 sg. 

domesticated in Africa, iv. 23 

—— marked with totem, i. 13; marked 
on their ears with totemic badge, ii. 
372, 425 

Cave inhabited by spirits of unborn 
children, iii. 150 sgg. 

Caverns in which the souls of the dead 
live, iii, 582 

Caves, prehistoric paintings in, i. 223 7. 1 

on Mount Elgon, ii. 451 59. 

Cayuga tribe of Iroquois, their phratries 
and clans, i. 57, iii. 4, 8 

Cedar, the white, iii. 257 

Cedar -bark, red, insignia of Secret 
Societies made of, iii. 504, 517, 519, 
524, 527, 540; ornaments of, 435, 
5IO, 511, 524 

Cedar-tree sacred, iii. 194 

Celibacy of sacred dairyman, ii, 854 

Celts, question of totemism among the, 
iv. 13 

Centipede god, ii. 156 

totem, ii. 231, 298 

Central Australia, deserts of, i. 317 59.3 
climate of, 170 sg.; totemism in, 175 

Syq. 
Central Australian aborigines, their 
primitive character, i. 93 sgg.; their 

theory of conception and childbirth, 

93 5sg.; their moral code, 146 sy. 

totemism, its peculiar features, i. 

102 sgg.; its analogy to that of the 

Banks’ Islanders, ii. 94 sgq., iv. 9 sg. 

totems, list of, 1. 252 sgq. 

tribes the more backward, i. 167, 
320 syg., 338 sg.; more primitive 
than the northern tribes, 242 sg. 

Central Provinces of India, totemism in 
the, ii. 222 sgg., 229 5g. 

Cephalophus, antelope clan, ii. 495 sg. 

Ceram, traces of totemism in, ii. 198 

Ceremonial laws, death the penalty for 
breaches of the, iii, 510, 519, 543 
5q. 

Ceremonies at birth, i. 31 SJus BU, 715 
at marriage, 32 syg., 73, ii. 456 sg., 
iv. 293 sg., 295; at death, i. 34 sgg. ; 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

at puberty, 36 sgy. ; at pregnancy, 73 ; 
transmitted from tribe to tribe, 283 

Ceremonies, magical, for influencing the 
totems, i. 23 sg. ; for multiplying the 
totems, 104 sgg.; for the control of 
the totems, 131 sgq., iii. 105, 126 57. ; 
to secure water and fish, i. 484 sy. ; for 
the multiplication of edible animals 
and plants, 573 sgg.; to ensure a 
supply of turtle and dugong, ii. 12 
sqqg.; to make fruits of earth grow, 
31 sgg., 34, 38 sg.; for increase of 
food supply, iii. 137 sgq. 

sacred, in Central Australia, i. 203 

59q- 

totemic, at birth and death, etc., iii. 

103 sgq. 

of initiation, iv. 227, 228 sgq. 

performed over slain animals, iv. 
268 sg. See also Birth, Death, Initia- 
tion, Marriage, Puberty, Rain-making 

Ceremony to secure success in hunting, 
i. 485; atcutting up an emu, 485 sg. 

Ceres, iii. 142, 144, 145 

Cerquin, in Honduras, iii. 443 

Chadars, totems of the, ii. 230 

Chalk, bedaubing the body with, ii. 
592 

Chalmers, Rev. J., ii. 34 5g. 

Chamars, totems of the, ii. 230 

Chameleon, antipathy of the Bechuanas 
to the, ii. 376 sg. ; a messenger of God 
to men, 376 597., 423 

—— clan, ii. 360, 362 sg. 

totem, ii. 306, 307, 435 

Chancas of Peru, iii. 578 

Change from maternal to paternal 
descent (mother-kin to father-kin), i. 
7% 5gq., ii. 15, 17, 196, 325, iii. 42, 
58, 72, 80, 122 sg., 320 Sg., iV. 131 
5G, 240 SY., 242 599. 

Changes of tribal customs initiated by old 
men, i. 352 sgq. 

Charcoal, prohibition to touch, i. 12, 
iii. 97 

Charlevoix, the Jesuit, iii. 14, 375 5g. 

Charms, totemic, iv. 280 

Chastity compulsory in certain cases, i. 
215 sg., ii. 411, 527, 528 sy.j re- 
quired at initiation, iii. 421, 424, 437; 
combined with abstinence from salt, iv. 
224 sqgg.; youthful, not valued, 301 

Chebleng tribes, the, ii. 428 

Chenchus, totemism among the, ii. 234 

Chepara tribe, i. 505 sgq. 

Cheremiss, sororate among the, iv. 147 

Cherokee, the, iii. 182 sgg. ; syllabary, 
184; expulsion of, 185; exogamous 
clans of, 186; superstitions about 
animals and plants, 186 sg. 

Cheyenne, the, iii. 1 2.1; Crazy Dance 
of, 481 sg. ; Warriors’ ‘Association of, 

INDEX 

485 sg. ; excess of women among the, 
iv. 84 

Chickasas (Chickasaws), phratries and 
clans of the, i. 56 

Chickasaws, the, iii. 177 sqg. ; totemism 
of, 178 sq. 

Chief masquerading as spirits, iii. 533; 
communes in solitude with Great Spirit, 

534 Sg. 

Chief-of-the-Ancients, iii. 337 sg. 

Chiefs in N. W. America, iii. 261; among 
the Haidas, 301 sg. ; of the Loucheux, 
358 

Chieftainship in Australia, i. 328 sg¢. 

Chilcotins, the, iii. 339, 347 

Child identified with an animal or a fruit, 
ji. 91 sg. 

Childbirth, simulation of, by the father, 
iv. 244 sg. 

Children, free from food restrictions, i. 
Ig; acquired by father through pay- 
ment for wife, 72; new-born, killed 
and eaten, 74; offerings to obtain, ii. 
219; Giver of Children, title of a 
sacred python, 501; unborn, living in 
cave, iii. 1505¢g.; regarded as a man’s 
property before they were known to 
be his offspring, iv. 126; bought with 
wife, 242 sgg. ; named after slain men, 
285 

Chili, the Araucanians of, iii. 58x ; cus- 
tom as to pregnant women in, iv. 64 

Chin women alone tattooed, iv. 203 

China, traces of totemism in, i, 86, ii. 
338 5g. 

China Rose clan, ii. 274 

Chinese family names derived from 
animals, plants, etc., ii. 338, 339 

Chingpaw. See Kachins 

Chinigchinich, Californian god, iii. 404 

Chinook, the, iii. 405, 408, 434 

Chins, exogamy among the, ii. 337 

Chippewayans, the, iii. 346. See Ojib- 
ways 

Chitomé, a holy pontiff of Congo, ii. 529 

Choctaws, i. 5, iii. 156, 171 sgg.; phra- 
tries and clans of the, i. 56; anoma- 
lous terms for cousins among the, iv. 
310 

Chota Nagpur, tribes of, ii. 284 sg¢. 

Chrysalis of witchetty grub, imitation of, 
as a magical ceremony, i. 106 

Chrysanthemum clan, ii. 273, 275 

Chuckchees, group-marriage among the, 
ii, 348 sgg., iv. 138; relationship, ii. 
352; women alone tattooed among 
the, iv. 205 

Churinga sacred sticks and stones of 
Central Australians, i. 96, 124 599., 
189, 190, 193, 194, 196, 197 599., 
215, ii. 21; buried at foot of boulder 
representing manna, i. 107 

333 

Cibola, iii, 242, 206, 215 

Cicatrices as ftribal badges, i. 28 sg. See 
Scars 

Cimbrian cavalry, helmets of, iv. 207 

Circassians, exogamy among the, iv. 
301 5g. 

Circle, tribal, iii. 93, 
5g. 

Circumcision, practised, i. 85, 565, 567 
99+. 575 #-*, 576 2.1, ti. 57, 3791 453, 
iii. 458; as an initiatory rite, i. 44, 
74, 195, 204; of son as atonement 
fur father, ii. 145; substitutes for, i. 
569; sexual licence at, ii. 145 s9g., 
403, 453 sg. ; among the Masai, 412 
sqq.; festival, 436; among the Nandi, 
443, 445; theory of, iv. 181; prac- 
tised, 181, 183, 184, 186, 188, 191, 
192, 201, 216; dress of Masai lads 
after, 258 sg. 

Circumlocutions used in speaking of 
totems, i. 16 

Cities developed out of sanctuaries or 
asylums, i. 95 sg. 

of Refuge, i. 96 sgy. 

Civet Cat clan, ii. 483 sy., 557 

Clam fish, iii, 259 

Clam-shell, sacred, iii. 98, 107 

Clan, initiation ceremonies intended to 
admit youths to life of the, i. 42; life 
of the clan in the blood, 42 7.°; the 
totem clan, obligations of, 53 599.; 
custom of transferring child to father’s, 
71 sqqg.; exogamy of the totem, 54 
59q.; Marriage into one clan only, ii. 
607, 609 

totem, i. 4 

totemic, solidarity of the, ii. 8; 
social obligations of members of a, iii. 
299, 475) $59 

Clans: subdivision of the totem clans, 
i. 56, 57 5¢g.; personal names of 
members of totem clans, 58 sg.; fusion 
of totem clans, 60; rules of descent in 
totem clans, 65 syg. ; rules of camp- 
ing of totem clans, 75; peace and 
war clans, 75; rules as to burial of 
members of totem clans, 75 sg. ; 
totem clans tend to pass into local 
clans, 83; subdivision of, ii. 192; 
paternal and maternal, 357 599. ; 
lands of, 628 ; supposed to take after 
the qualities of their totems, iii. 345 

—— totemic, supersession of clans by 
exogamous classes, i. 227, 236, 527 
59., 530; traditions as toorigin of, 555 
sq., iii. 8x sg. ; local segregation of, 
ii, 4, 5, 6; estates of, 474 59. ; burial- 
grounds of, 475; social obligations 
among members of, 299, 475, 559; 
physical types of, 505 sg. ; subdivision 
of the, lil. 41, 44. 54 59-1 57) 79 5G-> 

118, 120, 124 

334 

124; personal names of members of, 
76 sq., 1OX Sgg. ; not exogamous, iv. 
8 sg. See Names, personal 

Classes, tribes with two, i. 339 59.; 
anomalous exogamous, 451 syq., 472 
sgqg.; ‘social in N.W. America, iii. 
261 

--—— exogamous divisions (phratries) of 

‘Australian aborigines, i. 60 (see 
Phratries} ; more recent than totemism, 
157 #.%; superseding totemic clans, 
227, 236, 527 sg., 530; local centre 
af spirits of, 229 ; of the Arunta, etc., 

“286 sgg.; without names, 264 sg., 
ii, 70, iii, 244; of the Australian 
tribes, i. 271 syg.; named after 

animals or other natural objects, 417 ; 
traditions as to the origin of the, 465 
sq. ; equivalence of, 507 syg., 521 59.3 
in Torres Straits, ii. 5, 6 sy., 22, 23, 
50; in New Guinea, 29 gin Melanesia, 
67 sgg.; subdivision of, 102; in 
Mysore, 273; among the Iroquois, 

ili, 12 s5g.; local segregation of, 
‘357. sy.; with animal names in 
Australia, iv. 264 sy; in New 

Guinea, 278. 
and Exogomy 

Classificafton of natural objects under 
totemic divisions, i. 78 syy. 

Classificatory system of relationship, i, 
155, 177 5g., 286 sgq., 289 sgg., 362, 
375 59.1 380, 383 57., 419 5g., 431, 
441, 447, 461 s7., 486 s99., 492 59.5 
500, 506 59., 543. 59y., 566 w., ii. 16, 
53 59-1 57, 65 Sy, 73 SY» II4 5g., 
125 Sg., 129 5g., 140 Sgg., 169 sgy,, 
174 5g., 178 5g., 182 sg., 188, 191, 
266 599., 330 599.. 342, 344, 386 syy., 
401, 416 sy., 444 5q., iil. 19 syy., 38, 
43: 44 5y-1 $9 5g., 68, 69 594. 73 59, 
77, 83 59., 85, 113 Sgy., 119 5Y., 122, 
123, 128, 131, 137, 148 5g., 164 sgy., 
175 $99., 186, 240 sy., 305 SY., 367 
5g., 553, iv. 286, 314; among the 
Baganda, ii. "509 sgg.; among the 
Neyaux, 553; on the Gold Coast, 
575 59.5 ere the Ba-fioti, 615; 
among the Malagasy, 639 sg.; in 
the Trobriand Islands, iv.. 281 sg. ; 
originally a system: of marriage, not 
of consanguinity, i. 290 sg.; ex- 
plained by McLennan as a system 
of terms of address, 291 5g.; based 
on group marriage, 303 sgy.; the 
Polynesian (Malayan) form not the 
most primitive, iv. 105; results from 
a two-class system of exogamy, 114 
$qq. > a record of group marriage, 121 
sg.; always an accompaniment of 
totemism, 135; a landmark of group 
marriage, 151 

See also Exogamous 

ZOTE.MISM AND EXOGAMY 

Cleanliness essential to acquisition of a 
guardiap spirit, iii. 407, 408, 414, 
434) 437. 438 sg. : 

Clodd, Edward, iv. 53 

Clothing, absence of, among Central 
Australian aborigines, i. 321 

Cloud totein, i. 104 

—— people, iii. 213 

picture in rain-making ceremony, 
iii, 236 

Clouds, omens from, ii. 162 

Club-houses, ii. 38, 43 s7., 46; of men, 

38, 43, 57, 60, 79, 286, 314 57., 325, 

328, 341; for unmarried men, 622; 

of bachelors, iv. 284 

Coast Murring tribe, i. 22 

Cobra clan, ii. 232, 234, 236, 

242 

sacred, i. 21 

—— totem, ii. 288, 296, 297, 298 

Cochiti, Pueblo village, iii. 221 

Cockle, wife of mythical Raven, i. 6 

—- god, ii. 160 sg. 

Cockles growing on people’s bodies, i. 

18 

Cockroach, totem, ii. 435 

Coco-nut clan, ii. 233, 249 

palm people, iv. 285, 286 

Codrington, Dr. R. H., ii. 67 syy., 102, 

Io4, 105 sy7., 109 sy., iv. 80, 240 

5Y. 

Collective responsibility, its utility, 

39 $9. 

Coh ibitation with sisters, daughters, and 

mothers, iii. 362, 363, 575, 579 

Collas of Peru, iii. 578 

Colobus monkey clan, 

55° ss 

—— totem, ll. 440, 441 

Colloshes, iii. 271. See Koloshes 

Colombia, iii. 557 

Colours as totems, i. 24 sy. 

Columbia River, iii. 408 

Communal houses, ii. 28, 33, 35. 3759-5 

194, 214, iii, 6 sg., 30, 44, 45, 146, 

260, 573; for the unmarried of both 

* sexes, iv. 300 5g. 

taboos, ij. 215 

Commune, the undivided, i. 514 

Communism in land among the Ewe 

tribes, ii. 582; sexual, traces of, i. 

64, ii, 129, 403, 602 s9., 638, iii. 

472, iv. 139; survivals in Australia 

of, i. 31% sgg.; reported in Indo- 

nesia, ii. 213 syg.; between men and 
women of corresponding age-grades, 

415 39. 

Compensation for killing totem, i. 

for blood, iii. 560 sg., 563 

Compulsion applied to totem, i. 23 sg. 

Conception, Central Australian theory 

of, i. 93 sg.; theory of Pennefather 

238, 

iv, 

ii, 480 sg., 

9% 

INDEX 

natives as to, 536 sg.; not regarded 

as an effect of cohabitation, 576 57.. 

ii, 507 sg. ; food regarded as the cause 

of, i. 576, 577, ii. 612; totemism a 

primitive theory of, i. 157 sgg., 160 

Sqq., 245, 482, ii. 84, iii, 150 sg9., 

274, iv. 57 syg.; ignorance of the 

true moment of, 269 sg. See also 

Impregnation 

Conceptional totemism, i. 156, 161 59., 
ii, 93, iv. 57 sgg.; older than here- 
ditary totemism, ii. 99; of the Banks’ 
Islanders and Central Australians, 
parallel between, 94 599., iv. 9 59.5 
287; in relation to exogamy, 127 
A 

Conch-shell, totem, ii. 243 

Conciliation of game animals, i. 121 
SQQe, 24 

Conder, C. R., iv. 304 

Condor clans, i. 26 

Condors, descent from, i. 7, iii. 579 

Conduct, lessons in, imparted at initia- 
tion, i. 37 

Confederacies, or brotherhoods, in the 
Aru Archipelago, ii. 200 sg. ; of clans, 

_ 306 Syg. 

Confederacy of the Iroquois, iii. 3 syg. ; 
of Creek Indians, 156 s¢. 

Congo, kingdom of, ii. 613; taboos 
observed in, 614 sgg.; and Angola, 
totemism in, 609 sg¢. 

Connelly, W. E., iit. 305¢9., 37, iv. 134 

Connolly, R. M., ii. 563 2.1 

Conservatism of savages, i. 353 

Continence at magical ceremonies, i. 
215 sg.; observed from superstitious 
motives, ii. 410 sg., 527, 528 sg., iii. 
421, 424, 437; observed in certain 
industrial operations, iv. 226 sg. 

Control, magical, over totem, i. 533; of 
totems, magical ceremonies for, iil. 
105, 126 sq. 

Cooking men in oven, pretence of, i. 18, 
ii, 156, 158, 160 

Coomassie, ii. 554 

Co-operative magic, totemism a system 
of, i, 109, 113, 116 sgg. 

‘Copper deemed sacred, iii. 48; worked 
by Indians, 263 x. 

~ Indians, iii. 346 

—w— in North America, iv. 23 

plates, iii 292; as money, 262 

tools used by Indians, iii. 346 

totem, ii. 296 

Cooper's Creek, i. 367, 377, 378, 379 

Corea, exogamy of family names in, ii. 
339 

Corn, rice, etc,, strewed on bride, ii. 
260, 262; ceremony to protect corn 
from insects, 244; spirit of the, 
608 

« 

335 

Corn, ceremonies for ensuring crops of, 
ii. 140599. See also Maize 

dancg, iii. 142 sgy. ;, Green Corn 

dance, 171, 184; Maidens, mythical, 

236 ;: Medicine Festival, 140 sg. 

Great Mother, iti. 237 
Indian, sacrifices to, i. 14 
Corn-ear, worship of, i. 144 59. 
Corn-meal, sacred, iii. 230 
Corn-stalk clan, ii. 558, 572 
Correspondence of exogamous divisions 
in, i. 63 sg. 
Cos, marriage custom in, i. 73 
Costa Rica, totemism among the Indians 
of, iii. 551 sgg. 
Costume, totemic, iii. 276 
Cotton, iii. 195, 205 
clan, ii. 237 
Coudreau, H. A., iii. 574 2.2 
Council of Iroquois, iii. 16 sgy. ; 
156; of clan-elders, 206 
Council-women, iii. 35, 36 sg. 
Counseller-of-the- World, iii. 323 5g. 
Courtesans married to plants, i. 34 
Cousins, marriage of, i. 177 sgy., 180 
$9. 346, 393, 49%, 572, ji. 14x syy., 
188, 224 syy., 232 sg., 234, 236, 237, 
238, 243, 243 S9., 249, 250, 255 sy., 
271, 271 5g., 274, 365, 378 5g., 383, 
399 59.1 405, 409, 460 sg., 468, 508, 
522, 581, 607, 615, 637, iii. 348, 349 
5g., iV. 271, 294, 295, 300; prevented 
by the eight-class system, i. 277 5q., 
283, 572; favoured, 180 sg., ii, .65 ; 
forbidden, i. 346, 439, 449 Sq. 459 
475, 483, il. 75 s7., 233, 234, ili, 552 ; 
avoidance of, ii. 130 sy., 508, 629, 637 
594, iv. 109; marriage of second cousins, 
ii. 143, 169; effect of the marriage 
of cousins on the offspring, 149 sg. ; 
marriage of cousins prohibited among 
*commoners, but allowed among chiefs, 
388; first and second cousins for- 
bidden to marry, third cousins in 
certain cases allowed to marry, 409; 
anomalous terms applied to, 510 sg., 
lil, 70 5g., 74, 83 59., E15 SGy.1 149, 
165, 167, 175 5g., iv. 310 5g. 
marriages of first, said to be 
unfavourable to offspring, iv. 943 
Australian aversion to, 108; the 
incest line has commonly wavered at, 
120, 271. 
Couvade, the, i. 72 sg., iv. 244 Sgq. 
Cow, pretence of being born from, i. 
32, iv. 208 syg.; as image of Isis, 
213 
tailless, a totemic clan, ii. 497 ¢ 
totem, ii. 221, 242, 296, 297. 

federal, 

298 
Cowboy, royal, ii. 527 

336 

Cowichans, guardian spirits among the, 
lil, 409 sg. 

Cows, superstitious fear of depriving 
cows of their milk, ii. 414 

Coyote, Californian Indians descended 
from the, i. 6 

Crab god, ii. 157 

clan, ii, 319, 321 

Crane, descent from, i. 5 

clan, character of, iii. 55 sy.; of the 

Ojibways, i. 5 

Crested, totem, ii. 439 

the crested, sacred, iv. 304 

Crawley, E., i. 163 2.1, 277 7.” 

Cray-fish, descent from, i. 5; fed by 
Cray clan, 14 

clan, legendary origin of, iii, 175; 

of Choctaws, i. 5 

god, ii. 159 

totem, i. 5, 8 

Crazy Dance, iii. 480, 481 sg. 

Credit, system of, iii. 262 

Creeks, the, iii, 156 syy.; youths at 
initiation, i. 42; phratries and clans 
of, 56; guardian spirits of, iii. gox 
sqgq.; totemism of, 160 sgq. 

Crees, the, iii, 67 sg. 

or Knisteneaux, sororate among 
the, iv. 144 

Crescents, magical, ii. 22 sg. 

Crested Crane, totem, ii. 439; sacred, 
449 ; the woman who turned into a, 
497 

Crests, of families, ii, 200; figures of 
totems used as, iii. 4q; totemic, 227; 
of Tlingit clans, 267 sgg.; of the 
Haidas, 281 sgg.; legends told to 
explain origin of, 286 sgg., 313 599.3 
tattooed, 288 sg.; painted on faces, 
289 ; carved and painted, 309 ; respect 
shewn for, 310, 352; of the Kwakiutl, 
322 sgg.; of the Kwakiutl inherited 
through women, 329 sg.; painted on 
houses and dancing implements, 341. 
See also Badges 

Crocodile, shrine of the, ii. 18 sgg.; 
worshipped on the Slave Coast, 584 

clan, i. 43, 2%, ii. 545 

men, jij 9, 11 

tribe off Bechuanas, ii. 372 

and shark, heroes developed out of, 
iv. 30 sg. 

Crocodiles respected, i. 11, 13; magical 
ceremony for the multiplication of, 
229; Offerings to, ii. 200 ; men blood- 
brothers with, 207; sacred, 574, 598, 
lv. 37 

and sharks, images of, ii. 200 

Crooke, W., ii. 287 2.1, iv. 210, 212, 
257, 258 

Cross River, traces of totemism among 
the natives of the, ii. 592 s5¢. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Cross or cross-split totems, i. 14 

Cross-roads, burials of suicides, etc., at, 
ii. 507 sg., iii. 152 

Crow, relationship of clan to, i. 8 sgg. ; 
omens given by, 22 sg. ; reverence of 
the Kurnai for the, 494 sg. 

clan, ii. 497 sg.; and totem, 288, 
289, 290, 292, 297, 301, 428, 429 

Crow and Eaglehawk in Australia, i. 76 
sq. ; aS class names, 1. 392 sgg., 435 
594-1 494 5g., iv. 238 sgg. 

Crows or Upsarokas, exogamous clans 
of the, iii. 153; societies of the, 474; 
sororate among the, iv. 142 

Cruickshank, B., ii. 574 2.1 

Crystals at initiation ceremonies, i, 412 

Cuba, proportion of the sexes in, iv. 
86 

Cucumber totem, ii. 222 

Cultivation, shifting of, ii. 549 s¢., 555, 
564 Sy., 577 

Culture of totemic peoples, iv. 17 sgq. 

Cundinamarca, iii. 449 

Cupid and Psyche type of tale, ii. 55, 
64, 206, 308, 589, ili. 337 

Curr, E. M., i. 142, iv. 109 2.}, 219 

Currencies, native, ii. 64, iii. 262 
Curse of maternal uncle, its power, ii. 
409, 444 

Curses, ii. 164, 410 

Cushing, F. H., iii. 217, 231, iv. 232; 
on a Zuhi ceremony, i. 44 sg. 

Cutting the bodies of novices, iii, 419, 
423 59., 429 

Cuttle-fish clan, i, 18 

god, ii. 160, 163 

Cwa, a king of Uganda, ii. 483, 489 

Cyprus, Snake clan in, i. 20, 22 

Czekanowski, J., ii. 627 

Dacotas or Sioux, iii. 85 sg. ; religious 
associations of the, i. 46 sg. ; guardian 
spirits among the, iii. 396 sgg. ; Secret 
Societies of the, 459 sgg.; ‘‘clans” of 
the, 469 59. 

Daedala, Greek festival of, i. 33 

Dafias, the, ii. 328 

Dahomey, ii. 576; absolute monarchy 
of, 577 sg.; wars of, 578; transition 
to father-kin, 580 sg. ; license allowed 
to women of blood royal, 581 

Dairy, Toda religion of the, li. 254 

Dairymen, holy, of the Todas, ii. 254 

Dall, W. H., iii. 368, 369, 442 sy. 

Dalton, Col. E. T., i. 67 5g., ii. 286, 
290, 294, 323 

Damaras, ii. 354; their totems, i. 10. 
See Herero 

Dance round tree, i. 33; to secure sun- 
shine, ii. 373 sy.; the Green Corn, 
iii. 171, 184, 191; the Snake, 213, 
229 sqg.; Buffalo, 476 sg.; the 

INDEX 337 

Crazy, 480, 481 sg.; of penitence, 
147; for corn, 237; before war, 418 ; 
of guardian spirit, 420; of shaman to 
heal the sick, 422; of the medicine- 
bag, 463 sgg. ; the Great Dance of the 
Spirits, 502. See also Dances 

Dance, masked, of Mexicans, iv. 226 

of the Khasis, iv. 215 sg. 

Dance-houses, iii. 491, 493, 519 

Dance-masks, iii. 275, 312, 341, 343 59., 
435 

Dance-season, iii. 496 

Dancer, sacred, iii, 212, 214; fall of, 
severely punished, 519, iv. 315 sg. 

Dancers, the Fool, iii. 527 5g., 530, 532; 
the Ghost, 528 

Dances in imitation of animals, i. 37 
59q., ii, 126 sg., 398 Sg., iii. 418, 461, 

476 59., 494, 507, 509, 527, 529 59. ; 
totemic, i. 37 sg., ii. 20, 126 sg., 370, 
iii, 76, 275 sg., 312, iv. 313; of 
maidens at' puberty, i. 38, iv. 215 5g. ; 
for buffaloes, iii. 136; to imitate birds, 
269 ; of secret societies, 335 ; masked, 
343 5d iv. 285; of guardian spirits, 
tii, 434 sg.; dramatic representations 
of myths, 435; intended to increase 
the supply of edible animals, 494; of 
novices, 516 sg., 541,546; pantomimic 
representations of acts of spirits, 517 ; 
of cannibals, 524, 531; of Kwakiutl 
women, 531 sg. 

—— and songs as an exorcism, iii. 
518 

Dancing bands or associations of North 
American Indians, i. 46 sq., iii. 457 

—— girls married to plants, i. 34 

societies of the Mandans, iii. 471 
sq. ; of the Minnetarees, 472 sgg. ; of 
the Shuswap, 508 sg. 

Danger, supernatural, protection against 
it perhaps a motive of totemism, i. 
31 

Dangris, totems of the, ii ii. 230 

Danks, Rev. Benjamin, ii. 119 sgq. 

Dannert, E., ii. 358, 359, 360, 365, 
306 sy. 

Daramulun, mythical being, 
146, 148, 352, 353, 413 

‘‘ Darding Knife,” a ‘‘ honorific” 
iii, 546 

Darjis, totems of the, ii, 230 

Dark colour of Sauks and Foxes, iii. 

i. 4%, 145, 

totem, 

75 

Darling River, floods and droughts of 
the, i. 319 sg. ; tribes, 381 sgg. 

Darwin, Charles, on excess of women 
over men, iv. 84; on marriage of near 
kin, 95 2.1; his influence on specula- 
tions as to history of institutions, 98; 
on evils of inbreeding, 154, 162, 164, 
165 

VOL. IV 

Daudai, totemism in, ii. 25 sgq. 

Daughter, avoidance of, by father, ii. 
189, 424; marriage or cohabitation of 
a father with his, 40, 118, 628, iii 
362, 363, 579, iv. 315 

Daura, king of, ii, 607 sg. 

Dawn of Day, prayers to the, iii. 
414, 419, 423 

Dawson, George M., iii. 
437, 536 syg. 

Dawson, James, i. 322 7.1, 463, 466 s¢., 
468 sqg., 470, iv. 262 

Dead, sleeping on the graves of the dead 
to acquire their virtues, i. 43; pretence 
of recalling the dead to life at initiation, 
43 5g. ; smearing the juices of the dead 
on the living, 74; strengthened for 
resurrection, 75; bones of dead 
powdered and swallowed, 75 ; aborigi- 
nal Australian regard for the, 143; 
fires to warm the, 143; dislike of 
naming the, 456; reincarnation of the, 
93 5Sg-, 155, 182, 188 sgg., ii. 84, 
345 5g., 552, 604, 606, iii, 274 59., 
297 599-1 335 S9g.. 365 syg. 3 Offer- 
ings to the, ii, 31x ; supposed to ap- 
pear in the form of snakes and other 
animals, 389 syg. ; huts for the, 455; 
transmigrate or are transformed into 
their totems, i. 34 5¢., ti, 388 sg., 398, 
551 sg., 560, 626, 629 ; festival of the, 
iii, 239 57., 580; ashes of the, 270, 
271; as guardian spirits, 420; worship 
of the, among the Bantu tribes, iv. 32 
sgq.; land of, 214 sg. ; custom of eat- 
ing the bodies of the dead, 7 59., 
260 sgg.; supposed to be in hyznas, 

413, 

282, 299, 302, 

iv. 305 

hand, i. 499 

men and women as Rain-makers 
iii, 234 

—— totem mourned, i. 15 

Death, the penalty for breach of exo- 
gamous rule, i. 54, 55, 381 5g-, 404, 
440, 460 57., 476, 491 59., 540, 554, 
557> 572, ii. 121, 122, 126, 128, 131, 
473 S15, 562, iii, 48, 57, 552, iv. 
302; the penalty for incest, ii, 130, 
131; legends of the origin of, 376 
59.5 422 5g., iv. 222 

ceremonies, i. 34 sgq., iii. 104 

Death and resurrection, pretence of, at 
initiation, i. 43 5g., iii, 463 sgg., 485, 
487 59., 489 59., 505, 532, 542, 545, 
546, 549, iv. 228 

‘* Death paint,” iii. 129 

Decadence of tribes 
Australia, i. 340 

in South - East 

Decapitating prisoners, iv. 284 * 
Decay of totemism, i, 81 sgg., 227 
5g. 

Deceased wife's sister, right to marry, ii, 
Zz 

338 

630, iii, 19, 108, 155, iV. 139 sqgq. 
See also Sororate 

Deer, Dyak superstitions about, i. 17, 
iii, 190; flesh of deer tabooed, ii. 
203 599. 

Deer-head clan, i. 12, iii. 97, 103 sy. 

Defloration, blood shed at, iv. 
nt 

Degradation, no evidence of degradation 
among the Australian aborigines, i. 
342 5g. 

Deities, 
582 

De la Borde, iv. 245 .4 

Delawares or Lenape, descended from 
totemic animals, i. 6; sacrifices offered 
by, 14; their totems, 16; transference 
of child to father’s clan, 71; totemism 
among the, iii. 39 sgg.; guardian 
spirits among the, 393 599. 

Deliberation and will, human, as factors 
in growth of institutions, iv. 98, 160 
Sq. 

Demeter, iii. 142, 144, F45 

Democracy in relation to totemism, iv. 
28 

Demons, kept off women in childbed, iv. 
253 sg. 

Dénés. See Tinnehs 

Dennett, R. E., ii. 587 2.7, 614 2. 

Deori Chutiyas, the, ii. 328 

Descent from the totems, i. 5 599., 
556, ii. 56, 58, 86, 88, 138, 187, 
190, 197 57., 198 sg., 200, 565 59q., 
604, 605, iii, 18 sg., 32 5g, 76, 
94, 95: 175, 273 Sg. 570, IV. 
312; rules of, in totem clans, i. 65 
sqgq.; peculiar rule of, in Australian 
tribes with four subphratries (sub- 
classes), 68 sg.; indirect female, 68 sg.; 
indirect male, 68 sg. ; tribes wavering 
between male and female, 71 ; maternal 

+ descent not necessarily older than 
paternal, 167, 249, 335 5gg. ; indirect 
female descent of the subclasses, 399 ; 
indirect male descent of the subclasses, 
260, 444 sg.; change from maternal 
to paternal (mother-kin to father-kin), 
7i sqq., ii. 15, 17, 196, 325, ili, 42, 
58, 72, 80, 122 sg., 320 sg.; from 
animals, ti. 104 5g., 197 5g., 199, 200, 
565 sqy-, 633, 637, ili. 94, 95; from 
trees, ii, 197, 198 sg.; of property, 
iii, 16, 36, 58, 72; under mother- 
kin, ii. 320, 323; devices for shifting 
descent from the female to the male 

103 

presiding, of families, iii. 

line, iv. 13% Sg7., 240 sg., 242 
59. : 
Descendants of the Crocodile, Dog, 

Eagle, and Fish, iv. 285 
Descriptive system of relationship, iv. 
13 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Desert zone of Southern Hemisphere, »% 
168 

Deserts of Central Australia, i. 
5g. 

De Smet, Father, iii. 380 sg. 

Despotism in relation to religion, iv. 
28 sq. 

Devaks, sacred symbols of the Marathas, 
ii. 276 syg. 

Devangas, totemism among the, ii. 234 
5Qq- 

Development of gods out of totems, i. 8x 
5g-, ii. 18 sqg.. 139 5g., 151 59Qs. 174, 
178, 184 

Dew, rolling in the, iii. 414 

Dhangar - Oraons, totems of the, ii. 
230 

Dhangars, exogamous clans of the, ii. 
279 Sq. 

Dhimars, totems of the, ii, 230 

Dhombs, totemism among 
236 

Dhurma Raja, i. 21 

Diamou, diamon, family name, ii. 544, 
545» 550 S5T 

Dichotomy, deliberate and purposeful, of 
Australian tribes, i. 273 syg. See 
Bisection 

Dieri tribe, the, i. 186 2.2, 344 sgg. ; do 
not respect their totems, 19; the 
Mura-mura of the, 64; cannibalism, 
74; Mura-muras, 148 sg. ; classes and 
totems, 344 sy.; rules of marriage 
and descent, 345 svg. ; legends as to 
totems, 347 sgg.; their legends as to 
origin of exogamy, 350 sy.; ceremonies 
for the multiplication of their totems, 
357 5¢q- ; system of relationship, 362 ; 
group marriage among the, 363 sgq. ; 
their initiatory rites, iv. 201; their 
custom of eating dead relations, 263 
Sq. 

Diet of Masai warriors, fi. 414 

Diffusion, geographical, of totemism, i. 
84 59q., iv. 11 Sgg. 

Dilbi, i. 62 

Dimasa, exogamous clans among the, 
iv. 299 

Diminished respect for totem, i. 19 

‘« Dirt lodges,”’ iii. 87, 135 

Diseases caused by eating totems, i. 
17 

Disguise at birth, i. 31 ; at marriage, 33; 
of hunters, 40 

Disrespect for totem, penalties incurred 
by, i. 16 sgg. See also Eating 

Dividing range, ij. 493 

Divining stone, ii. 346 

Division of labour between totemic clans 
iv. 18 sg. 

Dixon, Roland B., iii. 491, 494, 495 

Djeetgun, sex totem, i. 47 

317 

the, ii. 

INDEX 

-Dobrizhoffer, M., i. 554, 555 2.1; on 
the Abipones, iv. 79 : 

Dodaim or totem, iii. 50, 51 

Dog, domesticated in Australia, iv. 21 ; 
in America, 22; Iroquois sacrifice 
of white, 22; descent from a, i. 5, 
7, iv. 173, 174; sick man disguised 
as, 208 ; worshipped, iii. 579 

clan in Torres Straits, i. 131, ii. 

494, 557 $9-, 572 

god, ii. 165 
men, ii. 9, 1% 
totem, i. 133, iii, 44, 78, 79, 

iv. 278; ceremony of the, i, 209; 
men of dog totem helped by dogs, 
iv. 278 

Dog-eaters, Society of the, iii. 537 

Dog-eating Spirit, iii. 545 

Dog-ribs, Indian tribe, iii. 346 

Dogs, kept by Kalangs, i. 15; omens 
from, ii. 165; torn to pieces and de- 
voured, iii. 542, 537, 541, 545 

Dolmen, ii. 308 

Dolphin, sacred, ii. 636 

Domestication of animals and plants, 
perhaps connected with totemism, i. 
87, iv. 19 sgg. 

Doms, totemism among the, ii. 
Sq. 

Doreh, traces of totemism at, ii. 58 

Dorsey, Rev. J. Owen, iii. 89, 93, 105, 
118, 124, 125, 128, 131, 155, 399 2.) 
462 

Double system of clans and_ taboos, 
maternal and paternal, among the 
Herero, ii. 357 sgg.; among the 
Wagogo, 404; on the Gold Coast, 
560 sg.; on the Lower Congo, 618 sg., 
621 

kingship, iv. 305 

Dougherty, John, iii. 89 sg., 114 sg. 

Dramas, sacred, in which ancestors are 
personated, i. 204 syq., iii. 550; evolu- 
tion of secular, zdd.; of the Pueblo 
Indians, 227 sgq. 

Dramatic representations of myths, iii. 
312, 521 

Dravidian languages, the three great, ii. 
227, 329 

Dravidians, totemism among the, ii. 218, 
329 sg.; cousin marriages among the, 
227 sg. ; their physical type, 291, 300, 
329; excess of women among the, 
iv, 86 

Drawings, totemic, on the ground, i. 
223 

Dreams, i. 454, 497 5q¢-, 535 59.» iii. 
134; individual totems acquired in, 
i. 49 sy. ; as vehicles of inspiration, 
352 sg. ; of totems, ii. 137; guardian 
spirits obtained in, 209 sgg., iii. 373 
5gq.; belief in the truth of, 377 59. ; 

313 

339 

of shamans, 497 5g.; Festival of, 484 
Sq. 

Dred: exchange of, between men and 
women at marriage, i. 73, iv. 255 
Sqq- 

Drowning, penalty of incest, iv. 302 

Drum, signal, ii. 475, 491, 496 

Drummers of kings of Uganda, ii. 495 

Drums, friction, ii. 436 

Duala stories, ii, 568 sg. 

Dudu, in New Guinea, i. 96 sg. ; men’s 
club-house, ii. 38 

Du Chaillu, P. B., ii. 609, 610, 611 

Dugong clan, ii. 11 

Dugongs, magical ceremony for the 
multiplication of, i. 229, ii. 13 5g. 

Duke of York Islands, totemism in the, 

ii, 118 sgy. 
Duncan, William, iii, 309, 310, 311, 
317 

Dundas, Hon. K. R., ii. 426, 429, 430 

Dunn, John, iii. 532 sgq. 

Durham, Miss M. E., iv. 15x ”.?, 317 

Durkheim, Prof. Emile, iv. 119 2.}, 
127 2.1; his theory of exogamy, 
100 sq. 

Durrad, Rev. W. J., ii. 88 

Diising’s theory of the cause of the vary- 
ing proportion of the sexes at birth, 
iv, 85 

Duyker or Bluebuck tribe of Bechuanas, 
ii. 374 sg. ; totem, 435 

Dyaks, their superstitions as to deer, i. 
17; traces of totemism among the, 86, 
li. 202 sgq. 

Eagle, drinking through wing bone of, 
iii, 518, 526; dance, 76; crest, 267, 
268 

clan (Haida), iii. 
clan, i. 12 sg. 

Eaglehawk, legends about, i. 563 

totem, ceremony of the, i. 210 

280 sgg.; sub- 

5g. 

Eaglehawk and Crow in Australia, i. 76 
sq.; aS Class names, i. 392 sgg., 435 
599-1 494 Sg., IV. 238 syg. 

Eagles, descent from, i, 7; kept in 
cages by Ainos, 14; kept in cages by 
Moquis, 15; ceremonies observed at 
killing, iii, 182, 187 sg. 

Landa, maternal clan, ii. 357 

Ear-rings, golden, as offering, ii. 200 

Ears, as totem, i. 14, ii. 297; pierced, 
296, 373, 443; of cattle marked with 
totemic badge, 372, 425 

Earth clan, ii. 232 

— folk, iv. 298 
——~ Goddess, human sacrifices to the, 
ii. 303 sg. 

—— Mother, iii. 236, 237, 577 
totem, i. 24 

340 

Eating dead relations, i. 74, iv. 7 5sy., 
260 sqq. 

together as marriage ceremony, i. 

72, 578, ii. 262 bs 

totem or other forbidden food, 
penalties for, i. 16 syg., 40 s¢q., iii. 
QI, 94; ceremonially, i. 109-111, 120, 
129, 207, 217; customs of the Central 
Australians in regard to, 102 5¢., 109 
$99., 230-238; traditions of the Central 
Australians in regard to, 238-242; 
supposed effect of, ii. 397, 403, 404, 
405, 406, 422, 448 5¢g., 473, 551, iv. 
281, 294, 308; custom of, 6 sq. 
See also Sacrament 

Ebussia, totemic clan, ii. 
563 

Echo, totem, ii. 626 

Ecstasy of novices and initiates, iii. 518, 
522, 543 

Edible, totems generally, i. 253 

Eel gods, ii. 157 

Fells, Rev. Myron, iii. 405 sgq. 

Eels, offerings to, i. 14; transmigration 
into, ii. 635 

Effigies of totemic animals, i. 106, 144, 
ii, 19; worshipped at marriage, iv. 
293, 294 

Effigy, magical, i, 540 

Egg, descent from an, ii. 337; of goose, 
descent from, i. 7 

Eggs, ceremony to make wild fowi lay, 
1 359 : 

Egypt, totemism in ancient, i. 12 

Egyptian queens, burial of, i. 35 

Egyptians, totemism of ancient, i. 17, 
86 ; the ancient, cursed the slain bulls, 
45; and pig’s milk, iv. 176; split 
totems among, 175 

Eight exogamous subclasses, tribes with, 
i. 259 sgg. 

Eight-class system, i. 272, 277 Sqg.; pre- 
vents the marriage of cousins, 277, 572; 
its effect on marriage, iv, 107 ; intro- 
duced to prevent the marriage of certain 
first cousins, 120 

Ekanda, clan, ii. 618, 621 

Eki, tabod, ii. 612, 613 

Ekirinja, taboo, i. 102 

Eland can, ii. 396 

totem, ii. 375 

Elder brothers of animal species, i. 82 ; 
of the Kurnai, 495, 498 

and younger brothers, distinction 
in respect of marriageability, ii, 191, 
199, 351, 352; Of mother and father, 
distinction in respect of marriage with 
their daughters, i. 177 sgq. 

Elders, council of, i. 542 

Eldorobo, the, ii. 447 

Elephant, superstition as to trunk of, ii. 
496 sqg.; Killer of the, 608 

560, 561, 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Elephant clan, ii. 
295 

397, 484 sg., iv. 

totem, ii. 221, 237 sg., 269 sg., 
292, 296, 315, 428, 429, 430, 435 

Elephant-hunters, ii. 496 

Elephants, ceremony for the multiplica- 
tion of, if. 497 

Eleusinian mysteries, iiii 144 

Elgon, Mount, ii. 407, 
454 

Elgumi or Wamia, the, ii. 447 

Elk clan, i. 35, iii, 94; of Omahas, i. 

43%, 451, 

17 

Ellis, Col. Sir A. B., ii. 556, 573 59.. 
578, 579, 582 sg. 

Ellis, William, iv. 267 sq. 

El-Makreezee, Arab historian, iv. 212 

Elopement, punishment of, i. 425, 440, 
460, 466, 473, 540; marriage by, 
483 sg., ii. 199; the ordinary form 
of marriage among the Kurnai, i. 
499 ‘ 

Emetics, use of, at initiation, iii. 402, 
414, 419, 423, 429, 432 ; after cannibal 
feast, 542; taken before eating new 
corn, iv. 313 sg. 

Emily Gap, i. 196 

Emu, prohibition to eat, i. 19; flesh, 
fat, and eggs, rules as to eating, 41, 
102; imitation of emu as a magical 
ceremony, 106; magical painting of, 
106 ; totem, 106 ; ceremony at cutting 
up an, 485 sy. 

Emus, magical ceremony for multiplying, 
i. 106, 574 

Emu-wren, sex totem, i. 47; the ‘‘ elder 
brother” of Kurnai men, 496 

Encounter Bay tribe, i, 482 

Endle, Rev. S., iv. 297 

Endogamy of totemic clans among the 
Kacharis, iv. 297; traditions of endo- 
gamy in Australia, i, 251 sg., 351; 
in royal clans, ii, 523 sg., 538, 628, 
iv. 299; in Madagascar, ii. 636; of 
the Bella Coolas, iii. 340 

and exogamy, i. 64; question 
which is the more beneficial, iv. 160 
599. 

Endogamous divisions, i. 578 sg. 

races at a disadvantage compared 
to exogamous races, iv, 166 

Ends of leaves, etc., as totems, i. 14, 
22 

Enemies eaten, i. 73 sg., iv. 260, 264 

Engano, sororate in, iv. 147 sg. 

Engwura, sacred rites, i. 204 

Entrails of animals, a totem, ii. 403 

Environment, its influence on organism, 
iv, 272 

Equivalence of exogamous classes in 
Australia, i, 62 sg., 507 Sgg., 522 
Sg. 

INDEX 

Erathipa, ‘‘ child” stones, i. 192 

Lrtnatulunga, sacred storehouses, i. 
194, 196, 197, 399 

Eshupum tribe, ii. 592, 593 

Eskimo or Innuits, iii, 251; their 
guardian animals, i. 50 sg. ; guardian 
spirits among the, iii. 442 sg. ; pacific 
character of, iv, 88; their sexual 
immorality, 88, 89 7.!; women alone 
tattooed among the, 205; reported 
totemism among the, iti. 368 sg. 

Estates of totem clans, ii. 474 59. 

Esthonian customs at thunder-storms, ii. 
438 

women, their practices at child- 
birth, iv. 251 sg. 

Estufa, iii. 203 

Euros, magical ceremony for the multi- 
plication of, i. 226 sg. 

Evening star totem, i. 102, 254 

Evil Eye, iv. 258 

Ewe-speaking people of the Slave Coast, 
ii, 576 sgg.; totemism among the, 
578 sg.; their sacred animals, iv. 
37 

Excess of women over men 
countries, iv. 84 

Exchange of sisters in marriage, i. 409, 
460, 463, 483, 491 S40, ii, 18, 26, 
28 sg., 40; of wives, i. 426, 477, 499, 
572 5g., ii. 539 

Exogamous classes, local separation of, 
among the Warramunga, i. 246 
sgq.; of the Arunta, etc., 256 sgy. ; 
without names, 264 sg., ii. 70, iii. 
244; of the Australian tribes, i. 271 
sqqg.; in Australia artificial, 273; 
named after animals or other natural 
objects, 417; anomalous, 451 599., 
472 sqq. ; traditions as to the origin 
of the, 77, 465 sg. ; equivalence of, 
in Australia, 62 s7., 507 599., 521 59g. ; 
in Melanesia, ii, 67 sgg.; in Mysore, 
273; local segregation of, iii. 357 sg.; 
different from exogamous clans, iv. 
75, 103; their tendency to disappear, 
133 599. 

groups, local segregation of, iii. 

124 sg. 

organisation of the Australian 
tribes, i. 271 sgy. 

Exogamy, i. 54 sgg.; traditions as to 
origin of, 64 sy., 350 sgy.; relaxation 
of the rule of, 83 sg., iv. 281; pro- 
hibition to marry within a group, i. 
101; no part of true totemism, 162 ; 
a social reform, 162 sg.; introduced 
to prevent the marriage of near rela- 
tions, 163, 166, 259, ti. 97, iv. 136 
sq. ; ultimate origin unknown, i. 165 ; 
transition from promiscuous marriages 
to exogamy, 242 sgy.; originally 

in some 

341 

97 5g., Joo. 257; decay of, i, 337 
sg. ; change of kinship exogamy into 
local exogamy, 507; deliberate aboli- 
tion of the rule of, ii. 192; im the 
Aryan race, 330, iv. 151 sg., 318 sg. ; 
beneficial to the species, i. 563; later 
than totemism, ii. 89; it was an 
innovation imposed on an existing 
system of totem clans, i. 123, 162 
sg.; distinct from totemism, iv. 9, 287 ; 
without totemism, 10 sg.; ‘‘ marrying 
out,” 72; attributed to scarcity of 
women, 75 sgg.; introduced to pre- 
vent the marriage of brothers and 
Sisters, 104 5g.; in relation to con- 
ceptional totemism, 127 syg.; of the 
class less permanent than of the clan, 
133 sgy.; of class more burdensome 
than of clan, 134 sg.; and theclassifica- 
tory system of relationship the land- 
marks of group marriage, 151; not 
proved for the whole human race, 
151 sg.; rise and decay of, 152 sg. ; 
its analogy to scientitic breeding, 166 
59g. 

Exogamy attaching to family names in 
Burma, ii. 337; in China, 339; in 
Corea, 339; among the Zulus and 
Matabeles, 382 sg. 

— local, i. 437 sg., 458, 463, 466, 
469, 477 59-1 490 Sy, 494, 507, 
iv. 167 sq.; superseding clan exo- 
gamy, ii. 7; coexisting with clan 
exogamy, 198 

without totemism, ii. 255, 408, 431; 
in Sumatra, 192syg.; in Assam, 327 
SY. 

Exogamy and endogamy, question which 
is the more beneficial, 160 sy. 

Exorcism of spirits, iii. 511, 516, 518, 
540 sg. . 

Expiation for offending the totem, i. 
18. See Appeasing 

Extension of the totemic taboo beyond 
the totemic clan, i. 225, 227 

External soul, i, 125 sgq., ii. 293 599., 
552, 561, iii, 451 sy. ; theory of, iv. 
52 5g. 

Extraction of teeth at puberty, ii. 453. 
See Teeth ~ 

Eye, Evil, iv. 258 

Eyes open or shut, prohibition to look at 
animals with their, i. 12, ii. 279, 290, 
295, 297, 314; inflamed by looking 
at the totem, i. 13; of fish, totem, 14 

Eyre, E. J., iv. 81 2.7, 199 

Eyre, Lake, i. 175 sg. ; tribes about, 
334 59.) 337 5 scenery of, 341 sg. 

97 ter fe of totemism, 257, ii. 

Face-paintings, i, 29, iii, 

289, 414, 426, sry T29, 269 sg., 

342 

Fady, taboo, ii. 631, 632, 635, 637 

Falcon crest, ii. 635 

Falkner, Thomas, iii. 581 7.1, 582 

Fall of dancer severely punished, iii. 519, 
iv. 315 sg. 

‘False Bride,” the, iv. 258 

Fancies of pregnant women the root of 
totemism, ii. 107, iv. 64 

Fans or Fangs, the, ii. 
among the, 612 sy. 

Fantees, the, ii, 553, 555, 559, 563, 
564 ; totemism of the, 571 sg. 

Fasting and sweating before initiation, 
iti. 467 

Fasts at marriage, iv. 226; at puberty, 
i. 50; in connection with hunting, 
iii. 134; to obtain guardian spirits, 
373, 376, 378, 382, 383, 384, 387, 
388,: 389, 391, 392 57., 395, 399, 
403, 404, 406, 409, 413, 419, 423, 
432, 437 

Fat smeared on faces, i. 19 ; smeared on 
young men as a ceremony, I9, 42; of 
wolf on door-posts, 32 

Father, totem spoken of as, i. 9, 13, 
423, iv. 278; belief that children 
emanate from the father alone, i. 338, 
382, 439 sg. ; generally unknown, ii. 
215; avoids his daughter, 189, 424; 
without authority over his children, 
iii, 244; has nothing to say to his 
children, iv, 289 

Fatherhood at first conceived as a social, 
not a physical, relationship, iv. 126. 
See Group and Paternity 

Father’s brother's daughter, marriage 
with, iv, 295 

clan, custom of transferring child 

to, i. 71 sgq., iii, 42, 72 

sister, marriage with a daughter of 

a father’s sister forbidden, ii. 188, 

IgI 

599; taboos 

sister's daughter, marriage with, 

iv. 294 

sister's husband and father-in-law, 

same term for, ii. 334 

totem, respect for, ii. 48 sy., 55, 
iv. 278, 281, 282 

Fathers and daughters, marriage or 
cohabitation of, ii. 40, 1x18, 362, 
363, 628, iii. 362, 363, 579, iv. 308, 
315 

Father-in-law, custom of providing food 
for, i. 504 sg. ; avoidance of, ii, 189 ; 
and father’s sister’s husband, same 
term for, 334; husband lives with his, 
iii. 571 

Father-kin perhaps as primitive as 
mother-kin, iv. 127; stable, mother- 
kin unstable, 131; reasons for pre- 
ferring it to mother-kin, 131. See 
Change and Descent 

ZJOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Fauna and flora of a country affected by 
totemism, i. 87 

Feast of first-fruits, iii, 157, 160 

Feasts made to a man’s ‘‘ medicine,” 
iii. 391 

Feathers of buzzard, sacred dress of, 
i. 16; of condors worn, 26; of totemic 
birds worn, ii, 44. 45, 49, 52, iv. 278, 
279, 308 

Federal council, iii, 156 

Felé, clan, ii. 550 

Female captive, i. 
Sq. 

403, 419, 476, 505 

descent, of totem clans, i. 65, 

66 sg.; among the Khasis (Kasias), 

67 sg. ; indirect, 68 sg. ; transition to 

male from, 71 sgg.; preference for, at 

institution of exogamy, iv. 125 5g. See 

Descent avd Mother-kin 

infanticide, ii. 263, iii, 358; sup- 
posed cause of exogamy, iv. 75 sg. 

Feminine forms of names of Australian 
subphratries (subclasses), i. 62 2.1, 
268, 269, 397 2.2 

Fenna, exogamous clan, ii. 198 

Fern folk, iv. 298 

Fertilisation, rites of, at marriage, ii. 
260 sy. ; of seed corn, magical cere- 
mony for the, iii. 141, 142, 143 

Festival held at south-east monsoon, iv. 
285; of Dreams, iij. 484 sg. ; of the 
dead, 580 

Fetish distinguished from totem, i. 4, 52 ; 
mode of acquiring a hereditary fetish, 
ti. 573 Sg. 

Fetishism, how distinguished from totem- 
ism, ii. 572 

Fewkes, J. W., iii. 228, 229, 231 

ffoulkes, Arthur, ii. 571 

Ficus Indica, i. 11; a totem, ii. 278, 
280, 288, 289, 292, 295, 296, 297, 
298, 299, 314 

religiosa, the pipal or peepul tree, 
a totem, ii. 231, 237, 289 

Field, Rev. J. T., ii. 48, 51 

Fight for kingdom, ii. 530 

Fights, as an annual religious rite, ii. 
163, 164 

Fiji, totemism in, i. 86, ii. £34 sgg.; 
the vasw (sister's son) in, 67, 75; 
marriage of cousins in, 141 sgg., 148 
sqq.; gods developed out of totems 
in, iv. 30; female infanticide in, 78; 
sororate in, 146 

Fijian form of the classificatory system 
of relationship, ii. 140 s¢g. 

Finger-nails, impregnation by, iii. 274 

Fingers, joints of fingers sacrificed to 
guardian spirits, ili. 401 

Fingoes, the, ii. 384 

Fire people, iv. 285 

sacred, ii, 112; its power of im- 

INDEX , 

pregnating women, 258, 259, 261 5¢.; 
made by the friction of wood, 261, 
262 2.}, 420, 529; kindled by chief on 
cloudy day, 373; taboos as to carrying, 
604, 605, 606 ; perpetual, 491, iii. 48, 
160, 184, 239, iv. 179 

Fire clan, ii, 245 

new, iv. 225, 313; made annually, 

iii, 160; made at the solstices, 237 

5g. 

phratry, iii. 118, 119 

totem, i. 234, 449 

Fires on graves to warm the dead, i. 
143; extinguished at death of king, 
ii. 529 

Firs, gigantic, iii. 257 

First-born children eaten, i. 74 

son called his father’s shame, ii. 
602 

First-fruits, sacrifice of, ui. 
iii. 157, 160 

Fis, a tribe, iv. 317 

Fish, sacrifices to, i. 14; ceremony for 
the multiplication of, 185, 574 ; abhor- 
rence of, ii. 382; not eaten, 541, 
iii, 245, 246 2.1; worshipped by 
fishermen, 578; prejudice against 
eating, iv. 304 

clan, i. 185, iv. 312 

totems, iv. 277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 
282, 283 

Fish-hawks, sacred, ii. 592 

Fishermen, guardian spirits of, iii, 416 

Fison, Rev. Lorimer, i. 292, 306, 558 sg.; 
ii. 135, 144 5g., 146 5g., iv. 83 

Fison and Howitt, i. 48, 60, 66, 70, 
g2 

Fité Furra, a Hausa ceremony, ii. 
603 

Flamingoes, ii. 426 

Flatheads, the, iv. 144 

Flattening of heads, iii. 409 

Flesh, fresh, introduced by exogamy, i. 
65 

—— and milk not to be eaten together, 
ii, 414 

Fletcher, Miss Alice C., 
iv. 48 

Flinders River, i. 517, 519, 521, 528 

Flood, legend of the Great, iii. 268, 
292 

Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, ii. 
Toi, 103; sacred animals, etc., in it, 
uit 

Flute clan, iv. 265 

— people, iii. 213 

priesthood, iii. 213 

Flutes or trumpets, mystic and sacred, 
ii. 57, iii. 574 

Fly totem, i. 133, ii. 282 

Foam of river, totem, i. 24, ii. 290 

Fofana, totemism among the, ii. 546 

14; feast of, 

iii. 399, 459 5¢., 

343 

Fog, ceremony to dissipate, iii. 105 

Food, tabods cn, in Australia, i. 19, 523 
sgg. ; in the grave for the dead, 134; 
provided fcr parents-in-law, 504 59. ; 
regarded as the cause of conception, 
576, 577, iv. 270; as a means of 
impregnation at marriage, ii. 262; 
foods prohibited among the abo- 
rigines of Australia, iv. 176 sgg.; 
prohibited at initiation, i. 40 sgg., 
484, iv. 217 sgg. 

supply, magical ceremonies for 
increase of, i. 104 sgg., 108 syq., iii. 
137 sqg.; in relation to social pro- 
gress, i. 168 sg., 230, 264, 320 599., 
331 599., 338 sg. 

Fool Spirit, iii. 334, 515 

Fools or Fool Dancers (Nutlmatl), the, 

a Secret Society of the Kwakiutl, iii. 

520, 525, 527 SY., 530, $32 

Forbidden food, punishment for eating, 
i. 428 sy. 

Ford, ceremony at a, ii. 493 

Foreskins, disposal of, at circumcision, 
i. 575 7.5, 576 m.}, iv. 183 sg. 

Forest-rat, story of the wife who was a, 
ii. 569 

Forgetfulness, pretence of, at initiation, 
i, 44; feigned, iii. 526 

Form of capture at marriage, iv. 72 

Formosa, hints of totemism among the 
aborigines of, ii. 341 

Formula for reckoning prohibited degrees, 
ii. 310 59., 313, 317 

Forrest, Sir John, i. 556 sg., 567 sy. 

Fortuitous determination of the totem, i. 
242 syg. 

Fossil bones, i. 357 

Four-class system, i. 272, 275 sgg.; 
peculiarity of the rule of descent in 
the, 276 sg., 285; devised to prevent 
the marriage of parents with children, 
i. 399 Ssgg., 445, iv. 107; its effect 
on marriage, 107; its origin, 116 sgg. 

tribes with female descent, i. 395 
sgg.; tribes with male descent, 441 
5qq. 

Four-class and eight-class systems only 
found in Australia, iv. 124 

Fowls not eaten, ii. 541 

Foxes and Sauks, totemism of the, iii. 
74 594. 

Fraternities, religious, iii. 206, 229 

‘*Fresh flesh’ introduced by exogamy, 
i, 65 

Freycinet, L. de, ii. 172, 173 

Friction of wood, fire made by, ii. 420 sy., 
iii. 237 5g. - 

Friend-Pereira, J. E., ii. 305 sgq. 

Frigate-bird crest, ii. 117; totem, iv. 
283 

Frodsham, Dr., i. 577 

344 

Frog, association of the frog with water, 
iii. 233 

clan, ii. 239; of the Zuni Indians, 

ceremony performed by, iii. 232 sg. 

crest, iii. 268 sg. 

totem, ii. 428, 430, 435 ; ceremony 
of the, i. 208 sg. 

Fuegians, magic amongst the, i. 142 7.1; 
pacific character of, iv. 88 

Fulahs of Gambia, totemism among 
the, ii. 546 sg. 

Fulani, the, ii. 601 sgg. 

Funafuti or Ellice Island, i. 7 

Funeral of totemic animal,’ii. 56 

sVites, i. 429 5g. 

Funerals, iii. 17, 275, °316 

Fusion of totem clans, i. 60. 

Ga people of the Gold Coast, iv. 268 

Gabb, W. W., iii. 552 sg. 

(sage, Thomas, iii. 444 sy. 

Gait, E. A., ii, 287 2.1, 318 sg., 323, 
324 5g. 

Gajos, traces of totemism among the, 
ii, 191 5g. 

Galla family, ii. 407 

Gallas, ii. 540 sgy. ; right of sanctuary 
among the, i. 97; exogamy among 
the, ii, 542 

Gamblers, guardian spirits of, iii. 416, 
426 

Game, conciliation of the game by 
hunters, i. 241 

Ldpovs adOdyyous, i, 63 2.5 

Ganga, medicine-man, ii. 615 

Ganigas, totemism among the, ii. 236 

Garden-hoe tribe of Bechuanas, ii. 374 

(Gardens of Adonis, i. 34 7.8 

Gardiner, J. Stanley, ii. 168 sg. 

Garos, female descent among the, i. 68, 
iv. 296 sy.; exogamy and mother-kin 
among the, ii. 322 sgg.; sororate 
among the, iv. 146; totemism among 
the, 295 59. 

Gason, $., i. 19 2.8, 70 2.3, 148 sg., 
162 2.1, 350, 351, 352, 359, iv. 202 

Gate-keepers of kings of Uganda, ii. 

499 | ae 
Gatschet, A. S., iii. 155 
Gazelle, dead, mourned for, i. 
totem, ii, 405 
Peninsula, the, i. 305 2., ii. 119, 

I5;a 

123 
Geelvink Bay, ii. 59 
Gennas, communal taboos, ii. 215 
Gennep, A. van, i. 337 2.}, ii. 61, 636 
Geographical diffusion of totemism, i. 84 
59q., iv, 11 sqg. 
Gesture language of widows, iv. 237 
Getae, the, i. 32 
Ghasias, cousin marriages among the, 
ii. 224; totems of the, 230 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Ghasis, totemism among the, ii. 238 

Ghasiyas, totemism among the, ii. 280 sy. 

Ghost, attempts to deceive or intimidate 
the, i. 429 ; ancestral, in animals and 
plants, ii. 104 sgg. ; patron of a Secret 
Society, iii. 334 

dancers, iii. 516 

Ghost-huts of the Baganda, iv. 34 

Ghosts, the, iii. 435, 436; sacrifices to, 
li. 107 59; Society of the, iii, 461; 
(Leldalenox), a Secret Society of the 
Kwakiutl, 522, 528 sg. 

Gibbon apes, sacred, ii. 205, 206 sg., 
210 

Gifts, magical, bestowed by guardian 
spirits, iii. 434 sgg.; made by father 
in his lifetime to his children, iv. 290. 
See Presents 

Giljaks (Gilyaks), keep young bears, i. 
15 2.4; their marriage customs and 
system of relationship, ii. 344; their 
personal names, 344 sg. 

Gillen, F. J., i. 475 7.4, iv. 273. See 
Spencer and Gillen, 

Ginseng, superstitions about, iii. 189, - 
193 Sg. 

Gippsland, i. 493 sy. 

Gtréwalt, a Fulani ceremony, ii. 602 sy. 

Gist, George, ii. 184 

Gnanji tribe, theory of conception, i. 
245 sg.; exogamous classes of the, 
267 ; classificatory terms used by the, 
gOl sg 

Goa tribe, i. 517, 526 

Goajiros, blood feud among the, i. 53; 
totemism among the, iii. 557 sgg. 

Goalas, totemism among the, ii. 295 

Goat, sacred animal of Bushmen, i. 13, 
ii. 393; tabooed to a Zulu tribe, ii. 
381 

Goatskin (aegis) of Athene, i. 32 

Goatsucker, sex totem, i. 48 

Gobir, a Hausa kingdom, ii. 608 

God-killing in Mangaia, i. 54 

Goddess incarnate in a woman, ii, 246 

Gods incarnate in animals, i. 81 5g., ii. 
152 5q7., 155, 156 syg., 167 sy., 169, 
175 5qg., 178, iii. 500; developed out 
of totemic animals and plants, i. 
81 5g., ii. 139 $g., 151 Sg., 166 5g.; of 
villages in Samoa, 153 sg., 160 sgq.; 
of households in Samoa, 155 sgy.; 
incarnate in men, 158 sy., 162 59,, 
164; gods, goddesses, and spirits per- 
sonated by masked men, iii. 227, 500 
59+» $10, 517, 533» 55° 

Gold, clan and totem, ii. 231, 232, 270, 
245, 272, 280, 295, 296, 297° 

and silver as totems, iv. 24 

Gold Coast, the natives of the, ii. 
5qg.; totemism, 556 s¢¢. 

Goldie, Rev. Hugh, ii. 596 %. 

553 

+ INDEX 

Golds or Goldi, exogamy of the, ii. 
346 sg.; their terms of relationship, 
347 

Gollas, totemism among the, ii. 236 sg. 

Gomme, G. L., iv. 13 2.? 

Gonds, Tiger clan of, i. 34; ceremony 
at initiation of rajah, 43; totemism 
among the, ii, 222 sgy., 314; cousin 
marriages among the, 224 

Good Mystery, iii. 82, 83 

Spirit, i. 148 sg. 

Goose, ancestress of Santals, i. 7 

Goraits or Koraits, totemism among the, 
ii. 314 

Gorilla, imitation of, i. 39 

Gorman, Rev. S., iii. 219 

Got, exogamous clan, ii. 223, 283, 
330 7 

Gotra, exogamous clan, ii. 224, 237, 
273: 279, 330 

Gottschling, Rev. E., iv. 303 

Goundans, cousin marriages among the, 
ij. 226 

Grampian Mountains (Australia), i, 462 

Grandfather, eldest son named after 
his, ii. 302; reborn in grandchild, 
iii, 298; totem called, ii. 559, iv. 
278 

Grandfathers, children named after their 
paternal, iii. 298 

Grand Master of Secret Society, iii. 492 
sg. 

Grandson, rebirth in, iii. 298 

Grasshopper clan, ii. 481 syy., 503 

—— totem, i. 317 

Grass-seed, ceremonies of Kaitish to 
make grass-seed grow, iv. 19 5g. 

totem, magical ceremony for the 
increase of, i. 215 sqq. 

Grave, impregnation of barren women at, 
ii, 259 ; shaman spends night at, iii. 
439. See Graves 

‘* Grave-father,”’ iii. 296 

Grave-poles, iii, 270 

Graves, totemic marks on, i. 31; of 
ancestors, sleeping on them to acquire 
virtues of the dead, 43 ; fires on graves 
to warm the dead, 143; sleeping on, 
iv. 227 5g.; to obtain guardian spirits, 
ii, 210 

Great Dividing Range, i. 421 

Mother, the, i. 6 

—— Mystery, the, iii. 82 

—— Spirit in North America, iii. 50, 
379, 380, 382, 383, 391, 485, 534, 
535) iv. 31 

Greek belief in reincarnation of dead, 
ili, 298 sg. ; custom of naming first- 
born son after his paternal grandfather, 
298 sg. 

custom of polling hair of young 

People at puberty, iv. 230 

345 

Greeks, abimal dances of ancient, i. 
39 Sg. ; jquestion of totemism among 
the, iv. 13 

Green Bay, Indians about, iii. 131, 133 

Corn Dance, iii. 171, 184, 191 

——— Corn Feast, iii. 35, 136 

Grey, Sir George, i. 323 syg., 550 599. ; 
on kobongs, i. 9 

Grey hair penalty for eating forbidden 
food, i. 41 sg. 

Grinnell, G. B., iii. 83, 388 sg9., 477 

Grizzly Bear Spirit, iii. 334, 515 

Bears (Wane), the, a Secret 
Society of the Kwakiutl, iii. 522, 527 

Groot, J. J. M. de, ii. 338 sg. . 

Grosventres, iti. 146 

Ground, blood of kin not spilt on, i. 

Ground-drawings in totemic ceremonies, 
i, 223 

Group fatherhood as easily traced as 
group motherhood, i. 167, 248 sg., 
335 5g., iv. 126 

marriage in Australia, i. 154 59., 
179, 249, 308 599., 337, 363-373, 426, 
501 sg.; the origin of the ¢lassifica- 
tory system of relationship, 304 sqq. ; 
among the Urabunna, 308 sgg.; among 
the Dieri, 363 sgg.; survivals of, in 
Australia, 383, 419, 545; survival of, 
in Melanesia, ii. 129; precedes in- 
dividual marriage, 69, 72 ; of brothers 
and sisters, 144; evidence of group 
marriage drawn from plural forms of 
certain terms of relationship, 72 sg. ; 
revival of, at circumcision, 145 59g. ; 
among the Todas, 264; among the 
Reindeer Chuckchees, 348 sgg.; among 
the Herero, 366 sg. ; a result of exo- 
gamy, iv. 121 5g. ; in Australia, 124 5¢.; 
preceded by sexual promiscuity, 137; 
among the Chuckchees and Herero, 
138; attested by the levirate and 
sororate, 139 syg.; a Stage between 
sexual promiscuity and monogamy, 
151; the landmarks of, 151 

Group-relationship, i. 179 sg., 249, 303 
5g. 

Groves, sacred, ii. 294, 302, 311, 615 

Guadalcanar, totemism in, ii, 109, 111 
Sq. 

Guamos, the, of the Orinoco, i. 42 7.8 

Guanas of Paraguay, their female in- 
fanticide, iv. 78 

Guardian-spirit dance, iii. 420 

Guardian spirits, ii. 453; (uyareng) 
obtained in dreams, 209 syg.; of 
animals, iii, 133 sg.; among the 

American Indians, 370 syg.; among 
the Algonkins, 372 syg.; acquired at 
puberty, 382, 399: 410, 413, 419, 421, 
423; men acquire the qualities of 

346 
their, 387, 400, 417 s9., 426, 451 
among the Sioux or Dacotas, 396 sg¢.; 
among the Californian Indians, 403 
59q.; parts of animals or of things as, 
412, 417, 427, 451; sometimes in- 
herited, 412, 415, 424 59., 434. 452; 
artificial objects as, 417, 420; pictures 
of, on rocks, 424, 440; magical gifts 
bestowed by, 434 sgg.; compared to 
totems, 449 sqg.; faith in guardian 
spirits a source of confidence and 
strength, 453; supposed to be the 
origin of totemism, iv. 48 sg. ; rare 
among totemic tribes, except in 
America, 49; of individuals, 313 

Guasangishu, the, #. 447 

Guatemala, iii. 447 

Guayami Indians, traces of totemism 
among the, iii. 554 sgq. 

Gudalas, totemism among the, ii. 237 

_ Guiana, British, the Arawaks of, iii. 

564 599. , 

—— Dutch, the Bush Negroes of, iii. 
§72 

French, iii. 448 

—— totemism in, i. 7, 17, iii. 565 soy. 

Guinea, fetishes in, ii. 572, 574; religion 
of the negroes of, iv. 36 sg. 

Guinea-fowl, a totem, ii. 405, 430 

Gulf Nations, totemism among the, iii. 
155 S99. 

Gurdon, Colonel P. R. T., ii. 321 5g., 
iv. 297 2.3 

\ 

Haddis, totemism among the, ii. 237 sg. 

Haddon, A. C., ii. 1, rt sg., 21 2.1, 
24, 39, iii. 371 7.1, 456; his theory of 
totemism, iv. 50 

Hahn, Rev. F., ii. 288 

Josaphat, ii. 360 

Haidas, the, iii, 252, 278 sgy.; de- 
scended from a raven and a cockle, i. 
6; their tattooing, 28; totem, carved 
posts among the, 30; exogamous clans 
of the, iii, 280 sgg. ; crests of the, 281 
59q. ; art of the, 288 sgg. ; totem-poles 
of the, 290 syg.; Secret Sccieties among 
the, 544 sg.; their totemic art, iv. 
26 5g, 

Hair turned white by eating totem, i. 17; 
grey, penalty for eating forbidden food, 
41 sg.; plucked out from novices 
at initiation, 467, iv. 228 sgqg.; 
modes of wearing the hair distinctive 
of age-grades, ii. 59 ; loss of hair sup- 
posed to result from infringing taboo, 
404; totemic clans distinguished by 
modes of wearing the hair, i. 26 sg., 
iii. 101, 103; impregnation by, 274 

Haisla dialect, iii. 318, 319 

Haislas, the, iii. 327, 339 

Hakea Flower totem, i. 107; magical 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

ceremony for 
flowers, i. 107 

Halbas, totems of the, ii. 230 

Halepaik, totemism among the, ii. 238, 
276 

Half-sister, marriage with the, ti. 602 

Halmahera, exogamy in, ii, 201 

Halvakki Vakkal, exogamous septs of 
the, ii. 276 

Hamatsas, cannibals, tii. 436; a Secret 
Society of the Kwakiutl, 521 sg. 

Hamitic peoples, ii. 407 

Hammer-headed shark, shrine of the, ii. 
18 sqgg. ; worship of the, 168 

Hammurabi, i. 357 

Hangga (Hanga), clan of Omahas, i. 11, 
iii. 95, 104 

Hanging, the punishment of unlawful 
marriages, ii. 128, 130, 13% 

Hanno, the Carthaginian, ii. 555 

Hano, Pueblo village, iii, 207 7.7, 209, 
214 

Hardisty, W. L., iii, 355 sgq. 

Hare, aversion of Namaquas to the, iv. 
222; the Great, iii. 66 

clan, its relation to snow, i. 132 sg. ; 

and totem, ii. 279 

tribe of Bechuanas, ii. 373 

Hares, sacrifices to, i. 14; Indian tribe, 
iii, 346 

Harper, C. H., ii. 557, 562 

Hartebeest totem, ii. 375 

Hartland, E. S., it. 262 2.4, iii. 371 2}, 
iv. 62 2.1, 247, 264 7.2 

Harvest festival, sexual licence at, ii. 
303, 315 

Hasungsa, male sect, iv. 299 , 

Hats representing crest-animals, iii. 269 ; 
of Haida chiefs, 292 

Hausas, the, ii. 601 59g. ; 
among the, 603 syq. 

Hawaii, traces of totemism in, ii. 172 
5g. 

Hawaiian form of the classificatory system 
of relationship, ii. 174 sg. 

Hawaiians, excess of males over females 
among the, iv. 86 

Hawk, worship of the, ii. 213 

totem, ii, 289, 297, 314, 439 

Hawkins, Col, Benjamin, iii. 4o2 sg. 

Haxthausen, A. von, iv. 234 

Head-dress of shamans, iii. 422 

Head-hunting, iv. 284 sy. 

Headman, mythical, in sky, i. 
supernatural, 145 59g. 

Headmen, i. 360 sg.; among the Aus- 
tralian aborigines, i. 327 sgg.; of 
Tinneh clans, iii. 353 5¢. 

Heads flattened, iii. 409 

Healers, the, iii, 522, §25 

Heape, Walter, iv. 65, 66 sg., 68; on 
effects of inbreeding, 162 sg. 

multiplying Hakea 

totemism 

338 5 

INDEX 

Hearne, Samuel, iii. 363 

Heart and kidneys of animals, a totem, ii, 
405 

Heart clan, ii. 499 5¢. 

totem, ii. 397 . 

Hearts of animals, royal totem, ii. 381 

Heaven, reported worship of, among 
the Tsimshians, iii. 316 sg. ; novices 
supposed to go to, 538 

folk (clan), iv. 297, 299 

Hebrews, cities of refuge among the, i. 
99; their prohibition of images, iv. 26 

Heckewelder, Rev. John, iii. 40, 394 
54qq. 

Heiltsuks, the, iii. 327; dialect, 318, 
319 

Hellwig, Dr. Albert, iv. 267 

Helmets representing totems, i. 30 

Hely, B. A., ii, 26 5g., 28 

Hemlock branches, ornaments of, worn 
by dancers, iii. 517, 524, 531% 

Henry, A., ii. 340 

Henshaw, R., ii. 595 

Herero, Ovaherero,or Damiaras, the, ii, 
354 syg.; totemism among the, 
356 sgg. ; group marriage among the, 
366 sy., iv. 138 

Heroes developed out of shark and 
crocodile, iv. 30 sg. 

Heron, clan and totem, ii, 310 

Herrera, A. de, Spanish historian, iii. 
443 SY. 

Hervey Islands, tattooing in, i. 28 ; cus- 
tom of settling child’s clan in, 71 

Hesione, i. 34 7.8 

Hiawatha, iii. 3 

Hidatsas. See Minnetarees 

Hieu, A. van, ii. 560 

High Priest, iii. 159, 160 

Hilhouse, W., iii. 565 

Hill-Tout, Ch., iii. 429 syg., 450, iv. 48 

Hindoos, exogamous clans (votras) among 
the, ii. 330; their exogamy, iv. 151 

Sq. 

Hippopotamus clan, ii. 494 59., 545 

Hippopotamuses, sacred, ii. 598 

History of human institutions inexplicable 
by physical forces alone, i. 281 

Hionipa, ceremonial avoidance of names, 
ii, 385 7.2 

Hobley, C. W., ii. 420, 421, 424 2.1, 
425 ”., 448 sg., iv. 86 

Hodge, F. W., iii. 220 2.3, 224 

Hodgson, A., iii. 172 sg. 

Hoffman, W. J., iii. 77 sgy., 392 59. 

Holeyas, totemism among the, ii, 271 

Hollis, A. C., ii. 408 7.7, 409 5g., 415, 
416, 417 2.4, 418, iv. 258 

Holmes, Rev. J. H., ii. 41 

Holy Basil clan, ii. 273 

Homicides, sanctuaries or asylums for, i. 
97 59g. 

347 

Homeeopathjc magic, i. 219 

Honduras, iji. 443 

Honey, ceremony for the increase of, i. 
228 

totem, i. 24, ii. 292 

Honey-ant people, i. 255 

Honey-wine, continence observed by 
brewers of, ii. 411 

Hope, Lake, i. 348 

Hopis or Moquis, iii. 203, 206, 208, 
209 sgq. ; ritual, 228 

Horn people, iii. 213 ‘ 

Hornbill, 1s a clan badge, ii. 43; crest, 
147, 118; the hornbill dance, 126 sg. ; 
Tespected by the Taveta, 417; omens 
dtawn from it, 422; sacred, iv. 304 

Horned animals, their flesh tabooed, ii. 
203 Sq. 

Horse, importance of the, for the 
prairie Indians, iii. 68 sg. 

clan and totem, ii. 221, 242, 248, 
274, 275, 314 

——~ tribe in China, ii. 338 

Horse-gram, totem, ii. 243 

Horse-mackerel, family, ii. 565 sgq. 

Horses of Osages, iii. 128; as medium 

of exchange, iti. 146; sacrificed to a 
man’s ‘‘ medicine” or guardian spirit, 
391, 400 

Hos, a Ewe tribe in W. Africa, ii, 581 ; 
or Larka Kols, the, ii. 292 sgg. ; exo- 
gamous clans of the, 294 

Hose, Dr. C., ii. 206, 209, 210, 211, 
212, 213 

Hostility of primitive groups, supposed, 
iv. 87 sgg. 

Hot Wind 
456 

Hottentots, some of their hordes named 
after animals, ii. 393 

‘* House of Bones,” iii. 173 

‘* House of Infants,”’ iii. 151, 152 

Houses, communal, ii. 28, 33, 35, 37 5¢., 
194, 214, iii. 6 sy., 30, 44, 45, 147, 
260, 573, iv. 300 sg.; of Australian 
aborigines, i. 32x sgq. 

Hovas, the, i. 85; of Madagascar, 
marriage of king with his niece, ii. 525 

Howitt, A. W., i. 79, 80, 133, 142, 
145 Sy., 15% Sg., 154, 155 2.1, 163, 
166, 168 2.1, 285 n.1, 332 s¢., 334 
57-1 337, 339 %.%, 340, 352 5y., 362, 
371 59., 373» 398, 400 n.1, gor 7.), 
410, 427, 439 434, 453, 455, 474 59., 
489, 493, 495, 497, 501, 503, 508 5g., 
514, li. 77, iv. 52, 84 2.7, 107 2.}, 
223, 264 7.6 

Howitt and Fison, i. 48, 60, 66, 70, 92, 
51 

Howitt, Miss Mary E. B., i. 397 7. 

Hualpi. See Walpi 

Huaneas of Peru, iii. 579 

totem, i. 24, 35, 455, 

348 

Human elephants, ii. 597 

incarnations of gods, ii. 158 sg., 
162 sg., 164 

Humbé, kingdom of, ii. 528 sg. 

Hunter, Sir W. W., ii. 300 2.1, 322 
Sq. 

Hunters disguise themselves as animals, 
i. 40, iv. 216 sg.; souls of dead 
hunters in animals, iii. 336 sg. ; 
guardian spirits of, 416, 420; super- 
stitious rules observed by, iv. 224 sg. 

Hunting, ceremonies before, iii. 572 sq. 

dances or pantomimes, i. 38 sg. 

Huron ceremony of marrying girls to 
nets, i. 34 72.6 

Hurons (Wyandots), their face-paintings, 
i. 29; their phratries and clans, 57; 
totemism among the, iii, 29 sgg.; 
belief of, in reincarnation of infants, 
366 ; guardian spirits of the, 372 59g. ; 
rule of exogamous classes relaxed 
among the, iv. 134 

Husband lives with wife's family, i. 72, 
ii. 320, 32 

Husband and wife, forbidden to speak to 
each other, i. 468 ; respect each other's 
totems, ii. 27, 29, 53, 55; not living 
together in the same house, 193 5¢q., 
iii. 14 sg.; living in separate house- 
holds in Sumatra, iv. 288 sgg.; no 
community of goods between, 290 

Husband's brother, marriage with de- 
ceased. See Levirate 

brothers, wife allowed to have 

marital relations With, i. 542 

father, avoidance of, ii. 189, 385, 

403, iii, 110, Ti1, 112 

parents, avoidance of, ii. 401 

totem respected by wife, ii. 27, 29, 
53> 55 eas 

Husbands, secondary, ii. - 264 sg., iil. 
277; spiritual, ii. 423 5g. 

Huth, A. H., on inbreeding, iv. 161 

Huts for the dead, ii. 455 

Hyzena, dead, mourned for, i. 15; 
Nandi superstitions as to, il. 441 
5qq.; veneration of the Wanika for 
the, 442 sg.; deemed sacred, 574, 
iv. es) 5g. 

--—— totem, ii. 371, 428, 434, 439 59. 

Hydrophobia, supposed remedy for, i. 
133 

Ibans or Sea Dyaks, analogies to totem- 
ism among the, ii. 209 sg. 

Ibbetson, Sir Denzil C. J., ii. 283 sg. 

Ibos, their belief in external souls, ii, 
596 

Idah, ii. 590, 591 

Identification of man with his totem, i. 9, 
118 sgq., 121, 123, 124, 159 59., 454, 
458, 472, ii, 107, iii, 106, iv. 58, 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

60; of a child with an animal or a 
fruit, ii. 91 sy. 

Idnimiia (grub), totem, i. 111 

Jfan, exogamous clan, ii. 198 

Igaras of Idah, ii. 590 

Ignorance of paternity at one time 
universal among men, iv. 155; of the 
true moment of conception in wonien, 
269 59. 

Iguana, descent from, ii, 605 

lkina bari, totemic taboos, iv, 308 sq. 

Tkula (Morning Star) tribe, reported rules 
of descent in, i. 70 

Mllinois, the, iii. 74 

Images of crocodiles and sharks, ii. 200 

Hebrew prohibition of, iv. 26 

Imitation of totemic and other animals, 
i. 37 s9q.; of wolves, 44 

Impregnation of women without sexual 
intercourse, i. 93 sg., 155 5g., 191 5., 
576, 577, ii. 84, 90 5g., 507 sg.; Tites 
of, 258 sgg. ; of women by the flower of 
the banana, 507 ; supposed, of women 
by animals and plants, go syg., 610, 
612; by finger-nails and hair, iii. 274. 
See also Conception 

Improvidence of Australian savages, iv. 
82 sg. 

Inanimate objects as totems, j. 24 sg. 

Inbreeding, injurious effects of, iv. 93 
sq. ; evil effects of, difficult to detect, 
154; question of the supposed in- 
jurious effects of, 154 sgg., 160 sgg. 

Incantations, j. ro5, 106, 107, 108; of 
manioc, maize, and bananas, iii. 573 

Incarnations of Samoan gods, ii. 152 sg., 
155, 156 sqg. 

Incest, abhorrence of, i. 54, 554, 164, 
iv. 94 sg. ; allowed, i. 55 ; origin of law 
of incest unknown, 165; punished 
with death among Australian abori- 
gines, 279; punishment of, ii. 72, 
126, 410; with daughter punished 
with death, 130; with sister punished 
with death, 131; avoidance of near 
relations a precaution against, i. 
285 2.1, 503, 542, ii. 77 5gg., 131, 
147 5g., 189, 424, 623, 638, ii. 112 
sq., iv. 108 sgg., 284; abhorrence 
of, even in cattle, ii. 461; of brother 
with sister, 638, iv. 108; with 
a mother more abhorred than with 
a daughter, ijt. 113, iv. 125; ex- 
tension of notion of, iii. 113 ; common 
among Brazilian Indians, 575 sg.; 
among Peruvian aborigines, 579, 
580; between parents and children, 
aversion of Australian aborigines 
to, iv. 108; aversion of civilised 
peoples to incest inherited from savage 
ancestors, 153 5g. ; origin of the aver- 
sion to incest unknown, 154 599.3 

INDEX 

belief in the sterilising effect of, 157 
sqq.; of cattle, 158 2.4; of mother 
with son, 173 sg.; punished with 
death, 302. See also Death and Un- 
lawful marriages 

Incestuous (4uoz), term applied to any 
one who kills or eats a person of the 
same exogamous class as himself, ii. 
122 ‘ 

marriages, iii. 362 59. 

Incontinence of subjects supposed to be 
injurious to kings, ii. 528 sg. See 
atso Chastity avd Continence 

India, totemism in, ii. 218 sgg. ; classi- 
ficatory system of relationship in, 329 
5g. 

Indirect female descent of the subclasses 
(subphratries), i. 68 5¢., 399 

male descent of the subclasses 
(subphratries), i. 68 sg., 444 sq- 

Individual or personal totem, i. 4, 49 599., 
ii. 98 59., iii, 370 59., iv. 173. See 
Guardian spirits 

marriage, advance from sexual 
promiscuity to, i. 238 ; an innovation 
on group marriage, ii. 69, 72 

Indonesia, totemism in, ii. 185 599.; 
alleged sexual communism- in, 213 
$9q- 

Indonesian race, the, ii. 185, 198 

Indragiri, exogamy in, ii. 194 sgq, 

Infanticide, female, ii. 263, iii, 358; 
supposed cause of exogamy, iv. 75 
sg.; female or male, cause of dispro- 
portion between the sexes, 77 599. ; 
among the Australian aborigines, 
81 sg. 

Infertility an effect of inbreeding, iv. 
162, 163, 165 

Inheritance, ii. 194, 195 sg., 196 sg., 
443; under mother-kin, rules of, 320, 
323, iv. 289 sg., 296 sg. 

Initiated and uninitiated, the, iii. 333 s¢., 
514 5g. 

Initiation at puberty, iv. 313; beards 
plucked out at,‘i. 484, iv. 228 sgy. ; 
foods forbidden at, i. 40, 484, iv. 217 
sgq.; sexual license accorded to youths 
at initiation, i. 484, ii. 39 2.1; among 
the Creek Indians, iii. go2; totemic 
taboo ceases at, ii, 425; by a super- 
natural being, iii. 513 sg. ; pretence 
of killing the novice at, iv. 54 

ceremonies or rites, i. 36 sgg., ii. 

29, 34, 35, 38 59., 39 2.1, 636 7.3, 

iii. §55, iv. 200 s9g., 227, 228 599. ; 

performed by members of a different 

class or totem, i. 43, 409, 427; extrac- 

tion of teeth at, 412 2.7, 467, iv. 180 

qq. ; prevalent in Australia, iii. 458; 

their meaning unknown, 458. See also 

Australian and Puberty 

349 

Innuits (Eskimo) of Alaska, iii. 251; 
their guardian animals, i. 50 sg. ; re- 
ported totem.sm among the, iii. 368 sg. 

Insects as totems of two exogamous 
classes, ii. 118, 120 

Instincts do not need to be reinforced 
by law, iv. 97 

Institutions, history of human institutions 
inexplicable by physical forces alone, 
i, 284 

Interbreeding, effects of close, i 164 

Intichtuma, magical ceremonies per- 
formed by the Central Australians for 
the multiplication of their totems, i. 
10g 59g., 183 $99., 214 599., 575, 
if, 31, 40, 80, 503, iii. 105, 127, 137, 
232, 236, 494 

Intiperu, intiperulu, exogamous sept, 
ii. 234, 236, 237, 250, 251 

Invocation of the totems, i, 532 sy. 

Invulnerability conferred by guardian 
spirits, iii, 386, 387, 408, 4%7, 422, 
435» 453 

Iowa modes of wearing the hair, i. 26 

Iowas, descended from totemic animals, 
i. 6; totemism of the, iii, 120 sgg. 

Ipai-Ipatha, i, 62 2.) 

Ireland, transference of travail-pangs to 
husband in, iv. 250 sg. 

Iron worked, ii. 377, 432; in Africa, 
iv. 23 sg.; asa totem, 24 

——— clan, ii, 314 

—— totem, ij. 288, 289, 298 

—— tribe of Bechuanas, ii. 374 

Iroquois, clans, i. 5; phratries and clans 
of the, i. 56 57. ; confederacy of the, 
iii. 3 sgg. ; totemism among the, 3 sg¢. ; 
guardian spirits of the, 372 sgg.; 
sacrifice of white dog, iv. 22; rule 
of exogamous classes relaxed among 
the, 133 sy.; sororate among the, 
148 sg. ‘ 

Irriakura (bulb), totem, i, 110 sg. ; cere- 
mony of the, i. 205 

Irrigation, artificial, ii. 427 

fruntarinia, disembodied spirits of an- 
cestors, i. 212 

Isanna River, Indians of the, iii. 575 

/sibongo, family name, ii. 382 

Isis, iii. 145; represented by a cow, iv. 
213 

Isowa sect in Morocco, iv. 178 

Israel, the lost Ten Tribes of, i. 99 

Itchumundi nation, i. 387 

Ivory, prohibition to touch, iv. 295 

Coast, totemism on the, ii. 547 s¢g. 

Jackal clan, ii. 494 

totem, ii. 435 
Jacobsen, J. Adrien, il. 500 59g. 
Jajaurung tribe, 1. 435 

Ja-Luo, the, ii. 447, 449 

350 

James, Edwin, iii. 48 59., 53, 58, 89, 
142 5g., 398 

Janappans or Saluppans, 
among the, ii. 238 sg. 

Japan current, iii. 255 

Java, the Kalangs of, i. 7 

Jaw-bone of dead kings preserved, ii. 
479, 492, iv. 34 

Jealousy, sexual, stronger in men than in 
women, ii. 144 ; absent in some races, 
216, iv. 88 sg. 

Jemez, the, iii. 207 

Jessamine clan, ii. 274, 275 

Jesuit reports, iii. 133 sy. 

Jesup North Pacific Expedition, ii. 346, 
348 2.3 

Jevons, F. B., i. g1, iv. 21 7. 

Jew lizard clan, i. 185 

lizards, ceremony for the multiplica- 
tion of, i. 185 

Jochelson, Waldemar, ii. 345 

Joest, Wilhelm, ii. 87 

Jogis, totemism among the, ii. 239 

Johnston, Sir Harry, ii. 513 5¢., 591 
Sq. 

Jones, Peter, iii. 50, 51, 54, 384 599. 

Joyce, T. A., ii. 625 2.3, iv. 308 

Juangs, the, ii. 314 sy. 

Junod, H. A., ii. 386, 387 

Jupagalk, the, i. 143 

Juri Indians, iii. 576 

Jurupari, spirit of a Secret Society, iii. 

totemism 

574 
Jute folk, iv. 298 ; required to chew jute 
as a ceremony, ibd. 

Kabiro, secondary totem, ii. 473 

Kacharis, totemism among the, iv, 297 
59q. 

Kachina, sacred dancer, iii. 212, 214, 
228 

Kachins or Chingpaws, exogamy among 
the, ii. 337 

Kadawarubi tribe, ii. 26, 29 

Kadimu people, ii. 450 

Kafirs, the Siah Posh, cities of refuge 
among the, i. 99 

Kagera, a god of the Baganda, ii. 498 

Kaiabara tribe, i. 443 s¢¢. 

Kaitish, magical totemic ceremonies of 
the, i. 214 sgg. ; customs in regard to 
eating the totem, 23% sg. ; marriage 
customs among the, 243 5g.; classifica- 
tory terms used by the, 299 sg. ; sur- 
vivals of sexual communism among 
the, 311 5g. ; ceremony of the Kaitish 
to make grass-seed grow, iv. 19 59. ; 
forbidden foods among the, 221 

Kalamantans, the, ii. 207 sgg., 212 

Kalangs, the, legend of their descent 
from a dog, i. 7, iv. 173; keep dogs, 
15 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Kalingi, totemism among the, ii. 231 

Kalkadoon tribe, i. 517 5g., 525 

Kallans, the, ii. 225 * 

Kalmucks, exogamy among the, iv. 302 
Sg. 

Kamasia, totemism among the, ii. 429 
Sg. 

Kamilaroi tribe or nation, i. 396 syq.; its 
social system, 61 sg., 272; rules of 
marriage and descent, 68 sg., 398 5qq.; 
classes, subclasses, etc., 397 59. 

Kamtchatkans, sororate among the, iv. 
147 

Kandhs. See Khonds 

Kandri, magical staff, i. 364 

Kangaroo, omens given by, i. 22; effigy 
of, at initiation, 38; imitation of, 38 
Sq. 

totem, i. 107; ceremony of the, 
209 

Kangaroos, magical ceremony for multi- 
plying, i. 107 59., 573 

Kan-gidda, totem or taboo, ii. 603 

Kannada language, ij. 273, 274, 275 

Kanook, ancestor of Wolf class, iii. 

265 
Kansas clan, iii. 96 ’ 
or Kaw, totemism of the, iii. 
125 sg.; sororate among the, iv, 
142 
Kapus or Reddis, totemism among the; 
ii. 239 5gg. 

Kara Kirghiz, tribes with animal names 
among the, ii. 343 sg. 

Karamundi nation, i. 387, 388 

Kararu and Matteri classes, i. 339 sg. 

Kasia maidens, dance of, i. 38 

Kasias (Khasis), rule of female descent 
among the, i. 67 sg. See Khasis 

Kasubas, totemism among the, ii, 232 

Kattkiro, prime minister of Uganda, ii. 
466, 488 

Katsina, district of Northern Nigeria, ii. 
600, 604, 605, 606, 607, 608 

Kaviaks, sororate among the, iv. 144 

Kavirondo, totemism in, ii. 446 s¢g. 

Kaya-Kaya of Dutch ‘New Guinea, 
totemism among the, ii. 59, iv. 284 
sqg.; age-grades among the, ii. 59 
5gq. ; agriculture of the, iv. 284 

Kayans, the, ii. 207, 212 

Keating, W. H., iii. 379 sg. 

Keepers of the Pipe, iii. 97, 98 

Kelgeres, the, ii. 602 

Kema, exogamous class, ii. 101%, 102, 
103 

Kenais or Kenayes, the, iii. 363 sgy. 

Kenyahs, the, ii. 206 sy., 212 

Keramin tribe, i. 391 

Keresan language, iii. 207, 217, 218, 
219, 221, 222, 223 

Keriahs of India, i. 12 

INDEX 

Khangars, totemism among the, ii. 220 
5g. 
Kharias, totemism among the, ii. 295 
Kharwars, exogamous clans of the, ii. 
281; totemism among the, 295 sg. 
Khasis or Khasias, the, ii. 318 sgg. ; 
exogamy and female kinship among 
the, 319 sgg. ; dance of the, iv. 215 sg. 

Khonds, the, ii. 303 sgg.; totemism 
among the, 304 sgg.; forbid inter- 
marriage of neighbouring tribes, iv. 
270 

Khyen women alone tattooed, i. 29 2.3 

Kiabara tribe, its social system, i, 62 

Kibuka, war-god of the Baganda, ii. 
487, iv. 35 

Kickapoos, totemism of the, iii. 77 

Kid, living, torn to pieces by men, i. 34 

Kika, totemic clan, ii. 472 

Kilamuke tribe, iii. 408 

Aili, exogamous clan, ii. 292 

Kilima Njaro, Mount, ii. 417 

Killer of the Elephant, ii. 608 

Killer-whales, souls of dead hunters in, 
iii. 336 : 

Killing totemic animal, punishment for, 
ii. 434; apologies for, iii. 67, 81 

Kilpara and Mukwara classes, i. 380 
599. 

Kimbugwe, minister in charge of the 
king’s navel string, ii. 482 

Kimera, a king of Uganda, ii. 

- 484, 493 
King almost worshipped, ii. 623 

kKing George's Sound, natives about, i. 
546 sgq. 

King of Daura, inauguration of, ii. 608 

King’s daughters always married to 
slaves, ii. 607 

Father, title of a high minister in 
Uganda, ii. 488 

Kings put to death in sickness, ii. 529 
Sqg., 608; supposed at death to turn 
into lions, 392, 535; names of kings 
not pronounced after their death, 535 

-—— dead, worship of, ii. 469 sgq., iv. 
33 5g-, 306 sgg. ; consulted as oracles, 
li, 470, iv. 306 

married to their sisters, iv. 307 

483, 

Sd. 

of the Creek Indians, iii. 

163 

of Unyoro, rules as to their life and 
death, ii. 526 sgg. 

Kingdom fought for, ii. 530 

Kingship, double, iv. 305 

Kingsley, Miss Mary H., i. 
594, 595 7.3, 610 

Kingsmill Islands, traces of totemism in 
the, ii, 176 

Kinship with animals, tests of, iy 20 
Sq. 

159) 

100, ii. 

351 

Kintu, first King of Uganda, ii. 475 sg., 
480, 483, 495 

Kioga, Lake, i.. 454 

Kiowa, the, iii 1 7.1 

Kirby, W. W., iii. 355, 359 2.2 

Kirghiz, tribes with animal names among 
the, ii. 343 59. 

Kitshi-Manido, the Great Spirit, iii. 485, 
486 

Kiva, sacred chamber, iii. 203 sg. 

Kiwai, totemism in, ii. 35 sqq. 

Kleintitschen, P., ii. 125 

Kliketats, the, iii. 408 

Knife Indians, iti. 413 

totem, i. 25 

Knistenaux or Crees, iii. 67 

Knives thrown at thunder-spirits, ii. 437 
Sq. 

Kobong or totem in W. Australia, i. 9, 
551 

Koetei, district of Borneo, 
sanctuary in, i. 98 

Kohl, J. G., iii. 488 

Kolarian or Munda language, ii. 291, 
300, 329 

Koloshes, the, iii. 264, 271 

Komatis, cousin marriages among the, 
ii, 225 sg.; totemism among the, 241 
59., 273 Sq. 

Kondhs. See Khonds 

Kongulu tribe, i. 420 sg. 

Koodoo clan, ii. 363 

Kootenay, the, iii. 253 

Koranas, the, ii. 393 

Koras, totemism among the, ii. 296 

Koravas or Yerukalas, totemism among 
the, ii. 243 

Korkus, totemism among the, ii. 222 

Koromojo people, totemism among the, 
ii, 451 

Korwas, the, ii. 315 
among the, 316 

Koryaks, their belief in the reincarnation 
of the dead, ii. 345 sy.; their marriage 
customs, 352 sg. ; sororate among 
the, iv. 147 

Koshtas, totemism among the, ii. 296 

Kothluwalawa, iii. 233 2.? 

Kroeber, A. L., iii. 249 5g. 

Kubary, J., ii, 184 

Kubi-Kubitha, i. 62 7.2 

Kubiri, totemism of the, iv. 280 

Kuekutsa, a group of Secret Societies, 
iii, 520, 521, 525 

Kiihn, W. Julius, i. 475 sgg. 

Kuinmurbura tribe, i. 417 sgg. 

Kula, exogamous clan, ii. 232, 269 

Kulin Brahmans, their marriage customs, 
ii. 619 59g. 

nation, i. 434 sgg.; sex totems of 
the, 47 

Kumbo-Butha, i. 62 2.1 

right of 

sg. ; totemism 

352 

Kumhars of Bengal, i. 10; totemism 
among the, ii. 316 

Kupathin, i. 62 

Kuri, exogamous clan, ii. 278 

the Hausa god Pan, ii, 603, 606 

Kurmis, totemism among the, ii. 296 

Kurnai tribe, i. 493 sgg. ; medicine-men, 
28, 497 sg. ; youth at initiation, 41; 
sex totems of the, 47, 496 sg.; rule 
of descent among the, 66; reverence 
eaglehawk and crow, 77; marriage 
customs, 499 sgg.; classificatory system 
of relationship, 500 

Kurnandaburi tribe, i. 379 sg. ; group- 
marriage among the, 367 sgq. 

Kurni, totemism among the, ii. 231 

Kurubas, totemism among the, ii. 245, 
269 syg.; sororate among the, iv. 
145 

Kurumbas, the, ii. 244 5g. 

Ausiut, ceremonial, iii. 510 

Kutchins or Loucheux, iii. 345¢59.% 354 
sqq. ; descended from animals, i. 6 sg. 

Kwakiutl, iii. 252, 253 ; totemism among 
the, 317 59g. ; crests of the, 322 s99., 
329 sgy. ; peculiar features of Kwakiutl 
totemism, 327; change in the social 
organisation of the Kwakiutl in winter, 
333 59-3 guardian spirits among the, 
433 5997, ; Secret Societies among the, 
512 sgg. 

KA wero, totem, ii. 449, 450 

Kwod, sacred place, ii. 19 

Kwoiam, a hero of Mabuiag, ii. 21 sgq. 

Kworafi, totemism ‘among the, ii. 55 

Labbé, P., ii. 344 59. 

Labrets, iii. 294 

Lachlan River tribes, i. 409 sg. 

Lactation, prolonged period of, among 
savages, iv. 79 

Lafitan, iii, 14 sy. 

Laguna, Pueblo village, iii. 218 sg. 

Lake Eyre, tribes about, i. 334 sg., 337, 
342, 344 5gg.; scenery of, 341 sg. 

Lalungs, exogamy among the, ii. 324 sg. 

Lambert, Father, ii. 66 

Lands of totemic clans, ii. 559, 628, iii. 
36 

Lang, Andrew, ii. 570 7.7, iv. 156 7.1 

Language, husband and wife speaking 
each a different, i. 63, 467 sg.; of 
animals, iii. 42r sg.; of women 
different from that of men, iv, 237 sg. 

Larrekiya tribe, i. 576 

Latham, R. G., iv. 72 2.3 

Laufer, Berthold, ii. 346 

Laughers, Society of the, iii. 512 

Laughing Boys, a totem, i. 160 sg.; of 
the Warramunga and Tjingilli, ii. 521 

Laurel, sacred, iii. 194 sg. 

Laws fathered on divine beings, i. 356 sg. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Leech folk (clan), iv. 298; required to 
chew leeches as ceremony, iézd. 

Legends told to explaia the origin of 
crests, iii. 286 57., 313 5gg., 322 
5g. 

Lenape or Delawares, descended from 
totemic animals, i. 6; totemism of the, 
iii. 39 sq9. 

Lending of wives, i. 426, 463, ii. 71, 
415, 421, iii, 472; as a magical rite, 
140 2.1 

Leopard clan, ii. 479, $50, 
59-1 572, 579 

men, ii. 391 

—— totem, ii. 430, iv: 308 

Leopards, queens turned into, ii. 392; 
worshipped by royal family of Dahomey, 
583 sg.; ceremonies observed at killing 
a leopard, 584 2.1; venerated by the 
Igaras, 590 sq. 

Leprosy and madness caused by eating 
totem, i. 17 

Leslie, David,’ ii. 381 

Levirate (marriage of 2 widow to her de- 
ceased husband's brother), i. 148, 426, 

440, 450 5g., 469, 492, 500 59g., 541, 
549, 552, 572, ii. 18, 26, 79 5g., 189, 
191, 199, 222, 234, 236, 249 59., 273, 
279, 280, 281, 281 sg., 291, 296, 299, 
302, 310, 313, 315, 347, 351, 352, 
367, 380, 384, 406, 412, 419, 428, 444, 
538 5g., 542, 581, 622, 630, 639, iii. 
18, 59, 85, 108, 127, 155, 164, 246, 
249, 277, 305, 361, 498, 562, iv. 
399 45 A%e B48) TAGh T44s 146, 
147, 148, 151 7.7, 294, 295, 300, 
316; forbidden, i. 461, ii. 271, 272, 

556 sy... 559 

275, 282, 326; not derived from 
polyandry, 80; discountenanced, iii. 
65 

Lewis and Clark, iii, 123, 135 2:1, 146, 
153, 400 : 

Lice, ceremony for the multiplication of, 
i, 185; a totem, ii. 425 

Licence, sexual at marriage, i. 155; at 
initiation, 484, ii. 39 2.1; at harvest 

festival, 303, 315; at circumcision, 
145 sgy., 403; accorded to Masai 
warriors, 414; allowed to Queen 

Mother and Queen Sister in Uganda, 
471; allowed to king’s sisters, 565; 
granted to women of blood royal in 
African kingdoms, 524, 538, 565, 581 
sq., 628; between the sexes up to 
marriage, iv. 301 

Life, the Master of, iii. 
4o1 

in blood, i. 42, 74 

Lightning, omens from, ii. 161 

god, ii. 161 

Lillgoets, the, iii. 342 syg.; guardian 
spirits among the, 418 sq. 

52, 379. 381, 

INDEX 

Limitation of time of marriage, ii. 630 

Linked totems, ii. 48, 5059., 52, 54 59., 
iv. 277 sgg. * 

Lion, apologies for killing, i. 19; 
(puma), descent from, iii. 578 

clan,’ ii. 480 

totem, ii. 428, 436 

—~ tribe of Bechuanas, ii. 372 sy. 

Lions, kings called, ii. 535; kings 
turned into, 392, 535 

Lisiansky, U., iii. 271 sg. 

Literature of totemism, i. 87 

Liver of animals, a totem, ii. 403, 421, 
422 

Livingstone, David, ii. 372 

Livonian marriage customs, ii. 262 ' 

Lizard, the originator of the sexes, i. 
48; sex totem, 48; sacred, ii. 293; 
antipathy of the Bechuanas to the, 
376 sq. ; effigy of lizard worshipped at 
marriage, iv, 293 

clan, ii. 301 

——— god, ii. 165 59. 

mark on child? iv. 65 

mates of totems, i. 255 

people, i. 256 

Lizards, omens from, ii. 161, 165 sg. ; 
monitor, worshipped at Bonny, 59r 

Lkungen, Secret Societies of the, iii. 507 

Sg. 

Lobster, dead, mourned for, i. 15 

Local centre of spirits of exogamous 
classes, i. 229 

clans developed out of totem clans, 
i, 83 

——- exogamy, i. 437 59., 458, 463, 466, 
499, 477 59-, 490 59., 494, 507, iv. 167 
sq. ; Superseding clan exogamy, ii. 7; 
coexisting with clan exogamy, 192, 198 

-—— segregation of the exogamous 
classes and totems among the Warra- 
munga, i. 246 sgg.; of totemic clans, 
ii. 4, 5, 6; of exogamous clans, 192, 
193, 194, 198; of exogamous groups, 
fii, 124 5g., 357 sg. 

totem centres, i. 155, 189 

Locust, clan of the Green, ii. 481 sgg. 

totem, ii, 187 

Lodge, totem, i. 25 

Loeboes, marriage said to be unknown 
among the, ii. 216 

Lohars, totemism among the, ‘ii. 296 

5g. 
Lolos, hints of totemism among the, ii. 
339 59. Be ik 
Long House, the, of the Iroquois, iii. 5 
Long, J., Indian interpreter, iii. 52, 381, 
382 
Long, Major S. H., iii. 64, 89, 93 
Longings and fancies of pregnant 
women, their influence on totemism, 
iv. 64 sgg., 270 
VOL. IV 

353 

Look at totem, prohibition to, i. 11, 12, 
13, i. 370, 372, 373 

Loon clan, eharacter of the, iii. 56 

Loskiel, G. H., iii. 41, 394 

Lost Ten Tribes of Israel, i. 99 J 

Loucheux cr Kutchins, the, iii. 345 5¢-+ 
354 sgg.; castes or clans of the, 354 
59q.; classificatory system of the, 367 
Sq. 

Louisiades, sororate in the, iv. 148 

Louse clan, i. 185 

totem, ii. 324 

Lubbock, Sir John, on origin of totem- 
ism, i. 87, 102. See Avebury, Lord 

Lucian, i. 175 

Lugala, a Baganda fetish, ii. 495 

Lung-fish clan, ii. 474, 485 sg. 

Lungs of animals, a totem, ii. 421 

Lur or Alur, the, ii. 628 

Luritcha, classificatory terms used by 
the, i. 298 sg. 

Lyon?Captain G. F., iv. 89 2.3 

Mabuiag, ii. 2, 4, 5, 14, 21, 23 
McDougall, W., ii. 206, 210, 212, 213 
Macgregor, Sir William, ii. 46 sg. 
Mackenzie, J., ii. 393 

Mackenzie, Dr. J. W.., ii. 88 

Mackenzie River, iii. 251, 252, 254 

McLennan, J. F., i. 71, 87, 91, 103, 
291 sg., sot, iv. 16, 301, 302 59. ; 
the discoverer of totemism and exo- 
gamy, 43, 71; his theory of the 
origin of exogamy, 71 sgq. 

Madagascar, traces of totemism in, i. 
85; analogies to totemism in, ii. 631 
599. 

Maddox, Rev. H. E., ii. 532 2.1 

Madi, the, ii. 628 

Madigas, religious customs of the, ii. 
245 sgg. ; exogamous clans of the, 247 

Madness, holy, iii. 334 

and leprosy caused by eating 
totem, i. 17 

Madras Presidency, totemism in the, 
ii. 230 sgg. 

Magic, in relation to religion, iv. 29 sg. ; 
the fallacy of, 56; sympathetic, 247 
5q., 252 sg.; imitative or homceo- 
pathic, i. 219, 573, ii. 13, 14, 618, 
iii. 137, 139, 140, 234, 236, 577; in 
hunting, i. 39; totemism a system of 
co-operative, 108 sg., 113, 116 sgy. ; 
negative or remedial, 116; antecedent 
to religion, 141; universal prevalence 
of, in Australia, 141 sg. ; how affected 
by the variability of the seasons, 169 
sqgqg.; causes which tend to confirm 
the belief in, 169 sgg.; perhaps the 
origin of agriculture, 217 sg., iv. 19 sq. 

Magic and religion, distinction between, 
i. 105; blending of, iii. 142, 235 

2A 

354 

Magical ceremonies, for the multiplication 
of the totems, i. 104 sgg., 183 599., 
214 599., 357 sqg. (see Intichiuma), 
ii. 503 ; for the control of the totems, 
i. 131 sgg. ; to secure water and fish, 
484 sg.; for the multiplication of 
edible animals and plants, 573 sgg. ; to 
ensure a supply of turtle and dugong, 
ii, 12 sgg.; to make fruits of earth 
grow, 31 sqg7., 34, 38 5g. ; for increase 
of food supply, iii. 137 sgg. 

Maguzawa, heathen Hausas, ii. 601 

Mahalbawa, totemism of the, ii. 604 

Mahicans. See Mohicans 

Mahili, totemism among the, ii. 297 

Maidens at puberty, dances of, i. 38, iv. 
215 5g. 

Maidus, Secret Society of the, iii. 491 
sgg. ; sororate among the, iv. 143 sq. 

Maize, cultivation of, iii. 3, 30, 39, 46, 
74, 88, 120, 135 sg., 146, 158, 171, 
180, 183, 195, 199, 204, 242,°248 ; 
worshipped, 577. See also Corn 

—— Old Woman, goddess of, slain 
by her sons, iii. 191 sgg. 

Red, clan of the, iii. go, 92, 99 

Makalakas, totemism among the, ii. 
377 59- 

Makanga, the, ii. 390 

Makonde, the, ii. 406 

Makua, the, ii. 406 

Malagasy, birth custom, i. 21; the 
classificatory system of relationship 
among the, ii. 639 s¢. 

tribes, traces of totemism among, 
i. 85; analogies to totemism among 
the, ii. 631 sgg. 

Malas, the, ii. 185; exogamy among, 

5g. 
Malay Archipelago, totemism in the, ii. 
185 sgq. 
race, four original clans of the, ii. 
193 ee 
Malays, exogamous clans of the, ii. 193 
SQ 247 

Male descent, of totem clans, i. 66, 67; 
indirect, 68 sg., 444; transition from 
femle to, 71 sgg.; reasons for pre- 
ferring it to female descent, iv. 131. 
See also Change, Descent, Father-kin, 
and Mother-kin 

Male and female births, causes which 
determine their proportion, iv. 85 
59. 

Malee scrub, i. 316 sg., 321 

Mals, totemism among the, ii. 317 

VWamag, mother’s eldest brother, ii. 194, 
195, 196 

an, totemic clan, iv. 283 

Vana, supernatural power, ii. 100 

Mandailing, totemism and exogamy in, 
ii. 190 59. 

- Mandingoes, i. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Mandans, the, iii. 134 sgg.; guardian 
spirits among, 40059. ; dancing societies 
of, 470 sgy. ; sororate among the, iv. 
142 

21; totemism among 
the, ii. 543 sgg., 551 

Mandwa, inspired priest or medium, ii. 
470, 500 

Manetho, iv. 176 

Mangaia, god-killing in, i. 54 

Manganja, the, i. 27 

Mangbetu, the, ii. 627, 628 

Manipur, the Meitheis of, ii. 325 599. 

Manis or Pangolin clan, ii. 486 sg. 

sVanitoo or oki, i, 51, 52, ii 212; 
guardian spirit of individual, iii. 51, 
52; Algonkin term for spirit, 372 
Sgq.; the Good and the Wicked, 374 

Manna, magical ceremony for the multi- 
plication of, i. 107 

Mannhardt, W., i. 104 

Manslayer, uncleanness of, ii, 4.44 

Mantis religiosus, a totem, ii, 120 

Manu, laws of, i. 356 

Maoris, excess of male over female 
births among the, iv. 86 

Maple sugar, iii, 62 2.1 

Mara, classificatory terms used by the, 
i. 302 sq. 

nation, i. 186 .*; {Victoria}, 462 

tribe, classes and totems of the, i. 
237 2.1; exogamous classes of the, 
270 

Maragwetta, totemism among the, ii. 
428 

Maramara and Pikalaba, exogamous 
divisions in New Britain, ii. 119 sg., 
122 Sg. 

Marathas, sacred symbols (devaks) of the, 
ll, 276 sgq. 

Maravars or Maravans, their lawless 
habits, ii. 248 ; their exogamous clans, 
248 sg. 

«Vargas, exogamous clans of the Battas 
of Sumatra, i. 137 .?, ii. 186, 190 

Marias, the, a Gond clan, i. 35 

Marks, totemic, on cattle, i, 13; on 
property, etc., 29; on bodies of men 
and women, 36; tribal, 28 sg., iv. 
197 599. 

Marriage, classificatory system of rela- 
tionship based on marriage, not on 
consanguinity, i. 290; to trees, 32 
sg.; to birds, daggers, earthen vessels, 
plants, 33 sg.; regulated by totemism, 
36; silence imposed on women after, 
63 7.5, iv. 233 sgg.; blood smeared 
on bride and bridegroom at, i. 72; 
exchange of dress between men and 
women at, 73, iv. 255 sgg.; licence 
at, i. 155; limitation of time of, ii. 
630; respect shewn to totems at, iv. 

INDEX 

293 Sg., 295; of fathers to their 
daughters, ii. 40, 118, 362, 363, iv. 
308, 315; by capture, 72, 300; 
blood-covenant at, 242; with a niece, 
a brother’s daughter, ii. 21 sg. ; with 
a niece, a sister's daughter, 271 sg., 
525, iii. 575, iv. 316; with near rela- 
tions, iii. 575 sg. See also Capture 
Marriage ceremonies, i. 32 sgg., ii. 456 
sy. ; totemic, iv. 293 5g., 295 
group. i. 249; survival of, 419; 
individual marriage an innovation on, 
ii. 69. See also Group Marriage 
laws of the Australian aborigines 
artificial, i. 280 
of cousins, ii. 188; favoured, 65 ; 
forbidden, 75 sg. See also Cousins 
system of the Australian aborigines 
purposeful, i. 282 
Marriages, punishment of unlawful, i. 54, 
551 381 59.1 393» 404, 425, 440, 46059., 
466 5y., 476, 491 59., 540, 554, 557, 
572, li. 71, 121, 122, 126, 128, 130, 
131, 186, 191,°321, 410, 473, 515, 
§62, iii. 48, 552; consanguineous, ii. 
351; incestuous, iii, 362 sg.; tem- 
porary, iv. 309 
Marshall, F. H. A., on effects of in- 
breeding, iv. 163 sg. 
Maryborough, tribes about, i. 441 syy., 
448 
Marzan, Father J. de, ii. 136 
Masai, the, ii. 407 sgg.; marriage 
customs, i, 73, ii, 408 sgg.; super- 
stitions, 408 sq.; age-grades, 412 syy.; 
classificatory system of relationship, 
416 sg. ; custom of boys after circum- 
cision, iv. 258 sg. 
Mask of the sun, iii. 533 
Masked dances, iv. 285 
women, iil. 555 
Maskers in religious ritual, iii. 227 
Masks, totemic, iii. 275; worn by 
dancers, 275, 312, 341, 343 59-5 435; 
of animals worn in dances, 312, 343 
sqg.; Of crest animals, 341 597., 343 
sg. ; representing ancestors, 343 594. i 
supposed to bring ill-luck to the 
wearer, 344; of shamans, 428, 438; 
made secretly, 501 sg. ; concealed from 
the profane, 519; representing gods or 
spirits, 438, 501, 510, 517, 533, 559; 
of deer skin, iv. 269 
Massim, the, iv. 276, 277 
Vastaba of ancient Egyptians, iv. 34 2.2 
Master of Life, iii. 379, 381, 401; of 
ceremonies, 555 
Matabele, exogamy of the family names 
among the, ii. 383 
Matangi, the goddess, ii. 246 
Mataranes, the, their festival of the 
dead, iii. 580 

355 

Material sais a sign of intellectual 
progress, i. 325 

Maternal descent not necessarily more 
primitive than paternal, i. 167, 248 sg., 
335 599. , preference for, at institution 
of exogamy, iv. 125 sg. See also 
Descent azd Mother-kin 

impressions supposed to be con- 

veyed to unborn young, iv. 64 sgq. 

uncle, his authority over his sister's 
children, iv. 289 

Mathew, Rev. John, iv. 240 

Matteri and Kararu classes, i. 
599. 

Matthews, Dr. Washington, iii. 151 s¢., 
243 Sq., 245, 401, iv. 32 2.4, 265 

Mauliks, totemism among the, ii. 317 

Mawatta, totemism at, ii. 25 sgg. 

Maximilian, Prince of Wied, iii, 135 
a.4, 143, 147, 401, 471, 472, 474) 
475 

May, a sacred month, ii. 163 

Mayne, Commander R. C., iii. 309 s¢., 
4It sg. 

Meches, totemism among the, iv. 299 

Mecklenburg, Duke of, ii. 627, 628, 
629 

Medaras, exogamous clans among the, 
ii, 250; sororate among the, iv. 145 
5g. 

Medicine, used as synonymous with 
mystery or guardian spirit, iii. 390 sg., 
401, 403, 470 sg. 

Medicine bag or mystery sack, iii. 378, 
385 sy., 388, 390, 391 5y., 397 Sy., 
411 sg., 415, 462 sgy., 487 sg. 

dance, iii. 147; of the Dacotas, 

469, 470; of the Blackfeet women, 

476 sq. 

feast of the Winnebagoes, iii, 466 

339 

599. 

Lodge, iii. 135, 139; the Grand, 
487 

—— Lodges, iii. 18 

—— Man, the chief, of the Nandi, ii. 
446 ; political power of, iii. 159 

men imitate their individual totems, 

i. 22; Kurnai, 28; individual totems 

of, 49, 50, 412, 482, 497 57. ; trans- 

migration of their souls, 129; social 

power of, 352; influence of, S49 sg. ; 

political influence of, iii. 358 ; guardian 

spirits essential to, 387. See also 

Shamans 

spirits of Roocooyen Indians, iii. 

448 . 

stone vomited by novices at initia~ 
tion, iii. 467 sq. 

Medium, inspired, ii. 470, 497, 500, iv. 
33) 34 

Aedzimo, embodiments of ancestors, iv. 
304 

356 

Me-emkoat, a group of Secret Societies, 
iii, 520, 521 

Megarians, burial custom of the, iv. 213 

Meitheis of Manipur, the, ii. 325 sgq; 
their exogamous clans, 326 sg. 

Mekeo-speaking tribes of New Guinea, 
ii, 42, 44 59. 

Melanesia, totemism in, i. 86, ii. 63 sgg. ; 
evolution of gods in, iv. 30 5g. 

Melanesia, Southern, question of totem- 
ism in, ii, 80 sgg. 

Melanesians, the, ii. 64 

Memorial column, iii. 342 

Men, dressed as women at marriage, i. 
73, iv. 255 syg.; excess of, over 
women among the Todas, ii. 263 

Men's club-houses, ii. 38, 43, 57, 60, 
79, 286, 314 sg7., 325, 328, 341; 
houses, iv. 284, 288; clans and 
women’s clans, 299 

Menangkabaw Malays, exogamy among 
the, ii, 193 

Ménarikam, marriage with a first cousin, 
ii, 224, 237, 238 

Menominees, totemism of the, iii. 77 
sqgq.; Grand Mystery Society of the, 
489 sg. 

Menstruation not connected with exo- 
gamy, iv. 102 sg. 

Menstruous blood, awe or horror of, iv. 
100, 102 

women forbidden to drink milk, 
ii. 522, 534; foods forbidden to, iv. 
219 { 

Mentawei (Mentawt) Islands, ii. 213, iv. 
2gr 72.2 

Merker, Captain M., ii. 405 2. 

Merolla’s account of taboos in Congo, ii. 
615 sg. 

Mess, H, A., iv. 29% 

Mesas, tablelands, iii. 197 

Metals, discovery of the use of the, iv. 
23 5g. 

Mexicans, masked dance of the, iv. 226 

Mia, mother, i. 289, 297 

Miamis, totemism of the, iii. 69 ; anoma- 
lous terms for cousins among the, iv. 
310 

Mice, guardian spirit of, iii. 133 sg. 

Afico, king or chief, iii. 159, 163 

Mfides, shamans, iii. 484, 485, 486 

VMidewiwin Society of the Ojibways, iii. 
484 syq. 

Mikirs, the, ii. 324, 328 

Milk, of pigs, i. 17; test of kinship, 
21; drunk sour, ii. 355; milk vessels 
never washed, 355; superstitious fear 
of depriving cows of their milk, 
414; sacred python fed with, 500; 
customs as to drinking, 514 sg., 526 
S9]-, $34, 539 5g-; prohibition to 
boil, 534 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Milk and flesh not to be eaten together, 
ii. 414 

—— blood, and flesh the food of Masai 
warriors, ii. 414 

Milkmen, royal, ii. 527 

Millbank Sound, iii. 306 

Milpulko tribe, i. 388 

Minabozho, iii. 485, 489 

Mindeleff, Cosmos, iii. 214 

Mindeleff, Victor, iii. 215 7.1 

Minkani, i. 357, 358 

Minnetarees or Hidatsas, i. 26; corn 
dance of the, iii. 142 sg.; totemism of 
the, 145 sgg.; guardian spirits of the, 
401; dancing societies of the, 472 
sqgq.; sororate among the, iv. 142; 
anomalous terms for cousins among 
the, 310 

Missoari valley, civilisation of the, iii. 
147 

Missouris and Otoes, totemism of the, 
iii, 122 

Mistakes in dances severely punished, iii. 
519, iv. 315 sg. 

Mistletoe and Balder, iii, 488 sg. 

Mitakoodi tribe, i. 524, 525 

Mitchell, T. L., iv. 177 

Miubbi tribe, i. 517, 518 sg. 

Mock-sacrifice of men to totems, i, 18 

Modzimo (God), iv. 303 

Mogers, exogamous clans of the, ii. 
250 

Mogwandi nation, totemism in the, ii. 
626 

Mohaves, the, iii. 247 sgg. 

Mohawks or Caniengas, iii. 4, 8 

Mohegans, phratries and clans of the, i. 
57 s¢. See Mohicans 

Mohicans, totemism of the, iii. 
classificatory system, 44 5g. 

Mole, totem, ii. 440 

Motimo of the Basutos, i. 149 

Molina, J. Ignatius, iii. 581 sy., 582 sy. 

Moluccas, totemism in the Moluccas, ii. 
197 599. 

Moluches or Araucanians, traces of totem- 
ism among the, iii. 581 sy. 

Monarchical rule in Australia, incipient 
tendency to, i. 331 

Monarchies, absolute, of Ashantee, Daho- 
mey, and Uganda, iv. 30 

Monbuttoo, the, ii. 628 

Money, native, i. 262, iii. 262 

Monitor lizards worshipped at Bonny, ii. 
591 

Monkey clan, ii. 319, 321, 488 sg. 

totem, ii. 439 

Monkeys as gods, ii. 377 

Monogamy, theory of primitive, iv. 95 
59-1 99; of the Kacharis, iv. 300 

Monsoon, festival at south-east, iv. 285 

Montagnards, the, iii. 439 

44; 

INDEX 

Montagnets, the, iii. 374, 375 

Moon, as totem, i. 25, ii. 242, 298; 
worship of the, 156; stolen by Raven, 
iii, 293 

clan, ii. 272 

Mooney, James, iii. 2 7.1, 481 57., iv. 
251 

Mogquis or Hopis, iii. 203, 206, 208, 
209 sgg.; descent of their clans, i. 6; 
the Snake clan of the, 7 5¢.; keep 
eagles, 15 ; the Snake Band (Society) 
of the, 46 ; phratries and clans of the, 
56, iii. 210 sgg. See aéso Hopis 

Moral bogies, i. 147 

code of the Central Australians, i. 
146 sq. 

Morang, men’s house, ii. 328 

Morgan, L. H., i. 55, 73, 286, 290, 
292, ii, 170, 171, 331, iii, 6,. 8, 11, 
19 Sg., 42, 50, 147, 153, 154, 240, 
247, iv. 16, 133, 138 2.1, 139, 140, 
141, 151 2.1, 155 2.1; his theory of 
the origin of exogamy, 103 sqg. 

Morice, Father A.%G., iii. 263, 348 5¢¢., 
367, 440 599., 545, iv. 48 

Morning Star, men of the, i. 472 

Morning Star tribe, i. 70 

Morrison, C. W., i. 577 2.? 

Morse, Jedidiah, iii. 65, 75 

Mortlock Islands, sororate 
146 

in the, iv. 

Islanders, exogamy among _ the, 
287 Sq. 

Mortuary poles, iii. 296 

totems, i. 455 

Moso, a Protean god, ii. 158, 164 . 

Mosquito Indians, i. 50 

totem, i. 183, ii. 315 

Mota, primitive theory of conception in, 
ii. go sgq. 

Moth totem, ii. 220 

Mother, avoidance of, ii. 77, 78, 189, 
638 

the Great, i. 6 

Mother-in-law, avoidance of, i. 285 2.3, 
286 2., 395, 404 5g., 416 sg., 440, 
451, 469, 492, 503, 506, 541, 565, 
572, li. 17, 26, 76 syg., 117, 189, 368, 
385, 400 sg., 403, 412, 424, 461, 508, 
522, 622 5g., 630, iii. 108 sgy., 136, 
148, 247, 277 Sg., 305, 361 sg., 498, 
583, iv. 273, 305, 314 sg.; marriage 
with, ii, 323, iti, 247; sexual inter- 
course with, 113; and mother’s 
brother's wife, same term for, ii. 334 

Mother-kin, a mother not necessarily the 
head of a family under mother-kin, ii. 
74 5¢.; compatible with the servitude 
of women, 117; change from, to 
father-kin, 196, 325, 580 sg., iv. 
131 S9., 240 sy., 242 sgg.; among 
the Khasis, 320; among the Garos, 

357 

322 sy.; ifelics of, among the Baganda, 
512 sqy.; does not involve the social 
superiority of women to men, iii. 359 ; 
an obstacle to theory of primitive 
patriarchal family, iv. 99. See also 
Change amd Descent 

“« Mother of Yams,”’ ii. 39 7.? 

Mother-right does not imply the superior 
position of women, ii. 132. See also 
Mother-kin 

Mother's brother and sister's son, re- 
lationship between, ii. 75; head of 
the family, 194, 195 ; and wife’s father, 
identity of name for, 227 ; his relation 
te his sister’s children, 443 sg. ; 
authority of, in Indian society, iii. 25 

brother, his importance in early 
society, iv. 99 

—— brother's wife, right of access to, 
ii, 387, iv. 282; and mother-in-law, 
same term for, ii. 334 

eldest brother head of household, 

iv, 289 

part in 
descent, iv. 130 

Motherhood, possibility of forgetting, 
i, 249 

‘* Motherhoods,”’ exogamous clans of the 
Garos, ii, 322, iv. 296, 297 

Mothers, marriage of sons with, iii. 113, 
362, 363; cohabitation with, 362, 
363, 579 

Motlav, primitive theory of conception 
in, ii. 92 

Motumotu or Toaripi tribe, ii. 40 sgy. 

Motupo, family taboo, ii. 378, 381 

Mounds, animal-shaped, i. 31 7.5 

Mount Gambier tribe, South Australia, 
i. 8, 134, 135; its subtotems, 79 

Mountain, a totem, iv. 279 

Mountaineers, the, ili. 346 

Mourning for dead animals (gazelle, 
hyzena, lobster, owl), i. 15, ii. 443; 
for totem, iv. 298 

extraction of teeth in, iv. 148 sg. 

Mowat. See Mawatta 

Apangu, hereditary taboos, ii. 617, 622 

Mpologoma River, ii. 454 

Apondo fruit, story of the wife who came 
from a, ii. 568 sg. 

Astro, totem, ii. 405 

Mud, babies made out of, i. 536 sg. 

Mugema, the earl of Busiro, ii. 488 sg. 

Muka Doras, exogamous clans of the, 
li, 250 

Mukasa, a great god of the Baganda, 
ji. 481, 494, 501, iv. 35 

Mukaua community, totemism of the, iv. 
279 

Mukjarawaint tribe, i. 462; sex totems 
of the, 47 sg. 

Mukwara and Kilpara classes, i, 380 sgg. 

determining line of 

358 

Mulga scrub, i. 317 

Miller, Max, iv. 44 

Mulongo, taboo inherited from father, 
ii, 404 

Munda or Kolarian language, ii. 291, 

2 

Mundas, the, ii. 291 sy.; totemism 
among the, i. 10, ii. 290 

wunedoo or munedo, guardian spirit, iii. 
382 sqg. 

Mungan-ngaua, i. 146 

Munsees, the, iii. 42 

Muramuras of the Dieri, i. 64, 148 5¢., 
347 599. 

Murdus or madas, totems, i. 348 

Muri-Matha, i. 62 7.4 

Murray River, i. 381 

Murring tribe, i. 488 

Muruburra tribe, i. 449 

Mushroom clan, ii. 499 

Musisi, a god of the Baganda, ii. 494, 
495 

Muskhogean stock, iii. 156 

Muskogees or Creeks, the, iii. 156 

Musoke, a Baganda god, iv. 33, 35 

Mustard clan, ii. 274 

Mutilations, bodily, at puberty, i. 36, 
iv, 180 sgg. ; of the natural openings 
of the body, 196 sg. 

Mutrachas, exogamous clans of the, ii. 
250 sg, 

Musiro, totem, ii. 403, 404, 448, 451, 
473» 476, 477, 478, 537 

Mweru, totemism dmong the, ii. 424 sgq. 

Mycooloon tribe, i. 519 sg., 521, 529; 
initiation ceremonies of, 40 sgq. 

Mysore, totemism in, ii. 269 sgy. 

Mystery, the Great or Good, iii. 82, 83 ; 

Dance of the Dacotas, iii. 463 

sack. See Medicine hag 

songs, iii. 427 sg. 

Myths, dramatic representations of, iii. 
312, 335) 435, 521 

Nag (serpent), totem, ii. 220 sy. ; (snake) 
clan, 296 

Naga tribes, the, ii. 328; of Assam, 
female infanticide among the, iv. 78; 
communal houses among the, 300 sg. 

Nagesar, totemism among the, ii. 297 

Naguals, guardian spirits of Central 
American Indians, iii. 443 5¢9., 498, 
549 

Nahanais, the, iii. 346 

Namaquas, their aversion to the hare, 
iv. 222 

Names, secret, i. 196, 197, 489, ii. 473; 
absence of names for exogamous 
classes, i. 264 sy., ii. 70; feminine, for 
the Australian subclasses, i. 268, 269, 
397 2.2, 407 2.1, 411 2.1, 415 2.7; of 
children, mode of determining, 534 59. ; 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

of relatives by marriage (father-in-law, 
mother-in-law, etc.) not mentioned, ii. 
16 sg., 57, 76, 124 5g., 189 7.1, 385, 
iii, Ir sy., iv. 283; superstitions as 

. to, ii. 345; Of chiefs not to be men- 
tioned after dusk, 397; of kings not 
mentioned after their death, 535 ; 
changed in sickness, 453; of ances- 
tors, given to children, 453, 457, iii. 
298; names of paternal grandfathers 
given to their grandsons, 298; family 
names of the Haidas, 297 sg.; new, 
at initiation, i. 44, iii, 510, 555; 
summer and winter names, 517; of 
slain men bestowed on children, iv. 
285 

Names, exogamy attaching to family 
names in Burma, ii. 337; in China, 
339; in Corea, 339; among the Zulus 
and Matabeles, 382 sg¢. 

personal, of members of totem 
clans, i. 58 sg., ii. 473, iii, 13 59., 
34 5g., 76 Sg., TOT 599., 225 Sg., 272 
59.1 308 sy., 329,°360; among the 
Gilyaks, ii. 344 5g. 

—— sacred, iii, 101 ; of secret societies, 
335 > . 

Name-sakes, invocation of, i. 532 59. 

Naming of children, iii. 35 ; into father's 
clan, 42, iv. 132; into any clan, iii. 72 

Nandi, the, ii. 431 sgg. ; totemism among 
the, 433 sg. ; classificatory system of 
relationship, 444 5g. ; age-grades, 445 

5q9. 

Nangera, a god of the Baganda, ii. 495 

Nanja, abode of disembodied spirits, i. 
190, 193, 201 

Nantaba, a Baganda fetish, ii. 486 

Narrang-ga tribe, i. 473 sqq. 

Narrinyeri, the, i. 14, 19, 477 59g. ; 
clans and totems of the, 478 syq. ; 
initiation ceremonies, 40; chiefs among 
the, 329 sg. 

Narumée, novice at initiation, i. 484 

Nass River, iii. 306 

Nassau, R. H., ii. 610 

Natarenes of Paraguay, i. 35 

Natchez, the, iii. 157; revere the sun, 
i. 25, iv. 479 

Nats, totemism among the, ii. 282 

Naualaku, supernatural, iii. 435 

Naualock or Nawalok, Great Dance of 
the Spirits, iii. 502, 503 

Navahoes, the, iv. 156; religion of the, 
32 7.1 

Navahoes and Apaches, iii, 202, 241. 
sgqg. ; exogamous clans of the, 243 syq. 

Navel, mutilation of the, iv. 197 

Navel-string, ceremony at cutting the, 
i. 537 59.; of King of Uganda, ii. 482, 
485, 492; of dead kings preserved, 
iv. 34 

INDEX 

Navels of totems, ii. 19, 22 sg. 

Nayindas, totemism among the, ii. 274 
5q. 

Ndo, totemism among the, ii. 429 

Negative or remedial magic, i. 116 

Negroes, Nilotic, ii, 461 

Nelson, E. W., iii. 368 sg. 

Nende, a Baganda war-god, ii. 499 

Net totem, i. 25 

Nether world, pretence of visit to the, 
iii. 528 sy. 

Nets, fishing, marriage of girls to, i. 34 
n& 

Neutral Nation, the, iii. 3 sy., 47 

New, Charles, ii. 541, iv. 233 sg. 

New birth, pretence of, i. 32 ; at initia- 
tion, 44, iv. 228 

fire, made annually, iii, 160, iv. 

313; made at the solstices, iii. 237 sq. 

fruits, solemn eating of, iv. 313 

moon, ceremony at, ii. sor 

names at initiation, i. 44, iii. 510, 

555 

New Britain, totenfism in, ii, 118 sgq. 

—— Caledonia, classificatory system of 
relationship in, ii. 65 sg., iv. 286 

Guinea, totemism in, ii. 25 sgg., 42 

5yg., iv. 276 sgg.; the two races of, 

276 

Hebrides, totemism in, i. 86; exo- 

gamous classes in the, ii. 69 s¢q. 

Ireland, totemism in, ii. 118 sgg., 

126 sqq. 

Mexico, iii. 195, 196, 204, 206 

— Year's feast among the Hausas, ii. 
608 

Nexadi, the, iii. 267, 268 

Neyaux, the classificatory system of re- 
lationship among the, ii. 553 

Nez Percés, the, iv. 144 

wVgaitye, tutelary genius or totem, i. 478, 
481 sy. 

Ngalalbal, mythical being, i. 41 

Ngameni tribe, i. 376 sg. 

Ngarego tribe, its phratries and clans, i. 
61 

Ngarigo tribe, i. 392, 393 sg. 

Niambe, supreme deity of the Barotse, 
iv. 306 

Nias, exogamous clans in, ii. 197 ; 
superstitious rules observed by hunters 
in, iv, 224 Sq. 

Nicknames, Herbert Spencer's theory 
that totemism originated in, i. 87, iv. 43 

Niece, marriage of paternal uncle with 
his niece, his brother’s daughter, dis- 
countenanced, ii, r21 sg.; right of 
maternal uncle to marry his niece, his 
sister's daughter, 271 5y., 525, iii. 575, 
iv. 316 

Nigeria, Northern, totemism in, ii. 600 
59q. 

359 

Nigeria, Soythern, totemism in, ii. 587 
59g. 

Night-jar, sex totem, i. 47 

Nikie, iii. g7 2.) 

Nile, bride of the, i. 34 2.6; Egyptian 
sacrifice of a virgin to the, iv. 212 sg. 
Nilotic negroes, ii. 407, 461, 628; of 

Kavirondo, the, 447 

Nind, Scott, i. 546 sgg., iv. 219 

Niskas, the, iii. 307, 311 ; Secret Societies 
among the, iii. 539 5g¢. 

Noa, marriageable, i. 346, 363, 365 

Nobles, commoners, and slaves, iii, 261 

Nootkas, the, iii. 253; Secret Society of 
the, 504 sq. 

North American Indians, dancing bands 
or associations of the, i. 465g. ; totem- 
ism among the, iii. 1 sgg.; guardian 
spirits among the, 370 sgg.; Secret 
Societies among the, 457 s¢q¢. 

Nose, piercing the, i. 569; totem, ii. 
397 

Nose-bone, practice of wearing, i. 27 sg. 

Nose-boring, custom of, iv. 196 

Noses, long, of Fool Dancers, iii. 527 sg. 

Novices, carried off by wolves, iii. 503, 
505, 518; receive new names, 510, 
555; carried off by spirits, 516 ; purifi- 
cation of the, 516, 518 ; dances of, 516 
59.) 541, 546; brought back onartificial 
monsters, 537 59-, 541, 542, 543 59.3 
rules observed by, after initiation, 539 ; 
their interview with a patron spirit, 
548 ; hair of, plucked out at initiation, 
iv. 228 sgq. 

Noviciate among the Narrinyeri, i. 484 

Noro, paternal divisions, ii. 560 sg. 

Nunc dimittis, the totemic, i. 199 

Nunz, a sort of external soul, ii. 81 syy. 

Nupa, marriageable, i. 178, 309 

Nursing mother, a totem of the Banyoro, 
ii, 521 

Nurtunjas, sacred Australian poles, i. 
124, 126 sgg., 212 2. 

Nyanja-speaking peoples 
Central Africa, ii. 395 

Nyarong, guardian spirit, ii. 209 sgg. 

Nyasaland Protectorate, ii. 394 

of British 

Oak, marriage of Zeus to, i. 33; as 
guardian spirit, iii. 408 

clan, ii. 321 

forests in the Khasi country, ii. 

321; in Manipur, 325 

groves of California, iii. 496 

Oak-tree dressed as bride, i. 33; men 
tied to, 33 

Oath by totem, i. 13, 21 3g., ii. 370, 
372 

Oaths on a cup, ii. 154 

Obligation to eat the totem, i. 110, 230 
5Y-1 233 

360 

Octopus family, i. 131, ii. 80 s¢. 

—— god, ii. 157 

Ododum, totem, iii. 67 

Offerings to totems, ii. 219, iv. 280 

Oil palms, ii. 577 

Ojibways, descended from a dog, i, 5; 
totemism of the, iii. 46 59g. ; guardian 
spirits among the, 382 sgg.; Afide- 
wiwin Society of the, 484 sg. 

Oktes, Okkis, or Otkons, supernatural 
beings, tii. 372 sg., 377 

Okilia, brother, i. 289, 297 

Okki, or manitoo, i. 51, 52, iii. 375. 377 

Oknanikilla, local totem centre, i. 189, 
190, 193, 194 ‘ 

Oknia, father, i. 289, 297 

Olala, a Cannibal Society, iii, 539 sg., 
542 

Old men, influence of, in Australia, i. 
283, 326 59g., 352 599-1 440 S9., 542; 
monopolise women, 549, 552, 572 

people unrestricted as to food, i. 

19 

Old Woman, the Mother of the Corn, 
iii. 140 5gg., 191 Sgg.; goddess of 
maize, slain by her sons, 191 sgg. 

Olo Ot, marriage said to be unknown 
among the, ii. 216, iv. 291 sg. 

Olympus, a totemic, i. 81 

Omahas, legends of their totems, i. 5, 8 ; 
totemic taboos, 11 sg.; totems, 14, 
17, iii. 85 sgg.; modes of wearing the 
hair, i. 26 sg.; guardian spirits among 
the, iti, 398 sgg.; Secret Societies of 
the, 461 sgg. ; sororate among the, iv. 
149; anomalous terms for cousins 
among the, 310 

Omens, drawn from totems, i. 22 59., ii. 
137, iv. 293; from dogs, ii. 165; from 
birds and animals, 206, 422 

Omusiro, totem, ii. 532 

Ona Indians of Tierra del Fuego, i. 147 

Oneidas, the, iii. 4, 8 

Onondagas, the, iii. 4, 8; their phratries 
and clans, i. 57 

Oolachen or candle-fish, iii. 259, 306 

Ootaroo and Pakoota, names of exo- 
gampous classes, i. 516 sq. 

Openings of the body, custom of 
mutilating the natural, iv. 196 s¢. 

Ophiogenes, i. 20, 22, iv. 179 

Oracles given by inspired medium, ii. 
168 

Oraibi, Pueblo village, iii. 203, 208, 210 

Orang Ot, the, iv. 292 

Sakai, reported communal marri- 
age among the, ii. 216 

Orang-Mamaq, exogamy among the, ii. 
194 Sg. 

Oraons, the, ii. 285 sgy.; totemism 
among the, i. 10, 14, ii. 287 sgg¢. 

Ordeal of spears, i. 555 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Ordeals, totemic, i. 20 5g.; judicial, 21, 
iv. 178 sg. sg 

Oregon, totemism not found in, i. 84; 
sororate among the Indians of, iv. 
144 

Organisation, exogamous, of Australian 
tribes, i. 271 sgqg.; produced by 
deliberate and sometimes repeated 
dichotomy, i. 285 . 

Orgies at birth of a royal child, ii. 638 
Sg. 

Origin of death, ii. 376 sg., 422 sg. 

Orinoco, Indians of the, iii. 572 

Orphans, gestures of orphans in dance, 
li. 373 59. 

Orthography of native names, ii. 93 7.°, 
iii. 351 7.1 

Orunda, taboo, ii. 610 

Oruzo, paternal clan, ii. 357 

Osages, legend of their descent, i. 5 sg.; 
their rules as to camping, 75 ; totemism 
of the, iii, 128 sgg. ; sororate among | 
the, iv. 141 

Osiris, ii. 34 & 

Ossetes, silence of brides among the, 
iv. 235 ; exogamy among the, 302 ' 

Ossidinge, district of W. Africa, ii. 597 

Ostiaks, i. 86 7.2 See Ostyaks 

Ostrich clan, iii. 581 

Ostriches at death ceremony, i. 35, iii. 580 

Ostyaks, exogamy among the, iv. 302 

Oswals, sororate among the, iv. 147 

Otoes and Missouris, totemism of the, iii. 
122 

Ottawas, totemic carvings of, i. 30 sy. ; 
totemism of the,'iii. 66 sg.; guardian 
spirits among the, 381 sg. 

Otter clan, ii. 481 

Otter-heart and his Beaver wife, ili, 60 
59q. 

Otter’s tongue in shamanism, iii. 438 

Otua, god, ii. 178 

Outaouaks, their totems, i. 5. 19 

Outlaws, sanctuaries or asylums for, i. 

96 sqq. 

Ovaherero. See Herero 

Ovakumbi, traces of totemism among the, 
ii. 623 

Ovambo, the, ii. 368 

Oven, pretence of baking a human victim 
in an, i. 18, ii. 156, 158, 160 

Owen, Miss Mary Alicia, iti. 76, 403 

Owl, mourning for dead, i. 15, ii, 165; 
kept as bird of omen, i. 23; omens 
given by, 23; a village god, ii. 155; 
transformation of woman into, iii, 269 

clan and owl masks, iii. 343 sq. 

totem, i. 48, ii. 298 

Owls, imitation of, i. 39 59. 

Padang, marriage customs in, ii. 193 59. 
Paddy (unhusked rice), totem, ii. 292 

INDEX 

Padma Sale, exogamous clans of the, ii. 
251 * 

Pageh Islands. See Poggi 

Pains of maternity transferred to husband, 
etc., iv. 248 sgg. 

Painting, magical, to represent emu, i. 
106 : 

Paintings, totemic, i. 29 sg., 196, Iii. 
267 sqg.; totemic body, i. 196, ii. 28, 
37; facial, iii, 36, 129, 269 sg., 289, 
414, 426, 517; of guardian spirits on 
rocks, 424, 440, 442 

Palm Oil Grove clan, ii. 558 

Palm squirrel, story of the wife who was 
a, ii, 568 

tree, marriage to, i. 34 7.8 

Palmer, Edward, i. 515 2.1, 521 59., 523, 
528, 530 599., 540, 542, 543 

Palmer, H. R., ii. 600, 601, 602, 604, 
607 

Pam, an African, ii. 603 

Panama, Indians of, iii. 554 syg. 

Pandion Heliaetus, ii. 197 

Pangolin or Manis clan, ii. 486 sq. 

Pans, totemism among the, ii. 297 sg. 

Panther clan, ii. 550, iv. 312 

Pantomimes at initiatory rites, i. 37 sg. 

Papuans, their culture, ii. 33; physical 
type of the, 201 

Papuans and Melanesians of New Guinea, 
iv. 276 

Paraguay, Natarenes of, i. 35, iii. 580 

Parents and children, prevention of 
marriage of, i. 163, 166, 274 sg9., 
283, 285; four-class system devised 
to prevent the marriage of parents 
with children, 399 sqz., 445, iv. 107, 
117 sg.; named after their children, 
ili, 361 

Parents-in-law, custom of providing food 
for, i. 504 sg. ; avoidance of, ii. 57. 
See also Avoidance and Mother-in-law 

Parhaiyas, totemism among the, ii. 317 

5g. 

Park, Mungo, ii. 555 2.” 

Parkinson, R., ii. 117, 118 2.3, 119, 
152 2. 

Parkman, Francis, ili. 372 sgq. 

Parnkalla, group marriage among the, 
i. 369 

Parrot, clan and totem, ii. 282, 558, 571, 
572 

Partridge, C., ii. 592, 593, 596 

Patridge, totem, ii. 439, 606 

Paruinji tribe, i. 388 sg. 

Pasemahers, exogamy among the, ii. 192 

Pastoral tribes, polyandry among, ii. 
539; laxity of sexual relations in 
certain, iv. 139 

Patagonians, their clans, i. 82 sg. 

Paternity, primitive notion of, i. 167, 
iv. 61 sgy,, 99; physical and social, 

361, 

s . 
i. 337; Yecognition of physical, 439 
sg.; ignbrance of paternity at one- 
time universal among mankind, iv. 
Iss te 

Paternity and maternity, physical, not 
implied by the classificatory terms 
“‘father” and ‘‘ mother,” i, 286 sg., 
Me. 54, 73 59- 

Patriarchal family supposed to be 
primitive, iv. 95 sg. ; objections to 
this view, 99 

Paulitschke, Philipp, ii. 541 7.3 

Pawnee totems, i. 29, 30 

Peace clans and War clans, iii. 129; 
towns, 157 

‘Peaceful relations between Australian 

tribes, i. 284; of some tribes of low 
savages, iv. 87 599. 

Peacock, totem, ii. 219, 220, 295; clan, 
275, iv. 293 

Peepul tree, marriage to, iv. 211 

Peleus and Thetis, i. 63 2.5 

Pelew Islands, totemism in the, ii. 151, 
183 sg. 

Penalties incurred by disrespect for totem, 
i, 16 syg. 

Pend d’Oreille Indians, iii. 409 

Pennant, Thomas, iv. 252 

Pennefather River, natives of the, i. 536, 
538, 539 

Pepper clan, ii. 231, 270, 274 

Perpetual fire, ii. 491, iii. 239 

Personal totems, i. 412, 448 s9., 482 
59-1 489, 497 59.1 534, 535, 536, 539 
564, ii, 84, 98 sg., 212. See Indi- 
vidual or personal totem and Guardian 
spirits 

Personation of ancestors, i. 204 ; of gods 
and goddesses by masked men and 
women, iii. 227 

Personification of corn - goddess by 
women, ili. 141, 142, 143 5g. 

Peru, aborigines of, their worship of 
natural objects, iii. sg. 

Peru, a Pacific island, iv. 235 

Peruvian Indians, descended from 
animals, i. 7 

Pestle clan, ii. 270, 274 

Petitot, Father E., iii. 357, 359 7.3, 365 
Sq. 368 2.7, 439 5g. 

Petroff, I., iii. 267 7. 

Phear, Sir John B., ii. 334 sg. 

Philippine Islands, traces of totemism in 
the, i. 86 

Phratries, ii, 283; in Australia, i. 60 
599. 76 syg., iv. 264 sg.; evidence 
for phratric totems, i. 76 sgg.; in 
Torres Straits, ii. 5, 6 sg., 22, 23, 
so; in New Guinea, 29, iv. 278; 
in Mysore, ii. 273; among the Iro- 
quois, iii. rz sg., 16 sgg.; functions 
of phratries among the Iroquois, 16 

362 

599. produced by subdivision of clans, 
41, 44, 79 sg.,214; of the Hopis, 210 
59g. ; nameless, 244; perhaps named 
after clans, 244. See also Classes 

Phratry, an exogamous group, including 
several totem clans, i. 55 sg. ; duties 
to members of the same, iii. 275 

Physical geography of South-Eastern 
Australia, i. 314 sgq. 

Piacular sacrifices, i. 45 

Piaroas, the, their doctrine of transmi- 
gration, ili. 572 sg. 

Piay, medicine or mystery, iii. 448 

Pigeon clan, i. 182, 183, ii. 231, 308; 
god, 156, 165 

(Wild) clan, i, 18 

Pigeons kept by Pigeon clan, i. 14 

Pig people, ivi 285; effigy of pig wor- 
shipped at marriage, 294 

Pig's heart, a god, ii. 157 

Pigs’ milk, i. 17; effect of drinking, iv. 
176; entrails, totem, ii. 288, 289 

Pikalaba and Maramara, exogamous 
divisions in New Britain, ii. 119 sg., 
122 sq. 

Pima Indians, sororate among the, iv. 

149 

Pinart, Alphonse, iii. 554 sg. 

Pineapple, totem, ii. 296 

Pinnaru, headman, i. 360 sg. 

Pipal (peepul) tree as totem, ii. 220, 
237 

Pipe, keepers of the, iii, 98 ; sacred, 105, 
107 Sq. 

Piraungaru, secondary spouses, i. 309 

Piros, the, iii. 207 

Pirrauru marriage, i. 363 $99., 371 

Pitta-Pitta tribe, i, 517, 524, 525, 526, 
528, 545 

Pitt-Rivers, General, i. 325 7.7, 343 

Placenta of a king of Uganda, ii. 483 2.; 
regarded as twin of child, 483 2., 
507 ; treatment of, 507 

Plague, ceremony to avert a, ii. 246 5g. 

Plantain clan, ii, 558 

Plants as totems, i. 11, iv. 298; mar- 
riage to, i. 34; domestication of, 87 ; 
assimjlation of people to, ii. 92; 
respect for, 282, 285 

Playfair, Major A., iv. 295, 296 sg. 

Pleiades clan, ii. 301 

Plover, imitation of cry of, i. 113 

Plum-tree, totem, i. 192 

Plural forms of terms for ‘‘ mother,” 
‘‘husband,” ‘‘ wife,” ii. 72 sg. 

Plutocracy, tendency to, iii. 303 

Pich, R., iv. 285 

Poggi or Pageh Islands, natives of the, 
ii, 213 sgg.; marriage customs in the, 
215 sq., iv. 290 sg. 

Poison-maker, continence observed by, 
li, 410 59. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Pole, village, ii. 604 ; sacred, iii, 107 

Poles, sacred, among the Australians, 
i, 125, 126; totem, iii, 270 59¢.; 
290 S99. 345 

Polyandry, i. 501; among the Todas, 
li, 256; among the Bahima and 
Baziba, 538, 539 sg.; fraternal, trace 
of, iii. 277; may prevent the rise of 
exogamy, iv. 90; in Africa, 274 

Polygamy, i. 549, ii, 26, 227, 263 sy., 
272, 347, 405, 416, 453, 456, 462, 
iii, 277, 305, 354, 358, 365, 561 
565 sg.. 574; Kulin, ii, 619 599. ; 
caused by prolonged lactation, iv. 79 ; 
favourable to female births, 87 

Polynesia, advanced condition of totem- 
ism in, i. 81 sg., ii. 1§1 sgg. ; evolu- 
tion of gods in, iv. 30; female in- 
fanticide in, 77 sq. 

Pomegranate clan, ii. 273 

Ponape, traces of totemism in, ii. 176 
5g. 

Pondos, the, ii. 382, 384 

Ponkas, totemism of tke, iii, 117 sgq. 

Porcupine, totem, ii. 371, 430; tribe of 
Bechuanas, 372 

Porcupines as guardian spirits, ii. 21x 

Porojas, totemism among the, iv. 294 

Port Essington, i, 578 

Lincoln tribe, group-marriage in 

the, i. 369 sg. ; their initiatory rites, 

iv. 200 59, 

Mackay tribe, i. 430 syg.; its 
phratries and subphratries, 77 s¢., 
78 sy. 

Porto Novo, ii. 585 

Possession by a spirit, i. 158 

Posts, totem, i. 30, iii. 270 59., 290 
59qq- 

Pot, person married to earthen, iv. 
21 

Potato people, iv. 285 

Potawattamies (Pottawatamies), sororate 
among the, iv. 141 59. 

Potlatch, feast accompanied by a distri- 
bution of property, iii. 262, 300 s¢., 
304 2.1, 342, 344, 519, 545 

Pottawatamies (Potawattamies), totem- 
ism of the, iii. 64 sg.; guardian spirits 
of the, 379 s7¢. 

Pottery, iii. 146; unknown, ii. 314, iii. 
260; made by women, ii. 432; of 
Pueblo Indians, iii. 205 

Powell, J. W., iii. 33, 36, 38 

Pow-wow, medicine-man, iii. 384, 387 

Prairies, the great, iii. 68 

Prayer-plumes, iii. 233, 234 

Prayers, for rain, iii, 235 sg.; to the 
sun, 389, 413, 423 

Pregnancy, ceremonies observed at, i. 
733 ceremony in the seventh month 
of, ii. 256 syg., iv. 259 sy. 

INDEX 363 

Pregnant women, their sick fancies the 
root of totemism, iii. 107, iv. 64 sgy. 
Prescott, Philander, iii. 469 ; on Dacotan 

clans, i. 46 

Presents made by a father to his children 
in his lifetime, ii. 195, iii. 174, 245, 
iv. 131, 290 

Pretence of baking man in oven, i. 18, 
ii. 156, 158, 160 

Primitive, sense in which existing savages 
are, iv. 17, 266; in what sense 
Australian aborigines are, 111 

Prince Consort among the Barotse, iv. 
306 

Princes allowed to marry their sisters, ii. 
538 

Princes and princesses live together pro- 
miscuously, ii. 523 

Prisoners decapitated, iv. 284 

Privation favourable to male births, 
plenty to female, iv. 85 

Procreation not associated with sexual 
intercourse, i. 19 sgg.; not implied 
by the classificatery terms for ‘‘father'’ 
and ‘‘ mother,” ii. 54, 73 59. 

Progress in aboriginal Australia, i. 154 
5g., 167, 264, 320 sgqy.; influence of 
the sea on social, 167 sqg., 264, 
33% 

material and social, among Aus- 

tralian coastal tribes, i. 320 sy. 

social, influenced by the food 
supply, i. 168 sg., 264, 320 sgg., 331 
S9q. 338 59. 

Prohibited degrees, formula for reckon- 
ing, ii. 310 sy., 313, 317 

Prohibitions on food at initiation, i. 4o 
sqg., iv. 176 sgy., 217 syy. See also 
Tabco 

Prometheus, i. 386 

Promiscuity, trace of sexual, ii. 638 sg., 
iv. 104 5Sg., 110 sg. ; preceded group 
marriage, 137; not practised within 
historical times, 138 ; probability that 
a large part of mankind has passed 
through, 151, 318 sg. 

Property, descent of, i. 67 2.5, ii. 194, 
195 sg7., 196 5g., 443; iii. 16, 36, 58, 
72, 174; descent of property under 
mother-kin, ii. 320, 323 ; bestowed by 
a man on his children during his life, 

195, iii, 174, 245; its influence in 
changing line of descent, 174 59., iv. 
13% Sy., 244; political influence 

acquired by private property, iii. 303 
sg. ; not allowed to pass by heredity 
into another clan, 349 

Prophet or medium of dead king, ii. 
470, iv. 306 

Proportion of the sexes at birth, causes 
which affect the, iv. 85 syg. 

Propnietary rights in the totem claimed 

by members of totemic clans, i. 112, 
231 5g. 

Proserpine River, i. 526, 532, 534 
Protection against supernatural danger 
perhaps a niotive of totemism, i. 31 
Protozoa, need of crossing among the, 

iv. 165 

Psylli, a Snake clan, i. 20; immune to 
snake bites, iv. 178 

Puberty, taboos on food at, i. 19; 
practice of knocking out teeth at, 27, 
iv, 180 sgg. ; ceremonies at, i. 36 sgg. ; 
dances of maidens at, 38, iv. 215 
sg. ; fasts at, i. 50; individual totems 
(guardian spirits) acquired at, 50; 
taboos imposed at, 531; guardian 
spirits acquired at, iii. 382, 399, 410 
413, 419, 421, 423; ideas of savages 
as to puberty obscure, 453, iv. 180, 
194, 202, 207, 215; hair of youths 
plucked out at, 228 sgg. See also 
Australian, Ceremonies, and Initiation 

Pueblo Indians, iii. 2, 195 sgg.; totemtc 
clans of the, 208 sgg.; religious dramas 
of the, 227 sgy.; their elaborate 
mythology and ritual, iv. 31 sg. 

—— country, natural features of the, 
iii. 196 sgg. 

village, plan of, iii. 201 sg. 

Puffin, divine, iv. 175 

Pumpkin, clan and totem, ii. 312, 315, 
319, 324; descent from a, 337 2.4 

Punaluan form of group marriage, iv. 
139, 140 2.2 

Punjab, question of totemism in the, ii. 
282 sg. 

Purchase of wife, i. 72, ii. 18, 197, 199, 
347, 379 

— as a means of effecting change 
from maternal to paternal descent, iv. 
241, 242 sgq. 

Purification for killing sacred animal, i. 
I9; by vapour-bath, iii. 486; of 
cannibals, 512, 523, 525; of novices, 
516; after mourning, iv. 298 

Puti (antelope), totem, i, 13 

Puttin, a sacred fish, ii. 205 sg. 

Pygmies of the Congo, iv. 192 

Pythagoras, his doctrine of transmigra- 
tion, iii. 298 

Python, clan, i. 20; expected to visit 
children at birth, 21; tribe of the 
Bechuanas, ii. 376 ; descent of people 
from the, 450; worship of the, in 
Uganda, 500 sgg.; totem, in Sene- 

gambia, 543 sg.; worshipped at 
Whydah, 585 sg.; worshipped at 
Brass, 591 sg. 

god, iv. 35 

Quail, totem, ii. 289 
Quappas, totemism of the, iii. 131, 132 sg. 

364 

Quartz, magical, iii. 505 

crystal, abode of guardian spirit, ii. 
209 

Queen Charlotte Islands, iii. 278 sg. 

Queen Mother in Uganda, ii. 469, 471; 
in Daura, 608 

—— Sister in Uganda, ii. 469, 470, 
471, 524; among the Barotse, iv., 
305 sg. 

Queens, burial of Egyptian, i. 35 

Queensland, Bishop of North, i. 577 

climate of, i, 442; totemism in, 

515 599. : 

tribes, food prohibitions observed 
by, i. 136 

Quojas, the, of Africa, i. 44 

Rabbit-hunt, ceremonial, iii. 199 

Racial tendency to produce more males 
or more females, iv. 86 

Rain, made by king, ii. 623; prayer for, 
iii. 235 sg.; associated with extraction 
of teeth, iv. 180 sg. 

—— clan, ii. 359, 361 

—— priests, iii. 206, 234, 235, 236 

—— totem, i. 24, 184, ii. 437. See also 
Rain-making 

Rainbow, omens from, ii. 166 

—— god, ii. 166 

—- totem, ii. 626 

Rainfall, influence of, on social progress, 
i. 168 sg., 264, 331 

Rain-makers, spirits of dead people, iii. 
233, 234 { : 

Rain-making, by bleeding, i. 75; 
ceremonies, 184, 218 sg., 360, ii. 162, 
498, iii. 426, 462, 547; ceremony of 
the water totem, i. 143; Ceremonies 
of the Zuiiis, ili. 233 597. 

Rajputs, exogamous clans (gotras) of the, 
ii. 330 

Ramaiyas, sororate among the, iv. 447 

Rangon, Dr. A., ii. 544 sg. 

Ranks, social, in N.W. America, iii. 
26% 

Raspberry mark on child, iv. 65 

Rat clan, ii. 491 

tgtem, ii. 436 

Rattles, iii. 522, 543 

Rattlesnake, respect for, i. 10; ceremonies 
at killing, iii. 189 

clan, iii. 232 

Rautias, totemism among the, ii. 298 sg. 

Raven, in mythology of N.W. America, 
i. 6; legends about the, iii. 292 s¢., 
295; as creator, 364; as a guardian 
spirit, 420; personated by a masked 
man, 525 

clan (Haida), iii. 280 sgy. 

class or phratry among the Tlingits, 

ili, 265 sgq. 

crest, iii, 267, 268 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Raven hero in N.W. America, iv. 31 

mask, iit, 525 

skins worn, i, 26 

Ray, Sidney H., ii. 39 

Rebirth of human beings, iii. 273, 274 
sq. ; of the dead, 297 syg. See also 
Reincarnation 

Red, as totem, i. 24; tabooed, 25 

clothes, a totem, ii. 403 

earth clan, ii. 558, 572 

—— ochre, custom of smearing novices 
with, iv. 229, 230 

or War towns, iii. 157 

Red Maize clan of Omahas, i. 
iii, 90, 92, 99; totem, i. 17 

——— River in Texas, iii. 180 

Reddis, See Kapus 

Reedbuck clan, ii. 496 sg. 

Reef Islands, totemism in the, ii. 85 sg. 

Reform, exogamy a social, i. 162 sg. 

Reformatory movement in Australian 
tribes, i. 285 7.4 

Reformers in Australian tribes, old men 
as, i, 283 ° 

Refuge, cities of, i. 96 sqq. 

Reinach, Salomon, i. 223 2.1, 386, iv. 
13 2.3, 21 #,, 103 a.) 

Reincarnation, i. 155; Urabunna theory 
of, 183; belief in reincarnation of 
dead universal in Central Australia, 
191; of the dead, ii, 84, 345 sy., 552, 
604, 606, iii, 274 5g., 335 599., 365 
sgq-; practices to facilitate, iv. 181, 
194. See also Rebirth and Trans- 
migration 

Relations, eating dead bodies of, i. 74, 
iv. 260 syg. ; marriage with near, ii. 
282, ili. 575 59. 

Relationship to totem, i. 8 syy. 

Relationships, the simplest and most 
obvious, iv. 112; simplest, recognised 
by founders of exogamy, 272. See 
Classificatory system 

Relaxation of the rule of exogamy, i. 
83 sg. 

Religion, preceded by magic, i. 141; 
rudiments of, in Australia, i. 142 
sgq.; influence of totemism on, iv. 27 
5qq. + in relation to despotism, 28 sg. ; 
in relation to magic, 29 sg. 

Religion and magic, distinction between, 
i. 105 ; blending of, iii. 142 ; combina- 
tion of, 235, 237 

Religious fraternities, iii. 206, 229 

side of totemism, i. 4 s¢g., 76 sqq., 
81 sg. 

Repertories or Calendars, Indian, iii. 
446 

Reptile clan, i. 23, 132, iii. 98; people, 
1 I2 

Resemblance of people to their totemic 
animals, ii. 8 sg., iii. 55 sg. 

8, If, 

INDEX 

Respect shown for totem, i. 8 syq., ii. 
IO SY., 27, 30, 36 59., §6, 219, 238, 
316, 397, iv. 278, 279, 281, 282, 283, 
292; diminished, i. 19 

Responsibility, common, of a family, ii. 
582 sg. ; of aclan, iv. 38 sg. 

Resurrection, pretence of, at initiation 
ceremony, i. 43 sg., iv. 228 ; apparent, 
of the totem, i. 4459. ; spiritual, 200; 
gift of, iii. 436; pretence of, at initia- 
tion into Secret Societies, 463 szq., 
485, 487 sqq.. 489 59., 505, 532, 542, 
545, 546, 549 

Rhys, Sir John, iv. 158 72.4 

Ribbe, C., ii, 116 

Rice, totem, ii. 221, 292, 296, 547 

wild, iii. 47 

Riggs, Dr. S. R., iii. 108 2.3, 396 sg. 

Ringa-Ringa tribe, i. 517, 529 

Rio Grande, iii. 196, 206, 207, 208 

Risley, Sic Herbert, i. 67, ii, 218 2.}, 
275 5g., 286 sg., 288, 292, 294, 297 59., 
318 2.3, 324, 620 sg., iv. 240 

Rites of initiation,°at puberty, i. 36 sg¢., 
prevalent in Australia, iii. 458. See 
also Ceremonies and Initiation 

Ritual of Pueblo Indians, iii. 227 sgq. 

Ritualistic organization, in N.W. 
America, iii. 513 sgy.; supersedes 
family or clan organisation during 
winter celebrations, 514, 517 59. 

River, worship of the spirit of a, ii. 
492 Sg. 

-——— turtles as guardian spirits, ii. 211 

Rivers, Dr. W. H. R., i. 249 2.3, 297, 
305, 307, 308, ii. 85 sgg., 109, 113, 
114, 137, 138 sqg., 141 2.1, 152 7., 
171, 177 Sg. 179 sgqg., 225 2.1, 227, 
228, 258, 268 sy., iv. 10 7.7, 59, 286; 
quoted, ii. 89-94 

Rivers worshipped, iii. 577 

Rock, sacred, ii. 605 

Rodes, sororate among the, iv. 146 sq. 

Rome, marriage ceremony at, i. 32; 
foundation of, 95 sy. 

Romulus and the foundation of Rome, 
i. 95 sg. 

Ronas, totemism among the, iv. 294 sy. 

Roocooyen Indians, guardian spirits of 
the, iii. 448 

Roondah, taboo, ii. 609, 610 

Roro-speaking tribes in New Guinea, ii. 42 

Rosa, J. N. de la, iii. 559 2.7, 562 2.7 

Roscoe, Rev. John, ii. 451, 453, 454, 
456, 458, 461 2.4, 468 7.), 472 2.4, 
479, 502, 503, 509 7.5, 514, S15, 
520, 5217.3, 523, 535, 538, 539, 542, 
iv. 34 2.1, 87 2.9, 1582.1, 305 2.3 

Rose, H. A., ii, 283 

Rosenberg, H. von, iv. 291 

Roth, W. E., i. 136, 137, 515, 522 599., 
$28 syg., 532 59q-1 542 59- 

365 

Rotuma, trates of totemism in, ii, 167 
5qq. 

Rotuman form of the classificatory system 
of relationsh’p, ii. 169 sg. 

Rotunda, the, iii. 160, 184 

Rudolph, Lake, ii. 407 

Sachems, head chiefs of the Iroquois, 
iii. 1§ sy., 17 59. 

Sachemship, iii. 71 sg. 

Sacrament, totem, i. 120, ii. 590, iv. 
230 5gg., 319 

Sacied animals, local, ii. 583 sgy., 590 
sgy.; in Madagascar, 632 sgg. ; and 
plants, not all to be confounded with 
totems, iii. 195; kept in captivity, iv. 
175 

Dancer, iii. 212, 214 

names, iii. 101 

—— pole, iii. 107 

shell, iii, 90 7.° 

stones, iii. 97, iv. 278 

tents, iii, 107 

Sacrifices to totems, i. 14, 19 59., 50, 
ii. 604; of totem, 588, 589, 589 sq., 
604 

piacular, i. 45; to ghosts, ii. 108 

Sago, magical ceremonies to make sago 
‘grow, ii. 31 syg., 38 sg. ; man who 
fertilised sago palms, 32 sg. 

Sago-palm people, iv. 285, 286 

St. Matthias Islands, totemism in, i. 133 

Sakai, their custom in a thunder-storm, 
ii. 438 

Sakalavas of Madagascar, i. 85, ii. 632, 
637, iv. 241 

Sal fish, respect shewn by potters for 
the, ii. 316 

Salisbury, Lake, ii. 454 

Salish, the, iii. 253, 260, 261, 263; 
totemism among the, 338 sgg. ; 
guardian spirits among the, 409 sgy. 

Salivas, tribe of the Orinoco, i. 85, iii. 
§72 

Saliyans, exogamy of the, iv. 295 

Salmon in North-West America, iii. 
258 s9., 347, 363 

dance, iii. 530, 547 sg. 

—— Society, iii. 530, 547 sy. 

Salt, prohibition to eat, i. g2; abstin- 
ence from, at initiation, iii. go2 ; super- 
Stitious abstinence from, iv. 223 sqq. 

totem, i. 24, ii. 289, 295, 296 

Salt-workers, superstitions of, iy. 226 sq. 

Saluppans. See Janappans 

Salvado, Bishop, i. 557, 560 

Samira, to be possessed of, ii. 471 2.! 

Samoa, totemism in, i. 8, 13, 14, 15, 22, 
81 sy., ii. 151 sgg. 

Samoan ceremony at birth, i. 51; mode 
of appeasing angry totem, i. 18; gods 
developed out of totems, iv. 30 

366 

Samoyeds, exogamy among the, ii. 343 
San Felipe, Pueblo village, iii. 223 sg. 
San Juan Capistrano, iii. 403 

Indians of, i. 39, 51 

Sanctuaries, development of cities out of, 
i. 95 syg-; in Australia, America, 
Africa, Borneo, etc., i. 96 sgg. 

Sanctuaries or asyluins, iv. 266 sgg. 

Sanctuary for murderers, ii. 165 

Sand, totem, i. 24 

Santa Ana, Pueblo village, iii. 223 

Santa Cruz Islands, totemism in the, ii. 
85 s9¢. 

Santals, the, ii. 300 sgg.; descended 
from goose, i. 7; exogamous clans and 
subclans of the, ii. 300 599. 

Santo Domingo, Pueblo village, iii. 222 

Saoras, sororate among the, iv. 146 

Sarawak, analogies to totemism in, ii. 
202 599. 

Sardine, burial of, i. 15 7.8 

Sardinia, custom at courtship in, iv. 
235 5g. 

Sauks and Foxes, totemism of the, ili. 
74 $99: 

Savage differs from civilised man rather 
in degree than in kind, i. 282 

Savagery, all civilised races have passed 
through a stage of, i. 94 

Savages, importance of studying, i. 95; 
their extinction, zézd. 

Savars, totemism among the, ij. 229 

Savo, totemism in, ii. 112 sg. 

Sayce, A. H., i. 86 sy. 

Scab supposed to result from eating 
totem, i. 17, ii, 403, 405 

Scalps as title of nobility, iii. 
304 2.) ; mystery of, 417, 427 

Scapegoat, human, ii. 491 

Scarcity of women assigned as cause of 
exogamy, iv. 75 5g. 

Scarification, iv. 313 

Scars as tribal or totemic badges, i. 28 
5g., 36, ii. 9 sg.; cut on bodies of 
Australian aborigines, iv. 198 sgq. 

Scherzer, K., iii. 447 

Schinz, H., ii. 368 

Schonhburgk, Sir R., iv. 145, 316 

Schoolcraft, H. R., iii. 10, 59, 
377 59> 

Schiirmann, C. W., i. 369, iv. 200 59. 

Schweinfurth, G., iv. 179 59. 

Science, exogamy an unconscious mimicry 
of, iv. 169 

Scorpion clan, i. 20, ii. 230, 233 

totem, ii. 543, 545 

Scotland, transference of travail-pangs to 
husbands in, iv. 252 

Scott, Sir J. George, ii. 336 59. 

Scratching, forbidden, ii. 527, 
rules as to, 526 

Sea, influence of the sea on progress, i. 

393, 

St, 

iii, 402 ; 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

167 sg., 264, 331; Spirit of the, iii. 
325 sg.; worshipped, 577 sg. 

Sea, totem, i. 24 

Sea-eel god, ii. 161 

Sea-urchin growing in man's body, i, 18 

Sea-weed clan, i. 22 

Seals, the, a group of Secret Societies, 
iii. 520 

Seboko, totem, ii. 370, 378 

Secondary husbands, ii. 264 sq., iii. 277 

Secret names, i. 196, 197, 489, ii. 473 

Societies, ii. 399, iii, 261, 333 
5q9q., 457 59qg.; sometimes graduated 
according to ages, 470 S¢q., 475, 477 
sqgqg., 548; insignia of the Secret 
Societies made of red cedar bark, 504, 
517, 519, 524, 527, 540; legends of 
origin of, 515; their resemblances to 
totemic clans, 547 sg. 

Seed clan, ii. 489 sy. 

Seed-corn, fertilisation of the, iii. 
142, 143; ritual with, 237 

Seeds, ceremony for the multiplication 
of edible, i. 573 sg. 

Segregation, local, of the exogamous 
classes and totems, i. 246 sgy.; of 
totemic clans, ii. 4, 5, 6; of exogam- 
ous clans, 192, 193, 194, 198; of 
exogamous groups, iii. 124 5y., 357 57. 

Seguela, totemism in, ii. 547 

Sekanais, the, iii. 346 s9., 354 

Self-denying ordinance of totemism, i. 
122; of Central Australian totemism, 
225, 232 

Seligmann, Dr. C. G., ii. 27, 29, 30, 31, 
35) 43) 45» 47, 5%, iv. 202, 276, 277 

Semas, the, ii. 328 

Seminoles, the, iti. 167 sgq. 

Semites, question of totemism among the, 
i. 86, iv. £3; not exogamous, 14 

Senecas, the, iii. 4, 5, 8; their phratries 
and clans, i. 56 s9. 

Senegambia, totemism in, i. 
22, ii. 543 sg. 

Senior and junior side of family in rela- 
tion to marriage, i. 177 sgg. 

Seriphos, respect for lobster in, i. 15 

Serpent clan, ii. 545 

Serpents, live, carried by dancers, iii. 
229 sgg. See also Snake and Snakes 

Servant clan, ii. §58 

Servia, traces of marriage to trees in, i. 32 

Serving for a wife, iii. 354, 365, iv. 300 

Sesamum folk, iv. 298 

Sese, Island of, ii. 499, 501 

Seven as a lucky number, iii. 426 

Seventh month of pregnancy, ceremonies 
observed in, i. 73, ii. 256 s¢¢., iv. 
259 59. 

Sex, totems, i. 4, 47 s7., 390 Sg., 456 
59-1 479, 490, 496 5g., ili. 456, iv. 
173; or patrons, ii. 627, iv. 173 

i4i, 

7, I0, 20, 

INDEX 

Sexes, legend of origin of, i. 48; pro- 
portions of, in primitive socety, iv. 
76 sqgq.; causes which affect the pro- 
portion of the sexes at birth, 85 sgq. ; 
proportion of the sexes in Africa, 86 
sg. ; licence between the, till marriage, 
301 

Sextus Empiricus, iv. 175 

Sexual communism, relics or traces of, 
i. 64, ii. 129, 602 sg., iii, 472; Sur- 
vivals of, in Australia, i. 311 599. ; 
in Indonesia, alleged, ii. 213 59g. ; 
between men and women of corre- 
sponding age-grades, 415 sy. 

intercourse not supposed to be the 

cause of childbirth, i, 191 sgg. See 
also Impregnation 

jealousy absent in some races, ii. 

216, iv. 88 sg. 

licence at harvest festival, ii. 303, 

315; at circumcision, 403, 454; 

accorded to Masai warriors, 414 

selection, dancing as means of, i, 

e 

38 

Shamans, guardian spirits of, iii. 412, 
415 57., 418, 420 sy., 426, 428, 437, 
438, 454 ; powers of, 418 ; head-dress 
of, 422; dance of, 422; masks of, 
428, 438 ; of the Maidus, 497 sg. See 
also Medicine-men 

Shark and crocodile, heroes developed 
out of, iv. 30 59. 

Sharks, respect for, i, 8, rr ; transmigra- 
tion into, ii. 173 ; wooden images of, 
iv. 213 

Sharp-edged tools and weapons used to 
repel spirits of thunder and hail, ii. 
437 59. 

Shawnees, transference of child to father’s 
clan among the, i. 71; totemism of 
the, iii. 71 sg. ; anomalous terms for 
cousins among the, iv. 310 

Sheep, tabooed, i, 12; sacrificed, 32; 
sacred, ii. 634; worshipped by shep- 
herds, iii. 577, 578 

clan, ii, 487 

totem, ii. 295, 378, 531 

Sheep’s head, a totem, ii. 405 

Shells, sacred, ii. 19, 20, 22 59., iii, go, 
98, 107; used in initiation rites of 
Secret Societies, 467, 468 sg., 485, 
487 Sg., 489 sg. 

Shields, totems carved or painted on, i. 
29 5g. 

Shifting of cultivation, ii. 300, 303. 315, 
ii, 549 597. 555, 577 

Shortlands Islands, totemism in the, ii. 
115 Sgy. 

Shoshonean language, iii. 207, 208 

Shrines of hammer-headed shark and 
crocodile, ii. 19 sg. 

Shuswap, guardian spirits among the, 

. 367 

iii. 42% sqy. ; Secret Societies among 
the, 508 s¢z. 

Sia, totemism oi the, iii. 219 s¢¢. 

Siah Posh Kafrs, cities of refuge among 
the, i. 99 

Siberia, totemism in, i. 85 59., ii. 341 
SQq- 

Sibree, J., ii. 637, 639 sg. 

Sichomovi, Pueblo village, iii. 209, 212 

Siciatl, the, iii. 433 7.3 

Sick people fed with the blood of their 
kinsfolk or smeared with it, i. 42 7.6 

Sickness caused by eating totem, i. 17 

Sidibes, the, ii. 544 

Siebert, Rev. Otto, i. 148 2.4, 347 2.3, 
350, 351, 352 

Siena or Senoofo, the, ii, 548 s¢g.; 
totemism among the, 550 syg. 

Sigai and Maiau, ii. 18 sq. 

Silence imposed on women after marriage, 
i. 63 2.5, iv. 233 syg.; imposed on 
widows, 237 

Sitk tabooed, i. 13 

Silver clan and totem, ii. 232, 245, 247, 
270, 271, 272, iv. 295; silver and 
gold as totems, iv. 24 

Simon, P., Spanish historian, iii. 449 2.1 

Simons, F. A. A., iii. 557 7.1, 558 sy. 

Simpson, Prof. J. Y., iv. 272 

Simulation of childbirth by the father, iv. 
244 599. 

Singhalese, physical type and racial 
affinities of the, ii, 334 sy. ; form of 
the classificatory system of relationship 
among the, 333 5¢- 

Singhie tribe of Dyaks, i. 17 

Sioux or Dacotas, iii, 85 sg.; guardian 
spirits among the, 396 syg.; Secret 
Societies among the, 459 syg. 

Stsauk ceremonial, iii. 510 

Sisiutl, mythical snake, iii. 53x 

Sister, marriage with deceased wife’s 
sister, ii. 630, iii. 19, 108, 155, iv. 
139 syg.; obligation to marry a de- 
ceased wife’s younger sister, prohibition 
to marry a deceased wife's elder sister, 
ji. 352. See also Sisters 

of wife, avoidance of, iv. 283, 284 

Sister's children, authority of maternal 
uncle over his, ii. 123 5¢., 194, 409, 
564, iv. 289; the heirs under mother- 
kin, ii. 320 

daughter, avoidance of, ii. 509; 

marriage of maternal uncle with his, 

271, 525, iii. 575, iv. 316 

son, rights of the maternal uncle 
over his, ii. 66 ; and mother’s brother, 
relation between, 75; at funerals, 
512; aman’s heir, iii. 277 

Sisters exchanged in marriage, i. 409, 
460, 463, 483, 491, 540, il. 18, 26, 
28 sg., 40, iv. 80, 274; avoidance of, 

368 

i. 542, 565, ii. 77 599., 124, 131, 147, 
189, 343, 344, 638, iii. 245, 362, iv. 286, 
288; right to marry a wife’s sisters, i. 
572, 377.2, ti. 143 5g., 245, 250, 272, 
384, 451, 453, 461, 463, 522, 630, iii. 
19, 65, 85, 127, 136, 148, 154, 155, 
246, 354, 498, iv. 139 599., 292, 3153 
names of sisters not mentioned by 
brothers, ii. 77; a wife’s sisters as 
concubines, 167; close tie between 
men married to sisters, 351 ; right to 
cohabit with, 523; right of princes to 
marry their sisters, 538; marriage of 
brothers with sisters, 541, iii. 362, 
363, 541, 575, 579, WW. 307 sg. 3 as 
joint wives in group marriage, 139; 
kings married to their, 307 sg. 

Sisters of king, licence allowed to, ii. 
565 

Sister-in-law, wife of wife’s brother, 
avoidance of, ii. 388 

Sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law, mutual 
avoidance of, ii. 412 

Sitka, iii, 271 

Skaulits, the, iii. 429 

Skin of totemic animal, prohibition to 
use, i. 12, 13; dressing in, 26; not 
worn, ii. 370, 373, 374, 397, 422, 436 

diseases caused by eating totems, 
i. 17, fi, 397, 403, 404, 405, 406, 448 

Skins of totemic animals as signs, i. 31; 
of animals prepared by Australian 
aborigines, 321 

Skulls, human, offered, ii. 22; in dance 
of Cannibals, iii. 531 

Sky, beings, i. 152 

mythical headman in, i. 338 

Slalemux, the, tii, 342 

Slave Coast, natives of the, ii. 576 sqg. 

Indians, the, iii. 439 

mother, children of a free man by 
a, iv. 243 

Slaves, iii. 261 ; king’s daughters always 
married to, ii. 607; sacrifice of, iii. 
276, 342 

the, an Indian tribe, iii. 346 

Slavs, South, silence of bride among the, 
iv. 235. See also South Slavonian 

Sleep, Spirit of, iii. 269, 540 sq. 

Sleeping in burial grounds to obtain the 
dead as guardian spirits, iii. 420, 438 ; 
on graves, iv. 227 sq. 

Small Bird clan, i. 22, 23, 27, 
subclan, ili. 95 s7., 104 

Smearing fat on faces, i. 19; on young 
men as a ceremony, 19, 42 

blood at marriage, i. 72 

the juices of the dead on the living, 
74 

Smith, W. Robertson, i. g1, 102, iv. 
13 2.1, 74; on totem sacrament, i. 
120, ii. S90, iv. 230 sg., 231 

131; 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Smiths, hereditary, ii. 497, iv. 19 

Smoke as means of producing clouds 
and rain, iii. 234 

Smoking as religious rite, iii. 105, 108, 
234, 237, 388, 389 

Smyth, R. Brongh, iv. 176 sg. 

Snail and beaver, descent of Osages 
from, i. § sg., iii, 129 

Snake produced at initiation, i. 37 

band (society) of the Moquis, i. 46 

—— black, a Hausa totem, ii. 604, 606, 
607 ; effigy of double-headed, iii. 531 

clan, i. 184, ii. 230, 250, 310, 312; 
of Moquis, i. 7 sg.; of Narrinyeri 
keep snakes, 14; in Cyprus, 20, 
22; in Senegambia, 133; of the 
Hopis, iii. 213, 229, 231, 232 

—— dance, iii. 213, 229 sgg. 

Order, the, iii. 231, 232 

Snake-bite, as ordeal, i. 20; cures for, 
22, iv. 179; supposed immunity to, 
178 

Snakes, born of a woman, i. 8, iii. 213 ; 
kept by Snake clan, i. 14; as kinsmen 
of people, 20; ceremony for the 
multiplication of, 184; the embodi- 
ments of the spirits of the dead, ii. 
389 sg.; princes turned into, 392; 
sacred among the Wanyamwezi, 450 
5g. ; superstitions about, iii. 188 sg. ; 
live, carried in Snake Dance, 229 sgq. 

Snow, its relation to the Hare clan, i. 
132 Sg. 

totem, i. 24, 36 

Snow-shower, imitation of, iii. 533 

Snowstorm, ceremony for stopping. iii. 
127 

Social aspect of totemism, 1. 53 sg¢. 

obligations of totemic clans, ii. 

475 559, iii. 299 

superiority of women among the 
Garos, ii. 323 

Societies, Secret, ii. 399, iii. 261, 333 
599-, 457 sgg. ; among the Siouan or 
Dacotan Indians, 459 s¢g. 

Soldier ant, totem, ii. 437 

Solomon Islands, totemism in the, i. 86; 
exogamous classes in the, ii. 101 59g. 

Solstices, rites observed at the, iii, 237 

54 
Somali family, ii. 407; marriage custom 
of the, iv, 256, 258 
Son perpetually disinherited, iii. 15 
Songhies, the, iii. 317 
Songish, the, iii. 507 

Songs, ceremonial, in unknown _lan- 
guages, i. 283; ancestral, iii, 276; 
sacred, 389; to invoke guardian 

spirits, 414, 421, 427 sg.; of sha- 
mans, 421; of guardian spirits, 434 
sq. ; accompanying dances, 502, 518 5 
and dances as an exorcism, 518 

INDEX 

Sonontowanas, the, iii. 4 

Soppitt, Mr., iv. 299 

Sorcerers able to wound the souls of 
enemies, iii. 375 

Sororate (the right to marry a wife's 
sisters), iv. 139 sgg.; among the 
Kacharis, 300 

Sosom, name of bull-roarer, iv. 
mythical giant, 285 

Soul, transference of, to external objects, 
i. 124 sgqg.; theory of external, 125 
sgqg., ii. 81, 552, 561, 593 syg., iii. 
451 Sg., iv. 52 sy. 

Souls, multiplicity of, i. 34 2.2; bush, 
fi. 594 sgg.; transmigration of, iii. 
297, 365 sy. See Transmigration 

South Slavonian birth-ceremony, i. 31 

custom at hail-storm, ii. 437 

peasantry, superstitions of the, ii. 
259. See alsu Slavs 

Southern Cross, the, i. 436 t 

Streamers, ceremony at sight of, 
i. 499 

Spartan marriage gustom, iv. 255 

Spear, god, ii, 166 

Spears, ordeal of, i. 555 

Speck, F, G., iv. 311, 312 Sg. 

Spelling of American Indian names, iii. 
93 7.” 

285; 

Spencer, Prof. Baldwin, i. 148, 149 2.}, - 

152, 186 2.2, ‘196 2,3, 333 sy., iv. 
51, 265; on totemism, i. 113-115 

Spencer, Herbert, his theory of totemism, 
i, 87, 102, iv. 43 5g. 

Spencer and Gillen, i. 92, 95, 10%, 103, 
I12, 125, 138, 146 sg., 148, 155, 163, 
168 2.1, 175, 191, 200, 229, 230, 
249 2.1, 251 sg., 253, 277 2.2, 289 
SJ. 293 59., 306 5g7., 310, 313, 336 
7.1, 339 2.1, 353 S¢9-» 504, 505, 511 
$94.» §71, 575, iV. 55, 56, 60, 73, 
82 2., 88 2.1, 199, 261 

Spider, effigy of spider worshipped at 
marriage, iv. 293 

clan, ii. 282 

Spieth, J., iv. 37 2.8 

Spinifex, i. 317 

Spinning, iii. 260 

Spiny Ant-eater clan, ii. 486 sg. 

Spirit of the sea, iii. 325 sg. 

Spirits, disembodied, in trees, i. 189, 
193 ; guardian, among the American 
Indians, iii. 370 sgg. ; represented by 
masked men, 500 5g., 510, 517, 533» 
550; present in winter, 517 ; attempts 
to deceive, iv. 253, 257 sg. ‘See 
Guardian spirits 

Spiritual husbands, ii. 423 sg. 

Spitting as a charm, i. 13 

Spleen of any animal, a totem, ii. 418 

Split totems, i. ro, 58 5g., 77, ti. 397, 
520, 536 sq., iii. 100, iv. 175 

VOL. IV 

369 

Sproat, G. M., iii. 410 sy. 

Squirrel Sal ii. 550 

folk, iv. 298 

Standard, royal, iii. 159 

Standards, totemic, ii. 23 

Stanley, W. B., ii. 546 7.) 

Star, totem, i. 24, 25 

Star Island, ii. 63 

Stars, transformation of birds into, i. 
436 Sg. 

Stephan, E., and Graebner, F., ii. 

131 

5g. 

Stephen, A. M., ‘iii, 245 sg. 

Stepmother, marriage with, ii. 189 

Sterilising effect of incest, belief in the, 
iv. 157 sgq. 

Stevenson, Mrs. M. C., iv. 232 

Stewart, D. S., i. 79, 471 sq. 

Stilts, novice set up on high, ii. 399 

Sting-ray, fish, worship of the, ii. 177 

god, ii. 158 

Stlatlumh, the, iii. 342 7.% 

Stokes, J. L., i. 578 

Stone, representing honeycomb, i, 228 ; 
worshipped, ii. 311; divining, 346; 
magical, in body of novice, iii. 505 

axes, hammers, and knives, iii, 260 

clan, it. 279 

sacred, iv. 278 

Stones, representing witchetty grubs, i. 
105; representing eggs of insects, 
Hakea flowers, manna, and kangaroos, 
105, 107 sg.; associated with child- 
birth, 192; representing eggs of grubs, 
199; representing euros (kangaroos), 
226 sg.; representing dugongs, 229; 
magical ceremonies performed at heaps 
of, 573 syg.; in which the spirits of 
the totems are thought to reside, ii. 
19, 21; gods in, 162; sacred, iii. 97, 
iv. 278 

Stow, G. W., iv. 216 

Strabo, iv. 309 

Strahlenberg, P. J. von, ii. 342 

Strehlow, Rev. C., i. 186 2.2, iv. 59 2.3 

Stseelis, guardian spirits of the, iii. 429 
59g. 

Sturt, Captain C., i. 318 

Subclans, ii. 248 sy., 300 syy., 408, 
410, 419, 421; rules of marriage as 
to, iit. 101 : 

Subclasses, tribes with eight exogamous, 
}. 259 sgg.; feminine names of the 
Australian, 268, 269, 397 #.”, 407 2.3, 
4II #., 415 7.2; alternation of the 
totems between the subclasses, 408 
sqg., 419, 433 5g.; indirect female 
descent of, 399; indirect male descent 
of, 444 sg.; totemism of the, 527, 
530, 531; totemic taboos of the, 531 

Subdivision of totem clans, i. 56, 57 syy., 
ii, 4, 16, iii, 41, 44, 54 59., 57, 79 

2B 

37° 

SJ. 124, 214; of exogamous classes, | 
ll. 162; of clans, 192 

Subincision, i. 565, 569 7.1, 575; as 
initiatory rite, 195, 204 

Subphratries, exogamous divisions of | 

Australian aborigines, i. 60, 61 sg., | 

76 sqqg. See Subclasses 
Subsidiary or secondary totems, ii. 3 sg., 

7 14 $99-+ 375» 375, 473» 476 sgy., 
516 sgg., 519 5g.; one possible source 

of, iv. 280. See also Linked totems 
Substitution or disguise at marriage, i. 
33 
Subtotems, i. 78 sgy., 133 5gg-, 427 

S9J-+ 431 59-1 452 59-1 470 59.1 $40, 
567; suggested explanation of, iv. 
270 

Sugar, maple, iii. 62 7.1 

Sugar-cane clan, ii. 231, 236, 239 

Sukman, fetish, ii. 573 

Suicides buried at cross-roads, ii. 507 sg. 

Suk or Bawgott, the, ii. 426 sgq.; 
totemism among the, 427 59. 

Suku, exogamous clan, ii. 193, 194, 
196 

Sulias, guardian spirits, iii. 429 sg. 

Sumatra, totemism 185 sgg.3 
husband and wife living in separate 
households in, iv. 288 sgg. 

Summer names, iii. 517 

in, ik, 
Sun, the divinity of the Natchez, i. 25, | 
iv. 179; imitation of, i, 131; cere- 
mony to make the sun shine, 131; 
descent from tq, ii. 220, 281; prayers 
to, iii. 389, 413, 423; shut up in a box 
and let out again, 323, sg. ; in bird 
shape, 325; not to shine on bones of 
human victims, 522, 526; represented 
by masked man, 533; mask of the, 
325, 502, 533; dead buried with 
reference to the sun's course, iv. 213 
Sq. 
clan, ii. 245, 272, 274, 359, 361, 
363, iii, 214; of the Bechuanas, i. 
131; in Murray Islands, 131 
totem, i. 24, 25, 35, 104, 254, 452, 
454) 455, 456, ii. 242, 428, 430, 440, 
441| iv. 213, 278 ; Arunta ceremony of 
the, i. 211 
tribe of Bechuanas, ii, 373 sg. 
worship, iii. 213, iv. 179 
Sun Father, iii, 237 
Priest, iii. 209, 233, 234, 237 
Sun-god, iii. 502, 503 
Sunrise, the dead buried with their heads 
towards the, iii. 274, iv. 213 
Superb Warbler, sex totem, i. 47; the 
‘* elder sister’ of Kurnai women, 496 
Supernatural beings, initiation into Secret 
Societies by, iii, 513 599.; as pro- 
tectors of families, 513 sgg. 
danger, desire for protection against 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

it perhaps a motive of totemism, 
i. 3 

Saperaarieal power (mana), ii. 100, 112; 
bestowed by guardian spirits, iii. 435; 
acquired at initiation, 513 ; claimed by 
members of Secret Societies, 537 

Superstition a useful auxiliary of law and 
morality, iv. 160 

Superstitions of the 
animals and plants, iii. 
about foods among the 
304 

Supreme Being, reported in Australia, 
i. 151 sg. 

Swan, J. G., iii. 506 sg. 

Swan maiden type of tale, ii. 308, 570, 
589, iii, 64 

totem, ii. 292, 295, 296, 298 

Swanton, J. R., iii, 280 59., 285 sg.» 
290, 292 Sg., 300, 544 

Swazies, the, ii. 384 

Sweat-bath, iii. 486 ; before war, 418 

Sweat-house, spirit of the, iii. 420 

Sweating at initiation, iii. 402, 413, 414, 
419, 421, 423; as a religious rite, 
486 

Swelling of body, penalty for eating 
totem, iv. 281, 294 

Swollen stomach, supposed effect of eat- 
ing totem, iv. 281 

Sword clan, ii. 279, 299 

Symbolism a veil of ignorance, i, 82 

Sympathetic magic, iv. 247 5g., 252 5g. 
in hunting, i. 39; taboos based on, 
iii. 577 sg. See also Magic 

Syrian goddess, the, iv..176; her sacred 
fish, i. 17 

Cherokee about 
186 $99. 
Zulus, iv. 

Taboo in Hawaii, ii. 172 

Taboos on food, i. 19 ; on food at initia- 
tion, 40 sgg. ; on food in Queensland, 
523 syg.; imposed at initiation, 531 ; 
communal, ii. 215; observed by 
members of an age-grade, 413; in 
Congo, 614 sgg.; hereditary in 
paternal line, 560 sg.; in Madagascar, 
631 sgy.; based on sympathetic 
magic, iii. 576 sg. 

totemic, i. 8 sgg. ; of the Nandi, ii. 
435 sgqg.; of the Omahas, iii. 94 sg. ; 
extended beyond the totemic clan, i. 
225, 227; cease at initiation, ii. ges. 
See also Prohibitions 

Tagals of the Philippines, the, iv. 253 

Tahiti, traces of totemism in, ii, 173 5g. 

Tailless Cow clan, ii. 497 

Tales told to promote the crops, ii. 58 

Tamaniu of Banks’ Islands, i. 52; a 
sort of external soul, ii 81 sgg., 100 
599. ; 

Tamanous, spirit, guardian spirit, ili. 
495 599. 

INDEX 

Tamanowash, guardian spirit, iii. 408 

Tamil language, ii. 227, 329; form of 
the classificatory system of relation- 
ship, 330 sgg. 

Tana, totem, ii. 547 

Tando, chief god of Ashantee, iv. 37 

Tanganyika, Lake, ii. 629, 630 

Tanner, John, iii. 110, 374 

Tano, the, iii. 207 

Tanoan language, iii. 207, 224, 225 

Taplin, Rev. George, i. 477 sgy. 

Tapyri, the, iv. 309 

Tartow, heap of stones, i. 573 

Tasmanians, the, i. 342; proportion of 
sexes among the, iv. 85 

Ta-tathi tribe, i. 390 sg. 

Tattoo marks, tribal, iv. 197 

Tattooed, crests, iii. 281, 288 sg. 

women alone, i. 29, iv. 202 sgq. 

Tattooing, i. 28 ; of Poggi Islanders, ii. 
214, 215 sy. ; on king’s body, iii, 159; 
totemic, 353 

Tautain, Dr., ii. 543 sg. 

Taveta, the, ii. 41 5gg. ; totemism among 
the, 418; silence of brides among the, 
iv. 233 5g. 

Teeth, boys’ teeth worn by women, i. 
27; chipped, 27; practice of knock- 
ing out teeth at puberty, 27; knocked 
out at initiation, 44, 74; extracted at 
initiation, 412 7.%, 467, 535, 539; 
loss of teeth supposed to result from 
infringing taboo, ii. 381, 404; ex- 
tracted at puberty, 443, 453; customs 
of knocking out, chipping, and filing 
the, iv. 180 sgg. ; extraction of teeth 
associated with rain, 180 sg. ; children 
who cut the upper teeth first put to 
death, 194 59. 

Tehuantepec, Indians of the Isthmus of, 
i. 51 

Teit, James, ili. 343, 345, 409, 423, 509 

Telugu language, ii. 227, 241, 329 

Tembus, the, li. 382, 384 

Temple-tombs of kings, iv. 34 

Temporary marriages, ii. 630, iv. 309 

wives, custom of furnishing, i. 63. 
See Wives 

Ten Broeck, P. G. S., iii. 207 2.? 

Ten Tribes of Israel, the lost, i. 99 

Tenné, totem, ii. 545, 546 

Tent, totem, i. 25 

Tents, sacred, iii, 107 

Terms of address, ii. 50; of relationship, 
plural, for ‘‘mother,” ‘‘ husband,” 
“‘wife,” 72 sg. See Classificatory 
system of relationship 

Tertre, J. B. du, iv. 315 

Test of medicine-men, i. 
kinship, 20 sg. 

Tetons, the, iii. rrz, 194 7.? 

Tevoro, village deities in Fiji, i. 139 sg. 

20; of totem 

371 

Tewa, the, iii) 2c7 

Texas, Wolf ding in, it 44 

Thatada clan, iii. 95 

Theal, G. McCaul, i. 150, ii. 383, 388 sgq. 

Theddora tribe, its phratries and clans, 
i. 61; branch tribe, 393 

Thetis, Peleus and, i. 63 2.5 

Thlinkets, disguised as their totemic 
animals, i. 26; totemic paintings and 
carvings among the, 30; phratries and 
clans of, 57. See adso Tlingits 

Thomas, N. W., ii. 587, 589, iv. 13 2.? 

Thompson Indians, guardian spirits 
among the, iii. 413 sgg. 

Thomson, Basil H., ii. 142 5g9¢., 149 sg. 

Threshold, jumping over the, iii. 512 

Throwers, Society of the, iii. 512 

Thunder, ceremonies to stop, ii. 437 59., 
iii, 126 sg. ; ceremony at first thunder 
of spring, 105 sg., 126 sg. 

—— bird, iii. 80 

clan, iii, 80 

—— phratry, iii, 118, 119 

——— totem, i. 24, ii. 626 

Thunder Mountain, iii. 215 

Thunder-being clan, iii. 126 sg. 

Thunder-stones rolled to procure rain, iii. 
236 

Thunderers, the, iii. 82, 83 

Thunderstorm, ceremonies for stopping, 
ii. 437 5g., iii. 126 sg. 

Thundung, ‘‘elder brother” 
Kurnai, i. 495 

Thuremlui, mythical Australian being, i. 

of the 

44 

Thurn, Sir E. F. im, iii. 565, 566, 569 
59.4 579 Sq. 

Thurston, Edgar, ii. 225 syy., 244 59.5 
iv. 294 

Tibetans, polyandry of the, iv. 91 

Tierra del Fuego, i. 147 

Tiga Loeroeng, exogamy in, il. 195 sg. 

Tiger (jaguar), kinship with, i. 20 ; oath 
by, 21 sg.; dead, mourning for, iv. 
298 

clan, i. 34, iv. 298, 299 ; imitation 
of tigers at marriage, i. 34 

— folk, iv. 298 

totem, ii. 288, 289, 295, 296, 297, 
298 

Tikopia, traces of totemism in, ii. 176, 
179 S9q. 

Tikopian form of the classificatory system 
of relationship, ii. 182 sg. 

Timucua Indians, their clans, iv. 314 

Tindalo, ancestral ghost, ii. 104, 107 s¢., 
III, 113 

Tinnehs or Dénés, iii. 252; totemisn. 
among the, 345 5¢g. ; totemism among 
the Western, 348; guardian spirits 
among the, 439 sgg. ; sororate among 
the, iv. 144 

372 

Tippa-malku marriage, i. 363 5g¢., 372 

Tiribis, the, iii, 551 sg. 

Tirki clan, i. 12; with a taboo on mice 
or on animals whose eyes are shut or 
open, ii. 279, 288, 289, 290, 295, 
297, 299) 314 

Tiwa or Tigua, the, iii. 207 

Tjingilli, sacred dramatic ceremonies of 
the, i. 227 sg.; classificatory terms 
used by the, 301 

tribe, exogamous classes of the, i. 

366 . 

Tlatlasikoalas, Secret Societies of the, iii. 

52r 

Tlingits, Tlinkits, Thlinkets, or Thlin- 
keets, iii. 252, 253; totemism among 
the, 264 sgg. ; guardian spirits among 
the, 437 sy. 

Ttokoala, iii. 435, 504, 505, 506, 529 

To Kabinana, a culture hero, ii. 120 

‘Toad in rainemaking ceremony, iii. 235 

Toaripi or Motumotu tribe, ii. 40 sgy. 

‘Toba, Lake, ii. 186 

Tobacco clan, iii, 220 

Todas, the, ii. 251 sgy. ; their country, 
252 sgq.; their sacred buffaloes and 
religion of the dairy, 254; their 
exogamy, 255; their polyandry, 256; 
ceremony in seventh month of preg- 
nancy, i. 73, ii. 256 sg.; their mar- 
triage customs, 263 sgg; their form of 
the classificatory system of relation- 
ship, ii. 266 sgg.; their kinship terms, 
i. 94 2.1; cousih marriages among the, 
ii, 227; sacred dairyman of the, 528 ; 
female infanticide among the, iv. 78; 
excess of male over female births 
among the, 86 ; their pacific character, 
88; group marriage among the, 150 

Tofa, exogamous clan, ti. 201 

Togatas, exogamy of the, iv. 295 

Togos, the, ii. 576 

Tomanoas, guardian spirit, iii. gog sy. 

Tombs of Kings of Uganda, ii. 469 syq., 
470; of Kings of the Barotse, iv. 306 sy. 

Tona, or individual totem, i. 51 

ee traces of totemism in, ii. 177 
5g. 

Tongan form of the classificatory system 
of relationship, ii. 178 sy. 

Tongo, a Protean god, ii. 158 

Tongues of buffaloes tabooed, i. r1, 12 

Tonsure, monkish, iv. 230 

Toodaim or totem, iii. 50, 51 

Topinard, P., iv. 162 

Toreyas, totemism among the, iv. 295 

Toro, in Africa, ii. 530; tribe in New 
Guinea, totemism among the, 35 

Toronto, iii. 29 

Torres Straits, totemism in, ii. 1 sq. 

Tortoise, the great original, i. 6; totem, 
il, 234, 250, 288, 289, 298, 299, 316 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Tortoise or Turtle clan, origin of, iii. 18 
sq. See also Turtle 

Tortures of young warriors, ii. 135, 
147 

Totem, defined, i. 3 sg. ; derivation of 
name, 3, iii. 50; different kinds of, 
i. 4; plants as totems, 4, 11; sex, 4, 
47 SY., 470; distinguished from fetish, 
4, §2; descent from the, § sgg., 556, 
ii. 56, 58, 86, 88, 138, 187, 190, 565 
5qq., 604, 605, iii. 1B 5g., 32 54., 76, 
175, 273 37., $70, WW. 312; respect 
shewn for, i. 8 syq., ii. 10 5g., 27, 
30, 36 sg., 56, 219 59., 238, 316, 
397, iv. 278, 275, 281, 282, 283, 292; 
man identified with his, i. 9, 118 sgy., 
Y2I, 123, 159 59%, 454, 458, 472; 
spoken of as brother, 9, iv. 174; 
spoken of as father, i. 9, 13, 423, iv. 
278; split, i. 10, 77, ii. 397, 520, 536 
sg., iii. 100; not to be touched, i. 11 
sgy.; not to be looked at, 11, 12, 
13, ii. 370, 372, 373; sworn by, i. 
13, 2% sg.; dead, mourned, 155, iv. 
298; not spoken of directly, i. 16; 
penalties incurred by disrespect for, 
16 sgq. ; thought to enter body of sinner 
and kill him, 17 sg. ; appeasing the, 
18; diminished respect for, 19; 
benefits conferred by, 22 sg.; gives 
omens, 22 sy.; compulsion applied 
to, 23 sg.; assimilation of man to, 
25 sgg.; painted on bodies of clans- 
people, 29; carved or painted on 
weapons, huts, canoes, etc., 29 5g. ; 
return to the totem at death, 34 sg. ; 
figure of totem burned into the flesh, 
51; members of totem clans named 
after parts of their totems, 58 59. ; 
traditions of people who always married 
women of their own totem, 103, 123; 
eating the totem ceremonially, 109 
59g-, 120, 129, 207; reasons for not 
eating, 121 sgg. ; local totem centres, 
155, 189; customs in regard to 
eating the totem in Central Australia, 
230-238; traditions in regard to 
eating the totem in Central Australia, 
238-242; extensive prohibitions as to 
eating the totem among the north- 
central tribes of Australia, 233 sgg. ; 
fortuitous determination of the, 242 
sgg.; Central Australian traditions as 
to men marrying women of the same 
totem, 251 sy. ; belief that the totem 
can grow up inside a person and cause 
his death, 428 sq., 482; buried, ii. 30, 
127, iv. 278 ; supposed effect of eating 
the, ii. 397, 403, 404. 405, 406, 422, 
448 sg.. 473, 551; called grandfather, 
559, iv. 278; said to have helped 
ancestor, ii. 588; sacrificed, 588, 589 

INDEX 

3q., 604; sacrifice to, 604; social 
obligations imposed by the, iii. 48 sg. ; 
penalty for eating the, 91, 94; not to 
be named publicly, 352; custom of 
eating or not eating, iv. 6 sgg.; pro- 
tection of, 313; worshipped at mar- 
riage, 293 sg. See also Identification, 
Totemism, and Totems 

Totem animal, not killed or eaten, i. 8 
sqg. ; fed or kept in captivity, 14 sgg. ; 
reasons for sparing, 122; appears to 
women before childbirth, ii. 137 

poles or posts, i. 30, iii. 270 5g., 

290 59q., 345 

sacrament, i. 120, ii. 590, iv. 230 
5qq., 298, 319 
Totemic animal kept, iv. 278 
badges, i. 60 
body paintings, ii. 28, 37. See also 
Paintings 

burial, ii. 190 

carvings, ii. 126 

charms, iv. 280 

—— dances, i. $7 s5g., ii. 20, 126 59., 
370, ili. 76, 275 sg., 312, iv. 313 

marks on cattle, i. 13; On graves, 

31; On property, etc., 279 

marriage ceremonies, iv. 293 sg., 

295 

modes of wearing the hair, i. 26 sg., 
iii, 101, 103 

—— oaths, i. 21 5g. 

—— ordeal, i. 20 

paintings, i. 196 

society democratical and magical, 

iv. 30 

taboo, ceases at initiation, ii. 425; 
of the Nandi, 435 sgg.; of the 
Omahas, iii. 94 sgg.; institution of 
new, iv. 309 

Totemism defined, iv. 3 sq.; social side of, 
i. 4, 53 Syg.; as areligion, 4 sgg., 76 
syg., 81 Sgg.; a religious and social 
system, 4, 101; perhaps originates in 
desire for protection against super- 
natural danger, 31; advanced condition 
of totemism in Samoa and Polynesia, 
81 sg. democratic, 83; not found in 
Washington, Oregon, and California, 
84, nor among the Eskimo, ¢é7d.; geo- 
graphical diffusion of, 84 sgg., iv. 11 
sqq.; universal in Australia, i. 84; its 
diffusion in America, 84 sg.; in Africa, 
85; in Bengal, 85; in Siberia, 85 s¢.; 
in Melanesia, 86 ; traces of totemism 
in Madagascar, 85; in Philippine 
Islands, 86, and among the Dyaks, 
86; its effect on fauna and flora, 
87; Herbert Spencer's theory that 
it originated in nicknames, 87; 
literature of, 87 ; theories of its origin, 
87, 91 sgg-; canons of, ror; Central 

VOL. IV 

373 

Australian, its peculiar features, 102 
$qq7.; aS fp system of co-operative 
magic, 108 sg., 113, 116 sgg.; magical 
rather than religious, 115; explained 
by soul transference, 128 ; hereditary, 
156 sg., 161 ; local, 156 sg.; older than 
exogamous classes, 1 57 2. a, ; primitive 
type of, 157 sqqg.; a primitive theory of 
conception, 160 sqg., 482, ii. 84, iii. 
152, iv. 57 sgg.; transition from con- 
ceptional to hereditary, i. 161 sg., 167, 
ii. 99, iv. 129; decay Of, i. 227, 527 s¢., 
337 5g.; in Central Australia, 175 sgq.; 
of the Arunta, 186 syy.; originally 
independent of exogamy, 257; in 
South-Eastern Australia, 314 599.3 
in North-East Australia, 515 sgg.; of 
the exogamous subclasses, 527, 530, 
531; developing into a worship of 
heroes or gods, ii. 18 sgg.; independent 
of exogamy, 89; conceptional, in the 
Banks’ Islands, 89 sgg.; natural 
starting-point for, 89 syy.; origin of, 
89 sgg.; conceptional, older than 
hereditary, 99, iv. 129; developed 
into a religion, ii. 151 sg., 166 59.; 
subordinate importance of, 247; 
without exogamy, 404 sg., 433; in the 
United States and Canada, iii. 1 599.; 
not a religion or worship of animals 
and plants, 118, iv. § sg., 27 Sg., IOI 
5sg.; pure, unmixed with exogamy, 
g, 287; older than exogamy, 9, 74 
sg.; exogamous, 9; primitive, 10; 
practised by peoples at different stages 
of culture, 17 sgg.; in relation to 
agriculture and the domestication of 
animals, 19 sg. ; its influence on art, 
25-27; its influence on religion, 27 
sqq. in relation to magic and demo- 
cracy, 28 sgg.; social influence of, 
38 sgg. ; theories of the origin of, 40 
sgq.; the author's three theories of, 
52 sgg.; aS an organised system of 

magic in Central Australia, 55 sg. ; 
conceptional theory of, 57 syg., 
287 

Totemism and exogamy distinct and 
independent in origin, ii. 97 sg., 100, 
iv. 9, 287 

Totems, individual or personal, i. 4, 
49 599., 412, 448 57., 564, 482 sg., 
489, 497 59-. 534, 535» 536, 539, ii. 
84, 98 sg., 212, ill. 339, 370 5¢., 440, 
441, 442; Sex totems, 1. 4, 47 5g., 390 
ve 456 $99.1 479, 49% 496 sg., ii. 627, 
iti. 4565 cross, i. 14; not worshipped, 
20, ii. 11 5g., 166, 559; colours as, 
i. 24 sg.; inanimate objects as, 24 
sq. ; artificial, 25, 160, 254; images 
of totems moulded of earth, 40; 
evidence for totems of the phratries, 

2B2 

374 

76 sgg.; of subphratries, 78; how 
related to subtotems, 80 sg.; de- 
veloping into gods, 84 sg. ; magical 
ceremonies for multiplication of the, 
104 sgg., 183 5gg., 214 S9Y., 357 
59g. ; traditions of people who habit- 
ually killed and ate their totems, 
112; magical ceremonies for the 
control of the, 131 sgg.; invocation 
of, 144, 532 sg.; generally edible 
objects, 159, 253; intermingling of, 
160; mythical, 161; local segrega- 
tion of the totems among the Warra- 
munga, 249 sgy.; list of Central 
Australian, 252 sg.; bird mates of, 

254 sgg.; mortuary, 455; transfor- 
mation into, 565; subsidiary or 
secondary, ii. 3 59., 7, 14 599., 

375, 376. 473, 476 s9797., 516 sgg., 
519 sg.; assimilation of people to 
their, i. 25 sqq., ii. 8 sg. ; associated or 
linked, 3059., 48 59., 50.59., 52, 54 S¢-3 
identification of people with their, 107, 
iii. 106; called ‘‘ birds,” ii. 132; acces- 
sory, 136; omens drawn from, 137; 
offerings to totems to obtain children, 
21g; temporary, 520 sy. ; transmigra- 
tion into, i. 34 5s7., it. 56, 59, 187, 
388 sgn, 398, 551 sy., 560, 626, 629; 
used as crests, iii. 40; relation of people 
to their, 273; presents made by 
strangers to effigies of, 310, 352; 
‘* honorific,” 545 sgg. ; traditions as 
to origin of, 571% sg.; not gods, iv. 
§, 27 sy.; associated or linked, 276 
sqgq.; subsidiary, 280; effigics of 
totems worshipped at marriage, 293, 
294; legend of origin of, 308; split 
totems, origin of, i. 58 59., iv. 175. 
See also Artificial, Identification, Split, 
Subsidiary, Totem, azd Totemism 

Touch, prohibition to touch totem, i. 11 
Sg., ii. 219, 220, 221, 231, 290, 292, 
295, 301, 313, 372, iii. 90, 92, 94, 95, 
96, 97, 98 

Traditions as to men marrying women of 
the same totem, i. 103, 251 SY. 5 of 
people who habitually killed and 
ate their totems, It2, 238 599. ; 
as to origins of totemic clans, iii. 
81 5q. 

Transference of child to father’s clan, i. 
71 sqy.; of wife to husband's clan, 
71 sg.; of soul to external objects, 
124 sgg.; to animal at initiation, iv. 
54; Of travail-pangs to husband, etc., 
248 sqq. 

Transformation into totemic animals, i. 
565, iii. 76, 268, 269; of deities into 
animals, ii. 139 sg. ; into deer, 207; 
into crocodile, 208 

Transformer, the mythical, iii. 521 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Transition from female to male (maternal 
to paternal) descent, i. 71 sgg., iii. 
320 sq. 

from mother-kin to father-kin, ii. 

580 sg. See also Change, Descent, 

and Mother-kin 

from promiscuous totemic to exo- 
exogamous totemic marriages, i. 242 
sgq.; from conceptional to hereditary 
totemism, iv. 129 

Transmigration of the dead into their 
totems, i. 34 s¢., ii. 56, 59, 187, 398, 
551 sg., 560, 626, 629, iv. 232; of 
souls of medicine-men, i. 129; into 
sharks, ii. 173 ; into horned animals, 
203; into animals, 321 7.4, 389 sgg., 
634 5g.; Of souls, iii. 297 579., 365 5g., 
iv. 45 sgg. ; into tapirs, iii. 573 

Transmission of ceremonies, songs, etc., 
from tribe to tribe, i. 283 

Travail-pangs transferred from mother 
to father, etc., iv. 248 sgq. 

Travancore, ordeal in, i. 21 

Tree, a sanctuary fof murderers, ii. 
165 

—— burial, i. 202 

Tree-creeper, sex totem, i. 47 

Tree, god, ii. 157 

totems, iv. 278, 279, 283 

Trees, descent from, i. 11, ii. 197, 198 
sg. ; custom of marrying people to, i, 
32 5g., iv. 2t0 sgg.; the abodes of 
disembodied spirits, i. 189, 193 ; their 
power of impregnating women, ii. 
258, 259 

Tribal badges, i. 28 sg., 36; tattoo 
marks, iv. 197 

Triennial feast, i. 443 

Trobriand Islands, totemism in the, 

iv. 280 sg.; classificatory system of . 
relationship in the, 281 5g. 

Tsetsueka, ‘* the secrets,"’ iii. 518 

Tsetsauts, the, iii. 347, 359 579- 

Tsetse-fly, totem, ii. 371 

Tshi-speaking peoples of the Gold Coast, 
ii. 553 sgg.; their totemism, 556 sgq. ; 
negroes, their religion, iv. 36 sg. 

Tsimshians, i. 252, 253; totemism 
among the, iii. 306 sgg.; Secret 
Societies among the, 536 s¢¢. 

Tuaregs, the, ii. 602 

Tubetube, totemism in, ii. 48, 50 
59g.; women alone tattooed in, iv. 
202 

Tugeri or Kaya-Kaya, totemism among 
the, ii. 59. See Kaya-Kaya 

Tumanang, i. 8 

Tumas, holed stones, iii. 558 

Turis, totemism among the, ii. 299 

Turkana, the, ii. 430 5¢. ; age-grades 
among the, 431 

Turkey clan, i. 30 

INDEX 

Turks of Central Asia, their customs at 
childbirth, iv. 253 sg. 

Turmeric clan, ii. 274, 275 

Turner, Dr. George, ii. 152 599. 

Turra tribe, i. 475; its phratries and 
clans, 60 sg. 

Turribul tribe, i. 143 

Turtle clan, ii. rz ; of Iroquois, i. 5; of 
the Delawares, 6, 30; in Samoa, 19 ; 
precedence accorded to the Turtle clan 
in America, 58 2.3 ; importance of the, 
iii, 31 59., 39 

descent from, i. 5, 6, 7; grow- 

ing in man’s body, 18, 19, ii. 160; 

figure of, drawn to dispel fog, i. 23; 

in Huron mythology, 58; magica 

ceremonies to ensure a supply of, ii. 

12 59. 

god, ii. 160 : 

Turtle or Tortoise clan, origin of, iii. 
18 sg. See also Tortoise 

Turtles, Zuni ceremony with, i. 44 5¢., 
iv. 232 59. 

Tusayan, iii. 198 2.1, 202, 203, 206, 
207, 208, 214, 215 

Tuscarora tribe of Iroquois, their phratries 
and clans, i. 57, iii. 5 8 

Twana and Klallam tribes, iii. 405 
59q. 

Twins, i, 549, ii, 122; ceremonies at 
the birth of, 457; supposed to be 
salmon, iii. 337; thought to possess 
guardian spirits, 423 

Two-class system, i. 272, 274 59., ii. 
45, 70; devised to prevent the marriage 
ot brothers with sisters, i. go1 59-, 445, 
iv. 207; with female descent, i. 276 
599., 340 599. ; with male descent, 434 
59g. ; its effect on marriage, iv. 107; 
its origin, 113 s¢g. ; in Melanesia and 
North America, 133 

Tylor, E. B., i. 503, ii, 146, 151 2.}, 
iii, 52, 292 2.1, 370, iv. 38 2.}, 46 
n.¥, 53 2.2, 246, 247, 275 2.! 

Uainuma Indians, iii. 576 
Ualare, sacred animal, ii. 41 sg. 
Uaupes River, Indians of the, iii. 573 

5g. 

Uganda, ii. 463 sg.; worship of dead 
kings of, iv. 33 5g. See Baganda 

Ularaka, Urabunna equivalent of alche- 
ringa, i. 181 

Ulcers caused by eating totem, i. 17 

Uli-ma brotherhood, ii. 200 sg. 

Uli-siwa brotherhood, ii. 200 s¢. 

Umbaia, classificatory terms used by 
the, i. 3012 

tribe, exogamous classes of the, i. 
267 

Umbrella, totem, ii. 292 

Umkulunkulu, i. 150 

375 

Unawa, wife, husband, i. 289, 298 

Unborn calf, @ totem, ii. 403, 405 

Unchalka, grub totem, ceremony of, i. 
209 Sq. 

Unchastity of unmarried youth supposed 
to be fatal to king, ii. 623 

Uncle, maternal, his rights over his 
sister's son, ii. 66 ; and sister's son, 
relationship between, 75 ; his authority 
over his sister's children, 123 59., 194, 
409, iv. 289; at marriage, ii. 239, 245; 
rights of, over his sister's children 
among the Basutos, 379; access to wife 
of, 387; his relation to his sister's 
children, 443 sg.; right of nephew to 
use the wife of his, 510 sg. ; his author- 
ity older than that of father, 513; his 
right to marry his niece, s25, tii. 575, 
iv. 316; avoidance of husband's, ii. 
630; in N. American Indian society, 
iii, 25% negotiates marriage of his 
niece, 562 

Uncleanness of manslayer, ii. 444 

Underground, traditions that totemic 
ancestors came from, iii. 95, 120, iv. 
282 

Undivided commune, the, i, 514 

United States, totemism in the, iii. 

1 39g. 

Unlawful marriages, punishment of, i. 
54, 55, 381 sg. 393, 404, 425. 440, 
460 sg., 466 59., 476, 491 59g., 540, 
554. 557, 572, ii. 71, 121, 122, 126, 
128, 130, 131, 186, I91, 321, 410, 
473, 515, 562, iil, 48, 57, 552, iv. 
302 

Unlucky to see totem, ii. 557 

Unmatjera, a tribe of the Arunta nation, 
i. 186 2.2; their customs as to eating 
the totem, i. 233 

Unyamwezi, ii. 408 

Unyoro, ii. 513; rules as to lifé and 
death of kings of, 526 sgg. See also 
Banyoro 

Upoto, the, ii. 630 

Upsarokas or Crows, exogamous clans of 
the, iii, 153 

Urabunna, totemism of the, i. 176 sgq.; 
rules of marriage and descent among, 
176 sgq.; theory of reincarnation, 183 ; 
classificatory terms used by, 295 59¢.; 
group marriage among, 308 sq¢. 

Uramma, a village goddess, ii. 246 

Urville, J. Dumont d’, ii. 179 

Uwagona, goddess of fertility, ii. 603 

Vakkaliga, totemism among the, ii. 231 5g. 

Vallambans, the, ii. 225 

Vancouver's Island, i. 318, 409, 410, 
504, 507 

Vanua Levu (Fiji), traces of totemism in, 
ii, 134 5g. 

376 

Variability of the seasons in relation to 
magic, i. 269 s¢¢. 

Vega, F. Nufiez de la Vega, iii. 445 5¢., 
446 59. 

Vega, Garcilasso de la, iii. 579 sg. 

Veil, bride's, i. 33 

Veiling face at sight of totem, ii. 219, 220 

Veindavolani, marriageable, ii. 142, 144, 
149 

(Veniaminoff, 1., iii, 277 

Venison tabooed, ii. 203 sgg. 

Verdigris clan, iii. 96; prohibition to 
touch, i. 12, iii. go, 96, 97 sg. 

Vermilion clan. ii. 313 

Vetter, Konrad, ii. 56 

Veve, exogamous class, ii. 70 

Vicarious suffering, utility of, iv. 39 

Victoria, physical geography of, i. 316 

South-West, chiefs in, i. 330 59., 
tribes of, 463 sg. 

Victoria Nyanza Lake, ii. 406, 457, 461, 
463 

Viehe, G., ii. 359, 364 

Vindihya Mountains, ii. 218, 219, 329 

Virgin sacrificed to the Nile, iv. 2r2 sg. 

Virgin Birth, story of, iii. 293 2.1; belief 
in, iv. 64 

Virginia, Indians of, i. 44 

Visions, membership of Secret Societies 
determined by participation in common, 
iii. 460 5g., 548; produced by fasting, 
373» 395 57-1 494, 432, 437, 

Viti Levu (Fiji), traces of totemism in, i. 
134 59g. 

Vulture clan, ii. 558 

Vultures, sacred, ii. §74 

Waang (Crow), i. 433 

Wabemba, ii. 629, 630; sororate among 
the, iv, 148; bridal custom of the, 
236 

Wacicka Society, iii. 462 

Wagawaga, totemism at, ii. 47, 48599. ; 
mutual avoidance of relations by 
marriage at, iv. 283 

Wagopo, totemism among the, ii. 402 
sq. 

Wahconda or Wakanda, iii. 108, 398 

Wahehe, the, iii. 113; totemism among, 
ii, go4 5g. 

Waheia, the, totemism among, ii. 406 

Wahorohoro, the, ii. 629 

Wakamba, ii. 420. See A-Kamba 

Wakan, sacred or taboo, iii. 108 2.3, 
397, 398 

Wakan Wacipt, or Mystery Dance of 
the Dacotas, iii. 463 

Wakanda} iii. 108, 398 

Wak:shan or Wakashes, iii. 253 

Wakelbura tribe, i. 421 sgg.; its sub- 
totems, i. 79 sg. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Walen, A,, ii. 632 2.3 

Wallaby, imitation of, i. 39 

Wallace, A. R., on evils of inbreeding, 
iv. 162, 164 

Walpari tribe, exogamous classes of the, 
i. 266 

Walpi (Hualpi), Pueblo village, iii. 208, 
209, 210, 212, 213, 229 

Waneia, a god of the Baganda, ii. 495 

Wangi, a Baganda god, ii. 497 

Wanika mourn dead hyzna, i. 
442 Sg. 

Waninga, i. 211 2.4% 

Wankonde, the, 40x 1.! 

Wanyamwezi, the. revere snakes, ii. 
450 sg. ; hold hyzenas sacred, iv. 305 

War chief, iii. 159 

clans and Peace clans, iii. 129 

—-— gods incarnate in owls, pigeons, 
bats, dugs, and lizards, ii. 164 sy9. 

towns, iii. 157 Seve Warriors 

Wards, separate, of totem class, i. 75 

Warramunga, the, ceremony of water- 
snake, i. 144 5g.; c@remony with arm- 
bone of dead, 202; sacred dramatic 
ceremonies of, 213 5sy., 220 sgg. } eX- 
tensive totemic prohibitions of, 23459¢.; 
exogamous classes of, 235 2.7, 265 sy.3 
rules of marriage and descent xmong, 
265 sg. ; classificatory terms used by, 
300; locat segregation of the exo- 
gamous classes and totems among, 
246 sgg.; their local exogamy, iv. 
168 

1S, ii. 

Black Snake totem, i. 

222 Sg., 234 Sy. 

nation, i. 186 2.2 

Warren, William W., fii, 49, 51, 52, 
53) 54, 57, 382 599. 
Warriors, rules of life of Masai, ii, 414; 
guardian spirits of, 416, 420, 426 
Warriors’ Association of the Arapahoes, 
iii. 479 sgg.; of the Cheyennes, 
485 sg. 

Wart hog clan, ii. 551 

Washing essential to the acquisition of a 
guardian spirit, iii. 407, 413, 419, 434 

Washington State, totemism not found 
in, i. 84; guardian spirits among the 
Indians of, tii. 405 s¢y. 

Watabwas, the, ii. 630 

Watchandies, the, iv. 273 

Water, at marriage ceremonies, i, 33; 
restrictions on use of, observed by 
members of the Water totem, 231 s¢., 
232, 233; Offerings cast into, iii. 449 

clan, i. 218 

—— totem, i. 24, 113, 254 

** Water of peace,” iv. 298 

Water-fowl as representatives of corn 
goddess, iii. 140 

Water-lilies used as food, i. 203 2.1 

I92 Sg.y 

3 INDEX 

Water-snake, mythical, i. 144 sy. 
Water-spirit, marriage to, iv. 213 
Water-wagtails, sacred, iv. 37 
Wathi-Wathi tribe, i. 383, 384, 386 
Watumbwes, the, ii. 630 

Weapons, characteristics of Australian, i. 
343 

Weaving, iii. 205, 260 

Webster, Prof. Hutton, iii. 457, 458 

Weeks, Rev. J. H., ii. 617, 618, 623 

Welchman, Dr., ii. 113 

Were -wolves, iii. 549; were-tigers, etc., 
ii. 599 sg. 

Westermarck, E., iv. 138 2. % 301, 307; 
his theory of the origin of exogamy, 
92 599. . 

Wheat clan, ii. 273 

Whirlwinds, spirits in, i. 191 7.? 

Whistles to represent voices of spirits, iii. 
516, 524, 543 

White Bat, totem, ceremony of the, i. 
207 Sg. 

Cockatoo, totem, i. 226, 454, 462, 

463, 465 ° 

Cockatoos, magical ceremony for 

the multiplication of, i, 226 

hair caused by eating totem, i. 17 

or Peace towns, iii, 157 

Whydah, kingdom of, ii. 584; worship 
of python at, 585 

Widows, silence imposed on, iv. 237 

Wied, Prince of. See Maximilian 

Wife, transferred to husband’s clan, i. 
71 sg.; of wife’s brother, avoidance 
of, ii, 388 

Wife and husband forbidden to speak 
to each other, i. 468 , 

Wife-purchase, i. 72, ii. 

18, 197, 199, 

347, 379 

Wife's family, husband lives with, i. 72 

father, avoidance of, ii. 17, 26, iii. 
305; father and mother’s brother, 
identity of name for, ii. 227 

mother, avoidance of, i. 285 7.3, 
286 2., 395, 404 Sy., 416 5g., 440, 
451, 469, 492, 503, 506, 541, 565, 
572, ii. 17, 26, 76 sgg., 187, 189, 
368, 385, 400 sg., 403, 412, 424, 461, 
508, 522, 622 sy., 630, iii. 108 5gg., 
136, 148, 247, 277 sy., 305, 361 5y., 
498, 583, iv. 109, 273, 305, 314 SY. ; 
marriage with, ii. 323, iii. 247; sexual 
intercourse with, 113 

parents, avoidance of, ii. 

124, 
581 

sisters, right to marry several, i. 
577 4.7, ii, 143 Sg., 245, 250, 272, 
291, 352, 384, 451, 453, 461. 463, 
522, 630, iii, 19, 65, 85, 108, 127, 
136, 148, 154, 155, 246, 354, 498, 
iv. 139 syg., 292, 315; avoidance of, 
283, 284 

377 

Wife’s totem sespected by husband, ii. 
27, 29, 53, fs See also Wives 

Wiimbaio tribe, i. 390 . : 

Wild boar, totem, ii. 375 

—— bull, totem, ii. 609 

Wild Cat people, tradition as to, i. 251 
5g. 

Cat, totem, i. 126 sg. 

Goose clan, ii. 299, 301, 312 

Wilken, G. A., ii. 216, 217, iv. 53, 161, 
194, 288, 291 sg.; his theory of . 
totemism, 45 sy. 

Williams, Thomas, ii. 135 

Willoughby, Rev. W. C., ii. 370, 374, 
375 

Willyaroo, initiatory rite, iv. 201 

Wilson, Rev. Edward F., iii. 388 

Wilya tribe, i. 387 

Wimmera District, i. 316, 451 

Wind, capture of the spirit of the Wind, 
ii. 486 sg. ; ceremony to make, i. 24, 
iii, 105 

clan, i. 132, ii. 478, 486 

—— people, iii. 105, 127; make wind, 
i. 24 

—— totem, i. 24, 102, 254, 328, ii. 
478 

Wing bone of eagle, drinking through, 
iii. 518, 526 

Wingong, i. 8 

Winnebagoes, totemism of the, iii. 131 
sqy.; medicine feast of, 466 sgq. 

Winter, change of the social organisation 
of the Kwakiutl in, iii. 333 s¢.; spirits 
appear only in, 435, 517; the season 
for the ritualistic performances, 507, 
509, 514, 517 Sg. 

ceremonial, iii. 435 

names, iii. 517 

Solstice ceremony, iii. 213 

Witches, precaution against, i. 31 

Witchetty Grub people, i. 199 

totem, i. 105 sg.; ceremony of the, 
210 

Witchetty grubs, magical ceremony for 
multiplying, i, ros sg.; custom of 
eating them ceremonially, 109 sg. ; 
totem centre of the, 196 

Wiradjuri nation, i. 405 syq. 

Wives, temporary, i. 63, ii. 71, 421; 
primary and secondary, i. 364 599., il. 
264 sg.; purchased, i. 72, ii, 18, 197, 
199, 347, 379; captured, 426 59., 
45°, 475, 476; exchanged, 426, 477, 
499, 572 syy., ii. 539; lent, i. 426, 
463, li. 415, 421, iii, 472; lent as a 
magical rite, 140 2.1; modes of ob- 
taining, i. 540 sg.; procured from ¢. 
distance, 548; of sacred serpent, 586 ; 
put away after birth of two children, 
ii. 630, iv. 309: obtained by exchange 
of sisters, 80. See also Wife 

378 

Wogait tribe, i. 576 

Wolf, descent from, i. 5; buried at 
Athens, 15 sg.; not spoken of directly, 
16; fat of, 32 

clan in Texas, i. 44; of Omahas, iii. 

96 sg. 

class or phratry among the Tlingits, 

iti, 265 sgq. 

crest, iii, 267, 268 

dance of the Ahts, iii. 503 ; dances 

of the Kwakiutl, 529 sg. 

skins, men dressed in, i, 26; worn 
by dancers, iii. 343 

——~— town, i. 12. See also Wolves 

Wolgal tribe, i. 392, 393, 394 5¢- 

Wollunqua, mythical snake, i. 144 sg. 

Wolves, imitation of, i, 44; ceremony 
at killing, iii, 190 sg. ; superstitions 
about, 190 sg. ; souls of dead hunters 
in, 336; initiation by, 504 sy., 527 

Woman, gives birth to animal, i. 7 sg. ; 
who gave birth to crayfish, story of, ii. 
159,167; who gave birth to a tortoise, 
story of, 494; head of household, iii. 
36; the Old, Mother of the Corn, 140 
Syq-, 491 sgg.; Who gave birth to 
snakes, 213; who suckled a wood- 
worn, 269; oldest, head of clan, iv. 288 

Women, give birth to animals, i. 16, ii. 
610, 612; food restrictions on, i. 19 ; 
alone tattooed, 29 7.3, iv. 202 sgy.; 
blood of, avoided, i. 49 2.3; dressed 
as men at marriage, 73, iv. 255 sgg. ; 
images of nakel, in rites of fertilisa- 
tion, ii. 38, 39; who gave birth to 
animals, legends of, 56, 58 sg.; veil 
their faces at sight of their totem, 219, 
220; social superiority of, among the 
Garos, 323; veiled, 539; fewer than 
men, iii. 358; hard work of, 358 sg. ; 
guardian spirits of, 377, 416; dances 
of Kwakiutl, 531 sg. ; excess of women 
over men in some countries, iv. 84 

Women and men, difference between 
language of, i. 64 2., iv. 23759. 

Women-councillors, iii. 35, 36 s¢. 

Women’s language different from men’s, 
i. 64 #., iv. 237 sg.; houses, 284; 
clans and men’s clans, 299 

Wonghibon tribe, i. 414 sgy. 

Wonkanguru tribe, i. 377 sy. 

Woodford, C. M., ii. 109 

Woodpecker, worshipped, ii. 174 ; omens 
drawn from the, 422; as a familiar, 
iii. 406; as a guardian spirit, 408 

crest, iii. 284, 287, 297 

totem, ii. 289, 290 

Woollen rug, tabooed, i. 12 

Woonamurra tribe, i. 526 

Worgaia tribe, the, exogamous classes of, 
i. 268; classificatory terms used by, 
300 sg. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

‘Worms, ceremony to keep from corn, i. 
23, iii, 104 sg. 

Worship, of animals in Peru, iii. 577 
sqq.; of totems at marriage, iv. 293 
5g., 295; of totems, incipient, 313 ; 
of dead kings among the Baganda, ii. 
469 sgqg.; of dead kings among the 
Barotse, iv. 306 sg. 

Wotjoballuk, burial customs of, i. 35; 
their phratries and clans, 61 

tribe, i. 454 sgy,; its subtotems, 
80, 135 

Wounded men, seclusion of, iv. 225 

Wulmala tribe, exogamous classes of 
the, i. 266 

Wurunjerri tribe, i. 435, 437 

Wyandots or Hurons, totemism among 
the, iii. 29 sgg. See Hurons 

Wyse, William, iv. 175 

Yabim, the, ii. 56 sg. 

Ya-itma-thang tribe, i. 392 sg. 

Yakuts, indications of totemism among 
the, i. 85 sg., ii. 34@ sy. 

Yam clan, ii. 491, 579 

people, iv. 285 

religion developed out of totemism 
in island of, iv. 30 sg. 

Yams, a magical ceremony to make them 
grow, i. 219 5¢., ii. 34, 38 5g. 

Yantruwanta tribe, i. 378 sq.; group 
marriage among the, 367 

Yao, the, of German East Africa, ii, 406 

Yaos, the, of British Central Africa, ii. 
399, 401 

Yapura River, Indians of the, iii, 576 

Yaraikanna tribe, i. 535 s7., 538, 539 

Yaurorka tribe, i. 378 

Yeerung, sex totem, i. 47 

Yehl or Yeshl, the mythical Raven, iii. 
265, 266, 293 2.1 

Yellow Knives or Copper Indians, iii. 
346 

Yendakarangu or Yandairunga tribe, 
group marriage among the, i. 368 
54... 374 54g. 

Yerkla-mining tribe, i. 472 sy. 

Yerrunthully tribe, i. 517, 528 sg. 

Yezidis, the, iv. 179; abominate blue, 
i. 25 

Y-Kia, exogamy among the, ii. 339 

York, Cape, i. 535 

Yoruba-speaking peoples of the Slave 
Coast, ii. 581 sg. 

Ysabel, totemism in, ii. 113 sg. 

Yuin tribe, i. 488 sgg. 

Yukon River, iii. 251, 252 

Yule, Col. Henry, i. 68, ii. 216 2.2 

Yuchis, totemism among the, iv. 311 s¢q. 

Zambesi, tribes of the Upper, ii. 391 
Zamolxis, birth of, i. 31 sg. 

INDEX 379 

Zaparo Indians of Ecuador, iii. 577 380 sgg.; Sororate among the, iv. 
Zebra flesh, tabooed, ii, 436 145; superstitions as to foods, 304 
—— clan, ii. 396, 399 s¢. Zufi ceremony! with turtles, i. 44 59., iv. 
--— totem, ii. 428 232 sg. 

Zeus married to an oak, i. 33 Indians, their totemic clans, iii. 

Zinyau, a dance in Angoniland, ii. 398 216 
Zoroaster, i. 356 village of, iii. 204, 208, 215 sg. 
Zulus, traces of totemism among the, ii. | Zufiian language, iii. 207 

THE END 

Printed by R. & R. CLarK, Limitep, Edinburgh. 

TLL 
00083142 

Digitized with financial assistance from 
An Initiative by 

1-7 Parekh, 

FOUNDATION 

WITH YOU, RIGHT THROUGE 

on 28 December, 2018 

— 
ell 
—. 

Ne : WA 
, Ch 
’ | 
eS ANA 
> | } 
L) . | 
JS Zin! :
