Totemism and Exogamy, Vol. 3 (James George Frazer, 1910)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/india.history.resource.92859). Vol. 3 of Frazer's four-volume treatise - exogamy, totemic taboos and the origin of the clan system.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

000 

BOnEAY BRANCH 4 

2) 

R 
OF THE q 

Town Hatt, Bossay. ‘ 

a 
¢ 
ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY. { 
ip 
i 

EOF RECS RECT RRSCT BIOS BS: 

Digitized with financial assistance from the 
Government of Maharashtra 
on 23 January, 2019 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
LONDON + BOMBAY + CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

NEW YORK « BOSTON - CHICAGO 
ATLANTA + SAN ERANCISCO 

THE MACMILLAN CO, OF CANADA, Ltb. 
TORONTO 

Totemism and Exogamy 

A Treatise on Certain Early Forms 

of Superstition and Society 

BY 

J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Lirt.D., F.B.A. 

FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 
PROFESSOR OF SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL 

3141 
ve 

IN FOUR VOLUMES 
VOL. Ill 

MACMILLAN AND CO, LIMITED 
ST. MARTIN’S STREET, LONDON 

IgI0O 

{ 
ILL 
i 

00083141 

CONTENTS 

AN EfHNOGRAPHICAL SURVEY OF TOTEMISM (concluded) Pp. 1-583 

CuapTer XVI.—ToreEMisM IN THE UNITED STATES AND 
CANADA. , ‘ : ; ; . Pp. 31-250 

§ 1. 
§ 2. 
§ 3. 
§ 4. 
§ 5. 
§ 6. 

87. 
§ 8. 

§ 9. 
§ Io. 

git. 

§ 12. 
§ 13. 
§ 14. 

Distribution of the Totemic Tribes, pp. 1-3. 

Totemism among the Iroquois, pp. 3-29. 

Totemism among the Hurons or Wyandots, pp. 29-38. 

Totemism among the Algonkin Tribes on the Atlantic, pp. 39-46. 
Totemism among the Ojibways, pp. 46-64. 

Totemism among other Algonkin Tribes of the Great Lakes, pp. 
64-68, 

Totemism among the Algonkin Tribes of the Mississippi, pp. 68-84. 

Exogamy among the Algonkin Tribes of the Rocky Mountains, pp. 
84 sg. 

Totemism among the Omahas, pp. 85-117. 

Totemism among the other Dacotan Tribes of the Missouri, pp. 
117-155. 

Totemism among the Gulf Nations, pp. 155-195. 

Totemism among the Pueblo Indians, pp. 195-241. 

Exogamy among the Navahoes and Apaches, pp. 241-247. 

Traces of Totemism among the Mohaves, pp. 247-250. 

Cuapter XVIJ.—Toremism in NoRTH-WeEsT AMERICA 

§ 1. 
§ 2. 
§ 3. 
§ 4. 
§ 5. 
§ 6, 

Pp. 251-369 
The Races of North-West America, pp. 251-263. 
Totemism among the Tlingits, pp. 264-278. 
Totemism among the Haidas, pp. 278-306. 
Totemism among the Tsimshians, PP. 306-317. 
Totemism among the Kwakiutl, pP- 317-338. 
Totemism among the Salish, pp- 338-345. 

Vv 

vi 

§ 7. 
g 8. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY 

Totemism among the Tinnehs (Dénés), pp. 345-368, 
Reported Totemism among the Eskimo, pp. 368 59. 

CuHaPTeER XVIII.—Guarptan Spirits AMONG THE 
AMERICAN INDIANS. ‘ : . - Pp. 370-456 

§ 1. 
§ 2. 
§ 3. 
' $4. 
§ 5. 
§ 6. 

§ 7. 

§ 8. 
§ 9. 
§ 10. 
§ 11. 
§ 12. 
§ 13. 
§ 14. 
§ 15. 
§ 16, 
§ 17. 
§ 18. 

Guardian Spirits in general, pp. 370-372. 

Guardian Spirits among the Algonkins, pp. 372-396. 
Guardian Spirits among the Sioux or Dacotas, pp. 396-401. 
Guardian Spirits among the Creek Indians, pp. 401-403. 
Guardian Spirits among the Californian Indians, pp. 403-405. 

Guardian Spirits amqng the Indians of Washington State, pp. 405- 
e 
409. 
Guardian Spirits among the Salish Indians of Vancouver's Island 
and British Columbia, pp. 409-412. .d 

Guardian Spirits among the Thompson Indians, pp. 413-418. 
Guardian Spirits among the Lillooets, pp. 418-421. 

Guardian Spirits among the Shuswap, pp. 421-428. 

Guardian Spirits among other Salish Tribes, pp. 429-433- 
Guardian Spirits among the Kwakiutl, pp. 433-436- 

Guardian Spirits among the Haidas and Tlingits, pp. 436-439. 
Guardian Spirits among the Tinnehs or Dénés, pp. 439-442. 
Guardian Spirits among the Eskimo, pp. 442 59. 

Guardian Spirits among the Central American Indians, Pp» 443-447. 
Guardian Spirits among the South American Indians, pp. 448 sg. 
Observations on American Guardian Spirits, pp. 449-456. 

CHAPTER XIX.—SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE INDIANS 
OF THE UNITED STATES. : : . Pp. 457-498 

§ 1. 
§ 2. 
§ 3. 
§ 4. 
§ 5. 

Secret Societies in general, pp. 457-459. 

Secret Societies among the Siouan or Dacotan Indians, pp. 459-474- 
Secret Societies among the Algonkin Indians, pp. 475-499- 

Secret Societies among the Arickarees, pp. 490 sg. 

Secret Society among the Maidus of California, pp. 491-498. 

CHAPTER XX.—-SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE INDIANS 

oF NorTH-WEST AMERICA . : : . Pp. 499-550 
§ 1. General Features of these Societies, pp. 499-504- 
§ 2. Secret Societies among the Indians of Vancouver Island, pp. 504- 
508. 
§ 3. Secret Societies among the Shuswap, pp- 508-510, 
§ 4. Secret Societies among the Bella Coolas, pp. §10-512. 
§ 5. Secret Societies among the Kwakiutl, pp. 512-536. 

CONTENTS vii 

“96, Secret Societies among the Tsimshians, pp. 536-539. 
§ 7. Secret Societies among the Niskas, pp- 539-544- 

§ 8. Secret Societies among the Haidas, pp. 544 59- 

§ 9. Secret Societies among the Tinnehs, pp. 545-547- 

§ 10. Observations on the Secret Societies of the North American Indians, 
PP. 547-559. 

CHAPTER XXI.—ToTEMISM AMONG THE INDIANS OF 
CENTRAL AMERICA . . : ‘ - Pp. 551-556 

§ 1. Totemism among the Indians of Costa Rica, pp. 551-554. 

§ 2. Traces of Totemism among the Guaymi Indians of Panama, pp. 
554-556. 0 

CuHaPTER XXII.—TorTEmMISM AMONG THE INDIANS OF 
SourH AMERICA oe) wee Pp. 559-583 

§ 1. Totemism among the Goajiros, pp. 557-563. 
§ 2. Totemism among the Arawaks of British Guiana, pp. 564-571. 

§ 3. Traces of Totemism among other Tribes of South America, PP» 
571-583. 

AN ETHNOGRAPHICAL SURVEY 
OF TOTEMISM (Concluded) 

CHAPTER XVI 

TOTEMISM IN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA 

§ 1. Distribution of the Totemic Tribes 

THE institution of totemism was first observed and described Totemism 
by Europeans among the Indian tribes of North America, ete 

and it is known to have prevailed widely, though by no tribes to 

the east 
means universally, among them. Within the great area orine 

now, covered by the United States and Canada the system MississiDpl, 
who li 

was ‘most highly developed by the tribes to the east of the in settled 

Mississippi, who lived in settled villages and cultivated the ad 

soil; it was practised by some but not all of the hunting the soil; 
tribes, who roamed the great western prairies, and it was tei . 
wholly unknown to the Californian Indians, the rudest repre- by some, 

sentatives of the Redskin race in North America, who had wate alt, 

1 On this subject Mr. James Mooney, 
speaking of the Arapahoes, the most 
westerly of the Algonkin tribes, ob- 
serves: ‘* There seems to be no possible 
trace of a clanor gentile system among 
the Arapaho, and the same remark 
holds good of the Cheyenne, Kiowa, 
and Comanche. It was once assumed 
that all Indian tribes had the clan 
system, but later research shows that 
it is lacking over wide areas in the 
western territory. It is very doubtful 
if it exists at all among the prairie 
tribes generally. Mr. 
has known and studied the Cheyenne 
for half a lifetime, states positively that 
they have no clans, as the term is 
usually understood. This agrees with 
the result of personal ‘investigations 
and the testimony of George Bent, a 

VOL. HI 

Ben Clark, who ° 

Cheyenne half-blood, and the best 
living authority on all that relates to 
his tribe. With the eastern tribes, 
however, and those who have removed 
from the east or the timbered country, 
as the Caddo, the gentile system is so 
much a part of their daily life that it is 
one of the first things to attract the 
attention of the observer ” (J. Mooney, 
““The Ghost-dance Religion,” /our- 
teenth Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology, Part ii. (Washington, 1896), 
p. 956). The absence of totemic clans 
among the Arapahoes is confirmed by 
another investigator, See <A. L. 
Kroeber, ‘The Arapaho,” Budletin of 
the American Museum of Natural 
History, vol, xviii. Part i. (New York, 
1902) p. 8. 

2. LOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cHiap. 

hunting 
tribes of 
the western 
prairies ; 
and it was 
wholly 
unknown 
to the rude 
savages of 
California. 

made little progress in the arts of life and in particular were 
wholly ignorant of agriculture. Again, totemism flourishes 
among the Pueblo Indians of the South-West, who live in 
massively-built and fortified towns of brick or hewn stone 
and diligently till the soil, raising abundant crops of cereals 
and fruits, and whose ancestors even constructed canals on a 
large scale to irrigate and fertilise the thirsty land under the 
torrid skies of Arizona and New Mexico! It is certainly 
remarkable that over this immense region, extending across 
America from the Atlantic to the Pacific, the institution of 
totemism should be found to exist and flourish among tribes 
which have made some progress in culture, while it is wholly 
absent from others which have lagged behind at a lower 
level of savagery. As it appears unlikely that these rude 
savages should have lost all traces of totemism if they had 
once practised it, while the system survives among their 
more cultured brethren, we seem driven to conclude that 

1 Handbook of American Indians 
North of Mexico, i. (Washington, 
1907) pp. 24-26, 80, 191, 809. As 
to the Pueblo Indians, their archi- 
tecture, agriculture, and other arts of 
life, see H. H. Bancroft, 7he Native 
Races of the Pacific States, i, 526 sgq. 3 
and below, pp. 195 sgg. Totemism 
‘appears to have been unknown among 
all the Indian tribes who inhabited"the 

Pacific slope of the Rocky Mountains 
within the area of the United States. 

and North-western Oregon, observes : 
‘*No division of tribes into clans is 
observable, nor any organization similar 
to the eastern tribes, neither have the 
Indians of this Territory emblematical 
distinctions resembling the totem” 
(Contributions to North American 
Ethnology, i, (Washington, 1877) p. 
184). Again, Mr. A. S, Gatschet 
says that the Klamath Indians of 
South-western Oregon ‘‘are absolutely 
ignorant of the gentile or clan system 

‘‘The Indians west of the Rocky 
Mountains seem to be, on the whole, 
inferior to those east of that chain, 
In stature, strength, and activity, they 
are much below them. Their social 
organization is more imperfect. The 
two classes of chiefs, those who preside 
in time of peace, and those who direct 
the operations of war,—the ceremony 
of initiation for the young men,—the 
distinction of clans or totems,—and 
the various important festivals which 
exist among the eastern tribes, are un- 
known to those of Oregon. Their 
conceptions on religious subjects are of 
a lower cast” (H, Hale, United States 
Exploring Expedition, Ethnography 
and Philology (Philadelphia, 1846), p. 
199). Again, George Gibbs, speaking 
of the tribes of Western Washington 

as prevalent among the Haida, Tlingit, 
and the Eastern Indians of North 
America” (Zhe Alamath Indians of 
South-western Oregon (Washington, 
1890), p. cvi.) (Contributions to North 
American Ethnology, vol. ii. Part i.). 
As to the absence of totemism among 
the Californian Indians, see S. Powers, 
Tribes of Caltfornia (Washington, 
1877), p. § (Contributions to North 
American Ethnology, vol. iii.) ; Hand- 
book of American Indians North of 
Mexico, i. 191. As to the Maidu, a 
Californian tribe, Mr. R. B. Dixon 
says: ‘‘No trace has been found of 
any gentile or totemic grouping” 
(‘The Northern Maidu,” Budletin of 
the American Aluseum of Natural 
History, vol. xvii. Part tii, May 1905, 
p- 223). 

XVI DISTRIBUTION OF THE TOTEMIC TRIBES 3 

among the Indians of North America totemism marks a 
degree of social and intellectual progress to which the more 
backward members of the Redskin family have not yet 
attained. 

§ 2. Totemism among the Iroquois 

At the time when America was discovered and for The 
centuries afterwards the Confederacy of the Iroquois was i 
the most powerful Indian nation to the north of Mexico. Iroquois, 
The six tribes which composed thg League were perhaps ey 
inferior in the arts of life to some of the southern tribes who of six tribes, 
dwelt towards the Gulf of Mexico; but they were second 
to none in political organisation, statecraft, and military 
prowess. While they waged war, if necessary, with relent- 
less cruelty, the aim of their confederacy was wise and 
statesmanlike ; it was to establish a widespread peace among 
the surrounding tribes, extinguishing war and substituting 
the regular forms of civil government for the uncertainties 
and excesses of private feuds. According to native tradition 
the League was founded about the middle of the fifteenth 
century by the sage and benevolent chief Hiawatha, the 
hero of Longfellow’s poem. It reached the height of its 
power towards the latter end of the seventeenth century, 
when its dominion extended over the greater parts of the 
present States of New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio, together 
with portions of Canada to the north of Lake Ontario. 

All the Iroquois tribes were sedentary and agricultural, An the 
depending on the chase for only a small part of their sub- Le ane 
sistence. Their staple food was maize. At intervals vary- sedentary 
ing from ten to twenty years they shifted the sites of their 20) 28" 
towns, when the supply of fuel in the neighbourhood was 
exhausted and the diminished crops under their primitive 

mode of agriculture shewed the need of fresher soil. The 

use of metals was unknown to the Iroquois; they felled 

trees and hewed timber by means of fire and stone chisels. 

Their language belongs to what is called the Huron-Iroquois 
family, the tribes of which in historical times. have occupied 

a long irregular area of inland territory stretching from 
Canada to North Carolina. The speech of all these 
tribes, including the Hurons, the Attiwandaronks or Neutral 

The land 
of the 
Iroquois. 

The 
Mohawks, 

The 
Oneidas. 

The 
Onondagas. 

The 
Cayugas, 

4 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Citar. 

a 

Nation, the Eries, and the Andastes or Conestogas, as well 
as the Iroquois, shewed a close affinity, and there can be 
little doubt that the ancestors of the tribes once dwelt 
together in a common home. That home, according to the 
traditions of all the surviving tribes, the Hurons, the Iroquois, 
and the Tuscaroras, was the lower valley of the St. 
Lawrence River. 

The Iroquois were first discovered by the Dutch in 
1609. Till then they had dwelt enshrouded in the great 
forests which in thosee days overspread the country now 
comprised within the State of New York. At the time of 
their discovery and for about a century later the con- 
federacy was composed of five tribes, namely the Mohawks 
or Caniengas, as they should properly be called, the Oneidas, 
the Onondagas, the Cayugas, and the Senecas or rather 
Sonontowanas. Of these tribes, the Mohawks possessed 
the Mohawk River and covered Lake George and Lake 
Champlain with their flotillas of large canoes, which they 
handled with the boldness and skill of practised boatmen. 
West of them the Oneidas held the small river and lake 
which bear their name, the first in a series of beautiful 
lakes joined by interlacing streams like fish immeshed in 
nets of silver. Still further west the Onondagas, the central 
and in some respects the ruling tribe of the league, owned 
the two lakes of Onondaga and Skeneateles, together with 
the common outlet of this inland lake system, the Oswego 
River, to its issue into Lake Ontario. Still moving west- 
ward, the lines of trail and river led to the long winding 
reaches of Lake Cayuga, about which were clustered the 
towns of the tribe who gave their name to the sheet of 

1 Horatio Hale, Zhe Jroguotis Book 
of Rites (Philadelphia, 1883), pp. 9 

former was brought into frequent inter- 
course with these Indians and was 

sqg., 18 sqgg., 50, 177 sgq.3 Lewis 
H. Morgan, League of the Ho-dé-no- 
sau-nee, or Iroquois (Rochester, 1851), 
pp. 3 599., 358, 3703; t@., Ancient 
Society (London, 1877), pp. 123 
sqq. 3 Handbook of American Indians 
North of Mexico, i. 615 sgqg. Our 
principal modern authorities on the 
Iroquois are the two distinguished 
American ethnologists Lewis H. 
Morgan and Horatio Hale. The 

adopted into one of their tribes (the 
Senecas). Compare Henry R. School- 
craft, Motes on the Jroquots (Albany, 
1847), pp. 44.599. ; R. M. Beauchamp, 
“The Origin and Antiquity of the 
New York Iroquois,” The American 
Antiquarian and Oriental Journal, 
viii. (1886) pp. 358-366; <Archao- 
logical Report, 1898 (Toronto), pp- 54 
59. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS 5 

water; and beyond them, over the wide expanse of hill and 
dale .surrounding Lakes Seneca and Canandaigua, were 
scattered the populous villages of the Senecas. The whole 
of this territory between the Hudson River and Lake 
Eyrie, embracing the best parts of the modern State of 
New York, was the home country of the Iroquois as 
distinguished from the vast territories to north, south, east, 
and west which they held by the slender tenure of Indian 
conquest and occupied only in the season of the hunt., But 
New York was their hereditary coyntry, the centre of their 
power, and the seat of their council-fires. Here amid the 
silence of the virgin forests were their villages, their fields 
of maize and tobacco, their fishing and hunting grounds, and 
the burial-places of their fathers. The Long House, to 
which they likened their confederacy, opened its’ eastern 
door upon the beautiful Hudson River and its western on 
the roar of Niagara. It was a noble patrimony, nor were 
they insensible of its natural and political advantages. It 
was their boast that they occupied the highest part of the 
continent. Situated on the head-waters of the Hudson, 
the Delaware, the Susquehanna, the Ohio, and the St. 
Lawrence, flowing in every direction to the sea, they held 
in their hands the gates of the country and could through 
them swoop down on any point at will; while valleys, 
divided by no mountain barriers, and short portages between 
the upper waters of the rivers, afforded them the means of 
easy communication among themselves,’ 

To this league of five tribes the Tuscaroras, expelled 
from North Carolina, were admitted as a sixth tribe in 
1712, and ever afterwards they were regarded as a 
constituent member of the confederacy, though they were 
not admitted to a full equality with the older members of 
the league. A portion of the Oneida territory to the north 
of the Susquehanna River was assigned to them as their 
domain. 

The progress in the material arts of life which the 
Iroquois had made at the time when they were first 

1, H. Morgan, League of the Lroquois Book of Rites, pp. 9 5g. 
Troguois, pp. 38-413; %., Ancient 2L, H. Morgan, League of the 
Society, pp. 125 sg.; H. Hale, Zhe Lroguois, p. 44. 

The 
Senecas, 

The com- 
manding 
situation 
of the 
home of the 
Troquois. 

The 
Tuscaroras, 

Progress 
made 

by the 
Troquois 
in the 
material 
arts. 

The large 
communal 
houses 

of the 
Troquois. 

6 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuapP. 

discovered by Europeans has been concisely described by 
L. H. Morgan, our chief modern authority on the nation. 
He says: “When discovered the Iroquois were in the 
Lower Status of barbarism, and well advanced in the arts 
of life pertaining to this condition. They manufactured 
nets, twine, and rope from filaments of bark; wove belts 
and burden straps, with warp and woof, from the same 
materials; they manufactured earthen vessels and pipes 
from clay mixed with siliceous materials and hardened by 
fire, some of which were oramented with rude medallions ; 
they cultivated maize, beans, squashes, and tobacco, in 
garden beds, and made unleavened bread from pounded 
maize which they boiled in earthen vessels; they tanned 
skins into leather with which they manufactured kilts, leggins 
and moccasins; they used the bow and arrow and war- 
club as their principal weapons; used flint stone and bone 
implements, wore skin garments, and were expert hunters 
and fishermen. They constructed long joint-tenement 
houses large enough to accommodate five, ten, and twenty 
families, and each household practised communism in living ; 
but they were unacquainted with the use of stone or adobe- . 
brick in house architecture, and with the use of the native 
metals, In mental capacity and in general advancement 
they were the representative branch of the Indian family 
north of New Mexico.” * 

The large communal houses of the Iroquois were con- 
structed of bark boards fastened on a framework of wooden 
poles and rafters. A single house was generally from fifty 
to a hundred and thirty feet long by about sixteen wide, 
with partitions at intervals of about ten or twelve feet. 
Each apartment served as a separate house, having a fire 
in the middle and accommodating two families, one on each 
side of the fire. Thus a house one hundred and twenty feet 
long would contain ten fires and twenty families. However 
long the house, it never had more or less than two doors, 
one at each of the narrow ends. Over one of these doors 
was carved the totemic device or crest of the head of the 
family ; which seems to imply, though we are not expressly 
told so, that only families of the same totem clan dwelt 

1 L, H. Morgan, Ancient Society, pp. 69 59. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS 7 

together in a communal house. The largest villages 
numbered from eighty to a hundred and fifty houses with a 
population which, according to Morgan, probably numbered 
as much as three thousand souls. In ancient times the 
village was surrounded by a stockade, sometimes by a 
double or even triple palisade erected on low mounds, 
But as the power of the Iroquois grew, the need of fortify- 
ing their villages decreased and with it the custom.’ 

Each of the six tribes which composed the Iroquois The 
confederacy was subdivided into a gumber of totemi¢ and — 
exogamous clans. But these clans were not the same in exogamous 
all six tribes, Every tribe had indeed the three clans of $28 
the Wolf, the Turtle (Tortoise), and the Bear ; and two tribes, Iroquois 
namely the Mohawks (Caniengas) and Oneidas, had these oe 
three clans and no others. But the other four tribes had 
each eight clans, which bore different names in the different 
tribes. Thus the Onondagas had, in addition to the three 
clans already named, five other clans, namely those of the 
Deer, Eel, Beaver, Ball and Snipe. The Cayugas and 
Senecas had also eight clans, which were similar to those of 
the Onondagas, except that among the Cayugas the Ball 
clan was replaced by the Hawk clan, while among the 
Senecas both the Ball and the Eel clans disappear and are 
replaced by the Hawk clan and the Heron clan. The 
Tuscaroras had also eight clans, but among them the Hawk, 
the Heron, and the Ball clans had no place. Instead of 
them: the Wolf clan was subdivided into two, namely the 
Gray Wolf and the Yellow Wolf; and the Turtle clan in 
like manner was subdivided into two, the Great Turtle 
and the Little Turtle. The Bear, Beaver, Eel, and Snipe 

1 L. H. Morgan, League gy the 
froguots, pp. 313-3193 t@., Systems 
of Consanguinity and Affinity, p. 153 
note#, As to the crest carved on the 
house, Morgan’s statement is_ that 
*Sover one of these doors was cut the 
tribal device of the head of the family ” 
(League of the Lroguots, p. 318). By 
“tribal device” Morgan must mean 
the totem, since in this early work, as 
well as in his Systems of Consanguinity 
and Affinity, he regularly uses the 

terms ivibe and /¢riéa/ in the sense in © 

which he afterwards used gews and 
gentile to designate what in this work 
I call the totem clan. It is to be 
observed that Morgan in all his writings 
hardly ever uses the word totem, though 
he very frequently referred to the thing, 
with which indeed probably no one 
was more familiar than he. This 
would suffice to prove how unsafe it is 
to argue from the absence of the word 
to the absence of the institution. 
Compare vol. ii. p. 151 note}. 

8 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA ‘H?®. 

clans were found among the Tuscaroras as among the 
Onondagas, the Cayugas, and the Senecas, To put this 
in tabular form :—" 

IROQUOIS TRIBES AND CLANS 

. Tribes. Clans. 

Mohawks (Caniengas) | Bear, Wolf, Turtle (Tortoise). 

Oneidas . : : Bear, Wolf, Turtle. 

Onondagas ‘ . | Bear, Wolf, Turtle, Deer, Beaver, Eel, Snipe, 
Ball. 

Cayugas . ; . | Bear, Wolf, Turtle, Deer, Beaver, Eel, Snipe, 
Hawk. 

Senecas . ‘ . | Bear, Wolf, Turtle, Deer, Beaver, Heron, 
Snipe, Hawk. 

Tuscaroras . . | Bear, Gray Wolf, Yellow Wolf, Great Turtle, 

Little Turtle, Beaver, Eel, Snipe. 
t 

Whereas The question naturally arises, Why have the Mohawks 

oe and the Oneidas only three clans each, while all the other 

tribes have tribes have eight? Have the Mohawks and Oneidas lost 
pee “ five clans or have the other tribes gained them? The 

Mohawks eminent ethnologist, L. H. Morgan, inclined to the former 

ae view: he thought that among the Mohawks and Oneidas 

re only five clans must have become extinct.?. On the other hand the 
nainely descendants of the ancient Mohawks and Oneidas affirm that 

pa wie their ancestors never had but three clans, the Bear, the Wolf, 

andthe andthe Turtle (Tortoise) ; and their statement is corroborated 
pitas by old treaties, now in the archives of the United States, in 
uncertain which these clans only are mentioned. Further confirmation 

Rreanert** ig supplied by the Book of Rites, a native work compiled 

andthe and written in,the Mohawk language about the middle of 
peltas the eighteenth century; for in this book also only three 

five clans, clans are recognised as existing in the whole Iroquois nation 
or whether : 
the other at the time when the league was formed. Apparently all 

Iroquois the towns of the nation were distributed among the three 
tribes have 

gained 1. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, Iroquois, pp. 79 599. 
them. p- 70; H. Hale, Zhe Lroguois Book of 
Rites, p. §53- Compare H. R. School- 2L. H. Morgan, League of the 

craft, WVotes on the [roqguots, pp. 128 Troguois, p. 81; id., Ancient Soctety, 
sgq.3 L. H. Morgan, League of the pp. 70, 92. 

XVI FOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS 9 

primary clans of the Bear, the Wolf, and the Turtle (Tortoise) ; 
if the other clans existed at all, it would seem that they did 
so merely as septs or subdivisions of the other three.’ That 
the Iroquois clans have a tendency to split up appears to be 
shewn by the clans of the Tuscaroras, of which the Gray 
Wolf and the Yellow Wolf seem clearly to be subdivisions 
of an original Wolf clan, and the Great Turtle and the 
Little Turtle to be in like manner subdivisions of an 
original Turtle clan. And one of the subdivisions which 
has actually taken place among the, Tuscaroras appears to 
be nascent among the Onondagas; for with them the 
Turtle clan includes two septs called respectively the 
Great Turtle and the Little Turtle, though as yet these’ 
septs are reckoned to form but one clan.2- On this analogy 
we should infer that in the Iroquois tribes which have more 
than three clans the additional clans have been produced, 
not by amalgamation but by segmentation. According to 
a tradition of the Seneca Iroquois, the Bear and the Deer 
were their original clans, and all the rest were subdivisions 
of them.? However, it is quite possible, as Horatio Hale 
inclined to think, that the additional clans were imported by 
captive members of foreign tribes, whom the Iroquois incor- 
porated among themselves, either adopting them directly 
into their own families and clans or more commonly allowing 
them for a time to remain in separate towns, but treating 
them as Iroquois. In such cases constant intercourse and 
frequent intermarriage would soon obliterate all traces of 
_alien origin, while the distinction of clanship might survive.‘ 
It is no longer possible to attribute the institution of The © 
these totemic clans to the sagacity of savage law-givers ‘tem 

clans, 
who devised and created them for the purpose of knitting being 

1H. Hale, Zhe Lroguois Book of 
Rites, p. 543 as to the history of the 
** Book of Rites” see zd. pp. 39 599. 
Early French writers seem to mention 
only the clans of the Bear, the Wolf, 
and the Turtle among the Iroquois. 
See Relations des Jésuites, 1647, p. 38 
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858) ; 
Lafitau, A/eurs des Sauvages Améri- 
quains (Paris, 1724), i. 94, 464; 
Charlevoix, Histotre de la Nouvelle 
France (Paris, 1744), V- 393 sg. The 

last of these writers says that the clan 
of the Turtle was divided into two, 
the Great Turtle and the Little 
Turtle. 

2H. Hale, The Lroguois Book of 
Rites, p. 53 note 2. 

3 L. H. Morgan, League of the 
Troguots, p. 80; td., Anctent Society, 
p. OI. 

4H. Hale, Zhe [roguois Book of 
Rites, pp- 54 59. 

distributed 
between 
the various 
tribes of 
the League, 
formed a 
bond of 
union 
between 
them. 

10 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA CharP. 

together the various tribes by the ties of marriage and 
consanguinity. Yet that the subdivision of the whole 
community into clans had this effect is undeniable. For 
the members of any one clan, to whatever tribe they 
belonged, looked upon each other as brothers, and thus all 
the clans were linked together by bonds of real or imaginary 
kinship. For example,a Mohawk of the Wolf clan regarded 
a Seneca of the Wolf clan as his brother; and similarly 
an Oneida of the Turtle clan welcomed as a brother a 
Turtle man of the Cayaiga or the Onondaga tribe. When 
a man of one tribe visited a village of another, he was 
entitled to be received by members of his clan with the 
same rites of hospitality which he might expect at home. 
If he was a Bear man, he went to a hut which bore the 
badge of the Bear, and there he was hailed as a brother. 
And similarly with members of all the other totem clans. 
In the eyes of an Iroquois, we are told, every member of 
his own totem clan, in whatever tribe he might be found, 
was as much his brother or his sister as if they had been 

. born of the same mother. This cross-relationship between 

Exogamy 
of the 
Iroquois 
clans. 

members of the same clan in different tribes was, if possible, 
even stronger than the relationship between members of the 
same tribe.’ 
Regarding all the women of his own clan as his sisters, 
a man was naturally forbidden to marry any of them. In 
other words the Iroquois clans were exogamous, “ Theory 
at this time,” says Schoolcraft, “founded doubtless on actual 
consanguinity in their inceptive age, makes these clans 
brothers. It is contrary to their usages that near kindred 
should intermarry, and the ancient rule interdicts all inter- 
marriage between persons of the same clan. They must 
marry into a clan whose totem is different from their own. 
A wolf or turtle male cannot marry a wolf or turtle female. 
There is an interdict of consanguinity. By this custom the 
purity of blood is preserved, while the tie of relationship 
between the clan themselves is strengthened or enlarged.” ? 
1L. H. Morgan, League o the 2 H. R. Schoolcraft, Motes on the 
Troquois, pp. 81 sg.; H. R. School- Jroguois, p. 128. How ‘‘the purity 
craft, Motes on the Iroquois, pp. 128, of blood is preserved” by insisting 

130 5g.3 H. Hale, The /roguots Book that it must always be mixed with 
of Rites, pp. 52 59- another, is not perfectly clear. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS II 

But marriage among the Iroquois was not regulated 
merely by the simple rule that a man might not marry a 
woman of his own clan but might marry a woman of any 
other. In tribes which were subdivided into eight clans, 
these clans were distributed in two groups, and the rule was 
that no man might marry a woman of any of the clans in 
his own group; but he might marry a woman of any clan 
in the other group. Thus the two groups of clans formed 
what among the Australian aborigines we are accustomed 
to call exogamous classes or phratries. Morgan’s original 
account of these Iroquois classes or phratries is as follows. 
He says that in each tribe or, as he calls it, nation there 
were eight clans or, as he at first called them, tribes, arranged 
in two divisions and named as follows :-— 

1. Wolf Bear Beaver Turtle. 
2. Deer Snipe Heron Hawk. 

Originally, he tells us, the four clans of the first division, 
namely the Wolf, Bear, Beaver, and Turtle (Tortoise), being 
brothers, were not allowed to marry among themselves. 
For a similar reason the four clans of the second division, 
namely the Deer, Snipe, Heron, and Hawk, were in like 
manner forbidden to marry among themselves. Any of the 
first four clans, however, was free to intermarry with any of 
the second four, “the relation between them being that of 
cousins. Thus Hawk could intermarry with Bear or Beaver, 
Heron with Turtle; but not Beaver and Turtle, nor Deer 
and Deer. Whoever violated these laws of marriage 
incurred the deepest detestation and disgrace.” In process 
of time, however, says Morgan, the rigour of the system was 
relaxed, until finally the prohibition was confined to the 
clan of the individual, which, among the residue of the 
Troquois is still religiously observed. They may now marry 
into any clan but their own. Under the original as well as 
modern regulation the husband and wife were of different 
clans. The children always belonged to the clan of their 
mother.! 

But we have seen that the number and names of the 
Iroquois clans varied in the tribes, and accordingly the 

1 L, H. Morgan, League of the Iroquois, pp- 79, 83- 

Further, 
the 
Iroquois 
clans were 
grouped 

in two 
exogamous 
phratries. 

12 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

List ofthe grouping of the clans in exogamous classes or phratries 
porauies within the tribe varied also. These variations have been 
in the recorded by Morgan in his later work, Amczent Society. 
Toaieis From it we learn that in the different tribes the phratries 

tribes. or classes were composed as follows :— 

Tribes. Phratries and Clans. 

c 

| First Phratry 

Bear 

Wolf 

Beaver 

Turtle (Tortoise) 
Deer . 
Snipe 

Heron 

Hawk 

Seneca 

| Second Phratry 

SP Rt ae ae 

Bear 

Wolf 

Turtle (Tortoise) 
Snipe 

Eel 

. Deer 

Beaver 

Hawk 

First Phratry 
Cayuga . 

SWAMP YN x 

Wolf 

Turtle (Tortoise) 
Snipe 

Beaver 

Ball 

. Deer 

Eel 

Bear 

Onondaga 

| First Phratry 

Second Phratry 

SNAP AYN o 

Bear 

Beaver 

Great Turtle (Tortoise) 
Eel 

Gray Wolf 

Yellow Wolf 

Little Turtle (Tortoise) 
Snipe 

| 
| 
| 

| First Phratry 
Tuscarora 

| Second Phratry 

SOS Os 

2 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, pp. 90-93. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS 13 

The two remaining Iroquois tribes, the Mohawks and The 
*Oneidas, had only three clans (the Bear, the Wolf, and the Mohawks 
Turtle,or Tortoise) and no phratries. It is doubtful, as we Oneidas 
saw, whether these tribes once had other clans and have lost cee 
them or whether they never had more than three. If the 
original organisation of the Mohawks and Oneidas resembled 
that of the other Iroquois tribes and consisted of eight clans 
arranged in two phratries, we must conclude that in the 
course of time the Mohawks and Oneidas have both lost a 
whole phratry and one clan of the remaining phratry besjdes. 

If on the other hand the Mohawks and Oneidas never had 
more than the three clans which are common to all the other 
four Iroquois tribes, it would seem to follow that in these 
four other tribes the five additional clans and their arrange- 
ment in two phratries are later modifications of the original 
tribal constitution. Which of these two views is the true 
one, the evidence at our disposal seems insufficient to decide.” 

Each Iroquois clan, and apparently as a rule each clan Each 
of any Indian tribe, had personal names for its members eines 
which were its special property and might not be used by personal 

‘other clans of the same tribe. These names either pro- (rie 
claimed by their significance the clan to which they belonged members, 
or were known by common reputation to belong to such hea 
and such a clan. When a child was born, the mother chose perty of 

: . the clan. 
its name, with the concurrence of her nearest relations, from There were 
the list of names belonging to the clan which happened at two classes 

the time not to be in use. But the child was not deemed a ctta: 
to be fully named until its birth and name, together with aaoed a 
the name and clan of its mother and the name of its father, the aqui 
had been announced at the next ensuing council of the tribe. "™* 
When a person died, his name could not be used again in 

the lifetime of his oldest surviving son without the consent 

of the latter. Two classes of names were in use, one adapted 

to childhood, and the other to adult life, and the two names 

were exchanged at the proper period in the same formal 
manner, one being taken away, to use the Indian expression, 

and the other bestowed in its place. This exchange of 

names took place at the age of sixteen or eighteen, the 

1 Above, pp. 8 sg, 
2. L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p- 92- 

Among the 
Troquois 
the totemic 
lan, 
property, 
titles, and 
aights of 
every sort 
were in- 
herited in 
the female 
line by 
children 
from their 
mother, 
not from 
their father. 
Influence 
of women. 

Husband 
and wife 
did not live 
together. 

14 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Chap. 

ceremony being performed by the chief of the clan. At the 
next council meeting of the tribe the change of names was 
publicly proclaimed ; and if the person was a male he there- 
upon entered on the duties of manhood. A person who 
had the control of a particular name, as, for example, the 
eldest son controlled the name of his deceased father, might 
lend the name to a friend in another clan; but after the 
death of the friend the name reverted to the clan to which it 
properly belonged.’ 

Among the Iroquqis the totemic clan, as well as property, 
titles, and rights of every sort, passed by inheritance in the 
female line from the mother, not from the father, to the 
children, Speaking of the Indians of Canada, particularly, 
it would seem, of the Iroquois and Hurons, Charlevoix 
observes that “children belong only to the mother and 
recognise none but her. The father is always like a stranger 
with regard to them, but so that if he is not considered as 
father he is nevertheless respected as the master of the hut.” ? 
Still more emphatically and perhaps with some exaggeration 
Lafitau writes that “ nothing is more real than this superiority 
of the women. It is in the women that properly consists 
the nation, the nobility of blood, the genealogical tree, the 
order of the generations, the preservation of the families. It 
is in them that all real authority resides; the country, the 
fields, and all their crops belong to them. They are the 
soul of the councils, the arbiters of peace and war; they 
keep the purse or public treasury: it is to them that slaves 
are given: they make the marriages: the children are in 
their domain, and it is in their blood that the order of suc- 
cession is founded. The men, on the contrary, are entirely 
isolated and limited to themselves, their children are strangers 
to them, with them everything perishes, it is only the woman 
who raises up the house; whereas if there are only men in 
the house, however numerous they may be, and however 
numerous their children, their family is extinguished... , 
Marriages are contracted in such a way that husband and 
wife never quit their own family and their own house to 
make one family and one house by themselves. Each 

1L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, 2 Charlevoix, Histoire de la Nouvelle 
pp. 78 sg. France (Paris, 1744), Vv. 424. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE [ROQUOIS 1S 

remains in his or her own home, and the children born of 

these marriages belong to the women who bore them; they 

are reckoned to the house and family of the wife and not to 

those of the husband, The husband’s goods dao not pass 

to his wife’s house, to which he is himself a stranger ; 

and in the wife’s house the daughters are reckoned the 

heiresses in preference to the males, because the males have 

nothing there but their subsistence.”’ Hence among the 

Iroquois a man’s son was perpetually disinherited : | he 

belonged to his mother’s clan and tribe: he could néver 

succeed to his father’s property, titles, or office. If, for 

example, an Onondaga man of the Wolf clan married an 

Onondaga woman of the Deer clan, their children were all 

Deer, not Wolves. If a Seneca man of the Bear clan married 

a Cayuga woman of the Beaver clan, the children were all 

Cayugas and Beavers, not Senecas and Bears. The same The fifty 

rule regulated the hereditary transmission of the sacheinship prunes 

or office of high chief. When the League of the Iroquois principal 

was at its height, it was governed by fifty sachems or high ane 

chiefs, whose office was hereditary, whose powers and dignities isu 4 

were équal, and whose jurisdiction was not limited territori- in the 

ally but was coextensive with the League. Of these fifty © female line 
fronia man 

sachems the Onondagas contributed fourteen, the Cayugas to his 

ten, the Mohawks nine, the Oneidas nine, and the Senecas cae 

eight. On account of the prevalence of mother-kin among sisters’ 

the Iroquois the sachemship was inherited not by the “hildren, 

sachem’s son but by his brother, or by the son of his sister. 

According to Schoolcraft, the brother inherited first, and 

only in default of brothers did the sister’s son succeed. 

According to L. H. Morgan, a better authority, there was 

no preference for a brother over a sister’s son nor any rule 

of primogeniture either among brothers or among the sons 

of sisters. Any brother or sister’s son might succeed to the 

sachemship, but he had to be elected or “raised up,” as the 

phrase was, to the office from among the eligible kinsmen 

by the council of all the other sachems. Thus the office of 

3 Lafitau, Afeurs des Sauvages We may compare a similar state of 
Amériquains (Paris, 1724), i. 71-73. things in some parts of Sumatra. See 
The writer seems here to refer espe- above, vol. ii. pp. 193 sgg. 
cially to the Iroquois and Hurons, 

Property 
in like 
manner 
descended 
in the 
female line. 

The 
Troquois 
phratry 
existed for 
* social and 
religious 
purposes, 

Function 
of the 
phratries in 
cases of 
homicide. 

16 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ cuapr. 

sachem was both hereditary and elective; yet the rule of 
heredity was absolute. Once a sachemship had been assigned 
to a particular totem clan, it might never pass out of it but 
with the extinction of the clan itself. Hence if, for example, 
a sachemship had been assigned to the Deer clan of the 
Cayuga tribe at the original distribution of these offices, it 
would descend from Deer to Deer in the female line for ever, 
so long as the Deer clan existed; but the son of a Deer 
sachem could never inherit his father’s office, since he was 
never of his father’s byt always of his mother’s totem. The 
descent of property was similar. Whatever a woman 
acquired or inherited she could dispose of at her pleasure in 
her lifetime, and at her death it was inherited by her children. 
What a man acquired or inherited he might in like manner 
dispose of in his lifetime; if he thus bestowed land or pro- 
perty on his wife or children in the presence of a witness, 
she or they were allowed to hold it. But if he did not dis- 
pose of his property in his lifetime, it could not be inherited 
by his children at his death; for his children were not of his 
totem, and it was a law of the Iroquois that property could 
not pass by descent out of the totem clan.’ 

Among the Iroquois, we are told, the phratry existed 
partly for social and partly for religious objects. In the 
game of ball, for example, the Senecas played by phratries, 
one phratry against the other, and they betted against each 
other upon the result of the game.” At a council of the 
tribe the sachems and lower chiefs in each phratry seated 
themselves on opposite sides of an imaginary council-fire, 
and the speakers addressed the two opposite bodies as repre- 
sentatives of the phratries.2? Again, when a man of one clan 
had murdered a man of another clan, the clan of the victim 
used to meet in council to concert measures for avenging his 
death ; while the clan of the murderer also met in council in 
order to procure a condonation of the crime. But if the two 
clans belonged to opposite phratries, then the clan to which 
the slayer belonged might call- on the other clans of its 

1 L. H. Morgan, League of the Iro- 2 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
quots, pp. 62 sg., 83-85, 87 sg.,9059., Pp. 94. 
325 sgg.3; H. R. Schoolcraft, Mores on 
the Iroquois, pp, 128 sg. 3 L. H. Morgarf, ap. cf. p. 95. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE [ROQUOIS 17 

phratry to unite with it in its efforts to effect a peaceful 
settlement. For that purpose the phratry would meet in 
council and send delegates with a belt of white wampum to 

the council of the victim’s phratry requesting them to use 

their good offices in the cause of peace, and offering apologies 

and compensation to the family and clan of the murdered 

man. These negotiations between the councils of the two 
phratries continued until a decision one way or another was 
arrived at.! Again, at the funerals of eminent persons the Function 
organisation in phratries played an important part. For Spacek 
while the phratry of the deceased in a body were the at funerals, 
mourners, the ceremonies were conducted by members of 

the opposite phratry. If it was a sachem who had died, it 

was usual for the opposite phratry to send, immediately after 

the funeral, the official wampum belt of the deceased ruler 

to the central council fire at Onondaga as a notification of 

his death. There the belt remained till the successor was 
installed, when it was bestowed on him as a badge of office. 

When the Seneca sachem Handsome Lake died, the 
customary address to the dead body and the other addresses 
before the removal of the corpse were delivered by members 

of the phratry to which the dead chief did not belong; and 

it was by men chosen from that phratry, and not from his 

own, that his mortal remains were borne to their last resting- 
place? Further, the phratry was directly concerned in the Function 
election both of sachems and of the inferior chiefs. After conti ve 
the clan of a deceased sachem or of an inferior chief had the clection 
elected his successor, it was necessary that their choice % fers 
should be accepted and ratified by both phratries. It 

was expected that the other clans of the same phratry would 
confirm the choice almost as a matter of course; but the 

other phratry must also assent. Accordingly a council of 

each phratry met; and if either of them rejected the nomi- 

nation of the clan, that nomination was set aside, and the 

clan had to make a fresh one. Even after the choice of 

the clan had been accepted *by both phratries, it was still 
necessary that the new sachem or the new chief should be 
inducted into his sachemship or his chieftainship by the 

1 L, H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 95. 
2 L. H. Morgan, of. cét. pp. 95 5¢- 
VOL, Ilr Cc 

18 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ cnar. 

council of the whole confederacy, which alone had power to 
invest with office. This federal council was composed of 
the fifty hereditary and elective sachems.’ Lastly, the 

Medicine 

Lodges Seneca Iroquois used to have two Medicine Lodges, as they 
phratries. were called, one in each phratry. To hold a Medicine 
Lodge was to observe their highest religious rites and to 
practise their deepest religious mysteries, But very little is 
now known concerning these lodges and their ceremonies. 
Each was a brotherhood, into which new members were 
admitted by a formaleinitiation.? 
Little is While we thus possess some authentic information as to 
pr the social aspect of totemism among the Iroquois, very little 
religious is known of its religious or superstitious side. So far as I 
aspect © know, we are not even told whether people might or might 
as not kill and eat their totem animals. According to L. H. 

Morgan, it can scarcely be said that any Indian clan had 
special religious rites; the six annual religious festivals of 
the Iroquois which he mentions were common to all the 
clans of the tribe, and were therefore not totemic but tribal.’ 
According to one account, the Iroquois professed to be 
descended from their three great totems, the turtle or 
tortoise, the bear, and the wolf; and of these animal 
ancestors the turtle was deemed the most honourable.‘ 
‘The Turtle The mode in which the Turtle or Tortoise clan originated is 
or Tortoise 

clay is said SAid to have been as follows. In early days many mud 
to be turtles lived in a pool, but one hot summer the pool dried 
descended 

from a real UP, SO the turtles had to set out to find another. One very 

ie fat turtle waddling in the great heat was much incommoded 

by his shell, which blistered his shoulders as he walked. 

1L, H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, 
pp- 97, 129. The federal council, 
consisting of the fifty sachems, as- 
sembled periodically, usually in autumn, 
at Onondaga, which was in effect the 
seat of government, to legislate for the 
commonweal. It declared war and 
made peace, sent and received embas- 
sies, entered into treaties of alliance, 
regulated the affairs of subject nations, 
and in a word took all needful measures 
to promote the prosperity and enlarge 
the dominion of the League. See 
L, H. Morgan, League of the Lroguois, 
pp. 62-67. 

At 

2L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
Pp. 97- 

3 L. H. Morgan, of. céé. pp. 
81 sg. The six festivals were the 
Maple festival, the Planting festival, the 
Strawberry festival, the Green Corn 
festival, the Harvest festival, and the 
New Year’s festival. For a description 
of these festivals, see L. H. Morgan, 
The League of the Iroquois, pp. 182 
59q- 

4 Timothy Dwight, Zravels in New 
England and New York (London, 
1823), iv. 184, 185. 

XVI- TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS 19 
last by a convulsive effort he made a shift to heave it off 
altogether, after which he developed into a man and became 
the progenitor of the Turtle clan.’ 

The Iroquois, like their kindred the Hurons, were very The rules 
scrupulous with regard to the prohibited degrees of kinship: casi 
among them only those persons might marry each other between 
between whom no relationship could be traced; even the hus’ 
artificial relationship created by adoption constituted a bar kin were 
to marriage.? In these respects they resemble the greater amen 
part of the tribes of American Ind#ans, among whom the by the. 
rules barring the intermarriage of blood relations are very Bat 
stringent.2 On the other hand there are no such restrictions tale ia 
laid on relatives by marriage after the death of a husband mary her 
or wife On the contrary, when a husband died, his oe 
brother was bound to marry the widow; and conversely, brother, 
when his wife died, a man was bound to marry either her 2"? 
sister or, in default of a sister, such other woman as the bound to 
family of his deceased wife might provide for him. The 72 his 
intention of these customs, we are told, was to raise up wife's 
offspring to the dead. A man who should refuse to marry ©" 
his deceased wife’s sister would, we are told, expose himself 
to all the abuse and vituperation which the insulted woman 
chose to heap upon his devoted head ; and this torrent of 
invective, conscious of his delinquency, he had to submit to 
in silence and with as good a grace as he could command.” 

The Iroquois, like many, if not all the other nations of The classi- 
North American Indians, possess the classificatory system of sale 
relationship. Indeed the existence of that system, which is relation- 
now known to prevail among so many races, was detected aaa 
for the first time by the great American ethnologist Lewis discovered 
H. Morgan in the Seneca tribe of Iroquois, with whom he rian 
lived as an adopted member of the tribe. At first he the Seneca 

: . : tribe of 
regarded the system as an invention of the Iroquois and ireaiieis: 

1E. A. Smith, ‘Myths of the 

sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Iroquois,” Second Annual Report of 

Family (Washington, 1871), p. 164 

the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1883), p. 77. 

2 Lafitau, Aleurs des sauvages 
amériquains (Paris, 1724), i. 558 sg. 5 
Charlevoix, Histotre de la Nouvelle 
France (Paris, 1744), Vv. 419. 

3 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 

(Smithsonian Contributions lo Know- 
ledge, vol. xvii.). 

4 L. H. Morgan, Le. 

5 Charlevoix, Wrstoire de la Nouvelle 
France, v. 419; compare Lafitau, 
Meurs des sauvages amériquains, i, 

560. 

20 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ cnayr. 

Afterwards peculiar to them; but afterwards to his surprise he found 
paeigews the same elaborate and complicated classification of kindred 
classificae among the Ojibways, a tribe of Indians of the Algonkin 
oes stock, who differ both in blood and language from the 
many other Iroquois. The discovery led him to extend his enquiries, 
ars chiefly by personal investigation, among the other Indian 
American tribes from the Atlantic to the Rocky Mountains and from 
bine the Arctic Sea to the Gulf of Mexico; and the result was 
many other tg prove that the many Indian nations scattered over this 
peoples of * : . : 
the world, Wide area, and speaking different languages or different 
dialects of the same language, all possess the classificatory 
system of relationship in fundamentally the same form, 
though the terms designating the various relationships differ 
with the language or the dialect of the tribe. Still further 
extending the scope of the enquiry, Morgan collected by 
means of printed circulars a large body of information as to 
the systems of relationship prevalent in Asia and the islands 
of the Pacific; and he was thus able to demonstrate that 
the classificatory system is still in use at the present day 
certainly among a very large part, and perhaps among 
the largest part, of the population of the globe. It is 
true that his enquiries elicited little or no response from 
Mexico, Central America, South America, and Africa; but 
subsequent research has made it probable that in Africa at 
least the same system is widespread among the many 
Account of nations of the great Bantu stock.’ As the classificatory 

Seni system of relationship is intimately bound up with, if it did 
poraveailiag not originate in, the custom of exogamy, with which we are 
ship concerned in this work, it may be well to describe the 
Toe Iroquois form of the system somewhat fully ; both because 

the Iroquois form is typical of that which prevails among all 
the other American Indian tribes whose systems of relation- 
ship have been examined, and also because it possesses a 
special interest in having been the first example of the 

1L, H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Family, pp. 3 59g. As to the evidence 
for the prevalence of the classificatory 
system in Africa, see above, vol. ii, 
Pp- 386 s97., 401, 416 59., 444 59., 509 
599-5 575 59-5 615, 639 sg. It is to be 
observed that Morgan appears to have 

collected no evidence of the prevalence 
of the classificatory system among the 
Indian tribes of California; and, as 
we have seen (p. 2, note), among 
these tribes totemism also is apparently 
absent. The coincidence, if it is such, 
can hardly be accidental. But to this 
subject we shall return later on. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS at 

institution which attracted the attention of scientific 
enquirers, In describing it I shall reproduce the exposition 
of its discoverer, L. H. Morgan, to some extent in his own 
words. The terms of relationship here given are those in 
use among the Seneca tribe of the Iroquois. They differ 
for the most part only dialectically from those in use among 
the other tribes of the confederacy.’ 

It is characteristic of the Iroquois as of most other forms Different 
of the classificatory system that it has separate terms for {1s for 
elder brother and younger brother,* for elder sister and younger 

: : brother 
younger sister, but no term for brother in general or for ana sister. 
sister in general, though there is a compound term in the 
plural number and-in the common gender for brothers and 
sisters in general? This careful discrimination of elder 
brother from younger brother, and of elder sister from 
younger sister, proves that the distinction between the senior 
and the junior branches of the family must have been 
deemed very important at the time when the classificatory 
system was instituted or took shape. A suggestion as to 
the origin of the distinction has already been offered.’ 

In the classificatory system Morgan distinguishes certain Indicative 
features which he calls indicative. They are those, he says, (ys.of 
which determine the character of the system, and to which fcatory 
the rest may be regarded as subordinate. In the Iroquois form ” a 
of the system the following are the indicative features :-— 

11, H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Family; pp. 154 sgg.3 td., Ancient 
Society, pp. 436 sgg. A brief notice 

(44, Ha', Ah’, Ka') appears to be the 
possessive pronoun “my.” See L. H. 
Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and 
Affinity, pp. 132, 137. If that is so, 

of the system had been given by the 
author in his early book, League of the 
froguois (Rochester, 1851), pp. 85-87, 
before he was aware of the wide pre- 
valence and far-reaching importance of 
the institution. 

2L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Family, pp. 154 sg.3 wd., Ancient 
Society, p. 437. The terms in ques- 
tion are these :— 

My elder brother Hé' je 
My younger brother . Ha’.gd 
My elder sister Ah 7é@ 
My younger sister . Ka'-gd. 

In all these terms the first syllable 

it would seem that the word for younger 
brother (¢4) is also the word for younger 
sister, and that the word for elder 
brother (ye) differs but little from the 
word for elder sister (72). In not a 
few forms of the classificatory system, 
whereas there are different terms for 
elder brother and elder sister, there is 
only one term for younger brother and 
younger sister. Examples have metusin 
the course of this work, In the spelling 
of Indian terms of relationship 4 is the 
long aas in father. Morgan represents 
it by @, which I have altered throughout. 
The a has the sound of a in ale, mate. 
3 See above, vol. i. pp. 179 sgq. 

1. I, being 

a male, 
call my 
brother’s 
children 
my 
children. 

2. I, being 
a male, call 

my sister's 
ehildren 
my 
nephews 
and nieces. 

I, being a 
female, 
call my 
brother’s 
children 
m 
nephews 
and nieces, 
and I call 
_ my sister's 
children 
my 
children. 

22 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

1. In the male branch of the first collateral line, myself 
being a male, I call my brother’s son and daughter my son 
and daughter, Ha-ah'-wuk and Ka-ah'-wuk; and each of 
them calls me father, Hd’-zzh. This is the first indicative 
feature of the system. It places my brother’s children in 
the same category with my own children. Each of their 
sons and daughters I call severally my grandson and grand- 
daughter, Ha-yd’-da and Ka-yd'-da, and they call me grand- 
father, Hoc-sote. The relationships here given are those 
which are actually recognised ; the terms of relationship are 
those which are actually applied : no others are known.! 

2. In the female branch of the first collateral line, 
myself being still a male, I call my sister’s son and daughter 
my nephew and niece, Ha-yi’-wan-da and Ka-yd'-wan-da ; 
and each of them calls me uncle, Hoc-no'-seh. This is the 
second indicative feature. It restricts the relationships of 
nephew and niece to the children of a man’s sisters, to the 
exclusion of the children of his brothers. The son and 
daughter of this nephew and of this niece are not, as might 
have been expected, my grand-nephew and grand-niece ; 
they are my grandson and granddaughter; and they call 
me grandfather. This, however we may explain it, is 
characteristic of the classificatory system; under it the 
several collateral lines, in their several branches, are ulti- 
mately merged in the lineal line.” 

If now the speaker is a female, then in the male branch 
of the first collateral line I call my brother’s son and 
daughter my nephew and niece, Ha-soh!-neh and Ka-soh'- 
neh; and each of them calls me aunt, Ah-ga’-huc. It will 
be noticed that the terms for nephew and niece which are 
used by females are quite different from those which are 
used by males. The son and daughter of this nephew and 
niece are not, as might have been expected, my grand- 
nephew and grand-niece ; they are my grandson and grand- 
daughter, Ha-yd’-da and Ka-yd-da; and each of them calls 
me grandmother, Oc’-Sote. 

Again, the speaker being still a female, in the female 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 2 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 155; td., sanguinityand Affinity, pp. 145, 156 5 
Ancient Society, p. 437. td,, Anctent Society, p. 438. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS 23 

branch of the first collateral line I call my sister’s son and 
daughter my son and daughter, Ha-ah’-wuk and Ka-al’- 
wuk; and each of them calls me mother, No-yeh’. The 
children of this son and daughter are my grandchildren ; 
and each of them calls me grandmother, O¢’-sote, 

3. In the male branch of the second collateral line, on 3. 1 call 

the father’s side, myself being a male, I call my father 

2, my father’s 
brother my 

brother my father, Hd/-nih ; and he calls me his son. This father. 

is the third indicative feature of the system. It places all 
of several brothers in the relation of a father to the children 
of each other.” 

4. My father’s brother’s son is my elder or younger 
brother; if he is older than myself I call him my elder 
brother, H/d’-j7e, and he calls me his younger brother, 
Ha!-gié; if he is younger than me, these terms are reversed. 
Similarly, my father’s brother’s daughter is my elder or 
younger sister; if she is older than myself I call her my 
elder sister, Ah’-je, and she calls me her younger brother, 
Ha'-gé; if she is younger than me, I call her my younger 
sister, Ka’-gd, and she calls me her elder brother. This 
is the fourth indicative feature. It creates the relationship 
of brother and sister amongst the children. of several 
brothers. Such brothers and sisters, to distinguish them 
from own brothers and sisters, may conveniently be called 
collateral brothers and sisters.- The children of these 
collateral brothers, myself being a male, are my sons and 
daughters (Ha-ah'-wuk and Ka-ah'-wuk), and they call me 
father ; their children are my grandchildren, and they call 
me grandfather. On the other hand, the children of my 
collateral sisters are not my children but my nephews and 
nieces (Ha-yd'-wan-da and Ka-yd'-wan-da), and they call 
me uncle; but the children of these nephews and nieces 
are my grandchildren, and they call me grandfather. It is 
thus that the classificatory system by its nomenclature brings 
back the divergent collateral lines into the direct lineal 
line. If I the speaker am a female, then the children of 
my collateral brothers are my nephews and nieces, and the 
children of my collateral sisters are my sons and daughters ; 

1]. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- Ancient Society, p. 438. 
Sanguinity and Affinity, p. 156; id., 2 L. H. Morgan, Lec. 

4. Teall 
my father’s 
brother's 
children 
my brothers 
and sisters. 

5. Icall 
my father’s 
sister my 
aunt. 

6. Icall my 
mother’s 
brother my 
uncle. 

24 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

but the children of these nephews and nieces and of these 
sons and daughters are all alike my grandchildren, the 
classificatory system merging as usual all these collateral 
relations in the direct lineal line! 

5. In the female branch of the second collateral line, 
myself being a male, my father’s sister is my aunt (A4-ga’- 
uc), and she calls me her nephew. This is the fifth 
indicative feature of the system. It restricts the relation- 
ship of aunt to the sisters of my father and to the sisters 
of such other persons,as stand to me in the relation of a 
father, to the exclusion of my mother’s sisters. My father’s 
sister’s children are my cousins (A/-gare’-seh, singular), and 
they call me cousin. With myself a male, the children of 
my male cousins are my sons and daughters, and they call 
me father, but the children of my female cousins are my 
nephews and nieces, and they call me uncle. With myself 
a female, these relationships are reversed: the children of 
my male cousins are my nephews and nieces, and they call 
me aunt, but the children of my female cousins are my sons 
and daughters, and they call me mother. All the children 
of these sons and daughters and nephews and nieces are 
alike my grandchildren, whether I am a male or a female, 
the classificatory system as usual bringing back the divergent 
collateral lines into the direct lineal line.’ 

6. On the mother’s side in the second collateral line, 
myself a male, my mother’s brother is my uncle (H/oc-xo-seh), 
and he calls me his nephew. This is the sixth indicative 
feature. It restricts the relationship of uncle to my mother’s 
brothers, own and collateral, to the exclusion of my father’s 
brothers; but it at the same time includes the brothers of 
all other women who stand to me in the relation of a 
mother. With myself a male, the children of my mother’s 
brother are my cousins (Ah-gdre’-seh) ; the children of my 
male cousins are my sons and daughters, and they call me 
father, but the children of my female cousins are my nephews 
and nieces, and they call me uncle. With myself a female, 
these last relationships are reversed: the children of my 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 2L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 156 sg.3; sangutnity and Affinity, pp. 157 59. ; 
id., Ancfent Society, pp. 438 sg. id., Ancient Society, p. 439. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS 25 

male cousins are my nephews and nieces, and they call me 
aunt, but the children of my female cousins are my sons 
and daughters, and they call me mother. The children of 
all these sons and daughters and nephews and _ nieces, 
whether I am a male or a female, are alike my grand. 
children, the classificatory system as usual bringing back 
the divergent collateral lines into the direct lineal line.’ 

The relationship of uncle, that is, of the mother’s Import. 
brother, is in some respects the most important in Indian mas 
society, for the uncle is invested with authority over his brother in 
nephews and nieces, the children of his sister, For practical ieee a 
purposes, indeed, he has more authority over them than authority 
their own father. For example, among the Choctaws, if ieiey 
a boy is to be placed at school, it is his uncle and not his children 
father who takes him to the school and makes the arrange- 9% in 
ments, Among the Winnebagoes, a maternal uncle may of their 
require services of a nephew or administer correction, which ionic 
the boy’s own father would neither ask nor attempt. 
Similarly with the Iowas and Ottoes an uncle may 
appropriate to his own use his nephew’s horse or gun 
or other personal property without being questioned, which 
the sufferer’s own father would have no recognised right to 
do. Over his nieces the authority of the uncle, we are 
told, is still more significant on account of his participation 
in their marriage contracts, which in many Indian nations 
carry with them presents. In America, as in many other 
parts of the world, this authority of the maternal uncle 
over his nephews and nieces is founded on the principle of 
female kinship, in accordance with which a man’s heirs are 
not his own but his sister’s children.” 

7. In the female branch of the second collateral line 7. Icallmy 
my mother’s sister is my mother, Woh-yeh’, and she calls ia he 
me her son. This is the seventh indicative feature of the mother. 
system. It places all of several sisters, own and collateral, 
in the relation of a mother to the children of each other.* 

8. My mother’s sister’s children are my brothers and 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- sanguinity and Affinity, p. 158. 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 158; id., 
Ancient Society, p. 439. 3 L. H. Morgan, of. cit. p. 1583 
2L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- id., Anctent Society, p. 439. 

26 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnuap. 

8. Icallmy sisters, elder or younger. This is the eighth indicative 
Boe feature. It establishes the relationship of brother and sister 
children among the children of sisters. The children of these 
bethers COllateral brothers are my sons and daughters, Ha-ah’-wuk 
and sisters. and Ka-ah’-wuk, and they call me father; their children 
are my grandchildren, and they call me grandfather. But 
the children of these collateral sisters are my nephews 
and nieces (Ha-yd’-wan-da and Ka-yd'-wan-da), and they 
call me'‘uncle; nevertheless their children are not my 
grand-nephew and gramd-niece, but my grandchildren, and 
they call me grandfather. It is thus that the classifi- 
catory system merges the collateral lines in the direct 
lineal line. With myself a female, the relationships of 
the children of collateral brothers and sisters are reversed, 
as in previous cases: that is, the children of my collateral 
brothers are my nephews and nieces; the children of my 
collateral sisters are my children; and the grandchildren 
of both my collateral brothers and my collateral sisters are 
all alike my grandchildren, the classificatory system as usual 
merging the collateral lines in the direct lineal line.’ 
9. Icall 9. In the third collateral line my father’s father’s 
my father’s brother is my grandfather (/oc’-sote), and calls me _ his 
brother my grandson. This is the ninth and last indicative feature. 
fees and It places these brothers of my paternal grandfather in the 
sore relation of grandfathers to me, and thus prevents collateral 
grandson. ascendants from passing beyond this relationship. The 
principle which merges the collateral lines in the lineal line 
works upward as well as downward. The son of such a 
collateral grandfather is my father (//d’-nih), and calls me 
his son; the children of this collateral father are my brothers 
and sisters ; the children of these collateral brothers are my 
sons and daughters ; the children of these collateral sisters 
are my nephews and nieces; and the children of these 
collateral sons and daughters, nephews and nieces are all 
alike my grandchildren, the classificatory system as usual 
merging the collateral lines in the direct lineal line. With 
myself a female, my relations to the children of my collateral 
brothers and sisters are reversed as in previous cases: that 
1L, H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, pp. 158 sg. 3 id., 
Ancient Society, pp. 439 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE IROQUOIS 27 

is, the children of my collateral brothers are my nephews and 
nieces; the children of my collateral sisters are my sons 
and daughters ; but the children of these collateral sons and 
daughters, nephews and nieces, are all alike my grand- 
children! “These relationships,” says their discoverer, 
L. H. Morgan, “so novel and original, did not exist simply 
in theory, but were actual, and of constant recognition, and 
lay at the foundation of their political, as well as social 
organization.” ? 

To recapitulate some of the cardmal relationships in the Recapitula- 
Seneca-Iroquois form of the classificatory system. In_ the ‘on.of the 
generation above his own a man applies the same term relation- 
Hé-nih, “my father,” to his own father and to his father’s ee a 
brothers ; and he applies the same term Wo-yeh’, “ my mother,” Iroquois 
to his own mother and to his mother’s sisters. In his own es 
generation he applies the same term Ade, “my elder sie 
brother,” to his own elder brothers and to his elder male eee 
cousins, the sons either of his father’s brothers or of his 
mother’s sisters ; and he applies the same term Ha’gd, “my 
younger brother,” to his own younger brothers and to his 
younger male cousins, the sons either of his father’s brothers 
or of his mother’s sisters. Similarly, in his own generation 
he applies the same term A/’-je, “my elder sister,” to 
his own elder sisters and to his elder female cousins, 
the daughters either of his father’s brothers or of his 
mother’s sisters; and he applies the same term Ka’-gd, “my 
younger sister,” to his own younger sisters and to his 
younger female cousins, the daughters either of his father’s 
brothers or of his mother’s sisters. In the generation below 
his own he applies the same term Ha-ah'-wuk, “my son,” to 
his own sons, to his brothers’ sons, and also to certain of his 
cousins’ sons, namely, to the sons either of his father’s 
brothers’ sons or of his mother’s sisters’ sons. Similarly, 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 161; id., 
Ancient Society, p. 440. In the 
former of these works Morgan stated 
as the ninth indicative feature that 
‘*the first collateral line in its two 
branches, and the second in its four 
branches, are finally brought into and 
merged in the lineal line; and the 

same will hereafter be found to be the 
case with each of the remaining col- 
lateral lines as far as the fact of con- 
sanguinity can be traced” (Systemes of 
Consanguinity and Affinity, pp. 159 
sg.). But this he omitted in his later 
work Ancient Society, 

2L. H. Morgan, League of the 
Lroquois, p. 87. 

28 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ cuape. 

in the generation below his own he applies the same 
term Ka-ah'-wuk, “my daughter,” to his own daughters, 
to his brothers’ daughters, and also to certain of his cousins’ 
daughters, namely, to the daughters either of his father’s 
brothers’ sons or of his mother’s sisters’ sons. On the other 
hand, he calls his father’s sister, not “my mother,” but “my 
aunt” (Ah-gal-huc) ; and he calls his mother’s brother, not 
“my father,” but “my uncle” (Hoc-no'-seh). He calls his 
male cousin, the son either of his father’s sister or of his 
mother’s brother, not “*my brother,” but “my cousin” (44- 
gétre'-seh); and, similarly, he calls his female cousin, the 
daughter either of his father’s sister or of his mother’s 
brother, not “my sister,” but “my cousin” (Ah-gare/sseh), 
Sharp Thus, as usually happens under the classificatory system, a 

distinction sharp distinction is drawn between cousins, according as 
rawn 

between they are the children, on the one hand, of two brothers or 
under. _ Of two sisters, or, on the other hand, of a brother and a sister 

Me classi- respectively ; for whereas the children of two brothers or of 
ene two sisters are brothers and sisters to each other, the children 

of a brother and a sister respectively are only cousins. 
The If we compare the classificatory system of the Seneca- 
aie Iroquois with the classificatory system of the Australian 
form of | aborigines, we are struck by the absence from the former 
be of classificatory terms for husband and wife. Amongst 
system has the Australians, as we have seen, a man calls his wife’s 
foe sisters, whether own or tribal, also his wives; and a woman 
terms for calls her husband’s brothers, whether own or tribal, also her 

band : 
a wife. husbands? But among the Seneca-Iroquois a man has a 

nie it different name for his wife and for his wife’s sister; he calls 
marks an . . . . . . 
advance on his wife da-yake'-ne, “my wife,” but his wife’s sister he calls 

eee ide ka-yd'-o, “my sister-in-law.” Similarly, among the Seneca- 
Tashan Iroquois a woman has a different name for her husband and 
facach for her husband’s brothers; she calls her husband da-yake'-ne, 
which “my husband,” but her husband’s brother she calls 4a-yd’-0, 
vee. my brother-in-law.” * Thus the classificatory system of the 
tory terms Seneca-Iroquois does not assign to every husband a number 
for husband 
and wife. 1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 301, 302, 303, 362, 375 s9., 380, 384, 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 167 sg. 405, 420, 441, 461, 500, 
and Table IJ., pp. 293 599.3 ia, 3 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
Ancient Society, pp. 447 599- sanguinity and Affinity, p. 1693 ia., 
2 See above, vol. i. pp- 299, 300, -4uczent Society, Pp.» 451, 452. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE 1ROQUOIS 29 

of wives, and to every wife a number of husbands ; in other 
words, so far as the terms for husband and wife are con- 
cerned, it does not, like the Australian system, point to the 
marriage of a group of men to a group of women. But 
if we are right in supposing that the classificatory system 
in general is based on group marriage,’ it appears to follow 
that the Seneca-Iroquois form of the system is less primitive 
than the Australian form, since, on this hypothesis, it 
has lost the cardinal feature of the whole system, namely, 
the recognition of the marital rights of a group of men over 
a group of women. That the Iroquois form of the system 
is less primitive than the Australian form seems perfectiy 
natural, when we consider the great advance in culture which 
the Iroquois had made by comparison. with the aborigines 
of Australia. 

§ 3. Totemism among the Hurons or Wyandots 

The Hurons were an Indian nation inhabiting that The 
portion of Canada which lies to the north of Lake Ontario Wace 
and the Saint Lawrence River. Their principal villages an Indian 
were along the Georgian Bay and around Lake Simcoe, #004." 
Toronto is said to take its name from a Huron word closely 

meaning “plenty”; for this neighbourhood was once ae 
favourite settlement of these Indians, But their traditions @nguage 
seem to shew that they had migrated southward to this troquois. 
happier land from the bleak region which stretches from 
Hudson’s Bay to the coast of Labrador. By blood and 
language the Hurons belonged to the same stock as the 
Iroquois ; indeed their language, or at all events the language 

of their descendants the modern Wyandots, is” said to be 
almost identical with that of the Seneca-Iroquois. The Conquest 
various tribes composing the nation were united i Sree 

enemies the Iroquois, who had waged with them a savage 
and relentless warfare. A remnant afterwards established 
themselves near Quebec; but by far the largest portion, 
after several changes, settled near Sandusky in Ohio, from 

1 See vol. i. pp. 303 5qq- 

30 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Chap. 

which towards the middle of the nineteenth century they 
were finally removed to Kansas. The name by which the 
Hurons called themselves was Wendat, and this, corrupted 
into the form Wyandot, is the name still borne by their 
descendants! The Hurons subsisted by hunting, fishing, 
and agriculture. They raised crops of maize, which they 

Great baked into bread. Like the Iroquois, they lived in great 
Saat communal houses from a hundfed and fifty to two hundred 
of the feet long, each with a passage running down the middle. 
Hurons, e . 
Such a house might a¢commodate from sixteen to twenty- 
four families, every family occupying its own compartment 
on one side of the central passage, while every pair of 
' families shared a fire between them. The chief town of the 
Hurons is said to have contained two hundred such large 
communal houses. In some places they changed the sites 
of their villages or towns at intervals of ten, fifteen or thirty 
years, more or less, when the wood in the neighbourhood 
was exhausted.’ 
The The Wyandots are divided into totemic and exogamous 
yoando's clans with descent in the female line. A list of eight of 

totemicand these clans was published by L. H. Morgan ;* but subse- 
‘la with quent research has extended the list of clans to twelve, 
rae though five of them are now extinct. Mr. William E. 
line. | Connelly, who has studied the Wyandot language and 
traditions for many years and is an adopted member of 
the tribe, gives the following list of Wyandot clans on the 
authority of a trustworthy witness, George Wright, whose 
evidence agrees in all main points with that of another 

witness, Matthias Splitlog :-—* 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinily and Affinity, pp. 151 sg.;3 
H. Hale, Zhe Lroguo’s Book of Rites, 
pp- I0 sg., 15 sg.; W. E. Connelly, 
“The Wyandots,” .frchzological Re- 
port, 1899 (Toronto, 1900), pp. 92 
599.3 Handbook of American Indians 
North of Mexico, Part i. (Washington, 
1907), pp. 584 sgg. According to 
L. H. Morgan (of. cit, p. 283) the 
original form of the name Wyandot is 
wane-dote, *‘ calf of the leg,” a name 
given to these Indians by the Iroquois 
and adopted by themselves. It refers, 

says Morgan, to their manner of string- 
ing buffalo-meat. 

2 F, Gabriel Sagard, Le Grand Voyage 
du pays des Hurons, Nouvelle Edition 
(Paris, 1865), pp. 80-83, 92 sgq. 

3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
p. 153. The eight which he mentions 
are the clans of the Wolf, Bear, Beaver, 
Turtle, Deer, Snake, Porcupine, and 
Hawk. 

# William E. Connelly, ‘The 
Wyandots,” Archeological Report, 1899 
(Toronto, 1900), pp. 100 sg. Major 
J. W. Powell had previously given a 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG THE HURONS OR WYANDOTS 31 

1. Big Turtle (Mossy Back). 7¢hn-gyowh'-wthsh-hih-yooh-wah'- 
nch-rih-noh. The people of the Big (or Great) Turtle. 

2. Little Turtle (Little Water Turtle, sometimes called Speckled 
Turtle). Zehn-yéh-roh-noh. The people of the Little Turtle. 

3. Mud Turtle. Yah'-nehs-t¢h'-rih-ndh. The people of the Mud 
Turtle. 

4. Wolf. Téhn-ah'-réh-squah'roh-noh. 

The people of the Wolf, or 
the clan that smells a bone. 

3. Bear. Téhn'-yoh-ych"*-rih-noh. The people of the Bear, or 
the clan of the Claws. : 
6. Beaver. Zsooh-tih-hah-téh-shih'-tih-tth-rih-noih. The people 

of the Beaver, or the clan of the House-Builders. 

7. Deer. ZVéhn-dih'-ah-riih-rih-noh. The people of the Deer, cr 
the clan of the Horns. 

.8. Porcupine. Yéh-réh'-héhseh'-rih-noh. 
pine, or the clan of the Quills. 

g. Striped Turtle. J/ah-ndh-hooh'-hah-shth-rih-noh. The people 
of the Striped Turtle, or the clan that carries the Stripes (or colors), 

10. Highland Turtle, or Prairie Turtle. Yeh-t6h-zhd0h'-rih-noh. 
The people of the Prairie Turtle, or the clan that carries the House. 

The people of the Porcu- 

11, Snake. Zéhun-goh"’-roh-noh. The people of the Snake, or the 
clan that carries the Trail. Sometimes called the Little Clan of the 
Horns, 

12. Hawk. TZéhn-déh-soh'-roh-noh. The people of the Hawk, or 

the clan of the Wings, 

The order in which the clans are here mentioned is that Order of 
of their precedence. Their camp was formed “on the shell eecpeia 
of the Big Turtle.” It began at the right fore-leg and con- and their 
tinued round the shell to the right to the left fore-leg in the ene 
order of precedence, except that the Wolf clan could be either 
in the centre of the encampment or at “the head of the 
Turtle.” The march was under the direction of the Wolf 
clan and was commanded by the chief of the Wolf clan. 

It will be observed that of these twelve clans no less than of the 
five have for their totems various sorts of turtles (tortoises). Wyandot 
“The Turtle clans,” says Mr. Connelly, “were always con- clans five 
sidered the most ancient and most honorable of the tribal Pave 
subdivisions, and the order of precedence and encampment totems 
was according to the ‘shell of the Big Turtle’ The turtle jings of 

turtles or 

list of eleven Wyandot clans as fol- dot Government,” First Annual Report tortoises. 

lows :—Deer, Bear, Highland Turtle 
(striped), Highland Turtle (black), 
Mud Turtle, Smooth Large Turtle, 
Hawk, Beaver, Wolf, Sea Snake, and 
Porcupine. See J. W. Powell, ‘* Wyan- 

of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1881), p. 59. 

1 W. E. Connelly, ‘*The Wyan- 
dots,” <Archeological Report, 1899 
(Toronto, 1900), pp. IOI 59. 

32 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ cuapr. 

idea was interwoven with the whole social and_ political 
The twelve fabric of ancient Tionnontate institutions.”! The multi- 

be sets plicity of the clans, in Mr. Connelly’s opinion, was the effect 
supposed of along development, some of them being added later or pro- 
to have wed ve oar) ae 
been pro. duced by a subdivision of the original clans. These original 
duced by clans he conjectures to have been only three in number, 
division namely, (1) Big Turtle, (2) Little Turtle, (3) Mud Turtle. 
of three 

rigtned He believes that the Wolf, Bear, Beaver, Deer, Porcupine, 
clans, the and Hawk clans were subsequently added in this order as 
Big ra the tribe increased in numbers. Next, if he is right, the 
Turtle,and Mud Turtle clan split into two, the seceding party taking 
Se the name of Prairie Turtle, or Highland Turtle, or Box 

Turtle. And after that the Big Turtle clan also split up, 
the seceding party taking the name of Striped Turtle. 
Lastly, the Deer clan subdivided, the seceding party taking 
the name of Snake? This snake, which the seceders took 
for their totem, was a purely mythical animal, at least he is 
unknown to zoologists of the present day; for he is said to 
have had four legs and the horns of a stag. These limbs and 
antlers the serpent was doubtless enriched with for the sake of 
indicating the relationship in which the Snake clan stood to 
the Deer clan; and for the same reason the Snake clan was 
sometimes called the Little Clan of the Horns. In the 
absence of the fabulous snake the members of the Wyandot 
clan revered the rattlesnake as a wise kinsman of their first 
Legends of ancestor.® According to tradition, the origin of the clan was 
the descent as follows. A fair young woman went into the woods to 

of the 
Wyandot receive the addresses of all the animals and to choose one 
clans 
from their 1 Ww, E, Connelly, ‘The Wyan- Wolf, and the Turtle. He adds that 
pana ¢ dots,” Archeological Report, 1899 the Tionnontates, who formed part of 

(Toronto, 1900), p. 98. The Tionnon- 
tates, according to Mr, Connelly, were 
the progenitors of the Wyandots (of. 
ett. pp. 92 59q.). 

2 W. E. Connelly, of. ct. p. 98. 
The French Jesuit Charlevoix, writing 
in 1721, gives a different account of 
the clans or, as he calls them, the 
tribes of the Hurons. He says that 
the Hurons were the nation of the 
Porcupine, and that they were sub- 
divided into three tribes named re- 
spectively after the Bear (or, according 
to others, the Roebuck, chezreuz/), the 

the Hurons, ordinarily called them- 
selves the Tobacco Nation. And of 
the Indians in general he writes: 
‘* Each tribe bears the name of an 
animal, and the whole nation has also 
its animal, whose name it assumes and 
whose figure is its badge or, if you will, 
its coat of arms. The only way in 
which they sign treaties is by drawing 
these figures, unless special reasons 
induce them to substitute others.” See 
Charlevoix, Historre de la Nouvelle 
France (Paris, 1744), v- 393- 

3 W. E. Connelly, of. cit, pp. 103 59. 

xvi TJOTEMISM AMONG THE HURONS OR WYANDOTS 33 

of them for a husband; their offspring was to form a new 
clan, which was to take its name from the animal-spouse. 
The snake, by assuming the guise of a handsome young man, 
won her heart and her hand. But after their marriage he 
could not keep his human form long; and when his bride 
saw him in his true serpent-shape, she fled in terror, and he 
pursued her, calling on her to return. She escaped, but 
gave birth to a brood of snakes, who were the progenitors of 
the Snake clan.’ Like the Snake, the original totemic 
Hawk was to a great extent mythical; for he is spoken of 
sometimes as a hawk, sometimes as an eagle, and often 
simply as the big bird or the chief of birds. However, 
unlike the mythical Snake, he has left real descendants, who 
appear to be the species of bird known as Cooper’s hawk or 
possibly the sparrow hawk.? The origin of the Hawk clan 
is said to have resembled that of the Snake clan. The bird 
assumed the form of a young man and married a young 
:woman, who lived with him in his nest. She bore him a 
number of hawks, who became the ancestors of the Hawk 
clan) The other Wyandot clans appear similarly to have 
believed that they were descended from their respective 
totems.‘ 
According to Major J. W. Powell the totemic clans of The dis- 

the Wyandots were grouped in four phratries or exogamous "bution 

of the 
classes as follows : —* Wyandot 
clans in 
First Phratry: 1. Bear; 2. Deer; 3. Striped Turtle. phratries. 

Second Phratry: 1. Highland Turtle; 2. Black Turtle; 3. Smooth 
Large Turtle. 
Third Phratry: 1. Hawk; 2. Beaver; 3. Wolf. 
- Fourth Phratry: 1. Sea Snake; 2. Porcupine. 

But according to Mr. W. E. Connelly there were never 
more than two phratries or exogamous classes in the 
Wyandot tribe, while the Wolf clan always stood between 
them, belonging to neither, but bearing the relation of 
cousin to both of them, and acting as mediator or umpire 

1 WwW. E. Connelly, ‘‘The Wyan- W. E. Connelly (of. c¢é. pp. 107 5¢., 
dots,” Archaeological Report, 1899 114). 
(Toronto, 1900), pp. 117 sg. - 5 J. W. Powell, * Wyandot Govern- 
2 w. E. Connelly, of. cz. p. 104. ment,” First Annual Report of the 

3 W. E. Connelly, of. ct. pp. 118 sg. Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
4 This is apparently implied by Mr. _ 1881), p. 60, 

VOL, YI D 

The 
Wyandot 
phratries 
were 
formerly 
exogamous 
as well as 
the clans, 

Every 
member 
ofa 
Wyandot 
clan bears 
a personal 
name, 
which has 
some 
reference 
to his 
totem, 

34 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

both between the phratries and between the clans. The 

two phratries according to Mr. Connelly were these :—! 

First Phratry: 1. Bear; 2. Deer; 3. Snake; 4. Hawk. 

Second Phratry: 1. Big Turtle; 2. Little Turtle; 3. Mud Turtle; 
4. Beaver; 5. Porcupine; 6. Striped Turtle; 7. Highland Turtle or 
Prairie Turtle. ' 

Mediator, executive power, umpire: the Wolf clan. 

In former times marriage was prohibited within the 
phratry as well as within the totem clan; for the clans 
grouped together in a phratry were regarded as brothers to 
each other, whereas they were only cousins to the clans of 
the other phratry. Hence, for example, a Bear man was 
forbidden to marry not only a Bear woman but also a Deer 
woman, a Snake woman, and a Hawk woman. But at a 
later time, before the Methodist missionaries came among 
the Wyandots, the rule prohibiting marriage within the 
phratry was abolished, and the prohibition was restricted to 
the totemic clan; in other words, the clan continued to be 
exogamous after the phratry had ceased to be so.” 

Every individual in a Wyandot clan bears a personal 
name which has some reference to his totem. Each clan 
possesses a list of such names, which are its peculiar property 
and may not be used by any other clan. The names are 
formed by rules in accordance with immemorial custom 
and may not be changed. They must be derived from some 
part, habit, action, or peculiarity of the totemic animal, from 
some myth connected with it, or from some property, law, 
or peculiarity of the element in which the animal lived. 
Thus a personal name was always a clan badge; a man 
disclosed his clan by mentioning his name.® The following 
are examples of thes¢ names :—* 

} Ww. E. Connelly, ‘The Wyan- 
dots,” Archaological Report, 1899 
(Toronte, 1900), p. 106. 

2 W. E. Connelly, dc. 

3 W. E. Connelly, of. cit. pp. 107 
Sg.5 109; J. W. Powell, ‘* Wyandot 

Government,” First Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1881), pp. 59 sg. : 

4}. W. Powell, of, cit. p. 603 
W. E. Connelly, ‘‘The Wyandots,” 
Archaological Report, 1899 (Toronto, 
1900), Pp. 109 599. 

xvi JOTEMISM AMONG THE HURONS OR WYANDOTS 35 

: 

Clan. | Personal Names. 
7 me = 
Deer. F . | Lean Deer (man), Spotted Fawn (woman), 
Old Deer, Old Doe. 
Bear - - . | Long Claws (man), Grunting for her Young 
(woman). 
Striped Turtle. . | Going round the Lake (man), Gone from the 
Water (woman). 
Mud Turtle. . | Hard Skull (man), Finding Sand Beach 
(woman). ° 
Smooth Large Turtle | Throwing Sand (man), Slow Walker (woman). 
Wolf. ; . | One who goes in the Dark (man), Footprint 
of Wolf, Always Hungry (woman). 
Snake. . . | Sitting in a curled Position (man). 
Porcupine ‘ . | The one who puts up Quills (man), Tree- 
. climber. 

Parents were not allowed to name their child. The The 
name was bestowed by the clan, and until about fifty years mine 
ago the ceremony of name-giving took place only once a among the 
year and always at the ancient anniversary of the Green “7° 
Corn Feast. The name was formally bestowed by the 
chief of the clan, a civil officer chosen by the- Council- 
women of the clan. These Council-women, we are told, 
“stood at the head of the clan and regulated its internal 
affairs.” At the ceremony of name-giving the clan chief 
took up an assigned position, and the parents of the clan, 
who had children to be named, filed before him, while the 
Council-women stood beside him and announced to him the 
name of each child. The chief then bestowed it on the 
infant, either by merely declaring it to the parents or by 
taking the child in his arms and addressing it by its name." 

These clan names, strangely enough, were responsible These clan 
for much of the fierce warfare which one tribe waged upon Van, 
another. For it was a religious duty to keep every one of source 
the clan names in use; in ancient times none of the names (tba 
was allowed to become obsolete. The animal from which 
the clan claimed descent was always angry when the names 

} WwW. E. Connelly, ‘‘The Wyan- Powell, ‘*Wyandot Government,” 

dots,” Archeological Report, 1899 First Annual Report of the Bureau of 
(Toronto, 1900), p. 108; J. W. thknology (Washington, 1881), p. 64. 

36 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Char. 

referring to him were not in use. To suffer a clan to be- 
come extinct was a reproach to the nation or tribe. Hence 
war was often undertaken to replenish the depleted ranks of 
a decaying clan by incorporating in it the captured women 
and children.’ 
Each clan Each clan has a distinctive mode of painting the face and 
cade distinctive ornaments to be used by the members at festivals 
ornaments. and religious ceremonies. The chief of the clan and the 
Council-women wear distinctive chaplets at their inauguration.” 
Descent of Descent of the clan is in the female line; in other 
the clan words, all children, whether male or female, belong to the 

and of 

property clan of their mother, not of their father.® Property also 
fs in the ve, descends in the female line. The head of the family and of 

the household is the woman; the hut and all household 
articles belong to her, and at her death they are inherited 
by her eldest daughter or nearest kinswoman. When the 
husband dies, his property goes, not to his children, but to 
his brother or to his sister’s son.‘ 

Each clan Each clan has its own lands, which it cultivates; and 
as inds, Within these lands each household has its own patch. It is 

which it the Women-Councillors who partition the clan lands among 

cnltvates: the households ; and the partition takes place every two 
years. But whilc each household has its own patch of 
ground, cultivation is communal ; that is, all the able-bodied 
women of the clan take a share in cultivating every patch ; 
every clan has a right to the services of all its women in the 
cultivation of the soil.’ 

According The civil government of the Wyandot clans, as it is de- 
i count the scribed for us by the American ethnologist, Major J. W. Powell, 

wyandots is very remarkable. According to him, each clan is governed 
were 

governed by a council composed of four women and one man, the 
whew chief of the clan. The women councillors are elected by 
co’ 
composed 
tw. E. Connelly, ‘‘The Wyan- the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
dots,” Archeological Report, 1899 1881), p. 63. 
(Toronto, 1900), p. 114. 4 5 ; . 
2 j. W. Powell, ‘* Wyandot Govern- Cc Je cts coe a ae Dey 
ment,” First Annual Report of the pao ae he i Ce? 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, octets Pe 153 
1881), p. 64. 5 J. W. Powell, ‘‘ Wyandot Govern- 
3 L. H. Morgan, Ascient Society, ment,” First Annual Report of the 
p- 1533 J. W. Powell, ‘‘Wyandot Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
Government,” First Annual Report of 1881), p. 65. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG THE HURONS OR WYANDOTS 37 

the heads of households, who are themselves women ; and chiefly of 
they in turn elect the chief of the clan... We have seen that (om 
it is the women councillors who biennially partition the clan is stoutly 
lands among the householders and decide on the names genie by 
which are to be given to all the children of the clan.? the tribe. 
Further, if Major Powell is right, the whole tribe is governed 

by a council which consists of all the councils of the clans 
united ; so that in the tribal council there are four times 

as many women as men.’ This statement, however, is 
doubted by a good authority, Mr. W. FE. Connelly, according 

to whom the Wyandots deny that it ever was true. “All 

that I have been able to learn on this subject,” says Mr. 
Connelly, “leads me to believe that the tribal council was 
composed of the hereditary chief of the tribe, the chief of 

each clan, and such additional warriors of ability and courage 

as the hereditary chief and council chose to ‘call to the 
council-fire” Women were not excluded from the delibera- 

tions of the council in certain contingencies, and were often 

called upon to give an opinion. The oldest Wyandots say 

that women were never recognised as members of the tribal 
council, This is the more probable, as the tribal council 
possessed only delegated and limited authority. The govern- 

ment of the Wyandots, in its functions, was a pure 
democracy. Questions affecting the interests of the whole 

tribe were determined by it in general convention, and men 

and women alike were heard, and voted, the majority 
ruling.”* According to Mr. Connelly, the office of The office 
tribal chief was hereditary in the Deer clan from the Qu 
remotest times to which tradition extends down to a great hereditary 
battle in which all the chiefs of that clan except one perished. Stee line; 
After that the tribal council transferred the office to the Pasting 
Porcupine clan; but many Wyandots still regard the chief tohis 
hereditary chief of the Deer clan as the true head of the brother 

A A or to his 
tribe® According to L. H. Morgan, the office of sachem or sister's son, 

1 J. W. Powell, ‘* Wyandot Govern- 
ment,” First Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1881), p. 61. 

2 Above, pp. 35, 36. 

3 J. W. Powell, ‘‘ Wyandot Govern- 
megt,” First Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 

1881), p. 61. 

4 Ww. E, Connelly, ‘‘The Wyan- 
dots,” <Archeological Report, 1899 
(Toronto, 1900), p. 120. 

5 W. E. Connelly, of. cit. pp. 
120 sg. The battle referred to in the 
text seems to have been fought about 
the end of the eighteenth century. 

Blood 
revenge. 

Little is 
known 

of the 
religious 
side of 
totemism 
among the 
Wyandots. 

Classifica- 
tory system 
of relation- 
ship 
among the 
Wyandots. 

38 ZTOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA chap. 

civil chief is hereditary in the clan, but elective among its 
members, Yet he adds that “the office of sachem passes 
from brother to brother, or from uncle to nephew ; but that, 
of war-chief was bestowed in reward of merit, and was not 
hereditary.” In Morgan’s time there were seven Wyandot 
sachems, one for each existing clan.' That hereditary 
chieftainships among the Hurons passed in the female line 
from the chief to his sister’s son was long ago observed by 
the Jesuit missionaries.” 

When a man of one clan has been murdered by a man 
of another, the aggrieved relatives appeal for justice to the 
council of the murderer’s clan; if they fail to obtain com- 
pensation, it becomes the duty of the victim’s nearest 
kinsman to avenge his death.’ 

With regard to the religious or superstitious aspect of 
totemism among the Wyandots, as among most other tribes 
of American Indians, our information is ex¢eedingly scanty. 
Major Powell says that each phratry “has the right to 
certain religious ceremonies and the preparation of certain 
medicines”; and that each clan “has the exclusive right to 
worship its tutelar god, and each individual has the exclusive 
right to the possession and use of a particular amulet.”* By 
“tutelar god” he means the totem of the clan, but he 
adduces no evidence which justifies such a description of the 
totem, nor does he tell us in what the alleged worship 
and amulets consist. 

Lastly, it may be observed that the Wyandots possess 
the classificatory system of relationship in the same form as 
the Iroquois, though the terms of relationship differ verbally 
with the difference of the language. The terms are fully 
recorded by L. H. Morgan.’ 

1 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 
153. 
. 2 Relations des Jesuits, 1634, pp. 
32 sg. (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 
1858) ; ¢d. 1658, p. 333 Charlevoix, 
Histoire de la Nouvelle France (Paris, 

1744), Vv. 395. 
7 7 W. Powell, ‘* Wyandot Govern- 

ment,” First Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1881), pp. 66 sg. 

4 J. W. Powell, of. cét. p- 65. - 

&§ L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
Sanguinity and Affinity, Table II. 
Pp- 293 599. 

xvi = TOTEMISM AMONG THE ALGONKIN TRIBES 39 

§ 4. Totemism among the Algonkin Tribes on the Atlantic 

The Delaware Indians or Lenape, as they call themselves, The 
were a branch of the widely-spread Algonkin stock. When pps 
they were discovered, their home country was the region an Aigon- 
around and north of Delaware Bay They tilled the Mm nbe 
ground, made pottery, and were skilful in manufacturing Atlantic. 
bead work and feather mantles, and in dressing deer skins. 
Though their weapons and tools were, mostly of stone, they 
had a considerable supply of native copper, which they 
made into arrow-heads, pipes, and ornaments Their houses 
were not communal; each family had its separate hut. 

Maize was their staple food ; but they had also large fields 
of squashes, beans, and sweet potatoes.” 

The Delawares or Lenapes were divided into three exo- The 
gamous clans, or perhaps rather phratries, which had for ror 
their totems respectively the Turtle (Tortoise), the Turkey, into three 
and the Wolf. Early writers such as Loskielsand Hecke- Geo, 
welder speak of these divisions as tribes. In referring to phratries, 
their totems the Delawares did not use the ordinary names freriaiee) 
for the animals ; they spoke of the wolf as Round Foot, of theTurkey, 
the turtle as Crawler, and of the turkey as Not-chewing. rie 
The Turtle clan claimed and was allowed a superiority and 
ascendency over the other two because their relation the 
turtle was not the common animal of that name, but the 

great original tortoise which, according to Indian mythology, 

bears the earth on its back.’ 

1 L. H. Morgan, Ascent Society, p. 
171; D. G. Brinton, Zhe Lendpé and 
their Legends (Philadelphia, 1885), 
Pp. 9 59., 3359-3 Handbook of American 
Indians north of Mexico, i. 385. For 
earlier accounts of the Delawares, see 
especially G. H. Loskiel, Hzstory of 
the Mission of the United Brethren 
among the Indians in North America 
(London, 1794), Part i. pp. I sgg.; 
Rev. John Heckewelder, ‘* An Account 
of the History, Manners, and Customs 
of the Indian Nations, who once 
inhabited Pennsylvania and the neigh- 
bouring States,” Zransactions of the 
Historical and Literary Committee of 
the American Philosophical Society, 

The wolf was honoured 

i, (Philadelphia, 1819) pp. 7 sgg. 

2p. G. Brinton, Zhe Lendpé and 
their Legénds, pp. 48-52. 

3G. H. Loskiel, History’ of the 
Mission of the United Brethren 
among the Indians in North America 
(London, 1794), Part i. p. 129; J. 
Heckewelder, ‘‘An Account of the 
History, Manners, and Customs of the 
Indian Nations, who once inhabited 
Pennsylvania and the neighbouring 
States,” Transactions of the Historical 
and Literary Committee of the American 
Philosophical Soctety, i, (Philadelphia, 
1819) pp. 245-247; L. H. Morgan, 
Ancient Society, pp. 171 sg.3 D. G. 
Brinton, The Lendpé and their Legends, 

The 
Delawares 
used the 
figures 

of their 
totems as 
badges or 
crests. 

40 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

because according to their traditions he was their benefactor, 
having helped their ancestors to issue from the bowels of 
the earth, As to the turkey, the totem of the third tribe, 
his merits were “that he is stationary, and always remains 
with or about them.” Such is the account of the origin of 
the totems which was given by an old Indian to the missionary 
J. Heckewelder, who resided among or near the Delawares 
for more than thirty years. Heckewelder adds: “ They are 
as proud of their origin from the tortoise, the turkey, and 
the wolf, as the nobles of Europe are of their descent from 
the feudal barons of ancient times, and when children 
spring from intermarriages between different tribes, their 
genealogy is carefully preserved by tradition in the family, 
that they may know to which tribe they belong.”? 

The Delawares used the figures of their totems as 
badges or crests to distinguish the tribal subdivision to 
which they belonged. On this subject Heckewelder says: 
“ The Turtle warrior draws either with a coal or paint here 
and there on the trees along the war path the whole animals 
carrying a gun with the muzzle projecting forward, and if he 
leaves a mark at the place where he has made a stroke on 
his enemy, it will be the picture of a tortoise. Those of the 
Turkey tribe paint only one foot of a turkey, and the Wolf 
tribe, sometimes a wolf at large with one leg and foot raised 
up to serve as a hand, in which the animal also carries a gun 
with the muzzle forward. . . . The Indians, in their hours 
of leisure, paint their different marks or badges on the doors 
of their respective houses, that those who pass by may know 
to which tribe the inhabitants belong. Those marks also 
serve them for signatures to treaties and other documents.” ” 

The three divisions of the Delawares, whether they are 
to be called clans, phratries, or subtribes, were originally 

P. 393 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 386. The fable 
that the earth rests on the back of a 
turtle or tortoise was told by the 
Hurons and Iroquois as well as by 
the Delawares. See Relations des 
JSésuites, 1636, p. tor (Canadian 
reprint, Quebec, 1858); Charlevoix, 
Histoire de la Nouvelle France (Paris, 
1744), Vv. 1473 Lafitau, A/eurs des 
sauvages amériguains (Paris, 1724), 

i. 94. 
1 J. Heckewelder, ‘An Account of 
the History, Manners, and Customs of 
the Indian Nations, who once inhabited 
Pennsylvania and the neighbouring 
States,” Transactions of the Historical 
and Literary Committee ofthe American 
Philosophical Soctety, i. (Philadelphia, 
1819) pp. 246, 247. 

2 J. Heckewelder, of. cit. pp. 246 
Sqe 

xvi ZOTEMISM AMONG THE ALGONKIN TRIBES 41 

exogamous ; no man might marry a woman of the same The three 
subdivision as himself. The Delawares and Iroquois, says ee 
Loskiel, “ never marry near relations. According to their of the 
own account, the Indian nations were divided into tribes, oo 
for no other purpose, than that no one might ever, either gamous. 
through temptation or mistake, marry a near relation, which 

at present is scarcely possible, for whoever intends to marry, 

must take a person of a different tribe.” In this passage 

the writer means by tribes what we now commonly call 
totemic clans or phratries. : 

While the three Delaware divisions of the Turtle, the TheTurtle, 
Turkey, and the Wolf may have been originally totemic Faviecaen 
clans of the ordinary type, they seem in course of time cians seem 
to have passed into something like phratries through ;2>* 
subdividing themselves into twelve subclans, each of which phratries 
had some of the attributes of a clan. When this segmenta- ies 
tion had taken place, the prohibition to marry within the into exo- 
clan ceased to apply to the three original clans and was liane 
restricted to the new subclans. Some of the names of these 
subclans point clearly to their origin in the segmentation 
of the old clans; for example, three subclans of the Turtle 
clan are called Smallest Turtle, Little Turtle, and Snapping 
Turtle respectively. Three of the subclans of the Turkey 
clan are called Big Bird, Red Face, and Ground Scratcher 
respectively. And two of the Wolf clan are called Big Feet 
and Long Body respectively. The names of all these sub- 
clans are personal and feminine.’ 

According to another American ethnologist, the late According 
D. G. Brinton, the three Delaware divisions of the Turtle, {P Bintom 
the Turkey, and the Wolf were neither clans- nor divisions 
phratries, but local subtribes, each inhabiting a territory of ae 
its own. He identifies them with the Unamis, the Una- were 
lachtigos (Wunalachtikos), and the Minsis (Monsys, Munsees), tne, 
which are mentioned by Loskiel as the three tribes of the phratries, 
Delawares; the Unamis, according to Brinton, are the Se 
Turtle people and inhabited the right bank of the Delaware 

1G. H. Loskiel, History of the pp. 171 sg., who gives a complete list 
Mission of the United Brethren among of the subclans. He obtained it at the 
the Indians in North America, Part Delaware reservation in Kansas in 
i. p. 56. 7 1860 with the aid of William Adams, 
2-L. H. Morgan, dAxcient Society, an educated Delaware. 

42 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

River ; the Unalachtigos or Wunalachtikos were the Turkey 

people and had their principal seat on the affluents of the 
Delaware near where Wilmington now stands; and the 

Minsis, Monsys, or Munsees were the Wolf people and 

dwelt in the mountains at the head-waters of the Delaware.’ 

It is quite possible that three original totemic clans of the 
ordinary type may in time have segregated themselves from 

each other, and occupying each a territory of its own have 
‘assumed the character of local subtribes. Such changes 

have already been noted in Australia? But it is to be 
observed that whereas the passage from kinship groups to 

local groups appears generally to take place under the 
influence of male descent? the Delawares to the last 
retained their female descent both of the clan and of 
property,’ which so far tells against Brinton’s theory. Yet 

Delawares on the other hand, the Delawares had a practice of some- 
practice of times naming a child into its father’s clan; and a son who 
eee thus received one of the names peculiar to his father’s clan 
child into became thereby a member of the clan with the right to 
its father’s succeed to his father. This remarkable custom, which we 

The 

lan. Thi 
enti if shall meet with again among the Shawnees,° may very well, 
may Pave as L. H. Morgan points out, have served to initiate a change 
sre Pae of descent from the female to the male line; once it had 
maternal been invented the device could hardly fail to grow in favour 
to paternal and be adopted more and more, since it possessed the great 
descent. : : . 

advantage of readily enabling children to succeed to the rank 

and property of their fathers. With this easy instrument for 

converting maternal into paternal descent, the old maternal 

1D. G. Brinton, Zhe Lénapé and 
their Legends, pp. 36-40. For the 
mention of the three Delaware tribes 
of the Unamis, Wunalachtikos, and 
Monsys, see G. H. Loskiel, History of 
the Mission of the United Brethren, 
Part i _p. 2. According to L. H. 
Morgan (Ancient Society, p. 173) the 
Munsees were an offshoot of the 
Delawares with the same three totemic 
and exogamous clans of the Turtle, the 
Turkey, and the Wolf, with descent in 
the female line. All statements of 
Morgan as to the internal organisation 
of the Indian tribes deserve to be 
treated with great respect, as he was 

aman of an accurate scientific mind, 
who had made very extensive personal 
investigations on this subject among 
the Indians, As to the Munsees, see 
Handbook of American Indians north 
of Mexico, i, 957. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 437, 458, 
463, 466, 473 59., 477 59-1 490 59.5 
494, 505. 

3 See above, vol, i, See the passages 
cited in the preceding note. 

4 L. H. Morgan, Anczent Society, 
p. 172. 

3 See below, p. 72. 

8 L. H. Morgan, Ansient Society, 
pp. 169, 172 sg. 

xvi =TOTEMISM AMONG THE ALGONKIN TRIBES 43 

clans of the Delawares may possibly have settled down, as 
Brinton held, into local subtribes. 

The Delawares have the classificatory system of The classi- 
relationship, though their form of the system differs in ak 
some points from that of the Iroquois. Thus in the relation- 
generation above his own a man calls his father’s brother See the 
“my little father” (Voh-’-tuz), not “my father” (Moh-'-h’) ; Delawares. 
and similarly he calls his mother’s sister “ my little mother ” 
(W’-gd-hé!-tut), not “ my mother” (N?-gd’-hase). In his own 
generation he has, as usually happens under the classifica- 
tory system, no single words for “ brother” and “ sister” in 
general, but_ has separate words for “my elder brother ” 
(Nah--hdns’) and “my younger brother ” (Nah--cese’-u-miss), 
for “ my elder sister ” (Va-mese') and “my younger sister” 
(Nah:-cese-u-miss). But he does not, as under the Iroquois 
form of the system, apply the terms “my elder brother,” 

“my younger brother,” “my elder sister,” “my younger 

sister” to certain of his cousins, namely, the children either 

of his father’s brother or of his mother’s sister; on the 

contrary he distinguishes these cousins from his brothers and 

sisters by applying to them different terms which may be 

translated “ my step-brother ” (Vee-md’-tus) and “ my step- 

sister” (N’-do-kwd-yome ). Moreover, he applies the very 

same terms to his other cousins, the children either of his 

father’s sister or of his mother’s brother; so that with the 

Delawares the sharp discrimination which under the classi- 

ficatory system is usually made between cousins, according 

as they are the children, on the one hand, of two brothers or 

of two sisters, or, on the other hand, of a brother and a 

sister, has been wholly obliterated. In the generation below 

his own a man applies the same term “my son” (V’-£weese’) 

to his own son and to his brother’s son, and the same term 

“my daughter” (V’-dé-nuss’) to his own daughter and to 

his brother’s daughter.’ Thus the Delaware form of the The 

classificatory system marks a distinct advance upon the nile de 
m of the 

Troquois form ; since it distinguishes the father’s brother from system 

the father and the mother’s sister from the mother, and has herein 

ceased to treat certain cousins as brothers and sisters. upon the 
Troquois 
\L. H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, pp. 220 sqg,., and form. 
Table II. pp. 293 s¢¢. 

Totemism 
among the 
Mohicans or 
Mohegans, 
another 
Algonkin 
tribe on the 
Atlantic 
slope. 

Antong the 
Mohicans 
the three 
original 
clans (the 
‘Turtle, the 
Turkey, 
and the 
Wolf) have 
become 
phratries 
by sub- 
division. 

Exogamy 
and female 
descent of 
the clans. 

44 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuapr. 

Another Algonkin tribe on the Atlantic slope which 
possessed totemism were the Mohicans, Mahicans, or 
Mohegans, who have been immortalised by Fenimore 
Cooper. They occupied the upper valley of the Hudson 
River in New York, but their territory extended eastward 
into Massachusetts. They lived, like the Iroquois, in long 
communal houses. Their villages and towns were stockaded, 
with a stretch of woodland on one side and of cornland on 
the other! Like the Delawares, they were divided into 
three sections which had for their totems the Turtle, the 
Turkey, and the Wolf respectively. And among the 
Mohicans, as among the Delawares, these original clans 
had developed through subdivision into phratries. It is 
rare, as Morgan justly says, to find among the American 
Indians the evidence of the segmentation of original clans 
preserved so clearly as it is among the Mohicans. For the 
three phratries bore the names of the three totemic animals, 
the Turtle, the Turkey, and the Wolf, and each of them 
included one or more clans whose totem was identical 
with that of its phratry ; so that the evolution of these clans 
by segmentation of the three original clans, now changed 
into phratries, seems to be highly probable.? The Mohican 
phratries and clans are as follows :—* 

Phratries. Clans, 
I. Wolf . . | 1. Wolf. 2. Bear. 3. Dog. 4. Opossum. 
Il, Turtle . | I. Little Turtle. 2, Mud Turtle. 3. Great Turtle. 
4. Yellow Eel. 

III. Turkey é | 1. Turkey. 2. Crane. 3. Chicken. 

Marriage within the clan is forbidden ; descent is in the 
female line. The office of sachem is hereditary in the clan, 
passing either from brother to brother or from uncle to 
nephew.4 

The Mohicans had the classificatory system of relationship, 

1 Handbook of American Indians p. 173. 
north of Mexico, i, 786-788, 926. 3 L. H. Morgan, of. vet. p. 174. 
2L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 4 L. H. Morgan, of, ctf. p, 174. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE ALGONKIN TRIBES 45 

but in some points their form of it differed curiously The ctassi- 
both from that of the Delawares and from that of the onl 
Iroquois. Thus in the generation above his own a man relation- 
applied the same term “my mother” (V’-guk’) to his own ae rn 
mother and to his mother’s sisters. But on the other hand Mohicans. 
he did not call his father’s brother “my father” (WVo/-). 

He called him by a different term, which may be translated 

“my step-father” (Vd-7d’-ku'). In his own generation he 

had, aS usually happens under the classificatory system, 
separate terms for “elder brother “and « younger brother,” 

for “elder sister” and “younger sister.” In the generation 

below her own a woman applied the same terms “my son” 
(N’-di-ome’) and “my daughter” (Ve-chune’) to her own son 

and daughter and to the sons and daughters of her sisters. 

But on the other hand a man did not call his brother’s son 

and daughter “my son” and “my daughter”; he called 

them both by a different term, which may be translated “my 
step-child ” (V4-kun’) Thus under the Mohican system, It isa 
whereas a man distinguished between his real father and his Pewlariy 
father’s brothers, he did not distinguish between his real Mohican. 
mother and his mother’s sisters; and whereas a man ;omthat 
discriminated his own sons from his brother’s sons, a mother paternity 
did not discriminate her own children from her sister’s exactly 
children. In other words, so far as the terms of relationship than _ 
go, paternity among the Mohicans was more certain than ""™” 
maternity. This is just the reverse of what on general 
grounds we might have anticipated. It tends to confirm 

the view which I have already advocated that the relation- 

ships. which the classificatory system has primarily in view 

are not physical but social. 

Another Algonkin tribe or confederacy of New England Totemism 

. . ° and 
which had totemism and exogamy were the Abenakis or exouiaily 

Abnakis. The confederacy so named had its centre in the among the 
present state of Maine. They lived in communal houses of ee 
a conical shape and tilled the soil, using fish as manure. 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- step-mother.” But this seems to be a 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 222, and mistake, for it contradicts the table on 
Table II. pp. 293 sgg- On p. 222. p. 339. In the text I follow the 
Morgan says that under the Mohican table. 
system ‘‘my mother’s sister is my 2 See above, vol. i. pp. 303 5979. 

Exogamy 
and 
paternal 
descent of 
the clans, 

The 
Ojibways 
or Chippe- 
ways are 
a great 
Algonkin 
tribe who 
ranged 
over a vast 
territory 
about the 
great lakes 
and 
westward, 

16 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA chav. 

Maize was an important article of their diet, but they 
lepended for their subsistence partly on hunting and still 
more on fishing. Each tribe had a civil chief and a war 
chief. A general council of the whole tribe, including 
women as well as men, decided on questions of peace and 
war. The Abenakis were divided into fourteen clans 
named after the following animals :-— 

1. Wolf. 2. Wild Cat (Black). 3. Bear. 

4. Snake. 5. Spotted Animal. 6. Beaver. 

7. Cariboo. 8. Sturgeon. 9. Muskrat. 

10. Pigeon Hawk. 11. Squirrel. 12. Spotted Frog. 
13. Crane. 14. Porcupine. 

Descent of the clan is now in the male line. Inter- 
marriage in the clan was anciently prohibited, but the pro- 
hibition has now lost much of its force. The office of 
sachem was hereditary in the clan.” 

§ 5. Lotemisin among the Ojibways 

The Ojibways or, as their name is popularly corrupted, 
the Chippeways, are one of the largest Indian tribes to the 
north of Mexico. They ranged over a region a thousand 
miles long from east to west, comprising both shores of 
Lake Huron and Lake Superior and extending westward 
across Minnesota to the Turtle Mountains in Northern Dakota. 
At present they number about thirty thousand and are nearly 
equally distributed between Canada and the United States. 
The Ojibways belong to the great Algonkin stock, who at 
the date of the discovery of America occupied an immense 
area from the Rocky Mountains on the west to Hudson’s 
Bay, Labrador, and the St. Lawrence River on the east ; 
while southward their territory extended along the Atlantic 
coast to Carolina, and down the east bank of the Mississippi 
in’ Wisconsin and Illinois to Kentucky. But the Algonkins 
were essentially a northern people; their home country was 
along the chain of the great lakes and the valley of the St. 
Lawrence. All Canada belonged to them, except a narrow 

1 Handbook of American Indians 2 L. H. Morgan, of. cz. pp. 174 sq. 

north of Mexico, i. 2-4; L. H. 8 Handbook of American Indians 
Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 174. north of Mexico, i. 277, 280. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 47 

fringe on the north held by the Eskimo and the peninsula 
between Lakes Huron, Erie, and Ontario, which was occupied 

by the Hurons and the Neutral Nation.’ The Ojibways 

_were in the main a race of hunters and fishers, roving their 

native forests on foot or paddling their light birch-bark 
canoes in search of game and fish. Theirs is a land of The land 
fine lakes, murmuring streams, and deep interminable ee 
woods, where the tall pines are intermingled with oak, ash, 

elm, beech, birch, and the sugar-maple, as well as with 

many kinds of wild-fruit trees, such as the wild plum, the 

crab apple, the elder, and the cherry ; while the underwood 
abounds with blackberries, huckleberries, strawberries, rasp- 
berries, wild grapes, and marsh cranberries. In summer the 
woodlands and glades are gay with a profusion of beautiful 
flowers, brilliant in colour but scentless. The climate is in 
general pure and dry and the sky clear; but the extremes 

of summer heat and winter cold are great. Spring sets in 
suddenly and under the burning summer sun vegetation 
shoots up rapidly. The autumns are lovely; the foliage 

then assumes hues of almost unimaginable variety and 
splendour. But while the Ojibways in their native state The 
were essentially a race of hunters and fishermen, they sub- alla 
sisted to a great extent on the wild rice which grows in to some 
rank luxuriance in the rivers and lakes of their country. 3°" 

wild ri Ht 
They collected the grain in canoes, paddling or punting which oe 
through the rice swamps, beating down the long stalks into plentifully 
the canoe, and threshing out the grain with poles. In this in their 
way they would collect from twenty to thirty bushels a day. ia 
The rice so obtained was dried over a fire, husked, and 

made into soup. Rivalry for the possession of the rice- 
swamps was one of the chief causes of the wars which the 
Ojibways waged with the Dacotas, Foxes, and other Indian 

tribes. Some of them also cultivated maize; they thought 

that the knowledge of Indian corn and of its cultivation had 

been imparted to their forefathers by the Great Spirit. 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 200 sg. 3 
id., Anctent Society, p. 165. 

2 Rev. Peter Jones,. History of the 
Ojebway Indians (London, #.d.), pp. 
51, 54 59., 56, 71 sg.3 William W. 

Warren, ‘‘ History of the Ojibways, 
based upon Traditions and Oral State- 
ments,” Collections of the Minnesota 
Historical Soctety, v. (Saint Paul, 
Minn., 1885) pp. 39 sg. 

3 W. H. Keating, Narrative of an 

Totemism 
among the 
Ojibways. 
Dr. Edwin 
James on 
the totems 
of the 
Algonkins 
in general. 

Marriage 
witha 
woman of 
the same 
totem 
punished 
with death, 

48 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cua. 

Though copper abounds in some parts of their country, the 
Ojibways made no use of it except to decorate their 
medicine-bags ; for they deemed it sacred. The principal 
town of the tribe was situated on an island in Lake 
Superior, where a perpetual fire is said to have been main- 
tained as a symbol of tribal unity.’ 

The Ojibways were divided into a large number of 
totemic clans. Indeed, totemism appears to have been 
common to’ the whole Algonkin stock of which the 
Ojibways formed part. On this subject a well-informed 
writer, Dr. Edwin James, observes: “Among the Indians 
of the Algonkin stock, every man receives from his father 
a totem, or family name. They affirm that no man is, by 
their customs, allowed to change his totem; and as this 
distinctive mark descends to all the children a man may 
have, as well as to all the prisoners he may take and adopt, 
it is manifest that, like the genealogies of the Hebrews, 
these totems should afford a complete enumeration of the 
stocks from which all the families have been derived. It 
differs not from our institution of surhames, except that the 
obligations of friendship and hospitality, and the restraint 
upon intermarriage, which it imposes, are more scrupulously 
regarded. They profess to consider it highly criminal for 
aman to marry a woman whose totem is the same as his 
own; and they relate instances where young men, for a 
violation of this rule, have been put to death by their 
nearest relatives. They say, also, that those having the 

Expedition to the Source of St. Peter's 
River (London, 1825), i. 1563 Rev. 
Peter Jones, History of the Ojebway 
Indians, pp. 55 sg.3 William W. 
Warren, in H.R. Schoolcraft’s J/zdtan 
Tribes of the United States, ii. (Phila- 
delphia, 1853) p. 1373 7a. ‘‘ History 
of the Ojibways,” Collections of the 
Minnesota Historical Society, v. 40. 
As to the gathering of the wild rice, see 
Geo. Catlin, North American Indians, 
Fourth Edition (London, 1844), ii. 
208, who says that the rice ‘‘ grows in 
immense fields around the shores of 
the rivers and lakes of these northern 
regions.” 

1 W. W. Warren, in H.R. School- 

craft's Indian Tribes of the United 
States, ii. 138. As to the superstitious 
veneration of the Indians for copper, 
which they found in Lake Superior 
and treasured as heirlooms or family 
deities, see Relations des Jésuites, 1667, 
p. 8 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). 
As to the abundance of copper ore in 
the neighbourhood of Lake Superior, see 
J. Carver, Travels through the Interior 
Parts of North America, Third Edition 
(London, 1781), pp. 138 5sg.; W. H. 
Holmes, ‘* Aboriginal Copper Mines 
of Isle Royale, Lake Superior,” 
American Anthropologist, New Series, 

iii. (1901) pp. 684 sgq. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 49 

same totem are bound, under whatever circumstances, aS social 
they meet, even though they should be of different and ee 
hostile bands, to treat each other not only as friends, but persons of 
as brethren, sisters, and relatives of the same family. Of ue 
the origin of this institution, and of the obligation to its 

strict observance, the Indians profess to know nothing. 

They say they suppose the totem was given them in the 
beginning, by their creator. Like surnames among us, thes 

marks are now numerous; and, as in the case of our au 
names, it is difficult to account for their multiplicity, without 
supposing a time when they might have been changed, or 

new ones adopted, more easily than at present. . . . It may 

be observed, that the Algonkins believe all other Indians to 

have totems, though, from the necessity they are in general 

under, of remaining ignorant of those of hostile bands, the 
omission of the totem in their picture writing, serves to 
designate an enemy. Thus, those bands of Ojibbeways who 

border on the country of the Dahcotah, or Sioux, always 
understand the figure of a man without totem, to mean 

one of that people.”' “The word éotem is of the Ojibbeway Totem is 
language, and, like almost all others, is readily moulded into 27 Obway 
the form of a verb.” * 

Similarly, the historian of the Ojibway tribe, W. W. W. W. 
Warren, tells us that the Algonkins or, as he chooses to won” 
call them, the Algics, “as a body are divided into several of the 
grand families or clans, each of which is known and per- is 
petuated by a symbol of some bird, animal, fish, or reptile, 
which they denominate the Totem or Do-daim (as the 
Ojibways pronounce it), and which is equivalent, in some 
respects, to the coat of arms of the European nobility. 

The Totem descends invariably in the male line, and inter- 
marriages never take place between persons of the same 
symbol or family, even should they belong to different and 
distinct tribes, as they consider one another related by the 
closest ties of blood and call one another by the nearest 
terms of consanguinity.” ° 

1 Narrative of the Captivity and 3 William W. Warren, ‘‘ History ot 
Adventures of John Tanner, prepared the Ojibways, basedgy upon Traditions 
for the press by Edwin James, M.D. and Oral Statements,” Collections of 
(London, 1830), pp. 313, 314. the Minnesota Hestorical Society, v. 

2 Jot. p. 316. (Saint Paul, Minn., 1885) pp. 34 sy. 

VOL. III E 

L. H. 
Morgan on 
the word 
totem. 

H.R. 
Schoolcraft 
on the 
totems 

of the 
Troquois 
and 
Ojibways. 

Peter Jones 
on the 
totems 

of the 
Ojibways. 

50 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA chav. 

The word totem, which has now passed into the languages 
of most civilised nations, is borrowed, as we have seen, from 
the language of the Ojibways, who used it in the same sense 
in which we employ the term. Thus L. H. Morgan, one 
of the best authorities on the American Indians, says that 
“in the Ojibwa dialect the word éotem, quite as often pro- 
nounced dodaim, signifies the symbol or device of a gens ; 
thus the figure of a Wolf was the totem of the Wolf gens,”? 
where by “ gens” Morgan as usual means what we call a clan. 
Again, H. R. Schoolcraft, another of the best authorities on 
the American Indians, speaking of the Iroquois, says that 
“nothing is more fully under the cognizance of observers of 
the manners and customs of this people, than the fact of 
the entire mass of a canton or tribe being separated into 
distinct clans, each of them distinguished by the name and 
device of some quadruped, bird, or other object in the 
animal kingdom. This device is called, among the Algon- 
quins (where the same separation into families or clans 
exists), cotem.”*® Again, Schoolcraft, tells us with respect to 
the Chippewas (Ojibways) that “the most striking trait in 
their moral history is the institution of the Totem—a sign 
manual, by which the affiliation of families is traced, agreeing, 
more exactly, perhaps, than has been supposed, with: the 
armorial bearings of the feudal ages. And this institution 
is kept up, with a feeling of importance, which it is difficult 
to account for. An Indian, as is well known, will tell his 
specific name with great reluctance, but his generic or family 
name—in other words, his Zotem, he will declare without 
hesitation, and with an evident feeling of pride.”* Again, 
the Rev. Peter Jones, one of our principal authorities on the 
Ojibways, writes that “their belief concerning their divisions 
into tribes is, that many years ago the Great Spirit gave his 
red children their toodaims, or tribes, in order that they 
might never forget that they were all related to each other, 
and that in time of distress or war they were bound to help 
each other. When an Indian, in travelling, meets with a 

! Vol. i, p. 1. 4H. R. Schoolcraft, Narrative of 
2L. H. Morgan, Amcient Society, an Expedition through the Upper 
p. 165. Mississippi to Itasca Lake (New York, 

3-H. R. Schoolcraft, Motes on the 1834), p- 146. 
Jroguois (Albany, 1847), pp. 126 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 5I 

strange band of Indians, all he has to do is to seek for 
those bearing the same emblem as his tribe; and having 
made it known that he belongs to their toodaim, he is sure 
to be treated as a relative. Formerly it was considered 
unlawful for parties of the same tribe to intermarry, but of 
late years this custom is not observed. I have remarked 
that when the English speak of the different nations of 
Indians they generally call them ¢7zbes; which term is 
quite erroneous, as each zad¢zon is subdivided into a number 
of tribes or clans, called ‘toodaims,’ bearing some resemblance 
to the divisions of the twelve tribes of Israel mentioned in 
Scripture ; and each tribe is distinguished by certain animals 
or things, as, for instance, the Ojebway nations have the 
following toodaims :—the Eagle, Reindeer, Otter, Bear, Buffalo, 
Beaver, Catfish, Pike, Birch-bark, White Oak Tree, Bear’s 
Liver, etc, etc. The Mohawk nation have only three 
divisions, or tribes—the Turtle, the Bear, and the Wolf.”? 

It is perfectly clear that the writers whom I have just An these 
quoted—-James, Warren, Morgan, Schoolcraft, and Jones— weolied Gis 
all employ the word Zofem to designate what we call the term totem 
clan totem and not what is sometimes called the individual ae ae 
totem or manitoo; and, further, we have the express testi- to the 
mony of several of -them that totem (dodaim, or toodaim) is Baviaual 
an Algonkin and in particular an Ojibway word. When azztoo. 
we remember, further, that of these writers Jones was a 
full-blooded Ojibway, that Warren was nearly a half-blood 
Ojibway, that Schoolcraft was married to an Ojibway wife 
and was intimately acquainted with the tribe,? and that 
Morgan spent years among the Indians, and was adopted 
by them, we may feel fairly confident that they could not 
be mistaken as to the meaning of a word in such common 
use as totem, and that therefore we are right in following 
them in their application of the term to the totem or sacred 
emblem of the clan. It is desirable to make this plain, 
because the first writer who introduced the term totem or, 
as he spelled it, totam to the notice of Europeans appears 
to have applied it incorrectly, not to the clan totem, but to 
the manitoo or guardian spirit of the individual. The 

1 Rev. Peter Jones, History of the 2 Handbook of American Indians 
Ojebway Indians, p. 138. north of Mexico, i, 278. 

But the 
Indian 
interpreter, 
J. Long, 
seems to 
have con- 
fused the 
guardian 
spirit 
(manitoo) 
with the 
clan totem. 

Totemic 
clans of the 
Ojibways. 
Warren's 
list. 

52 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cHap. 

writer in question was the Indian interpreter, J. Long, who 
published an account of the Indians in 1791. He tells us 
that “one part of the religious superstition of the savages 
consists in each having his ¢ofam, or favourite spirit, which 
he believes watches over him. This ‘¢ofam they conceive 
assumes the shape of some beast or other, and therefore they 
never kill, hunt, or eat the animal whose form they think 
this ¢o¢am bears.” To illustrate this superstition Long 
relates how a Chipprway (Ojibway), whose fofam was a 
bear, accidentally shot a bear and was thereafter filled with 
remorse and sorrow, believing that he had highly offended 
the Master of Life, that his czofam was angry, and that he 
would never be able to hunt any more.’ From this account 
it is clear that Long has confused the sanztoo or guardian 
spirit of the individual with the totem of the clan, and has 
applied to the former (the guardian spirit) the term totem, 
which strictly speaking is applicable only to the latter (the 
clan totem). His mistake was first pointed out by Professor 
E. B. Tylor.” I am the more concerned to call attention to 
the blunder because, misled by it, I formerly stated that the 
Ojibways abstained from killing, hunting, and eating their 
totems.2 Whether they did so! or not, we cannot say; 
as usual we have no information as to the relation of the 
American Indians to their totems, All that we can infer 
from Long’s account is that each man abstained from killing, 
hunting, and eating the animals in which he believed his own 
particular guardian spirit (s#anztoo) to be lodged. To these 
guardian spirits we shall return later on. 

The Ojibways were divided into at least forty totemic 
and exogamous clans, of which the following list of twenty- 
one clans is given by William W. Warren, the historian of 
the tribe :——* 

1 J. Long, Voyages and Travels of 
an Indian Interpreter and Trader 
(London, 1791), pp. 86 sg. Long 
also coined the word totemism (‘¢ The 
idea of destiny, or, if I may be allowed 
the phrase, ‘/ofamism,’ however strange, 
is not confined to the savages, many 
instances might be adduced from 
history,” etc. ). 

‘2 EF. B. Tylor, ‘* Remarks on Totem- 

ism,” /Journa. of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxviii, (1898) pp. 139 59. 

3 J.G. Frazer, Totenism (Edinburgh, 
1887), pp. 8 5g. (reprinted above, vol. 
i. pp. 9 59.). 

+ William W. Warren, ‘‘ History of 
the Ojibways,” Collections of the Min- 
nesota Historical Society, v. (1885) 
pp. 44 5g. 

x 
= 

Crane (U7j-e-jauk). 
Loon (AZong).3 

Marten ( Waub-ish-ash-e). 
Wolf (\/ah-een-gun). 
Pike (A’e-2oushay’). 
Eagle (.fe-gizzee). 
Moose (fous). 

Preyye o 

a) 

Goose (e-kah). 
. Sturgeon (uma). 
19. Beaver (A mzk). 
21. Hawk (A’a-kaik). 

oo 
Nw 

TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 53 

2. Catfish (Alan-um-aig).* 

4. Bear (1uk-wah).4 

6. Reindeer (Addick), 

8. Merman (Ne-daun-aub-ay). 

lo. Lynx (Be-sheu). 

12. Rattlesnake (Che-she-gwa). 

14. Black Duck or Cormorant 
(Vuk-ud-a-shib). 

16. Sucker (Vuma-bin). 

18. White Fish (Ude-kumazg). 

20. Gyll (Gy-aushh). 

The foregoing list of Ojibway clans agrees for the most Morgan's 
part with the lists given by our other authorities, but it may "s+ 
be supplemented from them. Thus L. H. Morgan also gives 
a list of twenty-one clans, “without being certain that they 
include the whole number” ; and while he omits several of 
those mentioned by Warren, to whom he does not refér, he 

adds the following :—* 

Mud Turtle (AZe-she'-/d). 
Little Turtle (Ale-skwa-da'-re). 
Duck (44-ah'-weh). 

Snake (Ke-va'-dig). 

. Heron (Afoosh-kd-o0-2e'). 

bw nN 

SAE» 

w 
° 

Again, Dr. Edwin James gives a list of eighteen totemic James's 
clans which he tells us were common to the Ojibways and "*- 

? Elsewhere (p. 46, compare p. 44) 
Warren gives Bus-in-as-see as the 
native name of the Crane clan. But 
Oj-e-jauk agrees closely with the dd- 
je-jawk, ‘crane,’ of Edwin James 
(Narrative of the Captivity and Adven- 
tures of John Tanner, p. 315) and the 
O-jee-jok, “crane,” of L. H. Morgan 
(Ancient Society, p. 166). 

2 Elsewhere (p. 46, compare p. 44) 
Warren appears to give A-wause as 
the native name of the Catfish clan, 
and this agrees with the ‘* 4/-wa-sts- 
sé, Small cat fish” of Edwin James (/.c.). 
L. H. Morgan also mentions an Ojib- 
way totem named 4d-wah-sis’-sa, but 
he gives as its English equivalent 
*bull-head ” ; he mentions the Catfish 
totem, but without giving its native 
name (Ancient Society, p. 166). Ap- 
parent discrepancies in the names of 
totems are perhaps sometimes to be 

Snapping Turtle (A/7k-o-noh’). 
Snipe (Chu-e-skwe'-ske-wéa). 
27. Duck (She-Sheéde’). 

Muskrat ( Wa-zhush'). 

31. Bull-head (44-wah-sis'-sa). 

explained by the Indian custom of 
designating their totems and totemic 
clans by a variety of different names, 
some of which are descriptive phrases. 

3 Elsewhere (p. 48, compare p. 44) 
Warren gives 4h-ah-wauk as the native 
name of the Loon clan; and this 
resembles the 44-ah-weh which Morgan 
(dnctient Society, p. 166) gives as the 
native name of a Duck totem. Onthe 
other hand A/ong, “loon,” is supported 
by Morgan (/¢.) and agrees closely 
with the A/ahkng, “loon,” of Edwin 
James (of, cit, p. 314). 

4 Elsewhere (p. 49, compare p. 44) 
Warren gives Moka as the native name 
of the Bear clan. The form A/uk-wah 
is supported by the AZuk-kwazw, ‘*bear,” 
of Edwin James (/.c.) and the A/é-kwd’ 
of Morgan (/.c.). 

® L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
pp- 165 sg. 

Jones’s 
list. 

Most of the 
Ojibway 
clans are 
said to 
have arisen 
through 
subdivision 
of five 
original 
clans, the 
Crane, 
Catfish, 
Loon, 
Bear, and 
Marten. 

54 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

Ottawas (Ottawwaws) ; but he is careful to add that many 
more might be enumerated. For the most part his list 
agrees with the lists of Warren and Morgan, but it supple- 
ments them by adding the following clans :—' 

32. Sparrow hawk (Pe-fe-ge-wis- 33. Water-snake (Alus-sun-dum- 
2ains). mo). 

34. Forked tree. 35. Wild cat (Pe-zhew). 

Finally, the Ojibway Indian, Peter Jones, gives as speci- 
mens, not as complete, a list of eleven Ojibway totemic clans 
including five which are not mentioned by Warren, Morgan, 
and James. These are as follows :-— 

36. Otter. 37. Buffalo. 38. Birch-bark. 
39. White Oak Tree. 40. Bear’s Liver. 

According to Warren, |! the Crane, Catfish, Loon, Bear, 
Marten, and Wolf were the principal clans, “not only in a 
civil point of view, but in numbers, as they comprise eight- 
tenths of the whole tribe.” Indeed, many of the totems were 
not known to the tribe in general, ard Warren ascertained 
them only through close enquiry. Among them he includes 
the Goose, Beaver, Sucker, Sturgeon, Gull, Hawk, Cormorant, 
and White Fish totems, which were known only in the 
remotest northern part of the Ojibway country. Old Ojib- 
way men, whom Warren particularly questioned on this 
subject, affirmed that all the totemic clans were only sub- 
divisions of five great original totemic clans, namely, the 
Crane, Catfish, Loon, Bear, and Marten clans ; according to 
these old men the new clans, formed by subdivision of the 
five original clans, “have assumed separate minor badges, 
without losing sight or remembrance of the main stock or 
family to which they belong. These divisions have been 
gradually taking place, caused in the same manner as the 
division into distinct tribes. They are easily classed under 
the five great heads, the names of which we have given.” * 

1 Narrative of the Captivity and Ojebway Indians, p. 138. 
Adventures of John Tanner, prepared 
for the press by Edwin James, M.D. 3 W. W. Warren, ‘‘ History of the 
(London, 1830), pp. 314 sg. This, so Ojibways,” Collections of the Minnesota 
far as I know, was the first published Afzstorical Society, v. (1885) p. 45 3 

list of Ojibway clans. compare zd. pp. 43 sg., for the five 
2 Rev. Peter Jones, History of the great original “ clans or totems.” 

XVI 

TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 55 

This is valuable testimony to the tendency of totemic clans to 
split into new clans, leaving the original clans in the position 
of phratries. The same tendency has met us repeatedly in 
our survey of the evidence. The ancestors of the five original 
Ojibway clans are said to have appeared suddenly in human 
form from the bosom of a great salt sea.’ 

The following, according to Warren, are the subdivisions Sub- 

of the five great original totemic clans of the Ojibways :—* Smfons 
original 
Ojibway 
clans. 

Primary Clans 

Secondary Clans 
(now ranking as phratries). 

(formed by subdivision of the primary clans). 

1. Catfish (4-waus-e)3 . Catfish, Merman, Sturgeon, Pike, White- 
fish, Sucker, and all other fish totems. 

Crane, Eagle. 

Loon, Goose, Cormorant. 

Common Bear, Grizzly Bear, Bear’s 
head, Bear’s foot, Bear’s ribs, etc. 

Marten, Moose, Reindeer. 

2. Crane (Bus-in-as-see) 4 
3. Loon (Ah-ah-wauk)® 
4. Bear (Moka) 6 

5. Marten (Waub-ish-a-she) 

Like the Torres Straits Islanders,’ some of the Ojibways The 
are supposed to resemble in various respects their totem oe 
animals. Thus “it is a general saying, and an observable posed to 
fact, amongst their fellows, that the Bear clan resemble the fae 
animal that forms their totem in disposition.” For they are totemic 
surly and pugnacious and have constantly embroiled their ee 
tribe in war with other tribes, though, to do them justice, 
they have always been ready, when it came to the rub, to 
give and take hard knocks. They are the acknowledged 
war chiefs and fighting men of the community ; the war- 
pipe and the war-club are committed to their custody ; and 
they have often been called the bulwarks of the tribe.* 
Again, the numerous and important Crane clan takes its 

1 W. W. Warren, ‘‘ History of the 
Ojibways,” Collections of the Minnesota 
Historical Society, v. (1885) Pp. 43 59- 

2 W. W. Warren, of. cit. pp. 45-59- 

3 As to this name, see above, Pp. 53, 
note 2, - 

4 As to this name, see above, p. 53, 
note }, 

5 As to this name, see above, p. 53: 

note #, 

6 As to this name, see above, p. 53, 
note 4, 

7 See above, vol. ii. pp. 8 sg. 

8 W. W. Warren, ‘‘ History of the 
Ojibways,” Collections of the Min- 
nesota Historical Society, v. (1885) 
P. 49. 

Claim of 
the Crane 
clan to rank 
highest, 

Counter 
claim of the 
Loon clan. 

56 ZTOTEMISM [IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuat. 

name of Bus-in-as-see or “ Echo-maker ” from the loud, clear, 
far-ringing cry of the crane ; and accordingly members of 
this clan are thought to possess naturally a loud, ringing 
voice, and they are the acknowledged orators of the tribe ; in 
former times, when different tribes met in council, the Crane 
men acted as interpreters of the wishes of their tribe. They 
claim, says Warren, with some apparent justice the chieftain- 
ship over the other clans of the Ojibways.’ A _half-blood 
who spoke French and had the honour and happiness of being © 
the husband of a Crane wife, assured a German traveller that 
“the badge of the Crane is the noblest and greatest badge 
among the Ojibways. The Cranes,” said he, “go as far 
back as the Deluge. Their names are to be found in the 
books of the Romans.” When the traveller seemed apt to 
smile, “ No, no, sir,” pursued the half-blood eagerly, “seriously, 
all the names at present among us were to be found already 
at the destruction of the tower of Babel. I am quite serious,,. 
sir. The Cranes took possession of these countries after 
the Deluge. It is well known. Hor ages the Cranes had 
the highest name. They are recorded in the greatest 
and oldest books. My mother was a Crane. My wife is a 
Crane. In these latter times théy have come down a little. 
But there are still Cranes at La Pointe, at Saut de Ste. 
Marie, at La Folle Avoine, near Detroit, and at Hudson's Bay. 
In short, sir, the Cranes have been and are still everywhere the 
most remarkable men in the world.”? However, when the 
same traveller conversed with a man of the Loon clan, he 
received the impression that the Loons were the oldest and 
noblest family in the whole country.2 And certainly they 
held their heads very high ; for they claimed to be the chief 
or royal family, supporting their claim by a reference to 

the collar which nature has placed round the neck of a Laon 

and which clearly resembles the wampum necklace of a 
chief. But this appeal to natural history was disallowed by 
the Cranes and the members of the other totem clans, who 
stuck to it that the Loon chiefs derived any authority they 

1 W. W. Warren, ‘History of the Zrzahklungen vom Obern See (Bremen, 
Ojibways,” Collections of the Minnesota 1859), i. 206 sg. 
Historical Society, v. (1885) pp. 46 s¢. 

2 J. G. Kohl, Avtschi-Gami oder 3 J. G. Kohl, of. cit, i. 205. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 57 

possessed, not from the Creator, but only from the French 
at Quebec." 

The subdivision of the Bear clan, the most numerous of ‘The 
all the clans of the Ojibways, furnishes a good example of ree in 
the splitting of a totem clan into segments, each of which an example 
takes for its totem either a species or a part of the original Sane re 
animal. Such totems I have called split totems.? However, a totem. 
we are told that after the old Bear clan had broken up into 
a number of new clans with the Bear’s head, the Bear’s foot, 
the Bear’s ribs, etc., for their totems, these new totemic clans 
coalesced again partially into two, namely, the Common 
Bear and the Grizzly Bear.’ 

According to Warren, members of the same totem clan Exogamy 
among the Ojibways were strictly forbidden to marry each oie 
other. Marriage between two persons of the same totem, clans; _ 
says he, “is one of the greatest sins that can be committed eo i 
in the Ojibway code of moral laws, and tradition says that punishable 
in former times it was punishable with death. In the “7” 
present somewhat degenerate times, when persons of the 
same totem intermarry (which even now very seldom 
occurs), they become objects of reproach. It is an offence 
equivalent among the whites to the sin of a mah marrying 
his own sister.” * 

Persons of the same totem are deemed to be closely The totem 
related to each other, even though they may belong to aes 
different tribes. “An individual,” says Warren, “of any beyond the 
one of the several totems belonging to a distinct tribe, as tiene 
for instance the Ojibway, is a close blood relation to all 
other Indians of the samé totem, both in his own and all 
other tribes, though he may be divided from them by a 
long vista of years, interminable miles, and knows not even 
of their existence.” ° 

1 W. W. Warren, ‘‘ The History of | was completed in manuscript in the 

the Ojibways,” Collections of the Min- 
nesota Historical Soctety, v. (1885) p. 48. 

* Above, vol. i, p. 103; vol. ii, 
PP. 536 sgg. 

3 W. W. Warren, ‘ History of the 
Ojibways,” Collections of the Minnesota 
Historical Society, v. (1885) p. 49. 

4 W. W. Warren, of. ctt. p. 42. 
Though Warren’s History of the Ojib- 
zvays was not published until 1885, it 

winter of 1852-53 (of. c#t. p. 18). 
Since then the rule of exogamy has 
probably been still further relaxed. 
See on this subject the testimony of 
the Rev. Peter Jones, quoted above, 
p- 51. The rule which forbids mar- 
riage within the gens (clan) is men- 
tioned without remark by L. H. 
Morgan (Ancient Society, p.- 167). 

5 W.W, Warren, of, czt, PP. 42 59. 

Among the 
Ojibways 
the descent 
of the 
totem is in 
the male 
line ; but 
there are 
grounds 
for think- 
ing that 
descent was 
formerly in 
the female 
line. 

Office and 
property 
are also 
hereditary 
in the 
male line. 

38 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA CHAP. 

Among the Ojibways, unlike most of the other Indian 
tribes thus far dealt with, descent of the totem is in the 
male line ; children always belong to their father’s totemic 
clan.' But there are several reasons for thinking that 
descent was originally in the female line, and that the 
change to the male line has been comparatively recent. 
For several tribes of the Algonkin stock, to which the 
Ojibways belong, retain the rule of female descent, and 
among these are the,Delawares, who are universally recog- 
nised by the Algonkins as one of the oldest of their tribes, 
and are styled Grandfathers by them all. As we cannot 
suppose that these tribes have exchanged male descent for 
female, a certain presumption is raised that the other 
Algonkin tribes, which now have male, formerly had female 
descent. Further, there isisome positive evidence that three 
or four generations ago the office of chief descended in the 
female line. For an Ojibway sachem who died in 1840 at 
the age of ninety, being asked why he did not retire from 
office in favour of his son, replied that his son could not 
succeed him, for the right of succession belonged, not to his 
son, but to his sister’s son. This proves that down to a 
comparatively recent time the sachemship passed in the 
female line. We should remember, too, that missionaries to 
the Indians, trained in different habits of thought, have 
generally opposed the custom of female descent, because 
they consider it unjust and unreasonable to disinherit a 
man’s own sons in favour of his nephews. It is therefore 
not improbable that among some tribes, the Ojibways 
perhaps included, the change from female to male descent 
has been brought about, or at least accelerated, by missionary 
influence.” 

However that may have been, office and property are 
now hereditary in the clan and therefore pass in the male 
line. Children at present get most of their father’s property, 
to the exclusion of the rest of the clan kindred. A woman's 
property goes to her children and in default of them to her 
sisters, own or collateral. A son may succeed his father as 

1 W. W. Warren, ‘‘ History of the p. 42; L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, 
Ojibways,” Collections of the Min- yp. 166. 
nesota [Historical Society, v. (1885) 2 L. H. Morgan, of, ec’. pp. 166 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 59 

sachem ; but when there are several sons, the clan chooses 
among them.’ 

While a man’s personal name might be, and often was, 
changed, for example when he went to war or any remark- 
able event had happened, the totem was never changed. 

“It is not true,’ says Edwin James, “that they have, in all Members 
instances, the figure of whatever may be their totem always ee 
tattooed on some part of their body, nor that they carry not always 
about them a skin, or any other mark, by which it may be pai by 
immediately recognised. Though they may sometimes do cutwara 
this, they are, in other instances, when they meet as ™"** 
strangers, compelled to inquire of each other their respective 
totems.” ? 

The Ojibways observed the law of the levirate: a man The 
was held bound to marry the wife of his deceased brother, "*'* 
but not till a year of her widowhood had elapsed. He was 
also under an obligation to provide for his brother's 
children.’ 

The Ojibways, like the rest of the Indian tribes now The classi- 
under consideration, possess the classificatory system of ee i 
relationship, but in some points their form of the system of relation- 
differs from that of the Iroquois. Thus among the Ojibways mata wie 
of Lake Superior, in the generation above his own a man Ojibways, 
calls his father’s brother, not “my father” (dss), but “ my 
step-father” (WV¥-ni-sho'-mée); and, similarly, he calls his 
mother’s sister, not “my mother” (Wiz'-gah), but “my step- 
mother” (WVi-no'-shé). In his own generation, as usually 
happens under the classificatory system, he has no single 
words for “brother” and “sister” in general, but has 
separate words for “ elder brother ” and “ younger brother,” for 
“elder sister” and “ younger sister”; but, as often happens 
under the classificatory system, the word for “younger 
brother ” and “ younger sister” is the same (Vi-shi-m2). A 
man calls his male cousins, the sons either of his father’s 
brother or of his mother’s sister, “my elder brother” 
(Nis-sd’-yé), or “ my younger brother ” (Vi-shi-me), according 

1 L. H. Morgan, Ancien? Society, for the press by Edwin James, M.D., 
p. 167, p- 315. 
3 W. H. Keating, Narrative of an 

2 Narrative of the Captivity and Expedition to the Source of St. Peters 
Adventures of John Tanner, prepared River (London, 1825), ii. 166 sg. 

‘The 
Ojibway 
form. of 

the classifi- 

catory 
system 
shews an 
advance 
upon the 
Iroquois 
form. 

The story 
of Otter- 
heart and 
his beaver 
wife. 

60 FOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Chav. 

as they are older or younger than himself ; and similarly he 
calls his female cousins, the daughters either of his father’s 
brother or of his mother’s sister, “ my elder sister ” (Vi-mis’- 
s) or “my younger sister” (Vi-shi-mé), according as they 
are older or younger than himself? But his male cousins, 
the sons either of his father’s sister’ or of his mother’s 
brother, he calls “my cousins,” not “my brothers”; and 
similarly his female cousins, the daughters either of his 
father’s sister or of, his mother’s brother, he calls “my 
cousins,” not “my sisters.” In the generation below his own 
a man calls his brother’s sons and daughters “my step- 
sons ” and my “ step-daughters,” not “my sons” and “my 
daughters.” Similarly a woman calls her sister's children 
“my step-children,” not “my sons” and “ my daughters.” ” 
; Thus by discriminating the father’s brother from the father, 
the mother’s sister from the mother, a man’s own children 
from his brother’s children, and a woman’s own children 
from her sister’s children, the Ojibway form of the classifi- 
catory system marks a distinct advance on the Iroquois 
form, which confounds the father’s brother with the father, 
the mother’s sister with the mother, a man’s own children 
with his brother’s children, and a woman’s own children 
with her sister’s children. It is possible that this advance 
may be associated with the change of descent from the 
female to the male line. . 

We have seen that among the clans of the Ojibway 
there is one that has for its totem the otter and another 
that has for its totem the beaver. The following story, 
taken down from the lips of an old Ojibway woman, refers 
to these two clans. There was a man of the Otter clan and 
his name was Otter-heart. Once upon a time he went to 

1 But among the Ojibways of Lake 
Michigan, Lake Huron, and Kansas 
he calls these relations, not ‘‘ my elder 
or younger brother,” ‘‘my elder or 
younger sister,” but ‘‘ my step-brother” 
(We-kd'-na or Ne-kd-nis), ‘my step- 
sister” (Win-dé-wa'-mé or N-do-wa- 
mé), except that among the Ojibways 
of Lake Huron and Kansas a mother’s 
sister’s daughter, younger than the 
speaker, is called his younger sister 
(Ne-she'-md). See LL. H. Morgan, 

Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, 
Table IL. pp. 314, 316, 340, 342. 
In his general remarks on the Ojibway 
system (pp. 204 sg.) Morgan seems 
to leave the Lake Superior form of it 
out of account. 

2 L, H. Morgan, of. cét. pp. 204 5g., 
and Table II. pp. 295, 296, 298, 
299, 300, 302, 303, 310, 311, 313, 
314, 316, 322, 323, 324, 325, 331, 
332 333» 3341 339, 340, 342. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 61 

catch beavers at a beaver-dam. But first he laid down his 

robe under a tree on a spot where he proposed to camp. 

Then he went to the dam, pierced it, and let all the water 

run out, so that the beavers were left high and dry, and he 

killed three of them. After that he returned to the place How Otter- 
where he had left his robe ; but what was his surprise to Det foun 
find in its place a cozy hut, and to see the smoke curling up woman and 
and the form of a woman busy at the fire. He went in, aed 
and there sure enough was his robe, beside the deer-skip 

which the woman had spread for him. “ Good,” said he to 
himself, “she is my wife.” She was small, but very pretty 

and dainty, and she moved about so briskly in the hut, yet 

so neatly and tidily that it was a joy to see her. She 
dressed him an excellent supper of the beavers and set the 
tit-bits before him. It tasted very good, and he asked her 

to share it with him. ‘“ No,” said she, shyly ; “I have plenty 

of time. I will eat afterwards what I am wont to eat.” 

He urged her, but still she refused, saying that she would 

eat afterwards what she was wont to eat. So he let her be. 

But in the night he was wakened by a rasping sound, as if 

mice or beavers were nibbling at wood. By the flickering 

light of the fire he fancied he saw his wife gnawing the 
birchen twigs with which he had tied up the beavers in a 
bundle. But he thought it must be a dream, and so fell 

asleep again till morning. When he awoke, his breakfast 

was ready, and his little wife stood before him and handed 

it to him. He told her his dream, but she did not laugh so 

much at it as he had expected. “Hold,” thought he to 
himself, “ perhaps it was no dream after all, but a waking 
reality. Come and tell me,’ said he to her, “ yesterday 

when I brought you the beavers, you looked at them so 
earnestly, and when you cut them up you considered them 

so curiously and examined every limb. Say, why did you 

do that?” “Qh,” said she and sighed, “ have I not cause 

to look at them so earnestly? I know them all. They 

are my kinsfolk. One was my cousin, another my aunt, 

and the third my grand-uncle.” “What,” said he, “ are you 

of the beaver clan?” ‘“ Yes,” said she, “ that is my family.” 

Then Otter-héart was glad, for the Otters and the Beavers 

have been allied clans’ from of old. ‘His beaver-wife pleased 

62 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

him very much, she was so simple and modest and so 

attentive to him; and the best proof that she loved him 

was that she had sacrificed her own kinsfolk for his sake. 

But to spare her natural feelings he promised that henceforth 

he would kill only birds and deer and other beasts and 

would let the beavers alone, that he and she might eat their 

meals together. And for her part she did not meddle any . 
more with the birchen twigs, and did not wake him of nights 

with her nibbling and gnawing, but she accustomed herself 

to eat meat like human folk. 

How in the So they lived the whole winter through very pleasantly. 
Rie He was a bold hunter, and she a quiet, careful house- 
treesshe wife, diligent and peaceable like the beavers. They were 
bore hi : P aie 

acon, @ happy pair. When the spring came and with it the 

joyous time of the sugar-making, they went out to their 
sugar-camp among the maple-trees,! and there in the sugar- 
camp she bore him a son. The very next day the father 
began to make bows and arrows for the little one. But his 
wife laughed at him and said it would be long before the 
child could use them. “Perhaps you are right,” said he, 
and broke what he had made. But it was not long before 
he had made another set of bows and arrows. So impatient 
was he to see his son grow up to be a good hunter. He 
pictured to himself how one day he would go out to the 
chase with him, how he would teach the little one all his 
woodland craft, and how the lad would be a great and 
famous huntsman. He built castles on castles in the air. 
Alas, alas, how seldom happy dreams come true! How 
little is enough to shatter the most perfect bliss! A breath 
of envious fate, the tiniest mistake, and all is gone for ever. 

Otter-heart and his beaver-wife had lived their happiest 

1 In the old days, before the intro- 
duction of cane sugar, the Indians used 
to make great quantities of sugar from 
the maple. The season of sugar- 
making began in March, when the 
crows migrated from the south. Then 
each family went out with the necessary 
equipage and utensils, to camp in its own 
sugar-grove among the maple-woods. 
See W. J. Hoffman, ‘The Menomini 
Indians,” Fourteenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (1892- 

93), Part i. (Washington, 1896) pp. 
287-290. As to the Indian manu- 
facture of maple-sugar, see Lafitau, 
Meurs des sauvages ameériguains 
(Paris, 1724), ii. 153 sgg.3 H. W. 
Henshaw, ‘‘Indian Origin of Maple 
Sugar,” American Anthropologist, iii. 
(1890) pp. 341 sgg.; A. F. Chamber- 
lain, in American Anthropologist, iv. 
(1891) pp. 39 sgg., 381 599. ; Hand- 
book of American Indians north of 
Mexico, i. 803 sq. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OJIBWAYS 63 

day. Destiny overtook them on the way home from the HowOtter- 
sugar-camp. Spring was now fully come, all the ice was ee 
melted, and every river and every brook ran high. So the wife. 
wife asked her husband to build a bridge for her over every - 
river and every little brook, that she might cross them 
dryshod. And he had to promise her solemnly to do so. 
“For,” said she, “if my feet should be wetted, it will prove 

a great sorrow for you.” Otter-heart did what he had 
promised. At every rivulet, at every trickling spring he 
built a bridge for his wife. At last he came to a little 
runlet only six inches wide. Now whether he was weary of 
always building bridges or whether he was lost in thought 
and day-dreams, I cannot say, but certain it is he strode 
over the tiny brook and forgot all about a bridge. But 
when he had gone on a bit and his wife and his little son 
did not come after him, he turned back to the brook, which 
now to his horror had swollen to a mighty rushing torrent. 

A foreboding of what had happened struck him like a flash 
of lightning, and too late he rued his forgetfulness. His 
little wife with her little son on her back had tripped after 
him with little steps. When she came to the runlet six 
inches wide, and found no bridge, she stopped -and called 
her husband to help her. But her cry was unheard, and in 
the anguish of her heart she made the leap. But she fell 
short with a splash into the water and when her foot was 
wet, it was all over with her. Immediately she turned into 

a beaver and her little son into a little beaver, and both 
swam with the stream, which suddenly swelled high, away 
down to the beavers’ pool. In despair Otter-heart followed 
down the bank of the wild raging torrent and after three 
days’ long and weary journey he came to the beavers’ pool 

at last. There he saw a beaver-house, and sitting on the 
roof his own little wife. She was plaiting a bag out of the 
bark of the white-wood, and she had her little beaver 
fastened by a string of white-wood bark at her side. Otter- 
heart was beside himself at the sight. He begged her from 
the bank to come back to him, but she answered that she 
could not now. “I sacrificed my kinsfolk and all for you, 
and I only asked that you would build me bridges and help 
me dryshod over the waters. You cruelly disregarded my 

The story 
belongs to 

the class of 

the Swan 
Maiden. 

The Pota- 
wattamies, 
an Algon- 
kin tribe. 

Keating's 
account 
of their 
totemism. 

64 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnar. 

request. Now I must remain for ever with my folk.” Her 
husband prayed her at least to undo the white-wood string 
and let his little son come to him, that he might kiss him. 
But even that she felt bound to refuse. She remained where 
she was. And—here the old woman suddenly broke off 
the tale, and nothing would induce her to say what became 
of Otter-heart, whether he turned into an otter and lived in 
the water near his beaver-wife, or whether, as the years 
slipped by, he forgot her and married again, or whether he 
went home to grow old in solitude, brooding till death over 
his vanished dream of bliss.’ 

This story belongs to the class of tales of which the 
Swan Maiden, Beauty and the Beast, and Cupid and Psyche 
are well-known examples. Stories of the same type have 
already met us among the totemic people of the Gold Coast 
in Africa ; and I have alréady pointed out that they may 
all have originated in totemism? 

§ 6. Totemism among other Algonkin Tribes 
of the Great Lakes 

Another totemic tribe of the Algonkin stock, whose 
country was in the region of the Great Lakes, were the 
Potawattamies. They bordered on the Dacotas to the 
west and occupied part of Northern Wisconsin, ranging 
eastwards towards Lake Michigan and the territory of the 
Ojibways on Lake Superior.* The tribe was visited in 
1823 by the expedition which Major S. H. Long led on 
behalf of the United States Government to the source of 
the St. Peter's River, the Red River, and Lake Winnipeg : 
and the account which the members of the expedition have 
left us of the manners and customs of the Potawattamies 
contains a notice of their totemic system, which deserves to 
be quoted as an early document in the history of totemism. 
“ Although not divided into regular tribes, they have a sort 
of family distinction, kept up by means of signs resembling 
those of heraldry. These signs are, by them, called Totem ; 
they are taken from an animal or some part of it, but by 

1J. G. Kohl, Avtschi-Gami oder 2 Above, vol. ii. pp. 566 sgq. 

Lirsthlungen vom Obern See (Bremen, 3°L, H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
1859), i. 140-146. sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 202 sq. 

xvi ZJOTEMISM AMONG OTHER ALGONKIN TRIBES 65 

no means imply a supposed relationship with that animal, 
as has been incorrectly stated. It is merely a distinguishing 
mark or badge, which appears to belong to every member 
of a family, whether male or female. The latter retain it 
even after matrimony, and do not assume that of their 
husbands. It does not appear that this implies the least 
obligation of the Indian to the animal from which it is 
taken. He may kill or eat it. The ‘Zotem appears to 
answer no other purpose than that of distinguishing familied ; 
it does not imply any degree of nobility or inequality of 
rank among them.”’' About the same time the Rev. 
Jedidiah Morse reported that the Potawattamies, Ottawas, 
and Chippewas (Ojibways) were divided into tribes which 
“take their badges from parts of some insect, animal, fish, 
or fowl; as bear, fin, tendon, etc. Those of the fish are of 
one tribe ; of the beast another ; of the fowl another, etc.” ? 
The Potawattamies are divided into fifteen totemic clans Totemic 

as follows :— co. 
1. Wolf. 2. Bear. 3. Beaver. ils as 
4. Elk. 5. Loon. 6. Eagle. 
7. Sturgeon. 8. Carp. g. Bald Eagle. 
1o. Thunder. 11. Rabbit. 12. Crow.. 
13. Fox. 14. Turkey. 15. Black Hawk. 

The rules of marriage, descent, and inheritance were the Rules of 
same among the Potawattamies as among the Ojibways oon 
that is, no man might marry a woman of his own clan ; descent. 
children took their clan from their father, not from their 
mother ; and both property and office were hereditary in 

the clan) “It was usual for them, when an Indian married Duty to 
one of several sisters, to consider him as wedded to all; and spot a 

it became incumbent upon him to take them all as wives, sisters. 
The marrying of a brother’s widow was not interdicted, but 
was always looked upon as a very improper connexion.. 

The union of persons related by blood was likewise dis- 

1 W. H. Keating, Warrative of an haven, 1822), Appendix, p. 143. This 

Expedition to the Source of St. Peters 
River, Lake Winnepeck, Lake of the 
Woods, etc. {London, 1825), i. 117. 

2 Rev. Jedidiah Morse, D.D., 
Report to the Secretary of War of the 
United States on Indian Affairs (New- 

VOL. Ill 

account points to the existence of split- 
totems (fin, tendon, etc.) among these 
tribes, 

3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
p- 167. 
F 

66 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

liked and discouraged. An incestuous connexion was at 
all times considered as highly criminal, but no punishment 
was attached to it.”? : 

The The Ottawas, another Algonkin tribe, formerly dwelt on 
Ottawas, the Ottawa River in Canada; but being driven thence by 
another . a ° : ‘ 

‘Algonkin the Iroquois they occupied the Manitoulin Islands in Lake 
eee ther Huron and some of them spread southward over Lower 
totemic Michigan.2? Morgan tells us that they were organised in 
ren the clans, but he failed to obtain their names? However, a 
Hare, the Jesuit missionary, writing in 1723, has recorded that the 

hal ica * Ottawas or Outaouaks, as he calls them, were divided into 
three families or clans, namely, the family of the Great Hare 
(Michabou), the family of the Carp (Vamepich), and the 
Legendof family of the Bear (J/qchova). The first of these families 
the Grea’ averred that their ancestor the Great Hare was a man of 
bis eet such gigantic stature that when he stretched his nets in 
; water eighteen fathoms deep the water barely reached to 
his armpits. At the time of the great flood this giant sent 

out the beaver to discover dry land, and when the animal 

did not return he sent out the otter on the same mission. 

The otter brought back a little soil covered with foam, out 

of which the Great Hare succeeded in creating the earth. 
Having accomplished that labour he flew up to heaven, 

Rule where he usually resides; but before quitting the earth he 
soapy commanded that, when his descendants died, their bodies 
the Hare should be burned and their ashes thrown into the air to 
Sara enable them to mount up to heaven; and he warned them 
not buried. that if they omitted to do so, the snow would not cease to 
fall, and their lakes and rivers would remain frozen, so that 

the Indians would not be able to catch fish, which is their 

staple food, and they would all die of hunger in spring. In 

point of fact an unusually long winter was attributed by the 

family of the Great Hare to their culpable negligence in 

having failed to burn the body of one of their number, who 

had died at a distance. So by the advice of an old woman 

1 W. H. Keating, Narrative of an sanguinity and Affinity, p. 202. 
Expedition to the Source of St. Peter's 
River (London, 1825), i. 111. 3 L. H. Morgan, Anczent Society, 
2L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- p. 167. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER ALGONKIN TRIBES 67 

four and twenty men were despatched to find the corpse 

and burp it. In the interval the thaw came and the snow 

melted. The Carp family of the Ottawas alleged that a Descent of 
carp laid its eggs on the bank of a river, that the warmth of eee 
the sun hatched the eggs, and that out of them came a acarp. 
woman, from whom the Carp family is descended. The Descent of 
Bear family of the Ottawas ascribed their origin to a bear’s rere 
paw, but without explaining the precise nature of the bear's paw. 
relationship. Whenever they killed a bear, they used i‘ offered by 
offer the animal a feast of its own flesh and harangued him the bear 
as follows: “Do not bear us a grudge because we have ee Sey 
killed you. 

hungry. They love you, they wish to put you into their +4 
body. Is it not glorious to be eaten by the sons of a 
chief?” The Bear family and the Carp family used to bury 

their dead, unlike the Great Hare family, who burned 
theirs! From a much later account we hear of the Bear 

clan and also of a Gull clan among the Ottawas. The 
people of the Gull clan called themselves Gulls, but the 

people of the Bear clan called themselves Big Feet. Each 

clan had its separate quarter in the village and set up its 
ododam or totemic mark on a post at the gate which led 

into its quarter.’ 

On the other hand, totemism has not been discovered Totemism 
among the Crees (Kristinons, Kilistinons, Knisteneaux, oene te 
etc.), a large and widely-spread Algonkin tribe of the Great Crees, a 
Lake region. By language and blood they are closely ais 
related to the Ojibways. At the time when they were tribe. 
discovered towards the middle of the seventeenth century, 
they occupied the north-west shore of Lake Superior and 
spread thence through a thickly wooded country to Hudson’s 
Bay on the north and the Red River on the west. They 
were then a race of roving hunters, without fixed abode, 
without villages, without fields, living by the chase and on 
wild oats which they gathered in the marshes. Under the 
influence of the Hudson’s Bay Company they have dwelt on 

a 

Apologies s 

al 

‘ 

You are sensible, you see that our children are they kill in a if 
ee 

1 Lettres Edifiantes et Curieuses, 
Nouvelle Edition, vi. (Paris, 1781) 
pp. 168-172. As to the Great Hare 
and the snow, see also Relations des 
Jésuites, 1667, p. 19 (Canadian 

reprint, Quebec, 1858). 

2 Mr. J. Hoskyns Abrahall, in Zhe 
Academy, 27th September 1884, p. 
203, quoting 7he Canadian Journal 
(Toronto), No. 14, March 1858. 

The 
Algonkin 
tribes of the 
Mississippi. 

The great 
prairies of 
the centre 
of North 
America. 

68 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnuap. 

the whole at peace among themselves and with their neigh- 
bours and have made some progress in civilisation. It is 
possible, and perhaps probable, as L. H. Morgan thought, 
that the Crees once had the totemic system, but have lost 
it. Like the rest of the Algonkin tribes they employ the 
classificatory system of relationship, but in an advanced or 
degenerate form; for they distinguish the father’s brother 
from the father, the mother’s sister from the mother, and a 
man’s brother’s children from his own children! 

§ 7. Totemism among the Algonkin Tribes of the Mississippi 

Thus far we have found totemism among both the 
eastern and northern tribes of the great Algonkin stock. 
The system also exists or existed among the western 
Algonkin tribes, who occupied the eastern bank of the 
Mississippi in the present States of Wisconsin and Illinois, 
extending southward to Kentucky and eastward into 
Indiana” Their country forms part of the great prairies 
which occupy a vast region in the interior of North America. 
From the Rocky Mountains in the west they stretch for 
more than a thousand miles to the great forests east of the 
Mississippi, and from the plateau of the Peace River in the 
north they extend southward for fifteen hundred miles to 
New Mexico. The immense carpet of verdure which they 
unroll day after day and week after week to the eye of the 
traveller is one of the most extraordinary natural spectacles 
on* which the eye of man can rest. No description can 
bring home to those who have not seen them an adequate 
conception of the vastness and magnificence of the American 
prairies. Yet before the Indians received the horse from 

1 Relations des Jésuites, 1640, p. 34 
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858); za. 
1656, p. 395 za. 1667, p. 24; Alexander 
Mackenzie, Voyages from Montreal 
through the Continent of North America 
(London, 1801), pp. xci. sgg.; L. H. 
Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and 
Affinity, pp. 203, 206 sgg., and Table 
Il. pp. 293 sgg. ; Handbook of 
American Indians north of Mexico, i, 
359 sgg. In one passage (Systems of 
Consanguinity and dffinity, p. 208) 

Morgan says that in the Cree system 
“my mother’s sister is my mother ” ; 
but this statement seems to be a 
mistake, for it is contradicted by the 
table on p. 339, where jn all three 
varieties of the Cree system the term 
for mother’s sister is given, not as 
‘mother ” (WV’-¢4’-we or N’-gé'-wa) 
but as ‘‘step-mother ” (4’-do'-s?s or 
NV’. do'-2i5). 

2L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
p. 168. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG TRIBES OF THE MISSISSIPPI 69 

Europeans and learned to breed and use it, these boundless Effect 
plains must have been for the most part an unbroken solitude, "ich ‘he 
uninhabited and uninhabitable by man, left to the undisturbed tion of the 
possession of the herds of wild animals which grazed their Bose? 
inexhaustible pastures. Only on the banks of the great social life 
rivers which traverse the prairies could the Indians without ne 
horses maintain themselves by fishing and hunting. Yet Indians. 
while the horse enabled the aborigines to spread and 
multiply over regions which had been a desert before, its 
acquisition hindered rather than helped their advance 
towards a higher form of -social life. For it broke up 

the villages, in which the germ of progress was planted, 

and dispersed their inhabitants in little bands to scour the 
prairies far and wide in pursuit of the buffaloes, whose 
migrations they followed. 

Amongst these prairie Indians were the Miamis, who, Totemic 
along with the other Western Algonkin tribes which we shall ee saa 
here notice, occupied the triangle between the Illinois, the 
Mississippi, and the Ohio Rivers.? The Miamis were divided 
into ten totemic and exogamous clans as follows :— 

1. Wolf. 2. Loon. 3. Eagle. 4. Buzzard. 
5. Panther. 6. Turkey. 7. Raccoon. 8. Snow. 
g. Sun. 1o. Water. 

Intermarriage within the clan was forbidden; descent Marriage 
was in the male line ; and both property and the office of ok 
sachem were hereditary in the clan.* 

The Miamis have the classificatory system of relation- The classi- 
ship. Thus in the generation above his own a man calls his eee 
father’s brother, as well as his own father, “my father ” relation- 
(No-sé! ); and he calls his mother’s sister, as well as his own SME 
mother, “my mother ” (Win-ge-ah'). But his mother’s 
brother he calls “my uncle” (Ne-shese’-sé), not “ my 
father” ; and his father’s sister he calls “my aunt ” 
(N’-sa-gwe'-sd), not “my mother.” In his own generation 
he calls his cousins, the children either of his father’s brother 
or of his mother’s sister, “my elder brother ” (Ve-sd-sd’) or 

11. H. Morgan, Systems of Consan- Handbook of American Indians north 
guinity and Affinity, pp. 172, 208 sg. of Mexico, i. 852 sqg. 
3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
2, L, H. Morgan, of. cet. p. 210; p. 168, 

Anomalous 
feature of 
the Miami 
system in 
regard to 
cousins, the 
children of 
a brother 
and sister 
respec- 
tively. 

7o TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuapr. 

“my younger brother” (WMe-she-md’), “my elder sister ” 
(Ne-mis-sd') or “my younger sister” (Ne-she-mé'), according 
to their sex and age. In the generation below his own he 
calls his brother's son and daughter “my son” (JVeen- 
gwase'-sé) and “my daughter” (Vin-dé'-nd); but he calls 
his sister’s son and daughter “ my nephew ” (Lan-gwéd-les’-sé) 
and “my niece” (Shames-sd'), not “my son” and “my 
daughter.” Conversely, a woman calls her brother’s son 
and daughter “my nephew” and “my niece”; but her 
sister’s son and daughter she calls “my son” and “my 
daughter.” In the generation next but one below his own a 
man calls the grandchildren of his brothers and sisters, own 
and collateral, “ my grandchildren”; and, conversely, in the 
generation next but one above his own he calls his grand- 
father’s brothers “my grandfathers.” 1 It will be observed 
that while there are separate terms for “elder brother” and 
“elder sister,” the term for “younger brother” and “ younger 
sister” is one and the same (Ve-she-md’). This identity of 
terms for younger brother and younger sister occurs in 
many forms of the classificatory system. 

So far the Miami form of the classificatory system is 
normal, But in regard to cousins, the children of a brother 
and sister respectively, the Miami system presents a remark- 
able feature, which we have not hitherto met with, though 
we shall find it again later on among tribes of the 
Dacotan stock. Two male cousins, the children of a 
brother and of a sister respectively, do not call each other 
cousins as they ordinarily would do under the classificatory 
system ; they call each other “uncle” and “nephew,” the 
son of the brother being the “uncle” and the son of the 
sister being the “nephew.” With two female cousins, the 
daughters of a brother and sister respectively, the case is still 
more remarkable ; for they call each other “ mother” and 
“daughter,” the daughter of the brother being the so-called 
“mother” of her cousin and the daughter of the sister being 
the so-called “daughter” of her cousin. When the two 
cousins, the children of a brother and sister respectively, are 
male and female, then, if the male is the son of the sister 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, p. 211, Table II. 
PP. 293 599. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG TRIBES OF THE M§SSISSIPPI 71 

and the female is the daughter of the brother, the female 
cousin ¢alls her male cousin “my son,” and he calls her 
“my mother.” But if the male cousin is the son of the 
brother, and the female cousin is the daughter of the sister, 
then the male cousin calls his female cousin “ my niece” and 
she calls him “ my uncle.” It should be observed that in 
all these cases a position of superiority, or at least of 
seniority, is assigned to the cousin, whether male or female, 
who is the child of the brother ; while the cousin, whether 
male or female, who is the child of the sister, is relegated 
to a position of inferiority or at least of juniority. Thus the 
male cousin, the child of the brother, is the “uncle” of his 
male or female cousin, the child of the sister; and the 
female cousin, the child of the brother, is the “ mother” of 
her male or female cousin, the child of the sister. Thus in 
all such cdses a preference is shewn for the male line, which 
may be connected with the fact that among the Miamis 
descent both of the clan and of property is in the male line. 
Whatever the origin of this curious nomenclature may be, 
we can hardly suppose that the persons who used it ever 
imagined a female cousin to have given birth to her male 
or female cousin; in other words, the relationship of 
maternity which it implies can only have been a social, 
not a physical one. As I have already pointed out more 
than once, the classificatory system in general is only 
intelligible on the supposition that the relationships which 
it recognises and classifies are not physical but social.” 
Nothing but confusion can result from an attempt to 
explain the system by means of our own conceptions of 
paternity and maternity. If an enquirer cannot divest 
himself of these conceptions in dealing with the subject, he 
had much better leave it alone. 

Another Algonkin tribe of this region were the Shawnees. 
Their old home was in the triangle between the Ohio and 
the Mississippi, but they have been again and again uprooted 
and expatriated by the Government of the United States, 

11, H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 325, 331, 332, 333. 334- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 211, 2 See vol. i pp. 289 s5¢9., 303 
with Table II. pp. 322, 323, 324, 599. 

The 
Shawnees, 
another 
Algonkin 
tribe. 

Their 
totemic 
clans. 

Rules of 
marriage 
and 
descent. 

Shawnee 
practice of 
naming 
children 
into any 
clan, 

This 
practice 
may have 
helped 
to shift 
descent 
from the 
maternal 
to the 
paternal 
line. 

72 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA char. 

They speak the most beautiful dialect of the Algonkin 
speech, and notwithstanding the shifts and changes to which 
they have been subjected, they have preserved their nation- 
ality and have made remarkable progress in agriculture and in 
other arts of civilised life.’ They are divided into thirteen 
exogamous fclans, which they still maintain for social and 
genealogical purposes. The names of the clans are these :— 

1. Wolf. 2. Loon. 3. Bear. —- 4. Buzzard. 
5. Panther. 6. Owl. 7. Turkey. 8. Deer. 
9g. Raccoon. 10. Turtle. 11. Snake, 12. Horse. 
13. Rabbit. 

The rules of marriage and descent are the same as 
among the Miamis; that is, marriage within the clan is 
forbidden, children take their clan from their father, not 
from their mother, and (‘both property and the office of 
sachem are hereditary in the clan, from which it follows that 
they descend in the male line.2 However, the Shawnees had 
a practice, which they shared with the Miamis and the 
Sauks and Foxes, of naming childrén, under certain restric- 
tions, into any clan whatever. Each clan, as among the 
Iroquois and Wyandots,* had certain personal names appro- 
priated to it which carried clan rights with them, so that a 
person’s name determined the clan to which he belonged. 
The father had no voice in the naming of his child. By an 
arrangement between the clans the choice of children’s names 
was left to certain persons, mostly matrons, who thereby 
possessed the power of deciding to which clan any person 
was to belong.” It has been already pointed out that this 
power of arbitrarily assigning any person to any clan may 
have been one of the means by which descent was shifted 
from the maternal to the paternal line.® In point of fact 
among the Shawnees, though descent is now in the male 
line, there are traces of a former custom of transmitting the 
sachemship in the female line. Thus a sachem of the Wolf 
clan, at the point of death, desired to be succeeded not by 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 4 See above, pp. 13 57.) 34 599- 

Sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 215 sg. 6 . ; 
2 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, Ta Hes Morea, Amen Sac), 

p. 168. Perego: 
3 L. H. Morgan, of. céf. p. 169. 6 Above, p. 42. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG TRIBES OF THE MISSISSIPPI 73 

his son but by a nephew, the son of a sister. The nephew 
was of the Fish clan, and the son was of the Rabbit clan, 
so that neither could succeed to the sachemship without 
being transferred, by a change of name, to the Wolf clan, 
in which the office was hereditary. But the chief’s wish was 
respected. After his death the Fish name of the nephew 
was changed to one of the Wolf names and he succeeded 
his uncle in the office. Such laxity, as Morgan says, indi- 
cates a decadence of the clan organisation ; but it tends to 
shew that at no remote period descent among the Shawnees 
was in the female line.’ 

The Shawnees have the classificatory system of relation- The classi- 
ship in a form which agrees in all essentials with that of ane. 
the Miamis. The agreement is all the more remarkable, of relation- 
because for upwards of two centuries the Shawnees had eae Re 
been in great ‘measure detached from their next of kin, the Shawnees. 
Western Algonkins, and had lived in intimate relations with 
the Eastern Algonkins. The main features of the Shawnee 
system are these. In the generation above his own a man 
calls his father’s brother, as well as his own father, “my father” 
(No-tha') ; and he calls his mother’s sister, as well as his 
own mother, “my mother” (We-ke-ah'). But his mother’s 
brother he calls “my uncle” (WVz-si-thé’), not “my father” ; 
and his father’s sister he calls “my aunt” (Wa-tha-gwe-thd’), 
not “my mother.” In his own generation he calls his 
cousins, the children either of his father’s brother or of his 
mother’s sister, “my elder brother” (’-¢ha-chd’) or “my 
younger brother” (N’-the-ma-thd’), “my elder sister” (V7 
mi-thé') or “my younger sister” (N’-the-ma-thd’), according 
to their sex and age. Jn the generation below his own he 
calls his brother’s son and daughter “my son” (We-kwe-thé’) 
and “my daughter” (Vi-td-na-tha’), but he calls his sister’s 
son and daughter “my nephew ” (Wa-/a-gwal-thd') and “my 
niece” (WVe-sa-me-thd'), not “my son” and “my daughter.” 
Conversely, a woman calls her brother’s son and daughter 
“my nephew” and “my niece,” not “my son” and “my 
daughter”; but her sister’s son and daughter she calls “my 

1L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, the Shawnee clans (above, p. 72). It 

pp. 169 sg. The Fish clan is not may have been extinct at the time 
mentioned by Morgan in his list of | when his list was compiled. 

Anomalous 
feature 

of the 
Shawnee 
system in 
regard to 
cousins, the 
children of 
a brother 
and sister 
respec- 
tively. 

ihe 
‘Sauks and 
Foxes, two 
Algonkin 
tribes con- 
solidated 
into one. 

74 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ cuavr. 

son” and “my daughter.” In the next generation but one 
below his own a man calls the grandchildren of his brothers 
and sisters, own and, collateral, “my grandchildren” ; and, 
conversely, in the generation next but one above his own he 
calls his grandfather’s brothers “my grandfathers,” Here 
again it will be observed that while there are separate 
terms for “elder brother” and “elder sister,” the term for 
“ younger bréther” and “younger sister” is one and the 
same. (N’-the-ma-thd’). In all these respects the Shawnee 
form of the system is identical with the Miami form, though 
the terms of relationship differ verbally. Further, the two 
systems agree in the curious relationships which they assign 
to the children of a brother and of a sister respectively. For 
in the Shawnee system, as in the Miami, two male cousins, 
the sons of a brother and a sister respectively, are called 
uncle and nephew to each other; and two female cousins, the 
children of a brother and of a sister respectively, are called 
mother and daughter to each other, But when two cousins, 
the children of a brother and sister respectively, are the one 
male and the other female, then the man calls his female 
cousin, the daughter of his father’s sister, “my niece”; but 
his female cousin, the daughter of his mother’s brother, he 
calls “my mother.” On her side the woman calls her male 
cousin, the son of her father’s sister, “my son,” but her male 
cousin, the son of her mother’s brother, she calls “my 
uncle”? 

Another Algonkin people of the Mississippi who have 
totemism are the Sauks and Foxes, two tribes which have 
been consolidated into one. They were first found upon 
the Fox River in Wisconsin and they ranged westward to 
the Mississippi. Among the tribes of the Mississippi the 
Sauks and Foxes have been distinguished by their restless 
and warlike disposition. They waged almost ceaseless war 
with the Illinois and Ojibways, and they were the only 
Algonkin tribe against whom the French turned their arms. 
But they were not nomads. They lived in villages and 
tilled the soil, raising crops of maize, beans, squashes, and 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, p. 217 and Table IJ. 
PP. 293 599. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG TRIBES OF THE MISSISSIPPI 75 

tobacco." In 1766 Captain Carver visited what he calls The grea, 
“the Great Town of the Saukies” on the Fox River, and the Souk 
he thus describes it: “This is the largest and best built 
Indian town I ever saw. It contains about ninety houses, 
each large enough for several families. These are built of 
hewn plank neatly jointed, and covered with bark so com- 
pactly as to keep out the most penetrating rains. Before the 
doors are placed comfortable sheds, in which the inhabitants 
sit, when the weather will permit, and smoak their pipes. 
The streets are regular and spacious ; so that it appears more 
like a civilized town than the abode of savages. The land 
near the town is very good. In their plantations, which lie 
adjacent to their houses, and which are neatly laid out, 
they raise great quantities of Indian corn, beans, melons, 
etc, so that this place is esteemed the best market for 
traders to furnish themselves with provisions, of any within 
eight hundred miles of it.”* Like all prairie Indians the 
Sauks and Foxes are very dark-skinned, very much more 
so than the forest Indians. Some of them are but a few 
shades lighter than negroes.® 

The Sauks or Sacs and Foxes are divided into at least Totemic 

5 - 4 cl 
fourteen totemic and exogamous clans, the names of which, ce oaks 

according to L, H. Morgan, are as follows :—* ‘ and Foxes, 
1. Wolf. 2. Bear. 3. Deer, 4. Elk. 
5. Hawk. 6. Eagle. 7. Fish, 8. Buffalo. 
9g. Thunder. Io. Bone. Ir. Fox. 12. Sea. 
13. Sturgeon. 14. Big Tree. 

Other accounts, which agree as to the number of the Other 
clans, vary as to their names. Thus Jedidiah Morse in 1822 the tetene 
reported that “each nation is subdivided into a great number clans of 

the Sauks 
of families or clans. Among the Sauks there are no less ang Foxes, 
than fourteen tribes, each of them distinguished by a par- 
ticular name, generally by the name of some animal, as the 

Bear tribe, Wolf tribe, Dog tribe, Elk tribe, Eagle tribe, 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 212; 7d., 
Ancient Society, p. 170; Handbook 
of American Indians north of Mexico, 
i. 472 sqq. 

2 J. Carvér, Travels through the In- 

terior Parts of North America, Third 
Edition (London, 1781), pp. 46 59. 
3 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
Sah ig and Affinity, Pp. 212. 
4 L. H. Morgan, Anctent Socrety, 
p- 170. 

Tradition- 
ary descent 
of the totem 
clans from 
animals. 

Totemic 
dances, 

Personal 
names of 
members of 
the clans. 

76 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

Partridge tribe, Sucker tribe, Thunder tribe, etc.”! In this list . 
the Dog, Partridge, and Sucker clans are not mentioned by 
Morgan. Again, a later account also enumerates fourteen 
clans, but substitutes the Big Lynx, Swan, Pheasant, Bass, 
and Bear Potato clans for the Deer, Hawk, Fish, Bone, and 
Big Tree clans of Morgan’s list.2 Another account speaks of 
seven clans only, and records a tradition that these seven 
clans had seven animal ancestors, namely, the fox, the eagle, 
the bear, the beaver, the fish, the antelope, and the raccoon. 
According to this legend,two brothers found thesevenancestral 
animals in a cave, lived for a month with them, and were 
adopted as brothers by the beasts. The first seven human 
ancestors of the clans had the power of taking the shape 
each of his totem animal. The principal clan is the Eagle 
clan, the hereditary chief of which is head of the tribe.t 
Each clan has its own tdtemic dance, in which none but 
members of the secret society of the clan take part. The 
Eagle dance is the most important of these totemic dances. 
An old woman told Miss Owen “ that when she was a little 
girl those who took part in the Totém dances were dressed 
to look like the Ancestral Animal whose favour was thus 
secured, but their appearance was so dreadful in their suits 
of skins, scales, or feathers, and the masks to correspond, 
that many women were frightened and made ill, a state of 
affairs very bad for a small tribe that could not afford the 
loss of women and babies. What to do the men knew not, 
but the Totems took pity on them, and in dreams warned 
the old men to destroy the masks. Since then masks have 
been painted to indicate the Totem.” 

Among the Sauks and 
had a number of personal 

1 Rev. Jedidiah Morse, D.D., Report 
to the Secretary of War of the United 
States on Indian Affairs (Newhaven, 
1822), Appendix, p. 132. 

2 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 473- 

3 Miss Mary Alicia Owen, Folk- 
lore of the Musquakie Indians of 
North America (London, 1904), pp. 
8-10. As to the name Miss Owen 
says (op. cit, p. 18) that ‘* Musquakie 
means ‘ fox,’ whether reference is made 

Foxes each clan, as usual, 
names which were borne by 

to the animal or the tribesman, in 
Saukie, Kickapoo, and Musquakie, 
though the Saukies . . . say jokingly 
that Geechee Manito-ah made the Saukie 
out of yellow clay and the Squawkie out 
of red.” 

4 Miss Mary Alicia Owen, of. cit, 
p- 25. 
5 Miss Mary Alicia Owen, Fo/h-lore 

of the Musgquakie Indians of North 
America, pp. 51 5g. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG TRIBES OF THE MISSISSIPPI 77 

members of the clan. Thus in the Deer clan there was a 
personal name “ Long Horn”; in the Wolf clan there was 
“Black Wolf”; in the Eagle clan there were “ Eagle drawing 
his nest,” “Eagle sitting with his head up,” and “Eagle 
flying over a limb.” ? 

The rules of marriage, descent, and inheritance are the Rules of 
same among the Sauks and Foxes as among the Miamis ; "77"8° 
that is, no man is allowed to marry a woman of his own descent. 
clan, children take their clan from their father, not from 
their mother, and property and office are hereditary in the 
clan,? 

Another of the Central Algonkin tribes, which is closely Totemic 
related to the Sauks and Foxes both by blood and language Rie 
are the Kickapoos. The earliest notice of the tribe places another 
them in the northern part of the present State of Illinois, “Sua 
between Lake Michigan and the Mississippi. About half of 
the tribe is now settled on a reservation in Mexico, The 
Kickapoos are divided into clans, of which at the present 
day the names are Water, Tree, Berry, Thunder, Man, Bear, 

Elk, Turkey, Bald Eagle, Wolf, and Fox. The rule was 

that no man might marry a woman of his own clan ; children 

took the clan of their father.2 The Kickapoos have the The classi- 
classificatory system of relationship in a form which agrees *<atory 

. 's 7 system of 
with that of the Miamis.* relation- 

ship. 
Another Algonkin tribe of this region who have totem- The Meno. 

ism are the Menominees. They now occupy a reservation suai 
at Keshena in North-eastern Wisconsin, which is almost Algonkin 
the same territory that they held when they were discovered "* 
by Jean Nicollet in 1634. Their language shews that they 
are more nearly related to the Ojibways than to any other 
Algonkin tribe. In recent years certain of their customs 
and myths have been investigated and recorded in great 
detail by Dr. W. J. Hoffman. _—_—He tells us that at the time 

11, H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 
169, note}. 

2L. H. Morgan, of, ct. p. 170. 

3 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 684 sq. 

4L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 213, and 

Table II. pp. 293 s¢g. 

6 W. J. Hoffman, M.D., ‘‘ The 
Menomini Indians,” Fourteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 
Part i, (Washington, 1896) pp. II- 
328, Compare Handbook of American 
Indians north of Mexico, i. 842 599. 

78 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

Totemic when he wrote (1892-93) the Menominees were divided 
clansand . : . 
phratries of into totemic clans, which were named and grouped under 

the Meno- ‘phratries as follows in the order of their importance :—! 
minees, a 

MENOMINEE TOTEMIC SYSTEM 

r + 

Phratries, Clans. 
L Bear { 1. Bear. 2. Porcupine. 3. Turtle. 4. Crane. 
i . . 5. Wolf. 6, Otter. 7. Sturgeon. 8. Sunfish. 

1. Golden Eagle. 2. Fork-tail Hawk. 3. Bald 
Eagle. 4. Turkey-buzzard. 5. Swift-flying 
Hawk. 6. Winter Hawk (remains all winter 
in Wisconsin). 7, Sparrow Hawk. 8. 
Reqd-tail Hawk. 9. Crow. 10. Raven. 
11. Beaver. 12. Elk. 13. Pine Squirrel. 

II. Big Thunder. 

III. Wolf . é 1. Wolf. 2. Dog. 3. Deer. 

ae 
On the position of the Wolf clan in the first phratry Dr. 
Hoffman observes that “although the Wolf is recognized as 
a member of the Bear phratry, his true position is at the 

head of the third phratry.” 
Another Having given the above as the list of “the Menomini 
ist orthe totems or gentes as they exist at this day,” Dr. Hoffman 
clansand adds: “According to Shu’nien and Wios’kasit the arrange- 
phrawes°T ment of totems into phratries and subphratries was as, 

minees. follows: 

“1. The Owa'-sse wi'dishi'anun, or Bear phratry, consisting of the 
following totems and subphratries : 

Owa'sse Bear 

Migka'no Mud-turtle } Totems 

Kita mt Porcupine 

Nama'nu Beaver BE ame einese 

O”" sass Muskrat kites eras 
brothers). 

1 W. J. Hoffman, ‘The Menomini of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part i. 
Indians,” Fourteenth Annual Report (Washington, 1896) p. 41.! 

xvi JOTEMISM AMONG TRIBES OF THE MISSISSIPPI 79 

“Tl, The Kiné'u” wi'dishi'anun, or Eagle phratry, consisting of 
the following totems : 

Pindsh’iu Bald Eagle 
Kaka ké Crow 

Ind gtthk Raven 
Ma'gkuana'ni Red-tail Hawk 
‘ Hinanda'shiu?? Golden Eagle 
Pe'niki'honau Fish Hawk 

“III, The Ota’tshia we«'dishi-anun, or Crane phratry, consisting of 
the following totems : | 

Ota-tshia Crane 

Shakshak' eu Great Heron 

Os'se « ‘Old Squaw’ Duck 
O'kawa' sthu Coot . 

“TV. The Mogwaz'o wi'disht’anun, or Wolf phratry, consisting of 
the following totems : 

Mogwai o Wolf 
‘ Hana’ [anda'm] Dog 
Apag'ssos Deer 

“V. The M6"s wi'dishi-anun, or Moose phratry, with the following 
totems : 

Mo"s Moose 
Oma!’ skos Elk 
Wabad' shiu Marten 
Wu' tshik Fisher” } 

Dr. Hoffman gives no explanation of the discrepancies 
between the two foregoing lists of clans and phratries. 
Perhaps he means us to understand that the second list, 
given on the authority of two Indians, represents the ancient 
arrangement of the clans as it has been handed down in the 
traditions of the tribe. As to the marriage rules Dr. 
Hoffman is also silent. We may conjecture that the clans 
are, theoretically at least, exogamous, but it would hardly be 
safe to infer that the phratries are so also. 

It should be observed that with one exception every Evidence 
phratry bears the name of a bird or animal which is also the Mee 
name of one of the totem clans included under it. This phratries 
naturally suggests that the present clans have been produced oe 

originated 

by the subdivision of older clans, which thereby passed into Oy sub- 
the rank of phratries, Similar evidence of the subdivision jhe Criginal 
totemic 
1 W. J. Hoffman, ‘The Menomini of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part i. clans, 
Indians,” Fourteenth Annual Report (Washington, 1896) p. 42. 

80 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ chap. 

” of totemic clans into new clans has already met us among the 

The rule 
of descent 
among 
the Meno- 
minees 
seems to 
have 
changed 
from the 
maternal 
to the 
paternal 
line. 

Mohicans and Ojibways.' The Big Thunder phratry appears 
at first sight to be an exception to this rule, but the exception 
is more apparent than real. For though the Big Thunder 
phratry does not include a Big Thunder clan, it includes the 
clan of the golden Eagle, the bird which is said to have 
been the representative of the Invisible Thunder? It is a 
common belief of the American Indians that the clap of 
thunder is made by a big bird flapping its great wings.’ 
With regard to the rule of descent Dr. Hoffman says : 
“ Mother-right, the older form of descent in the female line, 
is not now recognized by the Menomini, who have advanced 
to the next stage, that of father-right, or descent in the 
male line. . . . Some of the ancient customs respecting the 
disposition of property and children, in the event of the 
death of either parent, are still spoken of, though now 
seldom, if ever, practised. As descent was in the mother’s 
line, at her death both children and personal effects were 
transmitted to the nearest of the mother’s totemic kin, while 
at the death of the father his personal property was divided 
among his relatives or the people of his totem.” The view 
that the Menominees have passed from mother-kin to father- 
kin is supported by L. H. Morgan,who in 1859, questioning 
a Menominee man as to the rule of inheritance in his tribe, 
received the following answer: “ If I should die, my brothers 
and maternal uncles would rob my wife and children of my 
property. We now expect that our children will inherit 
our effects, but there is no certainty of it. The old law 
gives my property to my nearest kindred who are not my 
children, but my brothers and sisters, and maternal uncles.” ® 

1 See above, pp. 44, 55, 57- 

2 W. J. Hoffman, ‘‘ The Menomini 
Indians,” Fourteenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part i. 
(Washington, 1896) p. 39- 

3 Relations des Jésuites, 1634, p. 27 
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858) ; 
Lafitau, Aleurs des sauvages améri- 
guains (Paris, 1724), i. 126; J. G. 
Miiller, Geschichte der amerikanischen 
Urreligionen (Basel, 1867), pp. 120 sg. 3 
D.G. Brinton, AZyths of the New World, 
Second Edition (New York, 1876), pp. 

108, 163 sg.; G. B. Grinnell, Blackfoot 
Lodge Tales (London, 1893), p. 2593 
Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘A Study of 
Siouan Cults,” Eleventh Annual Report 
ofthe Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1894), p. 508. 

4 W. J. Hoffman, ‘“‘ The Menomini 
Indians,” Fourteenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part i. 
(Washington, 1896), p. 43. 

6 L. H. Morgan, Anctent Society, 
Pp. 170 sg. 

xvi JOTEMISM AMONG TRIBES OF THE MISSISSIPPI 81 

Members of any totem clan regard as their relations all Kinship 
persons who have the same totem, even though they may coma 
belong to a different tribe, or even to tribes of a different of the same 
linguistic family. Thus several Menominees of the Bear {vem 
totem said to Dr. Hoffman that men of the Bear totem different 
among the Sioux “ must be of the same kinship with them- ae 
selves, as they had the same common ancestor.” ! 

With regard to the relation in which a man stands We Apologies 
his totemic animal, Dr. Hoffman tells us that “although a "Sins | 
Bear man may kill a bear, he must first address himself to animal. A 
it and apologize for depriving it of life; and there are Carey 
certain portions only of which he may eat. the head and pets 

paws being tabu, and no member of his totem may partake? eat selena” 
of these portions, although the individuals of all other totems 4n4 paws. 
may do so.”* Elsewhere the same writer says: “Should 
an Indian of the Bear totem, or one whose adopted guardian 
is represented by the bear, desire to go hunting and meet 
with that animal, due apology would be paid to it before 
destroying it. The carcass would then be dressed and 
served, but no member of the Bear totem would partake of 
the meat, though the members of all other totems could 
freely do so. The hunter could, however, eat of the paws 
and head, the bones of the latter being subsequently placed 
upon a shelf, probably over the door, or in some other 
conspicuous place. Due reverence is paid to such a relic of 
the totem, and so strictly observed is this custom that no 
greater insult could be offered to the host than for any 
one to take down such bones and to cast them carelessly 
aside.”* We have seen that among the Ottawas men of 
the Bear clan used to apologise to a bear when they had 
killed it. 

The Menomirfees say that formerly there were more Menominee 
totemic clans, but that in course of time some of them have ries 

as to the 

become extinct. The tradition as to the origin of some of one 
of their 
1 W, J. Hoffman, ‘The Menomini At first sight Dr. Hoffman’s statements totemic 

Indians,” Fourteenth Annual Report as to eating the head and paws of the clans and 
of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part i. bear seem tocontradict each other. But phratries. 
(Washington, 1896) p. 43. However, perhaps he means that the Bear hunter 
we are told that the Sioux (Dacotas) who kills a bear may eat of these 
have not got totems. See below, p. 86. portions, though no other member of 

2 W. J. Hoffman, of. cit. p. 44. the Bear clan may do so. 

3 W. J. Hoffman, of. cit. p. 65. 4 Above, p. 67. 

VOL. Ti G 

The Bear. 
and the 
Golden 
Eagle or 

Thunderer. 

The Bear, 
the Wolf, 
the Crane, 
and other 
animals. 

82 ZTOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ cuap. 

them runs thus. When the Great Mystery? made the earth, 
he created also numerous beings termed manzdos or spirits, 
giving them the form of animals and birds. Most of the 
animal-manidos were malevolent (dnd’ maghi'u’ “ underground 
beings”); and the bird-szanidos were eagles and hawks, 
known as the Thunderers, chief of whom was the Invisible 
Thunder, represented by the Golden Eagle. When the 
Good Mystery (Mashd’ Ma'nidé) saw that the bear was still 
an animal, he determined to allow him to change his form. 
This accordingly was done, and the bear was turned into a 
man at the Menominee River, near ‘the spot where the 
animal first came out of the ground. The man found him- 
self alone and called to the Golden Eagle to come and be 
his brother. So the eagle swooped down and took the form 
of a man. They laid their heads together and were just 
considering whom next to invite to join them, when they 
perceived a beaver approaching. The beaver begged to be 
taken into the totem of the Thunderers, but being a woman 
was called Beaver woman and was adopted as a younger 
brother—perhaps we should say sister—of the Thunderer. 
Soon afterwards the Bear and Eagle, standing on the river- 
bank, saw a sturgeon, and the Bear adopted the Sturgeon 
as his younger brother and servant, In like manner the 
Thunderer, who was the Golden Eagle, took the Elk to be 
his younger brother and water-carrier. 

Another time the Bear was going up the Wisconsin 
River, but being weary he sat down to rest. Hard by, the 
river tumbled over rocks with a refreshing murmur, and 
from underneath the waterfall appeared the Wolf, who 
asked the Bear what he did there. The Bear said he was 
on a journey and being too tired to go further had sat 
down to rest. At that moment a crane fl=w by. The Bear 

1 « Masha’ Ma'nidé, or Great Un- 
known. This term is not to be under- 
stood as implying a belief in one 
supreme being; there are several 
manidos, each supreme in his own 
realm, as well as many lesser mysteries, 
or deities, or spirits. Neither is it to 
be regarded as implying a definite 
recognition of spirituality correspond- 
ing to that of civilized peoples, for the 

American Indians have not fully risen 
to the plane of psychotheism” (W. J. 
Hoftman, ‘‘ The Menomini Indians,” 
Fourteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology, Part i. (Wash- 
ington, 1896) p. 39, note!). Dr, 
Hoffman represents Afasha’ JMa'nidé 
variously as ‘the Great Mystery,” 
‘the Good Mystery,” and ‘the Great 
Unknown.” 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG TRIBES OF THE MISSISSIPPI 83 

called to the bird and prayed it to carry him to the Bear 
people at the head of the river, promising if he would do so 
to make him his younger brother. Just as the Bear was in 
the act of mounting on the back of the Crane, the Wolf 
called out, “Bear, Iam alone. Take me also as a younger 
brother.” That is why the Crane and the Wolf are now 
the younger brothers of the Bear; but afterwards the Wolf 
allowed the Deer and the Dog to join him, and therefore 
these three, as we have seen, now compose a phratry. But 
the Wolf ranks not only with their phratry, but also with 
the phratry of the Bear, where he is entitled to a seat in 
council on the north side. 

The Good Mystery made the Thunderers to be labourers, The 
that by their labours they might benefit the whole world. In J >underers 
spring days, when they return from the south-west, they fertilising 
bring with them the showers which make. the black earth ™" 
green and cause the plants to grow and the trees to put 
forth leaves. Were it not for the Thunderers, the earth 
would be parched, and the grass would wither and die. The 
Good Mystery also gave to the Thunderers his good gift of 
corn, the kind that is commonly called squaw corn, with 
small stalks and ears of various colours. The Thunderers The 
were also the makers of fire, having first received it from aed 
Ma’-nabiish, the hero of many a Menominee tale, who him- of fire. 
self stole it from an old man that dwelt on an island in a 
great lake. Among the Menominees to this day the 
Thunderers are charged with lighting the council fire, and 
when the tribe is on the march the Thunderers go on ahead 
to a camping-place and kindle the fire which is to be used 
by all the people. They are also the war-chiefs. They 
and the Bear people live together, the Bears taking their 
seats on the easteri: side of the council and the Thunderers 
on the western. 

The Menominees have the classificatory system of The classi- 
relationship in a form which is substantially identical with See 
that of the Miamis, agreeing with it in treating male cousins, relation. 

the sons of a brother and sister respectively, as uncle and oe 
minees, 
1 W. J. Hoffman, **The Menomini, (Washington, 1896) pp. 39 59- 
Indians,” Fourteenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part i. 2 W. J. Hoffman, of. czt, Pp. 40 59. 

84 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA CHapP. 

nephew, and female cousins, the children of a brother and 
sister respectively, as mother and daughter.’ 

§ 8.. Exogamy among the Algonkin Tribes 
of the Rocky Mountains 

The 
Blackfeet, 
the western- re . 
most of the the Rocky Mountains and the prairies at their foot. 
Algonkins, 

The westernmost of the Algonkins are the Blackfeet, 

a numerous nation, who range over the eastern slopes of 
A well- 
built, hardy, and courageous people, they are or rather were 
a nation of horsemen and depended for their subsistence 
exclusively on hunting. Their country used to abound 
in game more perhaps than any other part of North 
America. Among the American Indians the Blackfeet had 
no superiors in horsemanship and none in the art of stalking 
such wary animals as the | antelope. So long as the buffalo 
existed, the tribe lived chiefly on its flesh and clothed 
themselves in its skin.2 They are divided into three tribes : 
the Blackfeet proper, the Blood Blackfeet, and the Piegan 
Blackfeet, all speaking the same language, observing the 
same customs, and acknowledging a tie of blood between 
Exogamous them. Each tribe is subdivided into a number of clans, 
clans With bodies of blood kindred tracing their descent in the male 
descent. line. Formerly the members of a clan were all considered 
to be relatives, however remote, to each other, and there 

was a law prohibiting a man from marrying within his 
clan. In the old days this law was strictly enforced, but 
like many other old customs it is no longer observed. But 
though the clans are or used to be exogamous, they are 
apparently not totemic; at least Mr. G. B. Grinnell, one of 
our chief authorities on the Blackfeet, knows of no clan that 
has a totem. The names of the clans which he gives con- 
firm this view of the absence of totemism in the nation.’ 

The three 
tribes of 
Blackfeet. 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems o7 Con- 

sanguinity and Affinity, p. 213, and 
Table II. pp. 293 sgg. As to the 
Miami form of the system, see above, 
pp. 69-71. 

2 L. H. Morgan, of. cit. pp. 224 59.3 
G. B. Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge Tales 
(London, 1893), Pp- 177 s9g-, 226 
S$-y 241. 

3G. B. Grinnell, of. cit. pp. 208- 
211. %In the Blackfeet proper Mr. 
Grinnell enumerates eight! clans or, 
as he calls them, gentes; in the 
Blood Blackfeet, thirteen; and in 
the Piegan Blackfeet, twenty - four. 
Among the names of the clans are, for 
example, Flat Bows, Many Medicines, 
Black Elks, Liars, Biters, Skunks, 

XVI EXOGAMY AMONG THE ALGONKIN TRIBES 85 

However, the Blackfeet have the classificatory system of 
relationship, though in an advanced form ; for under it a 
man calls his father’s brother “my step-father,’ not “my 
father”; he calls his mother’s sister “my step-mother,” not 
“my mother”; he calls his brother’s son and daughter “my 
step-son” and “my step-daughter,” not “my son” and “my 
daughter.” On the other hand, he continues, as usual, to 
call his cousins, the son and daughter of his father’s brother, 
“my brother” and “my sister”; he calls his grandfather’s 
brother “ my grandfather”; and he calls the grandchildren 
of his brother and sister, and also of his collateral brothers 
and sisters, “ my grandchildren.” ? 

The Blackfeet marry as many wives as they please. 
All the younger sisters of a man’s wife were regarded as his Right to 
wives, if he chose to take them. If he did not wish to cael gs 
marry them, they might not be given in marriage to any younger 
other man without his consent. When a man dies, his 9 

The 
eldest brother has the right to marry the widow or widows.” tevirate. 

§ 9. Totemism among the Omahas 

Thus far we have surveyed the totemic systems, first, of The 
the Iroquois-Huron, and, next, of the Algonkin family. Son 
We now pass to the consideration of a third great family or family. 
stock of North American Indians, which may be called the 
Siouan or Dacotan from the Sioux or Dacotas, the 
largest and most famous members of the family. At the 
time of their discovery the Siouan family had fallen into a 
number of groups, and their language into a number of 
dialects, which differed from each other much more widely 
than the various dialects of the Algonkin language. But in 
the main the Siouan tribes inhabited continuous areas. 
They occupied the head-waters of the Mississippi and both 
banks of the Missouri for more than a thousand miles in 

Many Lodge Poles, Hair Shirts, Short 
Bows, Dried Meat, Black Patched 
Mocassins, They Don’t Laugh, Seldom 
Lonesome, Obstinate, Lone Fighters, 
Small Robes, Big Topknots, Worm 
people, All Chiefs, Red Round Robes, 
Compare L. H. Morgan, Systems of 

Consanguinity and Affinity, pp. 224 
sq.3 ta., Ancient Society, p. 171. 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 225 sq., 
and Table II. pp. 293 s¢¢. 

2G. B. Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge 
Tales, pp» 215, 217, 218. 

They 
occupied 
the head- 
waters of 
the Missis- 
sippi and 
both banks 
of the 
Missouri ; 
but they 
seem to 
have 
moved 
thither 
from the 
east, 

The Sioux 
proper or 
Dacotas 
have not 
now got 
totemism ; 
but there 
is some 
reason to 
think that 
they had it 
formerly. 

86 ZTOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

extent. “Roughly speaking, their territory reached from the 
Arkansas River on the south to the Saskatchewan River on 
the north, and from the Mississippi on the east to the Rocky 
Mountains on the west. But there are reasons to think 
that this was’ not their original home ; for tribes speaking 
archaic dialects of the Siouan speech have been found in 
Virginia and Louisiana. It is now believed, therefore, that 
the Siouan or Dacotan stock had its original home, not on 
the prairies of the west, but at the eastern foot of the 
Southern Alleghanies, till the pressure of the hostile 
Algonkin and Iroquoian tribes forced them back into the 
prairies west of the Mississippi, where they subsisted by 
hunting the buffalo.! 

Of the tribes composing this stock it appears that the 
Sioux proper, or Dacotas, as they called themselves, had 
not the totemic system ; at all events competent authorities 
failed to find it among them in the nineteenth century.” 
However, there are some grounds for thinking that they 
possessed the system as late as the middle of the eighteenth 
century. Thus Captain Carver, who explored the region of 
the Great Lakes and the head-waters of the Mississippi in 
1766, writes as follows: “ Every separate body of Indians 
is divided into bands or tribes ; which band or tribe forms 
a little community with the nation to which it belongs. As 
the nation has some particular symbol by which it is 

distinguished from others, so 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sSanguinity and Affinity, pp. 170 sg. 3 
id., Ancient Society, p. 1543 J. 
Mooney, Zhe Stouan Tribes of the 
East (Washington, 1894), pp. 5 599. 3 
J. Deniker, Zhe Races of Man, pp. 
528 sg. As to the various Siouan or 
Dacotan tribes, see S. R. Riggs, Dakota 
Grammar, Texts, and Ethnography 
(Washington, 1893), pp. 155 599-3 
W. J. McGee, ** The Siouan Indians,” 
Fifteenth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1897), pp- 
157 sgg.; J. Owen Dorsey, “ Siouan 
Sociology,” zéz@. pp. 213 sgg. 

2 Narrative of the Captivity and 
Adventures of John Tanner, prepared 
for the press by Edwin James, M.D. 

each tribe has a badge from 

(London, 1830) pp. 313; W. W.e 
Warren, ‘‘ History of the Ojibways,” 
Collections of the Minnesota Historical 
Society, v. (1885) p. 43 (‘From per- 
sonal knowledge and enquiry, I can 
confidently assert that among the 
Dakotas the system is not known”) ; 
L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 1545 
S. R. Riggs, Dakota Grammar, Texts, 
and Ethnography (Washington, 1893), 
P. 195 (Contributions to North Ameri- 
can Ethnology, vol. ix.). The last- 
mentioned writer (Riggs) observes that 
“the real foundation for the totemic 
system exists among the Dakota as 
well as the Iroquois, in the names of 
men often being taken from mythical 
animals, but the system was never 

carried: to perfection.” 
a 

XVI TOTEMI[SM AMONG THE OMAHAS 87 

which it is denominated : as that of the Eagle, the Panther, 
the Tiger, the Buffalo, etc, etc. One band of the Nau- 
dowessie is represented by a Snake, another a Tortoise, a 
third a Squirrel, a fourth a Wolf, and a fifth a Buffalo. 
Throughout every nation they particularize themselves in 
the same manner, and the meanest person among them will 
remember his lineal descent, and distinguish himself by his 
respective family.”? As Naudowessie is an old name for 
the Sioux or Dacotas,? Carver’s testimony certainly se¢ms 
to shew that those of the Dacotas with whom he came 
into contact were divided into totemic clans, as Morgan has 
already pointed out.® However, in modern times the 
numerous bands of which the tribe is composed appear to 
lack the characteristics of totemic clans, being neither 
named after animals nor exogamous.* Accordingly they 
need not be here considered. But if the Dacotas them- 
selves no longer possess totemism, many of the tribes of the 
same stock are still, or were till lately, divided into totemic 
clans. We begin our survey of them with the Omahas, a 
tribe of the Missouri valley in the State of Nebraska. The 
remainder of the tribe is now settled on a reservation in 
Burt County.° 

The Omahas supported themselves partly by agriculture 
and partly by the chase. Their village, consisting of 
“ diet-lodges,” was situated within a few miles of the 
Missouri, but they only occupied it for about five months in 
the year, returning to it in order to attend to their crops; 

1 J. Carver, Zvavels through the 
Interior Parts of North America, Third 
Edition (London, 1781), pp. 255 sq. 

2 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 380. 

3 L, H. Morgan, Anctent Society, p. 
154. 

4 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 378. For lists of 
these bands, see Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, 
- *Siouan Sociology,” fifteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1897), pp. 215 s5¢gg. The 
writer calls these bands ‘ gentes.” 
Among the names of the bands men- 
tioned by Dorsey are ‘‘ Not encum- 
bered with much baggage,” ‘‘ Eats-no- 

geese,” “ Bad Nation,” ‘Village on 
the Prairie,” ‘‘ Shooters among the 
Leaves,” ‘Village at the Dam,” 
** Dwellers on the Sand,” ‘* Dwellers on 
the Island,” ‘* Dwellers at the South,” 
** Five Lodges,” ‘* Those who lay meat 
on their shoulders,” etc. Another is 
called ‘Breakers (of the law or 
custom),” being so called ‘‘ because 
members of this gens disregarded the 
marriage law by taking wives within 
the gens.” 

5 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 
155; Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘*‘ Omaha 
Sociology,” Zhzrd Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1884), p. 2143 J. Deniker, Zhe Races 
of Man, p. 530. 

However, 
some tribes 
of the 
Dacotan 
stock have 
totemism. 

The 
Omahas, 

a Siouan 
tribe of the 
Missouri. 

88 ZTOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Ciap. 

for they planted maize, beans, pumpkins, and water-melons, 
but no other vegetables. At other times of the year they 
roamed the country in the pursuit of the buffalo, their 
favourite game, which they followed on horseback. The 
flesh of the buffalo, dried in the sun or jerked over a slow 
fire and condensed into cakes, was one of their principal 
foods, but they also hunted the deer and the elk, and 
trapped beavers and otters. The skins of all these animals 
they dressed and bartered with traders for the blankets, 
guns, powder, calico, knives and so forth, of which they 
stood in need. On the whole the Omahas depended 
mainly on the hunt for food, clothing, and shelter.” 

We have The Omahas have had the good fortune to be studied 
rariivele by several competent observers, and accordingly we possess 

fullaccount a more detailed account of their totemic system than of any 

Otome other Indian tribe in North America. For the most part, 
including as the reader may have already perceived, our knowledge of 
information . . . : : i 

about the the totemism of an American Indian tribe comprises little more 
totemic —_ than a bare list of the names of the clans with a brief statement 
taboos. : y 
Such in. Of the rules of marriage and descent.' In fact the attention 
ene of American observers, even of an observer so sagacious as 
givenas L.H. Morgan, seems to have been turned almost exclusively 
10 the an t© the social side of totemismi, while the religious or 
Indians. superstitious side of the system, in other words, the relation 

in which human beings are supposed to stand to their 

totemic objects, has been almost wholly overlooked. 

Asa 

consequence, while we are generally informed as to the 
social taboo which forbids marriage within the totemic clan, 
we have. commonly no information at all as to the religious 
or superstitious taboos which regulate the behaviour of the 

1 Edwin James, Account of an Ex- 
pedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky 
Mountains performed in the years 1819, 
7820, under the command of Major 
S. Hf, Long (London, 1823), i. 181- 
204. 

2 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘© Omaha Socio- 
logy,” Zhird Annual Report of the 

Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethno- 
Zogy (Washington, 1896), pp. 269-288. 
The ‘‘ dirt-lodges ” or ‘‘ earth-lodges ” 
of the Omahas were circular huts, 
consisting of a wooden framework 
‘thatched with grass, the whole structure 
being covered over with earth one or 
two feet deep. A hole in the middle 

Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, allowed the smoke to escape. The 
1884), p. 221. As to the houses, Omahas formerly made pottery. They 
furniture, and implements of the used stone knives and hoed the ground 

Omahas, see zd. *‘ Omaha Dwellings, 
Furniture, and Implements,” 7hzrteenth 

with the shoulder-blades of buffaloes 
(J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 278). 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 89 

clanspeople towards their totem. Even such a simple 
matter as the rule whether a man may or may not kill and 
eat his totem animal has been very rarely recorded of any 
American tribe. It would be rash to assume from the 
silence of our authorities that no such superstitious taboos 
exist in tribes where they have not been recorded, and that 
to the American Indians in general their totemic names mean 
no more than the proper names Bull, Lamb, and Rose mean 
to us. The example of totemic tribes in many other pafts 
of the world would suffice to raise a strong presumption that 
the Indians of America regard, or at some former time 
regarded, their totems with superstitious respect and awe ; 
and this presumption is greatly strengthened by the case of 
the Omahas, who are known to have so regarded their 
totems, and to have observed accordingly a system of taboos 
in respect of- them. It is in the highest degree improbable 
that in doing so the Omahas were exceptional ; far more 
probably similar taboos have been observed by all the 
totemic tribes of North America, though unfortunately very 
few of them have been put on record. We are bound to be 
all the more grateful to the men of truly scientific spirit who 
have had the intelligence to note and the patience to record 
the totemic taboos of the Omahas. 

Of these records we possess two, the first obtained by The 
Major S. H. Long’s expedition in 1819 and 1820, and the ee 
second by the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, who was a missionary Long's 
to the kindred tribe of Ponkas from 1871 to 1873 and ¢xpedition 
afterwards studied the Omahas and other tribes of the Rev. J. 
Siouan family for the American Bureau of Ethnology. Dosen 
Dorsey’s record is much the fuller and in many respects the 
more valuable of the two; but Long’s is also of great interest 
and importance, because it was procured at a time when the 
Omahas were still independent and when they retained their 
ancient customs and beliefs very little affected by contact 
with civilisation. Accordingly, I shall reproduce the earlier 
record entire in the words of the writer, Dr. Edwin James, 
the botanist and geologist of the expedition, who edited the 
journals of Major Long and his colleagues. The information 
with regard to the Omahas, or Omawhaws, as James calls 
them, was in great measure obtained from Mr. John 

go TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Hap. 

Dougherty, Deputy Indian Agent for the Missouri, “who 
had an excellent opportunity of making himself acquainted 
with the natives, by residing for a time in the Omawhaw 
village, and by visiting all the different nations of this river 
[the Missouri].”? The account runs thus :—? 

Totemic The Omawhaw nation is divided into two principal sections or tribes, 
eee which are distinguished by the names Honga-sha-no and Ish-ta-sun-da ; 
of the the latter means Grey Eyes. 

Omahas, The first-mentioned tribe is subdivided into eight bands, viz. 

as reported 1. Wase-ish-ta. — This band is interdicted from eating the flesh 
Py Me of male deer or male elk, in consequence of having their great medicine, 
Sceion which is a large shell, enveloped in the prepared skin of those animals.? 

The chief of this band is the Big Elk, Ongpatungah; and it is more 
powerful and numerous in individuals than either of the others. . . . 

2, Enk-ka-sa-ba.—This band will not eat red maize. They ascribe 
to their family the greatest antiquity, and declare that their first man 
emerged from the water with an ear of red maize in his hand. The 
principal chief is Ishkatappe. 

3. Wa-sa-ba-etaze ; or, those who do not touch bears.—This band 
refrains from eating the flesh of bears. 

4. Ka-e-ta-je, or those who do not touch turtles or tortoises, 

5. Wa-jinga-e-taze, or those who dc mot touch any kind of bird, 
excepting the war-eagle. 

6. Hun-guh.—This band does not eat white cranes, as the down 
of that bird is their medicine. 

7. Kon-za,—— This band must not touch the green clay, or even 
verdigrise, both of which are used as pigments by the other bands, for 
ornamenting their persons. 

8. Ya-pa-tajje.—This band must not touch deers’ heads, neither 
must they wear deer-skin mockasins. Many of the individuals of this 
band are partially gray-haired, This change of the hair, which they 

1 Edwin James, Account of an Ex- 
pedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky 

that the sight of it would instantly 
blind them. The sacred bundle was 

sVountatns performed in the years 
I8I1Q, 1820, under the command of 
sVajor S. H. Long (London, 1823), 
i, 181. 

2 E. James, op. czt. ii. 47-50. 

3 This sacred shell, Dr. James tells 
us (pp. 47 sg.), wrapped in its skin 
covering, was kept in ‘a skin lodge or 
temple,” under charge of a person who 
constantly resided in the lodge and 
guarded the shell. It was placed on a 
stand and never allowed to touch the 
earth. No one dared to open the skin 
and look at the shell, for they thought 

taken with the band to all national 
hunts, being transported on a man’s 
back. And before a national expedition 
was undertaken against an enemy, the 
holy shell was consulted as an oracle. 
The medicine-men smoked and listened 
for a sound from the sacred bundle. If 
a sound resembling a strong expulsion 
of breath or a distant gunshot was 
heard, they took it for a favourable 
omen; and- the expedition advanced 
with confidence. If no such sound was 
heard, they deemed the issue doubtful. 
As to the sacred shell, see also below, 

p. 107. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS g! 

consider as a deformity, is attributed to a violation of the above-mentioned 
laws prescribed by their medicine. 

The second division, or tribe Jsh/asunda, is subdivided into five 
bands. 

1. Za-pa-eta-je.—This band does not touch bison heads. 

2. Mon-eka-goh-ha, or the earth-makers. — Of this band was the 
celebrated Black Bird. They are not forbidden the use of any aliment ; 
and are said to have originated the present mode of mourning, by 
rubbing the body with whitish clay. 

3. Ya-sin-da, or the bison tail—This band does not eat bison 
calves, in the first year of the age of that animal. 

4. Ing-gera-je-da, or the red dung. — This name is said to have 
originated from the circumstance of this band having formerly quarrelled, 
and separated themselves from the nation, until, being nearly starved, 
they were compelled to eat the fruit of the wild cherry-tree, until their 
excrement became red. 

5. Wash-a-tung.—This band must not touch any of the reptilia 
class of animals. 

Each of these animals, or parts of animals, which the bands 
respectively are forbidden to touch or eat, is regarded as the particular 
mysterious medicine of the band collectively, to which it relates. 

This singular, and, to us, absurd law of interdiction, is generally 
rigidly observed; and a violation of it, they firmly believe, will be 
followed by some signal judgment, such as blindness, gray hairs, or 
general misfortune. Even should the forbidden food be eaten inad- 
vertently, or but tasted through ignorance, sickness they believe would 
be the inevitable consequence, not only to the unfortunate individual 
himself, but involving his wife and children also, 

In this account of the Omaha bands or clans, no mention 
is made of the rule of exogamy, which forbids a man to 
marry a woman of his own'clan; but this omission is 
supplied, as we shall see, by later writers. Thus it would 
appear from the account which I have just quoted that in 
the years 1819-1820 the Omaha were divided into thirteen 
totemic clans, which were arranged in two groups, perhaps 
phratries, as follows :— 

[TABLE 

92 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cHapr. 

bi rere ey Clans. Totems. Taboos. 
1. Wase-ish-ta Male deer and | Forbidden to eat flesh of 
male elk male deer or male elk. 
2. Enk-ka-sa-ba Red Maize Forbidden to eat red 

maize. 

3. Wa-sa-ba-etaje | Bear Forbidden to eat the 

flesh of bears. 
Turtle (Tortoise) | Forbidden to touch 

turtles or tortoises. 
Forbidden to touch any 
bird except the war- 
eagle. 
Forbidden to eat white 
cranes, 

5. Wa-jinga-e-taje| Bird 

Honga-sha-no 
6, Hun-giuh White Crane 

. Aon-sa 

“N 

8. Ta-pa-tajje 

Green Clay and 
verdigris 

Deers’ heads and 
deer-skin moc- 

Forbidden totouch green 
clay and verdigris. 
Forbidden to touch 
deers’ heads and to 
wear deer-skin moc- 

1 casins 

4. Ka-e-lazye 
4 
| 

casins. 
Heads of Buffaloes } Forbidden to touch 
heads of buffaloes. 
White clay? ? 
Tails of buffaloes | Forbidden to eat buffalo 
calves one year old. 

1. Ta-pa-etaje 

2. Mon-eka-goh-ha 
Ish-ta-sun-da }| 3. Ta-sin-da 

(Grey Eyes) 

4. Ing-geraje-da | Red dung? ? 
5. Wash-a-tung Reptiles Forbidden to touch 
reptiles. 
Morgan's Some forty years later, in 1860, L. H. Morgan obtained 
Baad a list of twelve Omaha clans as follows :—! 
clans. 1. Wé-zhese-ta Deer. 
2. Ink-ka-sa-ba Black. 
3. Ld-td-dé Bird. 
4. Ka-th Turtle. 
5. Da-thun-da Buffalo. 
6. Wé-sé-ba Bear. 
7. Hun-gh Medicine. 
‘ 8. Kunza Kaw. 
9. Té-pa Head. 
10. ln-gré-zhe-da Red. 
11, Lsh-dé-sun-da Thunder. 

12. O-non-e-ké gi-ha 

1 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, p. 

155. As Morgan ascertained the Omaha 

classificatory terms of relationship at 
Omaha, in Nebraska, in June 1860 (Sys- 
tems of Consanguinity and Affintty, p. 

Many seasons, 

284), I have assumed that he obtained 
his list of the clans at the same time. He 
was at work among the Eastern Dacotas 
in 1861 and among the Western in 1862 
(Ancient Society, p. 154). 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 93 

A comparison of this list with the preceding one will shew 
that while the two agree in some things, they differ in others. 
The discrepancies may be due to the changes which presum- 
ably took place among the Omahas in the interval. The 
name of Morgan’s Thunder clan (/sh-dd-sun-da) is clearly 
identical with /sh-ta-sun-da, which according to Dr. James’s 
information was not a clan or band, but one of the two great 
divisions into which the whole nation or tribe was distributed. 

When the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey studied the Omahas Tie Rev. 
some sixty years after Major Long’s expedition,’ he found Skies 
them organised in ten totemic clans, which were equally account of 
distributed between the same two great tribal divisions which a ty 
had been recorded by his predecessors. The names of the clans, and 
two tribal divisions, according to Dorsey, are Hanggashenoo pees 
and Eeshtasanda, which are clearly identical with the Honga- 
sha-no and Ish-ta-sun-da of Major Long; and each of the 
two divisions comprises five clans under it. In former days, 
when the tribe was encamped, the ten clans pitched their 
tents in a circle, the five clans of the Hanggashenoo division 
forming a semicircle on the right side of the line of march, 
and the five clans of the Eeshtasanda division forming the 
other semicircle on the left side of the line of march, Each 
clan had its regular place in the camp.” Further, each 

1 The principal results ot Mr. self (p. 206). Thus I write sé instead 

Dorsey’s study of the Omahas and the 
kindred Siouan tribes are embodied 
in the three following papers: (1) 
‘“*Qmaha Sociology,” Third Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1884), pp. 205-370; 
(2) “A Study of Siouan Cults,” 
Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1894), pp. 
361-5443 (3) ‘*Siouan Sociology,” 
Fifteenth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1897), pp- 
205-244. 

2 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘* Omaha Socio- 
logy,” Zhird Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1884), pp. 219 sg. In giving the 
Omaha names of the clans, subclans, 
and tribal subdivisions I have dis- 
carded Dorsey’s peculiar spelling with 
the explanations given by Dorsey him- 

of c; ¢h instead of ¢; ¢e instead of 7; ne 
instead of # ; 00 instead of w, etc. ; and 
I have regularly restored to their usual 
position the consonants which Dorsey 
has placed upside down. Dorsey’s 
spelling agrees in the main with the 
alphabet which the American Bureau 
of Ethnology has adopted for repre- 
senting the sounds of the native Indian: 
languages. It doubtless represents 
those sounds much more exactly than 
the spelling which I have adopted ;_ but 
on the other hand it is complicated and. 
uncouth and would be hardly intelligible 
to English readers. I have been con- 
tent to sacrifice a certain degree of 
exactness for the sake of simplicity and 
intelligibility. Further, my spelling 
has the advantage of bringing out more 
clearly the agreement of the clan names. 
given by Dorsey with those given by. 
his predecessors. 

The Elk 
clan, 

‘he Black 
Shoulder 
(Buffalo) 
clan. 

94 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

Omaha clan is subdivided into subclans. The number of the 
subclans varies, at present, according to the particular clan ; 
but Dorsey found traces of the existence of four subclans in 
each clan in former days. The subclans themselves seem to 
be composed of a number of groups of a still lower order 
which may be called sections.’ 

The list of Omaha clans (gentes) and subclans (sub- 
gentes) with their respective taboos, as ascertained by J. 
Owen Dorsey, is in the main as follows :—?* 

I. In the Hanggashenoo division of the tribe there were 
these five clans : 

1. The lejeeshte or Elk clan. It has the first place in 
the tribal circle. The members of this clan are afraid to 
touch any part of the male elk or to eat its flesh, and they 
may not eat the flesh of the male deer. Should they 
accidentally violate this custom, they say that they are sure 
to break out in boils and white spots on different parts of 
the body. But when a member of this clan dies, he is 
buried in moccasins made of deer skin. 

2. The EZengke-sabé or Black Shoulder clan. This is a 
Buffalo clan. Its place in the tribal circle is next to that of 
the Elk.clan. The clan has a tradition that its ancestors 
were once buffaloes who lived under water, but that having 
reached the land they snuffed at the four winds and prayed 
to them. When the Omahas went on the buffalo hunt and 
could get skins for tents, it was customary to decorate the 
principal tent of this clan on the outside with three circles, 
within each of which was painted a buffalo head. The clan 
used to be divided into four subclans, of which one is now 
extinct. The names of some of the subclans are variously 
given. (a) The members of one of them (the Wathigeeje) 
are forbidden to eat buffalo tongues and to touch buffalo 
heads. (0) The members of a second (the /Vataseejeede 
thatajt) are forbidden to eat red maize. (c) The members 
of a third (the Eeekeethé) are or were the criers of the tribe. 
(d) And the members of a fourth subdivision of the clan 

1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha Socio- logy,” of. ‘ait. pp. 225-251. As to 
logy,” Third Annual Report of the spelling of the native names of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, tribal divisions, clans, and subclans, see 

1884), p. 215. above, p. 93, note*. 
2 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha Socio- 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 95 

(the Ze-he-sabé eetaji) are not allowed to touch black horns 
(of buffaloes). But it is doubtful whether this last sub- 
division was strictly a subclan. 

3. The Hangga clan. This, like the Eengke-sabé, is a The 
Buffalo clan and camps next to it in the tribal circle. shed ak 
They, too, have a tradition that their ancestors were once clan. 
buffaloes and lived under water. The clan is divided into 
two subclans, each of, which has several names. (@) One of 
the subclans is sometimes spoken of by a name which 
means “Pertaining to the sacred cotton-wood bark”; but 
when its members are described by their taboos, they 
are called “Those who do not eat buffalo sides” and 
“Those who do not eat geese, swans, and cranes.” They 
are allowed to eat buffalo tongues. (6) The second 
subclan is often referred to as “Pertaining to the sacred 
skin of the white buffalo cow”; but when reference is 
made to their taboo they are called by a name which seems 
to mean “They cannot eat buffalo tongues.” However, 
they are at liberty to eat buffalo sides, which the other 
members of the Hangga clan are not allowed to do. 

4. The Thatada clan. It occupies the fourth place in The 
the tribal circle, next to the Hangga clan. But unlike other seas 
clans, its subclans have separate camping areas. Were it 
not for the marriage law, says Dorsey, we should say that 
the Thatada was a phratry and that its subclans were clans. 
These subclans are four in number, as follows: (a2) The 
Wasabe-heetajt subclan. Its name is derived from wasave, 
“a black bear,” 4a, “a skin,” and eetajz, “not to touch”; so 
that the name of the clan means “ Those who do not touch 
the skin of a black bear.” The members of this subclan are 
forbidden to touch the hide of a black bear and to eat its 
flesh. They say that their ancestors were made under- 
ground, and that they afterwards came to the surface. This 
Black Bear subclan is itself reported to be subdivided into 
four sections, to wit, the Black Bears, the Raccoons, the 
Grizzly Bears, and the Porcupines. Of these four sections 
the Black Bears and the Raccoons are said to be brothers, 
and when a man kills a black bear, he says, “I have killed 
a raccoon.” (6) The Wayeenga thatajé subclan. This 
name means “They who do not eat (small) birds.” The 

96 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA CHar. 

members of this subclan may eat wild turkeys, geese, ducks, 
and cranes. When they are sick, they may eat prairie 
chickens. When they are on the warpath, the only birds 
tabooed to them are the hawk and the martin. One of his 
Indian informants told Dorsey that this Small Bird subclan 
was itself subdivided into sections and subsections as follows : 
I. Hawk people: II. Blackbird people, subdivided again 
into White heads, Red heads, Yellow heads, and Red wings. 
III. Gray Blackbird (the common starling) or Thunder 
people, subdivided again into Gray Blackbirds, Meadow 
larks, Prairie-chickens, and perhaps Martins. IV. Owl and 
Magpie people, subdivided again into Great Owls, Small 
Owls, and Magpies. However, two other of Dorsey’s 
Indian informants denied that the Small Bird subclan was 
subdivided into these sections and subsections. (¢c) The 
Te-pa-eetaji subclan. These are the Eagle people, but they 
are not allowed to touch a buffalo head. According to one 
of Dorsey’s informants, this subclan is again subdivided into 
four sections called respectively “Keepers of the Pipe,” 
“The only Hangga,” “ Real Eagle,” and “Bald Eagle.” (d) 
The Ke-ee or Turtle subclan. The members of this subclan 
may not eat a turtle, but they are allowed to touch or carry 
one. Figures of turtles were painted on the outside of their 
tents. One of Dorsey’s informants affirmed, and two others 
denied, that the Turtle subclan was itself subdivided into 
four sections called respectively “ Big Turtle,” “Turtle that 
does not flee,” “ Red-breasted Turtle,” and “Spotted Turtle 
with Red Eyes.” 
The 5. The Kaze or Kansas clan. The members of the 
Verdigris clan are forbidden to touch verdigris, which they call “green 
; clay ” (wase-too) or “ gray green clay” (wase-too-goode). The 
clan is subdivided into two or four subclans, for with regard 
to the number of the subclans there was a difference of 
opinion among Dorsey’s informants. One of the subclans 
was called “Keepers of a Pipe” and another “ Wind 
people.” 
II. We now come to the five clans of the Eeshtasanda 
division. They are as follows: 
The Wolf 1. The Mathingka-gaghe clan. The name means “ The 
een: Earth-lodge Makers,” but the clan is a Wolf clan, for the 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 

97 

members of it call themselves the Wolf People, or the 
Prairie Wolf People. In the tribal circle the Wolf clan 
camps néxt to the Kansas clan, but on the opposite side of 
the road. They form the first of the Heshtasanda clans. 
Their principal mythical ancestors (zkie)' are the coyote, 
the wolf, and certain sacred stones, as to the number and 
colours of which opinions differ. One story is that the 
stones were made by the coyote or prairie wolf in ancient 
days for the purpose of bewitching enemies. The clan is - 
subdivided into several subclans, as to the number and 
names of which Dorsey’s informants were not agreed. One 
subclan is said to have been called “ Keepers of the Pipe,” 
another “Sacred Persons,” another “the Coyote and Wolf 
People,” another “ Keepers of the Sacred Stones,” and a 
third, “ Those who do not touch Swans.” 

2. The Ze-sende or Buffalo-tail clan. In the tribal circle The 
it camps between the Aathingka-gaghe clan and the 7a-da oe 
clan. Members of this clan may not eat a calf while it is 
red, but they may eat it when it turns black. This rule 
applies to the calf of the domestic cow as well as to that of 
the buffalo. Further, members of the clan may not touch a 
buffalo head nor eat the meat on the lowest rib of the 
buffalo, because the head of the calf before birth touches 
the mother near that rib. For purposes of marriage this 
clan is undivided. 

3. The Za-pa or Deer-head clan. Their place in the The Deer- 
tribal circle is next after that of the Ze-sénde clan. Members >*@¢ ‘!#”- 
of this clan may eat the flesh of deer, but they may not 
touch the skin of any animal of the deer family, nor wear 
mocassins of deer-skin, nor use the fat of deer for hair-oil, 
as the other Omahas do. According to some, the members 
of this clan are further forbidden to touch charcoal. For 
purposes of marriage this clan is subdivided into three or four 
subclans. One subclan is that of “The Keepers of the 
Sacred Pipe.” They are said to be Eagle People and to 

have a special taboo, being 

1 «< Nikie is a term that refers to a 
mythical ancestor, to some part of his 
body, to some of his acts, or to some 
ancient rite ascribed to him. A 
‘ntkie’ name is a personal name of 

VOL, Hil 

forbidden to touch verdigris 

such a character” (J. Owen Dorsey, 
‘© A Study of Siouan Cults,” Eleventh 

Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1894), 
P. 367). 

The Red 
Dung (?) 
clan, 

The 
Reptile 
clan. 

List of 
Omaha * 
clans, 

with the 
authorities. 

98 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA CHap. 

charcoal, and the skin of the wild cat. Another subclan is 
said to be that of “ The Thunder People,” and a third that 
of “ The Real Deer People.” 

4. The Eenggthe-jeede clan. The name has _ been 
explained in various ways. It seems to mean “red dung.” 
The place of the clan in the tribal circle is next to the 
Ta-da clan. Members of the clan may not eat a buffalo 
calf. It appears, says Dorsey, that the two Buffalo clans of 
the Eeshtasanda division are Buffalo-calf clans, and that the 
two Buffalo clans of the Haxggathenoo division are connected 
with the grown buffalo. The skin-tents of the Eengge-seede 
clan are decorated on each side of the entrance with a 
circle, within which is sketched the body of a buffalo calf, 
visible from the flanks upward. The clan is not subdivided 
for purposes of marriage. 

5. The Eeshtasanda clan. The meaning of the name is 
uncertain. According to one account the name (spelled 
Ish-ta-sun-da) means “Grey Eyes.”1 Members of the clan 
may not touch worms, snakes, toads, frogs, or any other — 
kinds of reptiles. Hence they are sometimes called “the 
Reptile People.” For purposes of marriage the clan is sub- 
divided into three or perhaps four subclans. One of the 
subclans is called “Keepers of the Pipe” or “Real 
Eeshtasanda,’ another is called “Reptile People,’ and a 
third “ Thunder People” (Zengtha). The “ Reptile People” 
are sometimes called “ Keepers of the Claws of the Wild-cat,” 
because they bind these claws to the waist of a new-born 
infant; and the “Thunder People” are sometimes called 
“Keepers of the Clam Shell,” because they bind a clam 
shell to the waist of a child of the subclan, when he is 
forward in learning to walk. 

The three lists of Omaha totems furnished by Long 
(James), Morgan, and Dorsey will be found on comparison 
to agree in the main, though they differ in detail, as will 
appear from the following table, in which the subclans 
mentioned by Dorsey are omitted, except in so far as they 
appear to coincide with the clans enumerated by Long and 

Morgan :— 
1 See above, p. 90. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 99 

OMAHA TOTEMS AND CLANS 

+ 
Totems. Clans and Subclans. Authorities. 
Male Elk and Deer. | Wase-ish-ta Long 
aS 35 . | Wéa-shese-ta Morgar 
ss 7 . | Wejeeshte Dorsey 
Red Maize . . . | Bnk-ka-sa-ba Long 
oe 35.3 : . | Watazee-jeedethataji (subclan) Dorsey 
Bear . 4 - . | Wa-sa-ba-etaje Long 
” : 7 . | Wa-sh-ba Morgan 
es E $ . | Wasaba-heetaji (subcian) Dorsey 
Turtle (Tortoise) . . Ka-e-ta-je Long 
Pr $5 7 . Ka-th Morgan 
$3 +s $ . Ae-ee (subclan) Dorsey 
Bird . . ‘ . Wa-jinga-e-taje Long 
ay. oe - 3 . Lé-té-dé Morgan 
say eis . . . | Wa-jeengathatajt (subclan) Dorsey 
White Crane , . | Hun-guh Long 
%9 ” E . | Zun-gé (medicine) Morgan 
4 . i . | Hangga Dorsey 
Verdigris . . . | Kon-sa Long 
9 ‘ . . | Xunzd (Kaw) Morgan 
. +5 : . . | Kase or Kansas Dorsey 
Deer-head . : . | Za-pa-taj-ze Long 
re 45 F . | Ta-pa Dorsey 
Buffalo-head . Ta-pa-etaye Long 
” ” . . | Ta-péd Morgan 
- os , . | Ze-pa-eetazi (subclan) Dorsey 
White Clay ? e . | Mon-eha-goh-ha Long 
Buffalo-tail . F . | Za-sin-da Long 
” Sale * . | Ze-stnde Dorsey 
Red Dung . 3 . | Lug-gera-je-da Long 
33 ae. ue . . | Ing-gra-che-da Morgan 
” ” 3 . Lengthejeede Dorsey 
Reptiles. F . | Wash-a-tung Long 
3 5 . . | Keshtasanda Dorsey 
Thunder. . . | Lsh-da-sun-da Morgan 
5 i 7 . | Zengtha (subclan) Dorsey 
Black Shoulder (Buffalo) | Zengha-sabe Dorsey 
? Thatada Dorsey 
Wolf? . s . | Wathingka-gaghe Dorsey 

Hence we see that the Red Maize, Bear, Turtle, Bird, Apparent 

Buffalo-head, and Thunder, which are reckoned as clans by hotles 
Long or Morgan or both, are described as subclans_ by clans and 
Dorsey. It may be that in the interval between Long’s or one 

Morgan’s visit to the Omahas and Dorsey’s examination of reports. 
the tribe these totemic divisions may have fallen from the 
rank of clans to that of subclans; but it is more probable 

100 JOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA ciap. 

that Long and Morgan mistook (as they might easily do) 
subclans for clans, and that the more exact investigations of 
Dorsey revealed the error. The existence of subclans for 
purposes of marriage within the totemic clans is interesting 
and instructive, because it furnishes a fresh illustration of 
the strong tendency of totemic clans to subdivide into new 
divisions, which in time assume the rank of clans, while the 
original clans, from which they sprang, rise or sink to the 
condition of phratries. 
The It is instructive to observe how often the device of 
oun es splitting the totem has been applied by the Omahas to the 
of the buffalo, which formerly provided them with their principal 
to“mal. means Of subsistence. Thus among their totems are Buffalo 
is often ap- Head, Buffalo Tail, and Black Shoulder of Buffalo; and 
paren’ “" members of the clans or subclans are accordingly forbidden, 
expedient some to eat buffaloes’ heals, others to eat buffaloes’ tongues, 
nee others to eat buffaloes’ sides, and others to eat buffalo 
a Lee calves while they are still red. I have already pointed out? 
while they that the practice of splitting a totem seems to be most 
peng: tae commonly applied to an edible animal, the flesh of which is 
’ one of the staple foods of the tribe ; and that the custom of 
thus splitting or subdividing a totemic animal into more or 
less minute parts is probably in many cases an economic 
expedient designed to quiet the scruples of the superstitious 
without debarring them altogether from participation in a 
food which they could ill spare, and which is indeed almost 
necessary to their subsistence. People thus salved their 
conscience by renouncing a small part of the animal, while 
they appeased their hunger by eating all the rest of it. 
Rules of With regard to the rules of marriage and descent in the 
ey Omaha clans Morgan briefly tells us that they are the same 
among the aS among the Ponkas; that is, no man is allowed to marry 
Omahas. a woman of his own clan, children belong to the clan of 
their father, not of their mother, and both property and 
the office of sachem are hereditary in the clan. Fuller 
details as to the marriage laws are given by Dorsey. From 
him we learn that a man is forbidden to marry any woman 
either of his father’s or of his mother’s clan; and that the 

1 See above, vol. ii. pp. 536 sy. 
2.1L. H. Morgan, Anctent Society, p. 155. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 101 
4 

same prohibition extends to the subclan of his father’s mother, 
to the subclan of his father’s mother’s mother, to the subclan 
of his mother’s mother, and to the subclan of his mother’s 
mother’s mother. Further, he may not marry a woman of 
the subclan to which the wife of his son, his nephew, or his 
grandson belongs ; and he may not marry a woman of the 
subclan to which the husband of his daughter, his niece, or 
his granddaughter belongs.! With regard to the importance 
of the subclans or subgentes, as he calls them, Dorsey observes 
that “were it not for the institution of subgentes a man 
would be compelled to marry outside of his tribe, as all the 
women would be his kindred, owing to previous intermarriages 
between the ten gentes. But in any gens those on the other 
side of the gentile uezhe, or fireplace, are not reckoned as full 
kindred, though they cannot intermarry.”? On the other 
hand a man is allowed to marry a woman of his own totem, 
provided that she is a member of another tribe.® 
Members of the various totem clans are distinguished Each clan 
from each other by their names and by the mode of wearing #74 3° 
their hair. In regard to names we have seen that in other personal 
Indian tribes each totemic clan has its own names appro- for its 
PP for its 
priated to it, which may not be used by members of other members. 
clans. Similarly Omaha clans and subclans have each its ocr 
own set of personal names which are bestowed on members commonly 
refer to the 
of the clan but on no others. These names commonly refer totem. 
in one way or other to the totem. For example, in the Elk Names of 
clan there were certain sacred (zzkie) names which were Aco 
bestowed on boys according to the order of their birth in 
the family. Thus the first-born son was called the Soft 
Horn (of the young elk.at its first appearance). The second 
was called Yellow Horn (of the young elk when a little 
older). The third was called the Branching Horns (of an 
elk three years old). The fourth was called the Four Horns 
(of an elk four years old). The fifth was called the Large 
Pronged Horns (of an elk six or seven years old). The 
sixth was called the Dark Horns (of a grown elk in summer). 

! J. Owen Dorsey, ‘ Omaha Socio- 2 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 258. 
logy,” Third Annual Report of the 3 J. Owen Dorsey, of. ett. p. 257. 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 4 See above, pp. 13 59-5 34 Squs 
1884), pp. 255-257. 76 sq. 

g3i4i 

Names of 
the Black 
Shoulder 

(Buffalo) 

clan, 

Names of 
the Black 
Bear 
subclan, 

Names of 
the Bird 
subclan. 

Names of 
the Turtle 
subclan. 

Names of 
the Eagle 
subclan. 

102 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA’ cHar. 

The seventh was called the Standing White Horns, in the 
distance (namely those of a grown elk in winter). Among 
the sacred names of men in the Elk clan are Elk, Young 

_Elk, Standing Elk, White Elk, Big Elk, Full-grown Elk, 

Dark Breast (of an elk), Stumpy Tail (of an elk). Among 
the sacred names of women in the Elk clan are Elk and 
Tail Female! In the Black Shoulder clan, which is a 
Buffalo clan, the first son is called “He who stirs up the 
water by jumping in it,’ with reference to a buffalo 
wallowing in the water; the second is called “ Buffaloes 
swimming in large numbers across a stream”; the third 
is called by a name that refers to the changing colour 
on the hairs of a buffalo calf; the fourth is called Knobby 
Horns (of a young buffalo bull); and so on. Among 
the names for men in this clan are (Buffalo that) Walks 
last in the herd, Four (buffaloes) Walking, Black Tongue 
(of a buffalo), Bent Tail, Cloven Hoofs (of a buffalo), Little 
Horn (of a buffalo), and Skittish Buffalo Calf. In the 
Black Bear subclan the first son is called Young Black 
Bear, the second Black Bear, the third Four Eyes (with 
references to the bear’s two eyes and the two eye-like spots 
over them in a black bear), and the fourth Gray Foot.? In 
the Bird subclan the first son is called Blackbird, the second 
Red feathers on the base of the wings, the third White-eyed 
Blackbird, the fourth Dried Wing, the fifth Hawk, the sixth 
Gray Hawk, the seventh White Wings. Among the names 
of men in the Bird subclan are Red Wings, Standing Hawk, 
Gray Blackbird, White Blackbird, and Yellow Head (of a 
blackbird). Among the names of men in the Turtle sub- 
clan are Ancestral Turtle, Turtle that flees not, Spotted 
Turtle with Red Eyes, (Turtle that) Has gone into the 
Lodge (or Shell), and “ Heat makes (a Turtle) Emerge 
from the Mud.”° In the Eagle subclan the firstborn son is 
called Dried Eagle, the second Pipe, the third Eaglet, the 
fourth Real Bald Eagle, the sixth Standing Bald Eagle, and 
the seventh “He (an Eagle) makes the Ground Shake by 

1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha Socio- 2 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cét. pp. 231 5g. 
logy,” Third Annual Report of the 3 J. Owen Dorsey, of. ct. p. 237. 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 4 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 239. 
1884), pp. 227 sq. 5 J. Owen Dorsey, of. c#t. p. 241. 

XVI ZOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 103 

”1 In the Buffalo-tail clan some of the Names of 

Alighting on. it. 

men’s names are Young Buffalo Bull, (Buffalo) Bristling Sepa 
with Artows, and “(Buffalo) Bull raises a Dust by Pawing 

the Ground.”” In the Deer-head clan some of the birth Names of 
names are Hoof of a Deer, Dark Chin of a Deer, “ Deer epee, 
Paws the Ground,” and “ Deer in the Distance Shows its Tail 

White Suddenly.”* And similarly with the names of boys, 

men, and women in the other Omaha clans and subclans.* 

"It is a law with the Omahas that there may not be more No two 
than one living person in a clan who bears any particular Pade 
name. But when the bearer of a name dies or changes it, may bear 
then that name may be given to any new-born child of the sth oe 
clan. This rule applies more strictly to the names of boys 
than of girls.° 

The style of wearing the hair which is characteristic of Each clan 
a clan or subclan is sometimes an imitation of the totem. ra eal 
Thus in the Black Shoulder clan, which is a Buffalo clan, character. 
the smaller boys have their hair cut in two locks like the Smo" 
horns of a buffalo.© People of the Hangga clan, which is the hair, © 
also a Buffalo clan, wear their hair in a crest from ear to Stich 
ear, and this is called by a name which refers to the back an imita- 
of a buffalo.” People of the Bird subclan leave a little hair (07. "”° 
in front, over the forehead, for a bill, and some at the back 
of the head, for the’ bird’s tail, with much over each ear for 
the two wings.® And people of the Turtle subclan cut off 
all the hair of a boy’s head except six locks; two are left 
on each side, one over the forehead, and one hanging down 
the back, in imitation of the legs, head, and tail of a turtle’? 

Members of the various Omaha clans also perform certain Rites and 
rites and ceremonies, which illustrate the relation in which eee) 
the people are supposed to stand to their totems. Thus in ctans. 

the Deer-head clan, on the fifth day after a birth, red spots Birth 

are made at short intervals down the infant’s back to imitate ie” 
4 . Deer-head 
1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘* Omaha Socio- 5 J. Owen Dorsey, of, cz. pp. 227 clan. 

logy,” Third Annual Report of the sq., note% 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 6 J. Owen Dorsey, of. crt. pp. 

1884), p. 240. 229 Sg. 
r J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 244. 7 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 235. 
3 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 245. 8 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 238. 

4 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. pp. 236, 9 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 240. 
ae roe 57-, 243, 246 sg., 248, 248 For other modes of wearing the hair, 
J-» 250 59. . see 7d, pp. 225, 237, 242, 244. 

Death 
ceremonies 
of two 
Buffalo 
clans. 

Magical 
ceremonies 
for the 
control of 
the totems, 

104 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuayr. 

a fawn. According to one account the members of the 
Deer-head clan all assemble to witness this ceremony and 
rub red on their hair and make red spots on*their breasts.’ 
The intention of the ceremony seems plainly to be to identify 
a new-born member of the clan with his totem the deer. A 
similar intention is expressed in a ceremony formerly observed 
at the death of a member of the Black Shoulder or Buffalo 
clan. The dying person, whether man or woman, was 
wrapped in a buffalo robe with the hair out, and his or her 
face was painted with the privileged decoration, which con- 
sists of two parallel lines painted across the forehead, two 
on each cheek, and two under the nose, one being above the 
upper lip and the other between the lower lip and the chin. 
Thus arrayed and decorated the dying man or woman was 
addressed as follows: “You are going to the animals (the 
buffaloes). You are going to rejoin your ancestors. You 
are going or, Your four souls are going, to the four winds. 
Be strong!”* Members of the Hangga clan, which is also 
a Buffalo clan, performed a like ceremony over one of their 
number at the point of death. They wrapped him in a 
buffalo robe with the hair out, painted his face with the 
traditional lines, and said to him: “ You came hither from 
the animals. And you are going back thither. Do not 
face this way again. When you go, continue walking.” ® 
Taken in connection with the legends that these two Buffalo 
clans are descended from buffaloes,* these death ceremonies 
plainly point to a belief that dead members of the clans were 
transformed back into the ancestral animals, the buffaloes. 
Further, members of the Omaha clans and subclans 
appear to have been credited with a power of magically 
controlling their totems for the good of the whole com- 

Ceremonies MuUnity. Thus at harvest time, when birds ate the corn, 
of the Bird members of the Bird subclan used to chew corn and spit it 

subclan and 

the Reptile Over the field, believing that this prevented the birds from 

clan, 

devouring the crop.” Again, when worms infested the corn, 

1 J, Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha Socio- 4 See above, pp. 94, 95. 
logy, Third Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 5 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha Socio- 
1884), pp. 245 s¢. logy,” Third Annual Report of the 

2 J. Owen Dorsey, of, zt, p. 229. Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
3 J. Owen Dorsey, of, ct. p. 233. 1884), pp. 238 59. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 105 

members of the Reptile clan used to catch some of them, 

pound them up with a little corn into a soup, and eat it, 
thinking that ‘after that the worms would leave the crop 

alone, at least for that season. Yet at ordinary times 
members of the Reptile clan were not allowed to touch 
worms.' Again, members of the Kansas clan, who are Ceremonies 
Wind People, flap blankets to start a breeze when the {ihe | 
mosquitoes are troublesome.? Again, during a fog men of and of the 
the Turtle subclan used to draw the figure of a turtle on ice 
the ground with its face to the south. On the head, tail, 

middle of the back, and on each leg were placed small 

pieces of a red breech-cloth with some tobacco. They 
imagined that this would make the fog disappear very 

soon. These ceremonies imply that members of a totemic 

clan possess a magical control over their totem and are 
expected to exercise it for the common good. They thus 
resemble the zz¢ichiuma ceremonies of the Central Australian 

tribes. It is probable that similar magical ceremonies for 

the control of the totems would have been found practised 

by many other totemic tribes of North America, if only 

these tribes had had the good fortune to be described by 

an observer of the calibre of the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey. 

A ceremony which appears to have been essentially akin Ceremony 
to the foregoing was performed by members of the Omaha Pte Ek 
Elk clan whenever the first thunder was heard in spring, clan when 
Then the Elk people called to their servants the Bear oe 
people, who repaired to the sacred tent of the Elk clan, was heard 

in spring. 
There one of the Bear people opened the sacred bag, 
took out the sacred pipe, and handed it to one of the Elk 
men with some tobacco‘from the elk bladder. Before~ the 
pipe was smoked the Thunder god was addressed ; and at 
the conclusion of the ceremony the rain was supposed to 
stop and the Bear people departed to their homes. The 
address to the Thunder god has not been recorded, but in 
the kindred tribe of the Ponkas it ran thus: “ Well, vener- 
able man, by your striking (with your club) you are 

1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha Socio- 2 J. Owen Dorsey, of. c#t. p. 241. 
logy,” Third Annual Report of the 3 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cit. p. 240. 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, $ See vol. i. pp. 104 sgg., 183 s¢9., 
1884), p. 248, 214 599. 

On the 
whole, 
Omaha 
totemism 
seems to 
comprise 
that 
identifica- 
tion of the 
man with 
his totem 
which is 
of the 
essence of 
totemism. 
The lack 
of evidence 
as tou 
similar 
identifica- 
tion in 
other 
American 
tribes is 
probably 
due to the 
inatten- 
tion of 
observers. 

106 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

frightening us, your grandchildren, who are here. Depart 
on high.”? This ceremony implies that the Elk clan was 
for some reason supposed to be able to stop thunder. 

On the whole, the Omaha traditions of descent from 
some of their totemic animals, the ceremonies performed at 
the birth and death of members of certain totemic clans, the 
adoption of personal names referring to the appearance or 
habits of the totemic animals, the wearing of the hair in 
imitation of the creatures, and the magical ceremonies 
performed for their control by the clansmen, all point 
clearly to that identification of the clanspeople with their 
totems which, as I have repeatedly indicated, appears to be 
of the essence of totemism. It is all the more remarkable 
to discover this fundamental principle of totemism carried 
into practice by a single tribe of American Indians, while 
among the tribes which surround it on all sides little or no 
trace of such an identification of the man with his totem has 
been reported. We may suspect that the lack of evidence 
on this head is due rather to the inattention of the observers 
than to the absence of the thing.! Similarly it is highly 
probable that many of the features of Australian totemism 
which are reported only of the Central tribes were shared 
by many of the others, though they have not been recorded 
among them. He who studies reports of the habits and 
customs of savages has constantly to bear in mind that the 
mere absence of evidence as to the existence of an institution 
hardly raises any presumption of the absence of the institution 
itself, and that nothing is so unsafe as to argue from the one 
to the other. In all investigations of savage life the mental 
capacity, intelligence, tact, and sympathy of the observer are 
of the first importance ; and as the union of these qualities 
is rare, so the number of first-rate observers of savages is 
few indeed. Where these personal .qualities of head and 
heart are wanting, no liberal subvention of money, no costly 
apparatus, no elaborate machinery will supply their place. 

Further, the Omahas possessed certain sacred objects | 

1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘Omaha Socio- bag, pipe, and elk bladder, which 
logy,” Third Annual Report of the are referred to in the text, see below, 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, p. 107. 

1884), p. 22%. As to sacred tent, 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 107 

which were associated with their totemic clans. One of Sacred 
these was a sacred pole of cotton-wood about eight feet 2°{5,, 
long, which according to tradition was cut more than two with the 
hundred years ago, before the separation of the Omahas, ("* 
the Ponkas, and the Iowas. The Ponkas indeed still claim The sacred 
a share in it. A scalp is fastened to the top of the pole, an 
and round about the middle of it is wound swan’s down, 
which is itself covered with cotton-wood bark and a piece of 
buffalo hide. This sacred pole used to be greased everl 

year when the Omahas were about to return from the 
summer hunt. They feared that if they neglected to 
grease the pole, the snow would lie deep on the ground 
when next they went out hunting. Though it has a scalp 
attached to it, the pole has nothing to do with war. Yet 

any warrior who had taken a scalp might dedicate it to the 

pole. This sacred pole was committed to the care of the 
Hangga clan, which was a Buffalo clan. They kept it in a 
sacred tent decorated on the outside with corn-stalks. 
Another sacred object which this clan had charge of was the 

skin of a white buffalo cow. This also they kept in a sacred 

tent adorned in like manner with corn-stalks. 

The Elk clan has likewise a sacred tent, in which certain The sacrea 
holy objects are preserved with religious care. In this tent seein 
there is a sacred bag containing the sacred clam - shell sacred pipe 
(tihaba), the bladder of a male elk filled with tobacco, and othe ¥Is 
the sacred pipe of the clan, the tribal war-pipe, made of red 
pipe-stone, The holy clam-shell is kept in a bag of 
buffalo hide which is never placed on the ground. In 
ancient days it was carried on the back of a youth, but in 
modern times, when a man could not be induced to carry it, 
it was put with its buffalo-skin bag into the skin of a coyote, 
and a woman took it on her back. The bag is fastened 
with the sinew of a male elk and may only be opened by a 
member of the Bear subclan of the 7atada clan.’ 

Lastly, the Hangga clan, which is a Buffalo clan, owns The sacred 
two_sacred pipes, though it has committed them to the Bese 

Hangya 

clan. 
1"J. Owen Dorsey, ‘Omaha Socio- 2 J. Owen Dorsey, of. cét. p. 226. 

logy,” Tatrd Annual Report of the As to the sacred clam-shell see also Dr. 

Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, James’s account summarised above, p. 

1884), pp. 233-235. go note 3, 

Smoking to 
Wakanda. 

Marriage 
with a 
deceased 
wife’s 
sister, 
‘The 
Levirate. 

108 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cua?. 

custody of the Black Shoulders, another Buffalo clan. The 
pipes are made of red pipe-stone and decorated with 
porcupine quills. On ceremonial occasions the two pipes are 
brought out and solemnly smoked. They may only be 
filled by an Zeshtasanda man, who knows the ritual and 
recites certain ancient words as he cleans the pipe-bowl, 
certain other words when he fills it, and so on. These words 
may not be heard by other people, so the pipe-cleaner turns 
everybody out of the lodge while he is engaged in the 
discharge of his solemn duty. When the pipes have been 
duly cleaned and filled, they are lit by a member of the 
Hangga clan, and are then passed round the chiefs assembled 
in council on the affairs of the tribe. Both pipes are smoked 
by the chiefs. In smoking they blow the smoke upwards, 
saying, “ Here, Wakanda, is the smoke.” They say that they 
do this because Wakanda gave them the pipes and he rules 
over them. Though at present there are only two sacred pipes, 
no less than seven clans are said to possess such objects.’ 
Sometimes a man marries his deceased wife’s sister at 
the express wish of the dying woman, who may say to her 
brother, “ Pity your brother-in-law. Let him marry my 
sister.” The Omahas observe the law of the levirate: a 
man marries the widow of his “ real or potential brother”, in 
order to become the “little father ” of his brother’s children.” 
The widespread custom which forbids all social inter- 

1J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha from not being understood, it is danger- 

Sociology,” Zhird Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1884), pp. 221-224. As to Wakanda, 
a supernatural being whose name is 
derived from’ wakan, ‘‘ mysterious,” 
“« wonderful,” ‘* incomprehensible,” 
“holy,” see J. Owen Dorsey, “A 
Study of Siouan Cults,” Eleventh 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1894), pp. 
366 sg., 372 sgg. In S.R. Riggs’s 
Dakota-English Dictionary (Washing- 
ton, 1890), pp. 507 sg., wakan is 
defined as ‘‘ spiritual, sacred, con- 
secrated ; wonderful, incomprehensible; 
said also of women at the menstrual 
period”; and the following explanatory 
note is added: ‘‘Afystertous : incom- 
prehensible ; in a peculiar state, which, 

ous to meddle with; hence the appli- 
cation of this word to women at the 
menstrual period, and from hence, too, 
arises the feeling among the wilder 
Indians that.if the Bible, the Church, 
the Missionary, etc., are zwakan, they 
are to be avoided, or shunned, not as 
being bad or dangerous, but as wakan. 
The word seems to be the only suitable 
one for holy, sacred, etc., but the 
common acceptation of it, given above, 
makes it quite misleading to the 
heathen.” Wakan may best be trans- 
lated by ‘‘ tabooed.” See The Golden 
Bough,? i. 343. 

2 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘ Omaha 
Sociology,” 7hird Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1884), p. 258. Compare E. James, 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 109 

course between a man and his wife’s parents, and also Custom of 
between a woman and her husband’s parents, was strictly (voidance 
observed by the Omahas, as well as by other tribes of the man ana 

Siouan or Dacotan stock. Thus we read that “it is a great mle 
singularity in the manners of the Omawhaws, that. neither between a 

the father-in-law nor mother-in-law will hold any direct py her 
conversation with their son-in-law; nor will he, on any husband's 
occasion, or under any consideration, converse immediately ables 
with them, although no ill-will exists between them ; they 
will not, on any account, mention each other’s name in 
company, nor look in each other’s faces ; any conversation 
that passes between them is conducted through the medium 
of some other person. . . . This extraordinary formality is 
carried to a great length, and is very rigidly observed. If a 
person enters a dwelling in which his son-in-law is seated, 
the latter turns his back, covers his head with his robe, and 
avails himself of the first opportunity to leave the presence. 
If a person visit his wife, during her residence at the lodge of 
her father, the latter averts himself, and conceals his head 
with his robe, and his hospitality is extended circuitously 
by means of his daughter, by whom the pipe is transferred 
to her husband to smoke. Communications or queries 
intended for the son-in-law are addressed aloud to the 
daughter, who receives the replies of her husband. The 
same formality is observed by the mother-in-law; if she 
wishes to present’ him with food, it is invariably handed to 
the daughter for him, or if she happens to be absent for the 
moment it is placed on the ground, and she retires from the 
lodge that he may take it up and eat it. A ten years’ 
separation will not change this custom. The Pawnees have 
no such formality, and on that account are said to be great 
fools. ... The more distinguished and respectable the 
parties are, the more rigidly is this rule observed ; and if 
either of the parties should be treated otherwise, the departure 
from the observance would be regarded as a mark of disrespect 
for a trifling fellow.”1 The same rule of avoidance extends 
Account of an Expedition from Pitts- tribal brother. 

durgh to the Rocky Mlountains (London, ; 

1823), i. 222 sg. By “ potential 1 E. James, Account of an Expedition. 

brother” Dorsey probably means “0m Pittsburgh to the Rocky Mountains, 
what is otherwise called a collateral or i, 232-234. 

Similarly 
a woman 
must 
avoid her 
husband's 
father. 

A similar 
custom of 
avoidance 
between a 
man and 
his wife's 
parents is 
observed 
by the 
Assinne- 
boins. 

10 JOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuavr. 

to a wife’s grandmother ; a man does not speak to his wife’s 
grandmother ; he and she are ashamed to do so.’ 

The foregoing accounts, it will be observed, speak only 
of the avoidance of a man by his wife’s parents or. grand- 
mother. But among the Omahas a wife was similarly 
debarred from social intercourse with her husband’s father ; 
for Dorsey tells us that “in like manner a woman cannot 
speak directly to her husband’s father under ordinary cir- 
cumstances. They must resort to the medium of a third 
party, the woman’s husband or child. But if the husband 
and child be absent, the woman or her father-in-law is 
obliged to make the necessary inquiry.” ” 

Similar rules of avoidance between a woman and her 
husband’s father, but especially between: a man and his 
wife’s mother, are observed by other tribes of the Siouan or 
Dacotan stock. Thus among’ the Assinneboins or Asiniboins, 
another Siouan tribe, “the names of the wife’s parents are 
never pronounced by the husband ; to do so would excite 
the ridicule of the whole camp. The husband and the- 
father-in-law never look on each other 'if they can avoid it, 
nor do they enter the same lodge. In like manner the wife 
never addresses her father-in-law.”* Tanner tells us how 
he entered an Assinneboin village with an Assinneboin 
Indian. “When we entered it,” says he, “I followed him 
immediately to his lodge. As I entered after him I saw 
the old man and woman cover their heads with their 
blankets, and my companion immediately entered a small 
lodge, merely large enough to admit one, and to conceal 
himself from the remainder of the family. Here he re- 
mained, his food being handed to him by his wife; but 
though secluded from sight, he maintained, by conversation, 
some intercourse with those without. When he wished to 
pass out of the lodge his wife gave notice to her parents, 
and they concealed their heads, and again, in the same 
manner, when he came in. This formality is strictly observed 
by the married men among the Assinneboins, and I believe 

1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘* Omaha 3 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Siouan Socio- 
Sociology,” Third Annual Report of logy,” Fifteenth Annual Report of the 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, ureau of Ethnology (Washington, 

1884), p. 262. 1897), p. 225. \ 
2 J. Owen Dorsey, /.c. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS eat 

among all the Bwoi-nug, or Dah-ko-tah, as they call them- 
selves, It is known to exist among the Omowhows. of the 
Missouri. 'It affects not only the intercourse between men 
and the parents of their wives, but that with their aunts and 
uncles ; and it is the business of all parties alike to avoid 
seeing each other. Ifa man enters a dwelling in which his 
son-in-law is seated, the latter conceals his face until he 
departs. While the young men remain with the parents of 
their wives, they have a little separate lodge within, or a 
part divided off by suspending mats or skins ; and into this 
little apartment the wife retires at night; by day she is the 
organ of communication with those without. A man rarely, 
if ever, mentions the name of his father-in-law, and it is 
considered highly indecorous and disrespectful for him to 
doso. This custom does not exist in any shape among the 
Ojibbeways, and they look upon it as a very foolish and 
troublesome one.”? 

A similar custom prevails among the Ponkas, another Simitar 
tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock. A Ponka chief has “sions of 
been seen to throw his blanket over his head, turn round among the 
very quickly, and go away into another part of the house, j°nasen 
when he happened to enter a room in which his mother-in- 
law: was seated. And as to the Dacotas proper, we are 
told that “somehow shame has come into the ¢zpz [tent], 
and the man is not allowed to address or to look towards 
his wife’s mother, especially, and the woman is shut off from 
familiar intercourse with her husband’s father and others, 
and etiquette prohibits them from speaking the names of 
their relatives by marriage. This custom is called zwsten 
kiyapi from iSsteda, to be ashamed. How it grew is not 
apparent. But none of their customs is more tenacious of 
life than this. And no family law is more binding.”® 
Another writer, speaking of the Dacotas, says: “The . 
father-in-law must not call the son-in-law by name ; neither 
must the mother-in-law: and the son-in-law must not call 

1 Narrative of the Captivity and 
ldventures of John Tanner, prepared 
for the press by Edwin James, M.D. 
(London, 1830) p. 146. 

2 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Omaha Socio- 
logy,” Zaird Annual Report of the 

Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1884), pp. 262 sg. 

3S. R. Riggs, Dakota Grammar, 
Texts, and Ethnography (Washington, 
1893), p. 204 (Contrébutions to North 
American Ethnology, vol. ix.). 

112, TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuat. 

his father-in-law or mother-in-law by name. There are also 
many others in the line of relationship who cannot call 
each other by name. I have heard of instances where the 
forbidden name has been called, and the offender was 
punished by having all of his or her clothes cut off of their 
backs and thrown away.” } 

Similar Among the Tetons, a Siouan or Dacotan tribe, a man 
pean may not look his mother-in-law in the face, nor may his 
among the brother do so, and she may not look at them. If a 
Fetons. man sees his mother-in-law, he must ‘put his robe over his 
Arapahos. head and shoulders and pass by on the other side of the 

road; also he must sit on the other side of the lodge. In 

like manner a woman dare not look at or address her 

husband’s father. A Teton man who lives with his wife’s 

kindred is called “a buried man” (wé-cha wo-kha), and a 

woman who lives with hér husband’s kindred is called 

“a buried woman.”® “The restrictions as to intercourse 

between certain relations, which are so widespread in North 

America, exist also among the Arapaho. A man and his 

mother-in-law may not look at or speak to each other. If, 

however, he gives her a horse, he may speak to her and 

see her. The same restrictions exist between father and 

daughter-in-law as between mother and son-in-law, say the 
Arapaho (though perhaps they are less rigid).” ® 

: It deserves to be noticed that in these accounts, while 

avoidares much is said of the mutual avoidance between a man and 

apply more his wife’s parents, comparatively little, in some cases nothing, 

eee is said of the mutual avoidance between a woman and her 

eee husband’s parents. From this we may perhaps infer that 

toawoman the rule which debars a man from social intercourse with 

and her his wife’s parents, especially with her mother, is more 

father-in- 2 - ‘ 
law. This Stringent than the rule which debars a woman from social 

The rule of 

eee intercourse with her husband’s parents, especially with his 
incest ofa father. The most probable explanation of all such rules of 

1 Philander Prescott, ‘* Contribu- 
tions to the History, Customs, and 
Opinions of the Dacota Tribe,” in 
H. R. Schoolcraft’s Jzdian Tribes of 
the United States, ii. 196. 

2 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘Teton 
Folk-lore,” American Anthropologist, 

ii. (1889) p. 157. 

3A. L. Kroeber, Zhe Arapaho, pp. 
10 sg. (Bulletin of the American 
Museum of Natural History, vol. xviii. 
Part i. New York, 1902). The 
Arapahos are an Algonkin, not a 
Siouan, tribe. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 113 

avoidance appears to be, as we saw,’ that they were adopted son with 
in order to prevent incest between persons who were deemed Laas 
too nearly related by marriage, the avoidance between with 
persons of opposite sexes being extended by false analogy frat". 
to include avoidance between persons of the same sex who incest of a 

stood in a similar relation to each other. If this view is correct, @ueMer 
it perhaps enables us to perceive why the rule of avoidance father. 
should apply more strictly to a man and his mother-in-law 
than to a woman and her father-in-law. For we can hardly 
doubt that incest with a mother was condemned as a social 
offence before incest with daughter fell under a similar con- 
demnation, if for no other reason than that the physical 
relationship of a mother to her son must have been known 
long before the relationship of a father to his daughter was 
recognised. Hence the incest of a son with his mother has 
probably always excited even deeper horror than the incest 
of a daughter with her father ; and if that is so, it is natural 
that when the conception of incest was extended so as to 
include persons related by marriage as well as by blood, the 
incest of a man with his mother-in-law should rank as a 
crime of deeper dye than the incest of a woman with her 
father-in-law, and that accordingly even more stringent pre- 
cautions should be adopted to guard against its commission. 
We have met with some tribes which allow a man to marry 
his own daughter,’ and with others which allow a man to have 
sexual intercourse with his daughter-in-law, his son’s wife ;* 
but we have as yet met with none which allows a mother to 
marry or have sexual intercourse with her own son. How- 
ever, it is reported that among the Tinneh Indians of 
North-West America sons sometimes cohabit with and even 
marry their mothers;* and among the Wahehe of German 
East Africa a man must sleep with his mother-in-law before 
he is allowed to cohabit with her daughter. The probable 
reason of this last singular custom will appear when we 
come to deal with the Navahoes.® 
The Omahas, in common with other tribes of the Siouan 

1 Above, vol. i. pp. 285 note, 503. 5 Rev. H. Cole, ‘Notes on the 
Wagogo of German East Africa,” 
ie Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
3 See vol. ii. pp. 225, 226. xxxii. (1902) p. 312. 
4 See below, pp- 362 sg. 6 See below, p. 247. 

VOL, HI I 

2 See vol. ii. pp. go, 118. 

‘The classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
ship 
among the 
Omahas. 

114 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

or Dacotan stock, possess the classificatory system of 
relationship. In its main outlines the system was detected 
among the Omahas in 1819-1820 by the members of 
Major Long’s expedition, who have bequeathed to us a 
valuable account of the tribe. That account is based chiefly 
on information supplied by the Agent for the Indians of 
the Missouri, Major John Dougherty, to whose integrity of 
character, humanity, and unequalled familiarity with the 
Indian character the painter Catlin bears high testimony.’ 
The account of the Omahas embodied in the report of 
Major Long’s expedition is an honourable monument of 

Dougherty’s this intelligent and upright man. He seems to have been 

account of 

the system. 

the first to recognise in its main outlines the classificatory 
system of relationship. His account of it, redacted by Dr. 
Edwin James, who compiled the narrative of the expedition, 
runs as follows: “ The designations by which the Omawhaws 
distinguish their various degrees of consanguinity are some- 
what different in meaning from ours. Children universally 
address their father’s brother by the title of “ater; and their 
mother’s brother by that of wmzcle ; their mother’s sister is 
called mother, and their father’s sister aunt. : . . The 
children of brothers and sisters address each other by the 
titles of brother and sister. . . . A man applies the title of 
We-hun-guh, or sister-in-law, to his wife’s sister, until] he takes 
her as his wife ; he also calls his wife’s brother’s daughter 
Wehunguh, and may in like manner take her to wife: thus 
the aunt and niece marry the same man. A man distin- 
guishes his wife’s brother by the title of Zahong, or brother- 
in-law, and his son also by the same designation. He calls 
the wife of his brother-in-law Cong-ha, or mother-in-law. 
A woman calls her husband’s brother ]Vzsh-e-a, or brother- 
in-law, and speaks of his children as herown. Her husband’s 
sister she distinguishes by the title of relationship, W7sh-e- 
cong, or sister-in-law. Men who marry sisters address each 
other by the title of brother. All women who marry the 
same individual, even though not previously related, apply 

1 Geo. Catlin, Zetters and Notes 25 sg. Catlin speaks of Dougherty as 
on the Manners, Customs, and Condi- ‘* this stern and uncompromising friend 
tion of the North American /ndians, of the red man, and of justice, who 
Fourth Edition (London, 1844), ii. has taken them close to his heart.” 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 1i5« 

to each other the title of sister. Remote degrees of con- 
sanguineous alliance are distinguished by their various 
appellativés, and are universally acknowledged.”! The 
same writer tells us that among the Omahas “even a very 
remote degree of consanguinity is an insuperable barrier to 
the marriage union.”? _ 

At a later time the Omaha system of relationship was Morgan's 
more fully investigated by L. H. Morgan. From his great {count of 
work the following cardinal terms of Omaha relationships ficatory 
are derived.® In the generation above his own a man calls 2 vction. 

his father’s brother “ my father” (/z-ddé-de) and his mother’s ship 
sister “my mother” (£-zd-hd). But he calls his mother’s pal ae 
brother “my uncle” (}Vee-nd-gee) and his father’s sister “ my 
aunt” (Wee-tee-me). In his own generation he calls his 
cousins, the children of his father’s brother or of his mother’s 
sister, “my elder brother” (lVce-zhe-thd), “my younger 
brother” (Wee-son-gd), “ my elder sister” (Wee-ton-ga), “ my 
younger sister” (Wee-ton-ga), according to the sex and age 

of the person referred to. In the generation below his own 

a man calls his brother’s son and daughter “ my son” (Wee- 
ni-se) and “my daughter” (We-zhun-ga). But his sister’s 
son and daughter he calls “ my nephew” (Wee-toans-ké) and 
“my niece ” (JVe-te-shd). Conversely in the generation 
below her own a woman calls her brother’s son and daughter 
“my nephew” (Wee-toans-kd) and “ my niece ” (We-ze-shd); 
but her sister’s son and daughter she calls “ my son” (Wee- 
shin-ga) and “my daughter” (We-shun-ga). 

Thus far the classificatory system of the Omahas is Anomalous 
perfectly regular and normal. But in one respect it presents fa 
a remarkable deviation from the ordinary pattern of the assigned 
system ; and this deviation it shares with other Siouan or the” 
Dacotan tribes of the Missouri region, though not with the children of 
Sioux or Dacotas proper. The deviation consists in the pein 
peculiar position assigned to cousins, who are the children sister re- 

i ‘ tively. 
of a brother and sister respectively. Under the usual re. es 

1 E. James, Expedition from Pitts- sanguinity and Affinity, Table II. 
burgh to the Rocky Mountains (Lon- pp. 293 sgg. Compare the Rev. J. 
don, 1823), i. 231 sq. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘Omaha Sociology,” 
Third Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Lthnology (Washington, 1884), 
3°L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- Pp- 253-255. 

2 E. James, of. cét. i. 213. 

116 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuav. 

form of the classificatory system the children of a brother y 

and a sister respectively are cousins to each other ; but among 
the Omahas and other Dacotan tribes of the Missouri they 
are uncle and nephew to each other, if they are males, and 
mother and daughter to each other if they are females.’ 
Precisely the same treatment of such cousins is met with, as 
we saw, among certain Algonkin tribes such as the Miamis 
and Shawnees.2. Thus an Omaha calls his male cousin, the 
son of his father’s sister, not “ my cousin,” but “my nephew ” 
(We-toans-ké) ; and conversely he calls his male cousin, the 
son of his mother’s brother, not “my cousin” but “my 
uncle” (Wee-nd-gee).2 A woman calls her female cousin, 
the daughter of her father’s sister, not “my cousin,” but 
“my daughter” (Wee-zhun-ga); and conversely she calls 
her female cousin, the daughter of her mother’s brother, not 
“my cousin” but “my mother” (4£-24-44).4. So much for 
the cases where the cousins in question are either both 
males or both females. Now for the cases in which they 
are one male and one female. A man calls his female 
cousin, the daughter of his father’s sister, not “my cousin ” 
but “my niece” (We-ze-zhd) ; and conversely she calls him, 
not “ my cousin” but “my uncle” ( Wee-nd-gee).> A man 
calls his female cousin, the daughter of his mother’s brother, 
not “my cousin” but “my mother” (4-zé-hé), and con- 
versely she calls him, not “my cousin” but “my son” 
(We-shun-ga or We-zhin-ga according as he is older or younger 
than she).® In all these cases, as I have already pointed 
out,’ the child of the brother ranks as senior to the child of 
the sister: if the two are males, then the son of the brother 
ranks as “uncle” and the son of the sister ranks as 
“nephew” of his cousin; if the two are females, then 
the daughter of the brother ranks as “mother” and the 
daughter of the sister ranks as “daughter” of her cousin. 
If the two are one male and one female, then the male, who 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 4 L. H. Morgan, of. cit. pp. 325, 
Sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 178 sg. 333, 334- 
2 6 L. H. Morgan, of. cit, pp. 324, 
spOVey BBs 1 Os. 74> 325, 331, 332. 
3 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 6 L. H. Morgan, of. cit. pp. 323, 
Sanguintty and Affinity, pp. 322, 323, 333, 334. 
331, 332. 7 Above, p. 71. 

~ 

XVI ZOTEMISM AMONG THE OMAHAS 117 

is the son of the brother, ranks as “uncle” of his female 
cousin, who is the daughter of the sister ; and on the other 
hand the male, who is the son of the sister, ranks as “son” 
of his female cousin, who is the daughter of the brother. 
Thus in all cases a preference is shewn for the male line over 
the female. 

cr It seems probable, as Morgan thought, that this remark- 
able treatment of cousins, the children of a brother and a 
sister, represents an older and ruder stage in the develop- 
ment of the classificatory system than the stage at which 

This treat- 
ment of 
cousins 
seems to 
represent 
an early 

such relations are placed, as among ourselves, in the rank of stage in the 

cousins! If that is so, we conclude that the Omahas and 
other Siouan or Dacotan tribes of the Missouri, as well as 
certain Algonkin tribes, have preserved the classificatory 
system in a more primitive form than the Iroquois and the 

ra 

Sioux or Dacotas proper, who, like ourselves, treat as 

cousins the children of a brother and sister.” 

§ 10. Totemism among the other Dacotan Tribes of the 
Missourt 

Fhe other Siouan or Dacotan tribes of the Missouri 
also had totemism, but their systems are far less fully known 
than that of the Omahas, and accordingly they may be 
dismissed more rapidly. 

Thus the Ponkas or Punkas, whose dialect is akin to 

that of the Omahas,® were found by L. H. Morgan to be 
organised in eight totemic clans as follows :— ’ 
1. Grizzly Bear. 2. Many People. 3. Elk. 4. Skunk. 
5. Buffalo. 6. Snake. 7. Medicine. 8. Ice. 

Marriage within the clan is prohibited. Descent is in 
the male line, children belonging to the clan of their father. 
The office of sachem is hereditary in the clan.* 

'L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- or Dacotas, see L. H. Morgan, 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 177, 179 Systems of Consanguinrty and Affinity, 
Sg PP. 322-325, 331-334- 

2 As to the Iroquois, see above, p. 3 . 
28; as to the terms for cousins (the L. H. Morgan, of. e#t. p. 177. 
children of the father’s sister or of 4L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 

the mother’s brother) among the Sioux pp. _£55. 

history of 
the classi- 
ficatory 
system, 

Other 
Siouan 
tribes. 

Totemic 
clans of the 
Ponkas 
according 
to L. H. 
Morgan. 

J. Owen 
Dorsey’s 
account of 
the totemic 
system 

of the 
Ponkas. 

18 ZOTEMISM 1N UNITED STATES AND CANADA char. 

According to the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, who, as a 
missionary to the tribe for several years, had special oppor- 
tunities of studying its customs, the social organisation of 
the Ponkas is much more elaborate The tribe is divided . 
into two moieties, one called Cheejoo and the other Wajaje ; 
the Checjoo moiety is again subdivided into two phratries, 

“namely the Thunder or Fire phratry and the Wind-makers 

Among the 
Ponkas, as 
among the 
Omahas, 
many of 
the totems 
and taboos 
refer to 

the buffalo, 
which 
furnished 
the tribe 
with their 
chief 
means of 
subsistence. 

Tribal 
circle of 
the Ponkas, 

or War phratry ; and the Wajaje moiety is in like manner 
subdivided into two moieties, namely the Earth phratry and 
the Water (?) phratry. Each phratry is again subdivided 
into two clans, and some of the clans are further subdivided: 
into subclans. The whole may be exhibited in tabular 
form as on the opposite page. 

From this it appears that the clans and subclans of 
the Ponkas, with their taboos, agree to a considerable extent 
with those of the Omahas, It is interesting in both tribes 
to observe how many of the clans and the taboos have 
reference to buffaloes, which furnished these tribes with their 
principal means of subsistence. Simildrly among the Herero 
and other pastoral tribes of Africa, who have the totemic 
system, a large proportion of the totemic taboos have 
reference to the cattle? This obsérvation should warn us 
against falling into the common error of treating totemism 
as a religion or worship of animals and plants. While it is 
true that the system invests animals, plants, and other natural 
objects with a degree of awe and mystery which seem 
strange to us, this superstitious respect never amounts to 
worship in the proper sense of the word so long as totemism 
is totemism. It is only when totemism proper has fallen 
into decay that a religion in the strict sense of the word 
may grow out of its ruins. 

Like the Omahas, the Ponkas camped in a circle, one 
half of the circle being assigned to the Cheejoo moiety and 
the other half to the Wajaje; and each phratry and each 
clan had its fixed place in the circle. 

1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘* Siouan Socio- 2 See above, vol. ii, pp. 358, 

logy,” Fifteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1897), pp. 228 sg. I have changed 
Dorsey's spelling. See above, p. 93 
note 2, 

362 sq. 

3 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Siouan Socio- 
logy,” Fifteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1897), p. 228. 

xvi TOTEAISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES . 119 

The Ponkas have, with merely dialectical variations in The classi- 
the terms, the classificatory system of relationship in the anal 
same form as the Omahas. The agreement extends to the relation- 

ship among 
the Ponkas. 
TOTEMIC SYSTEM OF THE PONKAS 

Moieties. Phratries. Clans. Subclans. 

1. Legs stretched out 
(in reference toa 
dead beast) 

2. Touch not the skin 
of a black bear 

Thunder or 
Fire 

1. Wears-tails (ze. locks of 
hair) : Does-not-touch- 

3. Wildcat | charcoal : Does-not-touch- 
| verdigris. 
2. Does-not-touch-blood. 

Cheejoo 

Wind-makers 

or War 1. Does-not-touch-a- buffalo- 
4. Bald Human 

tail. 
Head (Elk <j 2. Does- not - eat - buffalo - 
people) tongues. 
3- Does-not-eat-deer-and-elk. 
5. Medicine: Does- 

néttouch butt Real Ponka, Keepers-of-a- 

. sacred-pipe. 
Earth . felotaus: (Yu 2. Grey Ponka. 

falo people) | 
j 1. Buffalo-tail ; Does-not-eat- 
| buffalo - tongues : Does- 
6, Dark Buffalo sera ety yong te 
| 2. Does-not - touch -a- buffalo- 
head or skull. 

Wajaje 1, Dark Osage: Keepers-of-a- 
sacred-pipe : Does-not- 
touch - verdigris : Does - 
not-touch-charcoal. 

2. Grey Osage: Does-not- 
touch-serpents. 
3- Owl (now extinct). 

Water (?) .- 1. Does-not- touch -a-buffalo- 
head (or skul]). 

2. Does-not - touch-a-buffalo- 

8. Reddish-yellow calf. 

Buffalo? 3. Does-not-touch-the-yellow- 
hide-of-a-buffalo-calf. 

4. Does - not - eat - buffalo - 

‘ tongues. 

7. Wajaje, Osage 

1 The Ponka name is zuge, which, p. 117) is a misnomer. In this clan 
says Dorsey, is miscalled nzxe, ‘‘ice.” | (Reddish-yellow Buffalo) the subclans 
Hence it would seem that the name of are uncertain, but the four taboo names 
the eighth clan in Morgan’s list (above, _ exist as in the table. 

120 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

treatment of cousins, the children of a brother and sister 
respectively.! 

The lowas, The lowas, another Siouan or Dacotan tribe of the 
a Missouri, lived in a large village, cultivated maize and beans, 
tribe. and trafficked with traders from St. Louis in the skins of 
Their beavers, otters, raccoons, deer, and bears? They were 
totemic 

ansang oivided into two phratries; each phratry was subdivided 
phratries. into four or five clans; and each clan was again subdivided 
into subclans. In the tribal circle each phratry camped by 
itself in one of the semicircles. The table on the opposite 
page exhibits the Iowa phratries, clans, and subclans, as 
these were ascertained by the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey.* 
Subdivision In this list the names of the subclans compared with 
bees those of the clans seem to shew very clearly that among 
clans with the Iowas, as among so thany other totemic tribes, the clans 
secondary have a tendency to split into subclans with secondary 
derived totems derived from the primary. Thus we may suppose 
Hine that the Black Bear clan has split up into the subclans 
Black Bear with a White Spot, Black Bear with a Red 
Nose, etc.; that the Wolf clan has split up into the sub- 
clans White Wolf, Black Wolf, etc.; that the Eagle clan 
has split up into the subclans Golden Eagle, Grey Eagle, 
etc.; that the Elk clan has split up into the subclans Big 
Elk, Young Elk, etc.; and similarly with all the rest. 
lowa The Iowas have a tradition that the Bear clan and the 
ee Wolf clan used to live underground in the form of bears 
descent and wolves respectively, and that the Eagle and Pigeon 
of the <’ans clans came to earth in the shape of birds. They say, too, 
totemic that the Owl clan came out of a hollow tree near the Red 
sa Bank ; that the Snake clan came out of the bank near the 

water ; and that the Beaver clan issued forth from a little 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- extinct clan (Ancient Soctety, p. 156). 
Sanguinity and Affinity, Table II. pp. It agrees perfectly with Dorsey’s, 

293 599. except’ that it does not indicate the 
2 Handbook of American Indians distribution of the clans into phratries 
north of Mexico, i. 612 sg. and their subdivision into subclans, I 

3 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘Siouan Socio- — subjoin his list for comparison :— 
logy,” Fifteenth Annual Report of the 1. Wolf. 2. Bear. 3. Cow Buffalo. 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 4. Elk. 5. Eagle. 6. Pigeon. 
1897), pp. 238 sg. Morgan gives a 7. Snake. 8. Owl; , 

Hst of eight existing Iowa clans and one and an extinct Beaver clan. 

xvi JOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 121 

ToTEMIC SYSTEM OF THE IOWAS 

Phratries. Clans. Subclans. 

1. Large black bear with a white spot on the chest. 

2. A black bear with a red nose (literally, Nose 
White). 

3. Young black bear, a short black bear. 

4. A small reddish black bear, motherless ; it has 
little hair and runs swiftly. 

(| 1. Black bear 

. White-wolf. 
. Black-wolf. 

1 
r 2 
a WOM Se 3. Grey-wolf. 
4. Coyote. 
1. Real or Golden Eagle. 
2. Ancestral or Grey eagle. 

3. Spotted-eagle. 
4, Bald eagle. 

3. Eagle and 
Thunder- 
being 

First 4 

1. Big-elk. 

2. Young-elk (?). 

3. Elk-somewhat-long. 
4. Young-elk (?). 

4. Elk (now 
extinct) 

1, Big-beaver. 

2. (Meaning of name unknown). 
3. Young-beaver. 

4. Water-person. 

— 

5. Beaver! 

2. Young-raccoon. 
3. Young-pigeon. 
4. Prairie-chicken, grouse. 

6. Pigeon 

. Big-buffalo-bull. 

. Young-buffalo-bull. 

. Young-buffalo-buil-that-is-distended (?). 
. Buffalo-calf. 

| 
\ 
(lt Big-raccoon. 
\ 
[ 

7. Buffalo . + 

l 

PWN H 

1. Yellow-snake (Rattlesnake). 
2. Real-snake (species of snake shorter than the 

By Stake (iow rattlesnake), 

Second 
i 

oe 3. Copperhead-snake (?). 
4. Grey-snake. 
3 oe } The names of the subclans are forgotten. 

‘fF 1 The survivors of the Beaver clan have joined the Beaver clan of the 
Oto tribe. 

Marriage, 
descent, 
and rela- 
tionship. 

The 

Otoes and 
Missouris : 
their 
totemic 
clans. 

122 TOTEMISM JN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Chap. 

stream in an island of the river.1 These legends all point 
to a belief that the human clanspeople are descended from 
their totemic animals. . 

The rules of marriage, descent, and inheritance are the 
same among the Iowas as among the Ponkas,’ and they 
have the classificatory system of relationship in the same 
form.* 

The Otoes and Missouris are two Siouan or Dacotan 
tribes of the Missouri valley who have long coalesced into 
one. According to Morgan, the united tribes were divided 
into eight totemic clans as follows :—‘* 

1. Wolf. 2. 3. Cow Buffalo. 
5. Eagle. 7. Snake. 

4. Elk. 
8. Owl. 

Bear. 
6. Pigeon. 

Thus the clans agreed in their totems as well as in their 
number with those of the Iowas. Like them, too, they 
were exogamous, no man being allowed to marry a woman 
of his own clan. But unlike the clans of the Iowas, Ponkas, 
and Omahas, the clans of the Otoes and Missouris are 
hereditary in the female line, children belonging to the clan 
of their mother, not to that of their father. The office of 
sachem is also hereditary in the clan, and therefore in the 
female line. Taken together with the case of the Mandans, 
another Siouan or Dacotan tribe who retain maternal 
descent, the custom of the Otoes and Missouris raises a 
presumption that all the Siouan or Dacotan tribes had 

1 The Kev, William Hamilton, by J. Owen Dorsey agrees with that 

quoted by the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, 
“‘ The Social Organization of the Siouan 
Tribes,” Journal of American Folk-lore, 
iv. (1891) pp. 338-340. These 
Jegends were originally published by 
Mr. Hamilton in 1848 in a letter to 
the children of Presbyterian Sunday 
Schools. Mr. Hamilton is Owen 
Dorsey’s authority for the list of 
Towa clans given above. 

2 L. H. Morgan, dactent Society, 
p. 156. 

3 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, Table II, 
PP. 293 $99. 

4L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
p- 156. The list of Oto clans given 

of Morgan, except that it inserts a 
Beaver clan and does not distinguish 
the Black Bear from the Wolf clan. 
Of the Missouri clans Dorsey ascer- 
tained the names of three, namely 
the Black Bear, Eagle or Thunder- 
bird, andthe Elk. Of these the Eagle 
or Thunderbird clan is subdivided into 
four subclans, namely Thunderbird, 
Eagle, Hawk, and A-people-who-eat- 
no-small-birds-which-have-been-killed - 
by-larger-ones. This last subclan’ is 
said to be a recent addition, See J. 
Owen Dorsey, ‘*Siouan Sociology,” 
Fifteenth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1897), 
p. 240. 

XVI ‘TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 123 

formerly mother-kin instead of father-kin, and that the 
change from the one line of descent to the other, wherever 
it has taken place among them, has been comparatively 
recent.’ 

The Otoes have the classificatory system of relationship Classif- 
in a form which agrees with that of the Omahas.” carry 

system. 

Another tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock who had The 
totemism were the Kansas or Kaw. Their language i ee 
most nearly akin to that of the Osages. According to another 
Morgan, the Kansas or Kaw were among the wildest of the ea 
American Indians, yet withal an intelligent and interesting 
people. They long resisted all attempts to convert them 
to the Christian religion, of which the trappers and whisky- 
dealers in their neighbourhood did not perhaps afford an 
altogether shining example.* But they were not nomads, 
When the explorers Lewis and Clark visited them in 
1804, they inhabited two villages on the Kansas River, 
to which they had been compelled to ‘retreat from the 
Missouri by the inroads of the Sauks.* The members of 
Major Long’s expedition in 1819 found the Kansas in- 
habiting a large village or town of a hundred and twenty 
houses on the Kansas River. The houses were circular, Their 
built of wood, thatched with mats and bark and covered ees 
completely over with earth. In the middle of the house subsistence. 
was the fireplace, and raised bedsteads ran round the walls, 
which were hung with neatly-made reed-mats. In addition 
to the flesh of the buffalo, which they hunted till the vast 
herds of that useful animal were extinguished by the reckless 
improvidence of the white man, the Kansas subsisted on 
maize, beans, pumpkins, musk-melons, and water-melons, 
The work of cultivation was done by the women.° 

The Kansas or Kaw were visited in 1859 by L. H. 

1L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, the Command oy Captains Lewis and 

Pp. 155, 156. Clark to the Sources of the Altssouri, 
2 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- etc. (London, 1905) i. 55. 

sanguinity and Affinity, Table IL. 5 Edwin James, Account of .an 

Pp. 293 599. Expedition from Pittsburgh to the 
3°L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, Rocky Mountains under the Command 

p- 156 ; Handbook of American Indians of Major S. H. Long (London, 1823), 
north of Mexico, i. 653 sg. i. 110 sgg. The tribe is here called 
4 History of the Expedition under the Konzas, 

The 
totemic 
clans of the 
Kansas. 

Segmenta- 
tiontof the 
Eagle clan. 

Marriage 
and 
descent. 

J. Owen 
Dorsey’s 
account of 
the social 
organisa- 
tion of the 
Kansas. 

Arrange- 
ment of the 
phratries 
and clans 
in a tribal 
circle. 

Such a 
local 
separation 
of the 
exogamous 
divisions 
was 
probably 
adopted 
when 
exogamy 

124 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

Morgan,! who found them divided into fourteen totemic and 
exogamous clans as follows :— 

1. Deer. 2. Bear. 3. Buffalo. 4. Eagle (white). 
5. Eagle (black). 6. Duck. 7. Elk. 8. Raccoon. 

g. Prairie Wolf. 10. Turtle. 11. Earth. 12. Deer Tail. 
13. Tent, 14. Thunder. 

In this list, as Morgan points out, there are two Eagle 
clans and two Deer clans. This affords, he adds, a good 
illustration of the segmentation of a clan, the Eagle clan 
having probably split into two fragments, which, retaining 
the original eagle totem, distinguished themselves from 
each other as Black Eagles and White Eagles. The rules 
of marriage and descent among the Kansas were the same 
as among the Ponkas; that is, intermarriage within the 
totem clan was prohibited ; children belonged to the clan of 
their father, not of their mother ; and both property and the 
office of sachem were hereditary in the clan” 

At a later time the social organisation of the Kansas 
was carefully investigated by the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey. 
He found them divided into sixteen clans, which were 
grouped in seven phratries and subdivided into a number of 
subclans. The tribe camped in a circle, in which the clans 
had their fixed places. Eight clans, composing the Yata 
or left side of the tribe, camped in the semicircle on the left 
side of the line of march; and the other eight clans, com- 
posing the Zesktungga or right side of the tribe, camped in 
the semicircle on the right side of the line of march. These 
two halfs or sides of the tribe, the Yata and the Zeshtungga, 
formed what may be called superior phratries, since no man 
was allowed to marry a wife from his side of the tribal 
circle The mode in which among the Kansas, and 
apparently among all the other Dacotan tribes of the 
Missouri who camped in circles, the exogamous groups 
were thus locally segregated from each other is very note- 
worthy; since it may help us to understand the method in 
which the somewhat complex relations between the groups 
were kept clear in the minds of those who had to observe 

1 L, H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 3 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘*Siouan 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 285. Sociology,” Fifteenth Annual Report 

2.1L, H. Morgan, vcdent Society, of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
Pp. 156 sg. ton, 1897), PP» 230 232. 

xvi ZTOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 125 

them. It seems probable, as I have already pointed out in was first 
dealing with the Central Australians that when exogamy ps" 
was first instituted the groups within which marriage was sake of 
prohibited were for the sake of distinction locally separated fom20"s 
from each other. Once the distinction between the kinship tinction 
groups was clearly established in the minds of the people, rita 
the need of locally segregating them would be less urgent, 

and they might safely be allowed to intermingle freely, as 

they generally do in totemic communities. Yet still on 
certain occasions, when the tribe acted in concert, as in 
council or on the march, it might be deemed desirable to 
distinguish the kinship groups to the eye as well as to the 

mind by assigning them separate places at the council-board 

or in the camp. Such an arrangement would materially 
contribute to prevent the sharp but intricate lines, which at 

once united and divided the kinship groups, from becoming 
altogether blurred and confused. 

The social organisation of the Kansas in phratries, Table 
clans, and subclans, as these were ascertained by the Rev, ofthe. 
J. Owen Dorsey, is exhibited in the following table, in which nd clans 
the clans are arranged and numbered according to their ee 
order in the tribal circle.” It will be observed that clans of 
the same phratry do not always camp together. For the 
sake of clearness a diagram is subjoined, in which the places 
of the clans are numbered in the tribal circle. 

9 1 

12 
Yata Eeshtungga 
half tribe half tribe 

13 

1 Vol. i. pp. 246 sgg. of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
2 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘*Siouan ton, 1897), Pp. 230-232, 
Sociology,” Fifteenth Annual Report 

126 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnap. 

‘TOTEMIC SYSTEM OF THE KANSAS 

Phratries. Clans. Subclans. 

I, 1. Earth, or Earth-lodge 
‘esas 

Large Earth. 

. Small Earth. 

- Real deer. 

. Eats-no-deer. 

. Kills-deer, or Kills-quadrupeds. 

. Ponka people. 

. Wear-red-cedar (fronds)-on-their- 
heads, 

1. Wind people, or South-wind people, 

or Camp-behind-all. 
2. Small-wind, or Makes-a-breeze-near- 

II. 2. Deer, or Osage. 

PHOS 

III. 3. Ponka 

II. 4. Lodge - in-the - rear ; 
Last-lodge (Kaze, 

Aansa) 
the-ground. 
1. Real Black-bear, or Eats-raw (food). 
Ill. 5. Black bear 2. Wears-tails (locks of hair)-on-the- 
head. 
I, 6, Ghost 7 Not ascertained. 
IV. 7. ratte -a-turtle-on- nik Not ascepainca: 
B ae pthessiin-onstite: Not ascertained. 
L g. Elk. 

2. Sahagé (meaning unknown), 

1. Legs-stretched-out-stiff ; White-eagle 
people. 

2. Wade-in-blood ; Blood people. 

1. Nijht-people. * 

2. Walks-shining (Star people ?). 

1. Hawk-that-has-a-tail-like a ‘ King- 
eagle”; Little-one-like-an-eagle. 

2. Raccoon people, or Small Jean raccoon. 

VI. 10. White eagle 

vi. [at. — i, a 

VII. . Holds-the-fire - brand- 

to-sacred - pipes, 

Small Hangga 

VII. 13. LargeHangea; Hangsa 

apart from the rest, 

or Stiff-deer-tail 

II. 14. Buffalo (bull), or Big 
Feet 

A black eagle with spots. Subclans not 
recorded. 

1. Buffalo with dark hair. 

2. Reddish-yellow buffalo. 

(Red-hawk people?) Subclans not re- 
corded. 

Vv. 15. Cheejoo peacemaker 

IL. 16 Thunder-being people ; 

Grey-hawk people Subclans not recorded. 

a 
= 
‘ 
| 
-{ 1. Real Elk. 
{ 
= 
| 
| 

Magical Some of the totemic clans of the Kansas, like certain of 

pay hates the clans of the Omahas, appear to have been supposed to 

control of exercise a magical control over their totems for the general 
Gao. good. Thus when the first thunderstorm broke in the spring 

of the of the year, the people of the Thunder-being clan used to put 
Thunder- : 5 
a quantity of green cedar on a fire, making a great smoke. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 127 

The storm ceased after the members of the other clans had being clan 
offered prayers. The Buffalo clan helped the Thunder-being 41 ihe st 
clan in the worship of the Thunder-being, by sending one storm 

of their men to open the sacred bag of grey hawk skin and “P"5: 
remove the mystery pipe.! Again, when there was a blizzard Ceremony 
or storm accompanied by severe cold and heavy snow, the BAe 
other Kansas used to beg the men of the Kaze or Kamsaa snow- 
clan to interpose, because they were Wind People. They *°™ 
said to one of that clan, “O grandfather, I wish good weather. 

Please cause one of your children to be decorated.” Then 

the youngest son of one of the Kaze men was chosen for the 

purpose and painted with red paint. Thus decorated, the 
youth rolled over and over in the snow, reddening its white 
surface for some distance around him. That was supposed 

to stop the storm.? These ceremonies for stopping thunder- Analogy 
storms and snowstorms, performed respectively by Thunder ee, 
People and Wind People, appear to resemble in principle to the 
the ixtichiuma ceremonies of the Central Australians: they “iu 
are magical rites performed by members of totemic clans Central 
with the intention of controlling their totems for the general Ds ca 
good of the community. It seems probable that such cere- 

monies were commonly practised by the American Indians, 

as by the aboriginal Australians, though unfortunately very 

little indeed about them has been observed and recorded. 

The Kansas would not marry any of their kindred, Marriage 
however remote. Women before marriage laboured in the CS oims 
fields, served their parents, carried wood and water, and Kansas. 
cooked. But when the eldest daughter married, she com- Marriage 
manded the lodge, her mother, and all her sisters; for her hie 
sisters, in accordance with a custom widely prevalent among sisters. 
the North American Indians, were destined also to be the ‘° 

- wives of her husband. The Kansas observed the law of the the 
levirate. On thé death of her husband the widow scarified levirate. 
herself, rubbed clay on her body, and neglected her dress for 
.a year, after which the eldest brother of her deceased husband 
took her to wife without any ceremony, removing her and 

her children, whom he regarded as his own, to his house. 

1 J. Owen Dorsey, “A Study (Washington, 1894), p. 385. 
-of Siouan Cults,” Eleventh Annual 2 J. Owen Dorsey, of. ct. pp. 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 410 sg. 

128 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnar. 

If the deceased man left no brother, the widow might marry 
whom she liked. Some Kansas had four or five wives, mostly 
sisters.’ 
The classi- The Kansas or Kaws had the classificatory system of 
ree relationship in the same form as the Omahas, including the 
relation- peculiar position assigned to cousins, the children of a 
aie the brother and a sister respectively.” The main outlines of 
Kansas. the system were detected among the Kansas by the members 
of Major Long’s expedition in 1819; for they have recorded 
that in this tribe “the niece has great deference for the 
uncle ; the female calls her mother’s sister mother, and her 
mother’s brother wxcle. The male calls his father’s brother 
father, his father’s sister aunt, his mother’s sister mother, 

and his mother’s brother uzc/e.” ? 

The Osages Closely allied by language and blood to the Kansas, with 
ae whom they freely intermarried, were the Osages, another tribe 

people of the Siouan or Dacotan stock in the basin of the Missouri. 

ae They called themselves Waw-sash-e, which the French 

valley. traders corrupted into Osage. The tribe possessed fine horses, 
which they captured wild and kept in the best order. But 
they were settled in villages on the Osage River, had made 
considerable progress in agriculture, and were less addicted 
to war than their northern neighbours. In person the Osages 
were tall and well-built. L.H. Morgan did not succeed in 
reaching them when he was among the Missouri tribes in 
1859 and 1860.' 

The social The social system of the Osages has been described by 

eens the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey. According to him three primary 

S bats divisions or tribes, each including seven clans, coalesced into 
siae an . oe . 
the War a nation of fourteen clans, several of the original clans being 

Side, suppressed in order that the number of the clans in the tribal 

1 Edwin James, Account of an Ex- 4 History of the Expedition under 
pedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky the Command of Captains Lewis and 
Mountains under the Command of Maj. Clark to the Sources of the Alissourt, 
S. H, Long (London, 1823), i. 115, ete. (London, 1905) i. 43 sg. ; Edwin 

116. James, Account of an Expedition from 

2 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- Pittsburgh to the Rocky Mountains 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 178 sq., (London, 1823), iii. 106-108; L. H. 
and Table IT. pp. 293 s¢g. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and 

3 Edwin James, Account ‘of an Ex- Affinity, p. 177; td., Ancient Soctety, 
pedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky p. 157. 
Mountains (London, 1823), i, 116 sg. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 129 

circle should not exceed fourteen, seven on one side of the 

circle and seven on the other. Those on the left are called 
.Chee-zhoo; they are the Peace Side. Those on the right 

are called Hang-ka and Washashe (Osage); they are the 

War Side. The Peace clans might not take animal life of 

any sort, but were obliged to content themselves with vege- 

table food, till they made an agreement with the War clans 

to supply them with vegetable food in exchange for flesh, 

which the War clans could obtain. Some of the clans are The | 
divided into subclans. The list of the fourteen clans with Bee ae 
their subclans’ will be found on the next page. 

Before they attacked an enemy, the Osages painted their The war- 
faces afresh. This was the “death paint.” All the clans on ray ue 
the Chee-shoo or Peace side used “ fire paint,” which was red, 
applying it with the left hand all over the face. They also 
put mud on the left cheek. The clans on the War side put 
mud on the right cheek. Some warriors who acted like 
black bears painted themselves with charcoal alone.” 

The Osages are said to have universally believed that Belief of 
they were descended from a snail and a beaver. A flood, canes” 
they alleged, swept a snail from the banks of the Osage are de- 
River down to the Missouri and left it high and dry on the a 
shore. Warmed by the sun, the snail ripened into a man, snail anda 
who, after receiving a bow and arrow from the Great Spirit, ania 
returned to the Osage River. There he fell into a dispute 
with a beaver for the possession of the stream; but the 
dispute was happily settled by his marrying the beaver’s 
daughter and sharing the enjoyment of the river with her 

Osages. 

family. From their union sprang the nation of the Osages, Their 
“who have ever since preserved a pious reverence for their Sh" ane 
eavers. 

ancestors, abstaining from the chase of the beaver, because 
in killing that animal, they killed a brother of the Osage. 

1 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘* Siouan Socio- 
logy,” Fifteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1897), pp. 233 sg. 3 zd. “ An Account 
of the War Customs of the Osages,” 
The American Naturalist, xviii. (Phila- 
delphia, 1884) pp. 113-114. In the 
latter article the order of clans 3 and 
4 is inverted; and the names of the 
clans are simplified. In the text I 

VOL, LUT 

have omitted some of the alternative 

names of the clans and subclans. As 
before, I have altered Dorsey’s peculiar 
spelling, setting some of the consonants 
on their feet instead of on their heads, 
etc. See above, p. 93, note% 

2 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘An Account 
of the War Customs of the Osages,” 
The American Naturalist, xviii. 
(Philadelphia, 1884) pp. 132 sg. 

K 

130 JOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA 

TOTEMIC SYSTEM 

CHAP. 

OF THE OSAGES 

Sides. Clans. Subclans. 
{| 1. Those-who-wear- 
tails-or-locks-of- { | 1. Sun and Comet people. 
hair - on - their (| 2. Wolf people. 
heads 
1. ? 
2» Babsto- Dull fare { 2. Hide-with-the-hair-on. 
3. Those-who-carry- 
the-sun-on-their- {| 1. Sun-people. 
Chee-zhoo back, Sun -car- (| 2. Swan people. 
(Left or riers 
Peace 4. Chee-zhoo peace- { 1. Touches-no-blood, or Red-eagle (really 
Side) makers, or Red a hawk). 
eagle 2. Bald eagle, or Sycamore people. 
: 1. Night people. 
5. Nigbe people { 2. Beek beat people. 
1. Buffalo-bull. 
Si Bulen bol if 2, Reddish-yellow buffalo. 
& Se CLE: oy (Net recorded.) 
1. White Osage. 
2. Turtle-carriers. 
3. Tali-flags, etc. 
8. Elder Osages 4. Deer-lights, or Deer people. 
5. Fish people. 
6. A deer subclan, called by some, “‘Turtle- 
with-a-serrated-crest-along-the-shell.” 
9. Hang-ka apartfrom 
the rest, or Real 
Eagle people 
1. Pond-lily ) or according { 1. Flags. 
a soe peace - 1} 5. Dark t to sate 2 Watsetsi (?). 
Hang - ka pa Buffalo account 3. Red cedar. 
and 11. Hang-ka-having- :: 
Washashe 4 wings, or Wate} . patria 
(Right or eagle people : ° 
War Side) A 1. Black bear. 
12. Black bear?! { 2. Small cat. 
B { 1. Swan. 
2. Dried pond-lily. 
13. Elk A 
14. Lighters - of - the - 

sacred - pipes, or 

South-wind people, 

or Wind people, 
i or Fire people 

1 This clan (No. 12) is divided into 
two parts, which were originally 
separate clans: A. Wearing-a-tail (or 

lock)-of-hair-on-the-head ; B. Wearing- 
four-locks-of-hair. 

xvi ZFOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 

131 

Of late years, however, since the trade with the whites has 
rendered beaver skins more valuable, the sanctity of these 
maternal relatives has visibly reduced, and the poor animals 
have nearly lost all the privileges of kindred.”* This legend, 
with the custom said to be based on it, has the appearance 
of being totemic ; yet neither the beaver nor the snail appears 
in the extant list of Osage totems. It is possible that they 
were the totems of clans which have become extinct. 

The Osages had the classificatory system of relationship trhe 
in a form which, apart from dialectical differences in the sees 
terms, agreed with that of the Omahas.? system, 

Another tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock in the The 

region of the Missouri were the Quappas. When they were pelos eg ’ 
discovered by the French they inhabited five villages on the nea 
Arkansas River. The following names of their totemic their 
clans were obtained by the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey from a unc 
full-blooded member of the tribe :—Deer, Elk, Eagle, Small- 
bird, Ancestral, Black Bear, Grizzly Bear (?), Buffalo (ordinary), 
Reddish-yellow Buffalo, Beaver, Fish, Star, Crane, Dog (or 
Wolf?), Thunder-being, Panther, Turtle, Serpent, and Sun. 
Mr. Dorsey’s informant was not able to say on which side 
of the tribal circle each clan encamped. The Quappas had 
the classificatory system in a form which coincided with that 
of the Osages.* 

The Winnebagoes are a tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan The 
stock, who claimed to be the Elder Brothers of the Omahas, ns 
Otoes, Iowas, and Missouris, and their claim was conceded another 
by these tribes.” When they were first discovered they were Su" 
established at the head of Green Bay, Lake Michigan, and 
around Winnebago Lake in the present State of Wisconsin. 

1 History of the Expedition under 
the Command of Captains Lewts and 
Clark to the Sources of the Missouri, 
etc. (London, 1905) i. 43-45. 

2 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, Table II. pp. 
293 599- 

3 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Siouan Socio- 
logy,” Fifteenth Annual Report of 

the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1897), p. 229. 
4L, H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, Table IT. 
PP. 293 599- 
. KE. Fletcher, ‘Origin and 
History of the Winnebagoes,” in H. 
R. Schooleraft’s Jndian Tribes of the 
Onited States, iv. (Philadelphia, 1856) 
PP. 227, 235 sg. 

Totemic 
clans of the 
Winne- 
bagoes. 

Marriage 
and descent 
among the 
Winne- 
bagoes : 
traces of 

mother-kin. 

132 JOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA _ cuap. 

They are the so-called Puants of the early French explorers. 
The Winnebago dialect belongs to the Siouan or Dacotan 
family of speech, but occupies in some respects a peculiar 
position. It approximates to the dialects of the Missouri 
tribes rather than to the language of the Sioux or Dacotas 
proper! The Winnebagoes were divided into eight totemic 
and exogamous clans, of which the names are given by 
Morgan as follows :—? 

1. Wolf. 2. Bear. 3. Buffalo. 4. Eagle. 
5. Elk. 6. Deer. 7. Snake. 8. Thunder, 

Another list of the Winnebago clans was obtained by the 
Rev. J. Owen Dorsey from a full-blooded Winnebago of the 
Wolf clan. It agrees with that of Morgan except that it 
substitutes a Water-monster clan for the Thunder clan, and 
that instead of the Eagle clan it exhibits a Bird clan sub- 
divided into four subclans, namely Eagle, Pigeon, Hawk 
(probably), and Thunder-bird? 

The rules of marriage, descent, and inheritance were the 
same among the Winnebagoes as among the Ponkas; that 
is, intermarriage within the clan was forbidden, children 
belonged to the clan of their father, not of their mother, and 
both property and the office of sachem were hereditary in 
the clan.* Yet traces of an older custom of female descent 
or mother-kin may perhaps be detected among the Winne- 
bagoes ; for Carver, who travelled in these regions in 1766, 
1767, and 1768, observes that “some nations, where the 
dignitary is hereditary, limit the succession to the female 
line. On the death of a chief, his sister’s son sometimes 
succeeds him in preference to his own son; and if he 
happens to have no sister, the nearest female relation assumes 
the dignity. This accounts for a woman being at the head 
of the Winnebagoe nation, which, before I was acquainted 
with their laws, appeared strange to me.”* 

The Winnebagoes possessed the classificatory system of 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 180. 1897), pp. 240 sg. ; 

2 L. H, Morgan, Ancient Society, : fe H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
P. 157. 6 J. Carver, Travels through the 

3 J. Owen Dorsey, ‘Siouan Sociv- Jnteréor Parts of North America, 
logy,” Fifteenth Annual Report of — Third Edition (London, 1781), p. 259. 

xvi TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 133 

relationship in a form closely agreeing with that of the The classi- 
Omahas and Kansas ; amongst other points of agreement it inlay 
placed cousins, the children of a brother and sister respectively, reiation- 
in the relation of uncle and nephew, or mother and daughter to *P- 
each other, according as the cousins were males or females.’ 

An interesting account of the superstitions of the Indian super- 
tribes about Green Bay (Baze des Puans), Lake Michigan, is ene 
given in one of the Jesuit reports for 1672, and as the pout 
Winnebagoes were probably one at least of these tribes, the 71°c" 
account may be here subjoined. If it does not directly bear Michigan. 
on their totemic system, it does so indirectly, by illustrating 
that general attitude of mind towards nature of which 
totemism is a special product. “Four different peoples,” 
says the Jesuit missionary, “are placed towards the head of 
the bay and live there partly by what they gather from the 
earth, and partly by fishing and hunting. Two others rather 
more distant dwell usually on the rivers which discharge into 
the same bay on the north side; and all recognise diverse 
sorts of divinities, to which they often offer sacrifices. These 
peoples have their gods, as the pagans had theirs formerly ; 
they have them in the sky, in the air, on the earth, in the 
woods, in the waters, and even in the infernal regions ; and 
as there have been found theologians who assign particular 
intelligences not only to the stars but also to the earth for 
the preservation of each species of thing, so those of our 
savages who are esteemed intelligent by their fellows 
entertain a belief that in addition to the sun and the thunder, 
which they recognise as gods of the sky and the air, 
every sort of beast, fish, and fowl, has a particular guardian Guardian 
spirit (gente), which has care of it, which watches over its {Pits of 
preservation, and which defends it from harm. and fowl. 

“That is why, just as the Egyptians erected altars to Guardian 
rats and mice, so these peoples have a particular regard for SPitit of 
these creatures, as appears from a mouse which we had 
caught and thrown out of the house. For a young girl 
having seized the mouse and being desirous of eating it, her 
father took the creature first and fondled it tenderly. And 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- treatment of cousins, see above, PP. 7°, 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 180, and 74, 115 sgg. 
Table II. pp. 293 sgg. As to this 

Veneration 
for the 
bear and 
ceremonies 
when it is 
killed. 

Custom 

of fasting 
before a 
hunt in 
order to 
dream of 
the animal 
which is to 
be killed. 

The 
Mandans, 
another 
Siouan 
tribe of 
the Upper 
Missouri. 

134 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap, 

when we asked him why he did so, ‘It is,’ said he, ‘ because 
I would appease the guardian spirit (geze), who has charge 
of mice; in order that my daughter may not suffer from 
such an unusual viand, 

“There are certain animals, to the guardian spirits 
(genies) of which they pay much more respect than to 
others, because they are more useful to them. The venera- 
tion which they have for the bear is incredible; for when 
they have killed one of these animals in the chase, they 
usually make a solemn feast of it with very special ceremonies. 
They carefully preserve the beast’s head, paint it with the 
most beautiful colours they can find, and during the feast 
they set the head in a conspicuous place, that it may receive 
the adoration of all the guests and the praises which they 
bestow on it, one after the other, in their finest songs. 

“ They act somewhat inl the same way towards the other 
divinities ; but to propitiate them they practise diverse sorts 
of devotions, of which the commonest and most considerable 
is this. They remain four or five days without eating, in 
order that by thus weakening their heads they may be able 
in a dream to see one of their divinities, on whom they 
imagine all their good fortune to depend. And because they 
believe that they could not be lucky in the chase of the deer 
or the bear, if they had not first seen them in a dream before 
going to seek the beasts, their whole care is to get a sight 
in sleep of the animal which they wish to catch. That is 
why they prepare themselves for their hunts by great fasts, 
which they prolong sometimes for ten days, as the OQutagami 
nation does more usually. Indeed they do much more, for 
while the men are out hunting, they oblige the little children 
to fast, in order that they may dream of the bear which 
their kinsfolk are gone to look for; and they fancy that the 
beast will be caught if it has been once dreamed of, even by 
children,” * 

A Siouan or Dacotan tribe of the Upper Missouri valley 
are the Mandans, who having had the good fortune to be de- 
scribed by the painter Catlin and other travellers are amongst 
the best known of North American Indians, though they 

1 Relations des Jésuites, 1672, Pp. 38 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). 

xvi ZTOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 135 

seem never to have played an important part in history. 
When they were visited in the first half of the nineteenth 
century, their once numerous villages had been reduced to 

two, which were situated on the Missouri about four miles 
below the mouth of the Knife River. Their principal] Their 
village or town occupied a position of great natural beauty tne 
and strength, being built on a bluff at a bend of the town. 
Missouri and protected on two sides by the river, while the 
prairies stretched away, far as the eye could see, till their 
interminable carpet of green, unbroken by a tree, and 
changing into blue in the distance, touched the rim of 

the horizon. The houses of the village were of circular Their 
shape, from forty to sixty feet in diameter, solidly built of ae Sr 
timber and covered with earth, which earned for them with lodges." 
white men the disparaging name of “dirt lodges.” In spite 

of the name, however, the houses were not only commodious, 

but very neat and comfortable. The fire-place’ occupied the 
centre and the smoke escaped by a hole in the roof. Bed- 
steads, screened off by curtains of buffalo or elk skin, ran 
round the walls. Each house could accommodate from 
twenty to forty inmates. In the middle of the village was 

an open circular space, in which public festivals were held 

and religious rites celebrated. One of the huts facing on The _ 
this open space was the council house or “ Medicine Lodge,” me 
where some of the most sacred ceremonies were performed. 

It was in this lodge that the young Mandan warriors annually 
submitted to many of those dreadful tortures which Catlin 

has made famous by his descriptions and sketches. The 
Mandans subsisted partly by agriculture and partly by the 

chase. Their staple foods were buffalo meat and maize. 

They raised a good deal of maize and some beans, pump- 

1 History of the Expedition under and Affinity, p. 181; Washington”™ 

Captains Lewis and Clark to the 
Sources of the Missouri, etc. (London, 
1905) i. 185 sg. ; Geo. Catlin, Letters 
and Notes on the Manners, Customs, 
and Condition of the North American 
Indians, Fourth Edition (London, 
1844), i. 80 sgg., 169 sgg.3; Maxi- 
milian Prinz zu Wied, Reise in das 
Innere Nord-America (Coblenz, 1839- 
1841), ii, 104 sg., 116 sgg.3 L. H. 
Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity 

Matthews, Zthnography and Philology 
of the Hidatsa Indians (Washington, 
1877), pp. 6 s99., 13 sg. ; Handbook 
American Indians north of Mexico, i. 
796 sgg. Lewis and Clark spent the 
winter of 1804-1805 at the principal 
Mandan village; Catlin resided for 
several months in the same village in 
1832; and Prince Maximilian visited 
it in 1833. 

The 
staplefoods 
of the 
Mandans 
were 
buffalo 
meat and 
maize. 

Exogamous 
clans of the 
Mandans. 

Female 
descent of 
the clans. 

Right to 
marry a 
wife's 
younger 
sisters. 
Avoidance 
of wife’s 
mother, 

136 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

kins, and tobacco. The corn was sown in May and reaped 
in October. During the summer the women thrice hoed the 
ground with the shoulder-blades of buffaloes, for which in 
later times iron hoes were substituted. The season of the 
green corn was a time of great festivity with the Mandans. 
What they did not then eat of the corn was dried and 
packed away in caches, as the French called such storehouses, 
that is, in pits six or eight feet deep, shaped like a jug and 
tightly closed at the top. But the Mandans depended 
mainly on the flesh of the buffalo, and when the herds did 
not approach their villages they sometimes suffered much 
from hunger ; for being a small weak tribe they dared not 
venture far afield in search of the animals lest they should 
be cut off by their powerful enemies the Sioux.’ 

According to enquiries made by L. H. Morgan at the’ 
old Mandan village in 1862, the Mandans were divided into 
seven exogamous clans as follows :— 

1. Wolf. 
5. Eagle. 

2. Bear. 
6. Flathead. 

3. Prairie Chicken. 
7. High Village. 

4. Good Knife. 

Marriage within the clan was as usual forbidden, but 
contrary to the rule of most Siouan or Dacotan tribes of 
the Missouri the descent of the clan was in the female line, 
that is, children belonged to the clan of their mother, not to 
that of their father. Taken with other exceptions, which 
have already met us, this raises a presumption that descent 
was originally in the female line among all the tribes of the 
Siouan or Dacotan stock, Property and office were both 
hereditary in the clan.2 When a man married an eldest 
daughter, he had a right to all her sisters? A woman 
never spoke to her son-in-law, the husband of her daughter ; 
but if he brought her the scalp of a slain foe, from that 
moment the two were free to converse with each other.* 

1 History of the Expedition under the 
Command of Captains Lewis and Clark 
to the Sources of the Missouri, ete. 
(London, 1905) i. 220; Geo. Catlin, 
Letters and Notes on the Manners, 
Customs, and Conditions of the North 
American Indians, Fourth Edition 
(London, 1844), i. “121 sg.; Maxi- 
milian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse in das 
tnnere Nord-America (Coblenz, 1839- 

1841), ii. 123 5¢9., 192 sgg.; Washing- 
ton Matthews, Ethnography and Philo- 
logy of the Hidatsa Indians, pp. 8 sq., 
23 599. 

2 L. H. Morgan, Anctent Society, p. 
158. 

5 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Reise 
in das Innere Nord-America, ii. 130. 

4 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, of. 
cv, ii, 132. 

xvl ZJOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 137 

Like all the other Indian tribes with which we are here The classi- 
concerned, the Mandans had the classificatory system of cists - 
relationship. Thus in the generation above his own a man telation- 
called his father’s brother “my father” (7é-cay), and his ae the 
mother’s sister “my mother” (/Vé-a); but his mother’s Mandans. 
brother he called “my uncle” (74-wdéd-rd-to-ra), and his 
father’s sister he called “my aunt” (P-2o-mte-nick). In his 
own generation he called his cousins, the children of his 
father’s brother, “ my elder brother ” (JZo0-ké), “ my younget 
brother” (Jfe-sho-kéd), “my elder sister” (P’-td-me-a), “my 
younger sister” (P’-/d-me-ha), according to their sex and 
age. In the generation below his own he called his brother's 
son and daughter “my son” (AZe-ne-ka) and “my daughter ” 
(Me-no-hé-ka); but his sister’s son and daughter he called 
“my nephew ” and “ my niece.” ? 

The Mandans performed certain magical ceremonies for Magical 
the increase of the food supply, which in principle resemble ae 
the <zntichiuma ceremonies of the Central Australian by the 
aborigines, the only essential difference between them being aes 
that, whereas among the Australians the ceremony for increase of 
increasing any particular article of food is only performed ee 
by the persons who have that article of food for their totem, 
there appears to have been no such limitation among the 
Mandans. Strictly speaking, therefore, the ceremonies 
which the Mandans performed were not totemic; but as 
they agree in principle with the magical totemic cere- 
monies performed by their kinsmen the Omahas and 
the Kansas,? as well as by the Central Australians, a 
brief description of them may not be out of place in 
this work. ' 

We have seen that the staple foods of the Mandans were The 
two, namely, buffalo meat and Indian corn. Both these pint In 
necessaries of life they attempted to increase and multiply order to 
by ceremonies based on the principle of imitative or homceo- asta 6 

pathic magic, First, in regard to buffaloes, it was a standing ea the 
. Mandans 
rule of the Mandan village that every man must possess the used 10 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- this and thought there might be a 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 184 sg., mistake. He was not able to obtain a 
and Table II. pp. 293 sgg. The complete set of the Mandan terms of 
terms for elder and younger sister are __ relationship. 
the same in the tables. Morgan noted 2 See above, pp. 104-106, 126 sg. 

dress them- 
selves in 
buffalo 
skins and 
mimic the 
action and 
voice of the 
buffalo. 

138 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnap. 

skin of a buffalo’s head with the horns, and this he had to 
keep in constant readiness hanging on a post at the head of 
his bed, that he might bé able at a moment’s notice to put 
it as a mask on his own head, and so disguised to turn out 
and dance for buffaloes in the public square, whenever the 
chiefs might command him so to do. Sometimes the 
dancers wore the entire skins of buffaloes, with horns, hoof, 
and tail all complete. The order to dance the buffalo dance 
was issued whenever no buffaloes had been seen for some 
time, and the pressure of hunger began to be felt in the 
village. Thereupon from ten to fifteen men, each wearing 
the head and horns of a buffalo, and armed with the bow 
or spear with which they were accustomed to slaughter the 
beasts, would sally out into the public square and there 
stamp, grunt, and bellow in imitation of buffaloes till they 
could stamp, grunt, and Bellow no more, As each grew 
tired he signified it by bending forward and sinking towards 
the ground ; whereupon one of his fellows would draw his 
bow and hit him with a blunt arrow. The man so struck 
then dropped like a dead buffalo and was dragged out of 
the ring by the heels by the bystanders, who brandished 
their knives over him and went through the motions of 
skinning and cutting him up. The place of the wearied 
dancer was at once supplied by another, who danced into 
the ring with his mask on, and carried on the pantomime 
till exhausted nature compelled him also to desist. In this 
way the dance was kept up day and night by relays of 
dancers till the buffaloes appeared, even though the per- 
formance might last without a moment’s intermission for 
weeks. All the time the drums were beating, the rattles 
rattling, the spectators singing or yelling themselves hoarse ; 
and all the time the sentinels on the neighbouring hills were 
straining their eyes to catch the first sight of the herd like 
moving specks in the distance. The moment they did so, 
they signalled the joyful news to the village by waving their 
robes. Then at last the dance ceased, the drums throbbed 
no longer, all was bustle in preparation for the hunt. Spears 
were polishing, bows were twanging, horses pawing and 
snorting in impatience. Then there was a great clatter of 
hoofs, a whirlwind of galloping horses, and they were off. 

xvi ZOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 139 

The dance had been successful; it had compelled the 
buffaloes to come.! 

In this ceremony, which has been graphically described 
for us by the painter Catlin, the pretence of being buffaloes 
and of being killed and cut up as such was clearly supposed, 
on the principles of imitative or homceopathic magic, to * 
produce the effect which it mimicked ; it obliged the animals 
to come and be killed. The ceremony was not observed at 
stated intervals but only as occasion arose, whenever thé 
buffaloes were long of coming. But the Mandans regularly Annual 
performed another magical ceremony for buffaloes every Pofomoa 
year in spring, when the willows burst into leaf on the banks in'spring 
of the river. The intention of this annual rite, as the Bape: 
manner of its celebration clearly shews, was not to ensure ee 
the killing but rather the procreation of buffaloes. The tr consisted 
actors were indeed disguised like buffaloes as in the other once 
ceremony; they wore the entire skins of buffaloes with representa- 
the horns and tails complete ; the heads of the buffaloes iain 
were thrown over their heads, their eyes peered through the of the 
eye-holes of the animals, and they imitated the motions of eae 
buffaloes. But the scene which they acted was not the dressed in 
slaughter of the beast, but the leap of the buffalo bull on Dunale 
the buffalo cow. When that scene had been publicly acted 
in the presence of the whole population, wound up to the 
highest pitch of excitement, the actor who personated the 
buffalo bull was mocked by the women and children, be- 
spattered with filth, and ignominiously driven away from the 
village into the prairie. There he was again beset by a 
throng of women and children, and the artificial implement 
of fertility was wrested from his body by one of the women, 
who wrapped it in a bunch of wild sage and, escorted by two 
matrons on each side, bore it back triumphantly to the 
village. There she was lifted by her four female attendants 
on to the roof of the Medicine Lodge, over the door, where 

she stood and harangued the multitude for some time, , 

1 Geo. Taplin, Letters and Notes on of skin of the whole length of the 
the Alanners, Customs, and Condi- animal’s back with the tail at the end, 
tion of the North American Indians, so that while the head and horns of the 
Fourth Edition (London, 1844), i. 83, | buffalo were on the dancer’s head, its 
127-129. Each buffalo-mask worn bya tail swept the ground at his heels. 
dancer had usually attached to it a strip 

140 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Cua. 

claiming that “ she held the power of creation, and also the 
power of life and death over them ; that she was the father 
of all the buffaloes, and that she could make them come or 
stay away, as she pleased.” ? 

While the two buffalo dances of the Mandans which 
ue es have just been described, differed from each other both in 
are based their immediate purpose and in the manner of their celebra- 
on the tion, the ultimate aim of both was one and the same ; it was 

principle : 
of imitative to ensure a plentiful supply of food for the tribe. And as 

Both these 

magic. the aim of the two ceremonies was identical, so too was the 
principle on which both were supposed to produce the 
desired result. It was the principle of imitative or homco- 
pathic magic. 
Magical The same magical principle was resorted to by the 
performea Mandans for the purpose of ensuring an abundant supply of 
bythe their other staple food, the,Indian corn. They celebrated in 
eat spring and autumn what they called “the Corn Medicine 
to ensure a Festival of the Women” (Wahka-Sinhusch). For they 
oe a thought that the Old Woman, who never dies, causes the fruits 

of the earth to grow and sends the migratory water-fowl in 
spring—the swans, the geese, and the ducks—as symbols of 
the fruits and as her own representatives, the wild goose 
signifying maize, the wild swan pumpkins, and the wild duck 
beans. So in spring days, when the birds were expected, 
the Indians got much dried meat ready and hung it up as 

1 George Catlin, O- Kee-Pa, a 
Religious Ceremony, and other Cus- 
toms of the Mandans (London, 1867), 
pp. 6, 9, 16-24, and Foltum Reser- 
vatum, pp. i.-ili. Compare zd., Letters 
and Notes on the Manners, Customs, 
and Condition of the American Indians, 
Fourth Edition (London, 1844), i. 
157 sg-, 164 sgg. Catlin speaks of 
**dancing what they call, Bel-lohck- 
na-pic (bull-dance); to the strict 
observance of which they attribute 

e the coming of buffaloes to supply them 
with food during the season.” But the 
nature of the dance clearly indicates 
that the purpose of the ceremony was 
not so much to ensure the coming as 
the multiplication of the buffaloes. A 
remarkable feature of the ceremony, 
which is not mentioned by Catlin, was 

that during its celebration the men 
offered the use of their wives to the 
older men and the offer was generally 
accepted. The same feature character- 
ised the bull-dance of the Minnetarees 
or Hidatsas, a tribe akin to the 
Mandans. Probably it was regarded 
as a magical rite which sympathetically 
promoted the procreation of buffaloes. 
See History of the Expedition under 
the Command of Captains Lewis and 
Clark to the Sources of the Afissourt, 
etc. (London, 1905) i. 209 59.3 
Edwin James, Account of an Expedition 
from Pittsburgh to the Rocky Moun- 
tains (London, 1823), ii. 59 sg. 3 
Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rerse zz 
das Innere Nord-America (Coblenz, 
1839-1841), ii. 181, 263-267. 

xvi FOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES i141 

an offering to the Old Woman on rows of long poles in front The Old 
of the village. Then on one of these days the old women Woman 
of the village, as representatives of the Old Woman who ais and 
never dies, assembled at the poles, each of them carrying a heenibels 

stick with a maize-cob fastened to the top. They sat down, of the fruits 
laid their sticks before them on the earth, danced in a circle a8 
round the poles, and then took their maize-sticks in their 
hands. While they did so, old men beat drums and rattled 
rattles. Meantime younger women came and put a littld 

dry powdered flesh in the mouths of the old women, each of 
them receiving in return a grain of the consecrated maize which 

she ate. Also three or four grains of the maize were placed 

in their dish, which were afterwards carefully mixed with the 
seed-corn and were supposed to impart luck and fertility to 

it. After that the dried meat which hung on the poles 
belonged to the old women, because they represented the 
Old Woman who never dies. 

Such was the Corn Medicine Festival of the Women ceremony 
which the Mandans held in spring. In autumn the festival peg 
was repeated, but its purpose, we are told, was then to the 
attract the herds of buffaloes and to ensure a supply of their pair 
flesh. At that time, instead of a stick inserted into a cob of the Old 
maize, every woman carried in her arms a whole plant of maize, be 
which she had rooted out of the ground. They named the dies. 
maize and also the birds, which symbolised the fruits of the 
earth, by the name of the Old Woman who never dies, and 
they cried to them in autumn, “ Mother, have pity on us! 

Send us not the sharp cold too soon, that we may have 
meat! Let not all the game go away, that we may have 
something for the winter!” They thought that the birds 
flying south in autumn carried with them to the Old 
Woman the dried meat and other things which they had 
hung up on the poles as thank-offerings to her for the crops 
she had given them, and they imagined that she ate the 
meat which the birds brought her. Old women who could 
not afford to give a costlier offering would hang up the foot 
of a buffalo on one of the poles ; and when the Old Woman 
who never dies received such a humble gift brought her by 
one of the birds, she would take it and say, “This poor 
offering is dearer to me than the costliest gifts”; and she 

The Old 
Woman is 
a corn- 
goddess, 

a Savage 
equivalent 
of Demeter 
and Ceres. 

Minnetaree 
ceremony 

to promote 
the growth 
of the corn. 

142 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

would boil a piece of it with her maize and eat it with 
relish? 

In these ceremonies the Old Woman who never dies has 
clearly attained to the rank of a corn-goddess, the equivalent 
of the Greek Demeter and the Roman Ceres. For she is 
supposed to cause the crops to grow; she is actually, like 
her Greek and Roman counterparts, identified with the corn, 
since it is called by her name ; she receives offerings, and is 
prayed to by the women under the title of Mother. All 
this is purely religious. Yet the personification of the 
goddess by the old women and the fertilisation of the 
seed-corn by them are magical in their nature, since they 
are not propitiations of the deity ; far from that, they are 
usurpations of her divine functions by women, who take it 
on themselves to represent instead of to worship the 
goddess. Thus, whereas the Mandan ceremonies designed 
to ensure a supply of buffalo meat were purely magical, the 
ceremony for the fertilisation of the ground exhibits a 
blending of magic with religion. The distinction is inter- 
esting, since the intellectual advance from magic to religion 
is thus associated with the social advance from hunting to 
agriculture. 

A somewhat similar ceremony intended to promote the 
growth of the corn was observed by the Minnetarees or 
Hidatsas, who also, as we saw, resembled their kinsmen the 
Mandans in dancing a bull-dance for the multiplication of 
buffaloes. The ceremony has been described by Dr. 
Edwin James as follows :— 

“ Amongst the Minnetarees, is a ceremony called the 
corn dance ; which, however, has but little claim to the title 
of a dance. Notice being given of this ceremony, by the 
village criers, the squaws repair to the medicine lodge, in 
which the magi are seated, performing their incantations, 
carrying with them a portion of each kind of seed which 
they respectively intend to plant the ensuing season ; as an 
ear of maize, some pumpkin, water-melon, or tobacco-seed. 
These are attached to the end of small sticks, which are 
stuck in the ground, so as to form a right line in front of the 
magi. The squaws then strip themselves entirely of their 

1 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse zz dak Innere Nord-America, ii. 182-184. 

xvi ZTOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 143 

garments, and take their seats before the spectators. The 
magi then throw themselves into a violent agitation, singing, 
leaping about, pointing to the sky, the earth, the sun, and 
the north star, successively. After these paroxysms have 
subsided, the squaws arise ; and each one taking her respect- 
ive sticks, holds them up with extended arms. One of the 
magi being provided with a large bunch of a species of bitter 
herb, dips it in a vessel of water, and sprinkles copiously the 
seeds and persons of the squaws, with much grotesqué 
gesticulation. This concludes the ceremony; when the 
seeds are supposed to be fertilized, and to be capable of 
communicating their fertility to any quantity of their kind. 
The women then assume their clothing, and return home, 
being careful to deposit the fertilized seed with their stock ; 
after which they may proceed to planting as soon as they 
please.” ? 

In this Minnetaree ceremony it will be noticed that the Women 
fertilisation of the seed is performed by men, not by women padasianis 
yet the presence of naked women at the ceremony, each part in the 
bearing the seed which is to be fertilised, shews that their pla 
help was deemed essential to the success of the rite. We 
may conjecture that their co-operation was based on the 
principle of imitative magic, their maternal functions being 
supposed to aid the production of the corn and other fruits 
of the earth, The conjecture is confirmed by the evidence Prince - 
of Prince Maximilian, who witnessed this same corn dance ee 
of the women among the Minnetarees, the intention of description 
which, he tells us, was to ensure a good crop of maize in the eae 
coming year. In the middle of the hut, where a fire was ceremony 
blazing, stood a tall strong woman dréssed in a long robe of ae 
yellow leather decorated with. many tassels and pieces of red crop of 
and blue cloth. She pretended to have a maize-cob in her ae = 
body which she could conjure out and in at will. The pretended 

to bring up 
music struck up and four other women began to dance, a cob of 
waddling like ducks with tiny steps in time to the rapid nee out 
beat of the drum, while their arms hung limp at their sides, mouth. 
Meantime the other big woman danced alone by the fire, 
warming her hands at the flames and then holding them to 

1 Edwin James, Account of an Expe- Mountains under the Command g Maj. 
dition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky S. H. Long (London, 1823), ii. 58 sg. 

Possible re- 
semblance 
of this 
ceremony 
to one of 
the rites 

of the 
Eleusinian 
mysteries. 

Arickaree 
worship of 
a corn- 
ear as 
‘*Mother.” 

144 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA ciate. 

her face. At last she began to totter and to swing her 
arms to and fro. Then her head drooped backwards, 
and in her open mouth appeared the point of a white 
cob of maize, which gradually protruded more and more, 
while the convulsive movements of the dancer increased in 
violence. When the cob was half out of her mouth, it 
seemed as if $he would faint, and another woman ran to 
her assistance, put her arms round the sufferer’s body, and 
set her on the ground. There she lay in convulsions, 
supported by her companion, while the music rose higher 
than ever. Other women stroked the arms and breast of 
the patient with bunches of wormwood, and the’ maize-cob 
gradually vanished again. Then the dancer rose to her feet, 
danced about for a little, and was relieved by another.’ 

In this scene the medicine-woman, as the writer calls 
her, seems to have personated the corn-goddess giving birth 
to the corn from her own body. In the Eleusinian mysteries 
the culminating point of the ceremonies was reached when 
the high priest, in a blaze of light, presented to the initiated 
a reaped ear of corn, while he cried with a loud voice that 
the goddess had been delivered of a sacred boy.? Perhaps 
in the temple at Eleusis, as in the Indian hut on the prairie 
by the Missouri, the goddess was personated by a woman 
who feigned to bring forth from her body the good gift of 
the goddess to mankind, an ear of corn. At all events we 
may assume with some degree of probability that the Old 
Woman who never dies, who makes the corn to grow, and 
whom the Mandans addressed as “ Mother,” was originally, 
like Demeter and Ceres, nothing but a personification of the 
corn itself. If any doubt remains in the reader’s mind, it 
may be dissipated by a custom which is practised by the 
Arickarees, an Indian tribe of the Upper Missouri whose 
survivors now live in the same village with the survivors both 
of the Mandans and the Minnetarees. “In every Arickaree 
lodge,” we are told, “ there is a large ear of corn, which has 
lasted for generations, sticking out of the mouth of a 
medicine-bag. At their feasts, they make offerings to the 

? Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse 2 Hippolytus, Refutatio Omnium 
in das Innere Nord-America, ii. 190, Haeresium, v. 8. p. 164 (ed. L. 
268-270. Duncker and F. G. Schneidewin). 

xvi ZOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 

145 

corn by rubbing a piece of meat on it, while they pray to it 

for plentiful harvests, and address it by the name of 
‘mother, ”? In this simple worship of the mother-corn we 

may see as it were in miniature the origin of some of the 

great goddesses of classical antiquity, Isis, Demeter, and 
Ceres, the only substantial difference between them being 

that whereas the corn-goddess of America was.a personifica- 

tion of maize, the corn-goddesses of the old world were 
personifications of wheat or barley. 

Before concluding this subject I would remind the readey These _ 

that there is no ground for connecting either the buffalo. Rrro"®* 

for the 
dances or the corn-dances of these Indians with totemism ; multiplica- 
in other words, there is no evidence that such dances were eae 
danced by men and women who had the buffalo or the corn and corn 
for their totem. If nevertheless I have called attention to lve dia 
them in a treatise on totemism it is merely because in their totemic. 
aim and method these dances or rather dramas present a 

close analogy to the purely totemic ceremonies of the Central 
Australians, which similarly aim at increasing the food 

supply by means of imitative or homceopathic magic. 

Another tribe of the Upper Missouri valley are the The Minne- 

Minnetarees or Hidatsas, as they now generally call them- figstecs 

selves. The name Minnetarees, by which they have been 

1 Washington Matthews, £¢hno- 
graphy and Philology of the Hidatsa 
Indians (Washington, 1877), p. 12. 
As to the Arickaree worship of maize, 
see Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse 
tn das Innere Nord-America, ii, 244 

occasions. This priceless treasure, 
which, we are told, the Arickarees 
prized as much as Christians do the Bible, 
was kept in a medicine-hut, fastened 
high up. One of the chief mysteries 
or religious festivals of the Arickarees 

sg. ‘*Maize,” he says, ‘‘is one of the 
chief mysteries (‘medicines’) of the 
Arickarees, and they honour it in many 
ways.” He describes a very sacred 
bird-hox, which was thought to be a 
most powerful means of promoting the 
growth of maize and the other crops. 
The box was about six feet long, but 
narrow, with seven gourd - bottles 
inserted on the top. Inside it was full 
of the stuffed skins of many birds, but 
only of migratory birds which passed 
the summer in the Arickaree country. 
The box also contained a famous 
medicine-pipe, which was only smoked 
at great festivals and on extraordinary 

VOL. II 

was celebrated with this bird-box when 
the fields had been sown and the first 
pumpkins were ripe. Also in summer, 
when the trees were in leaf, they took 

an evergreen tree, a juniper, peeled its 
stem, painted it with red, white, and ° 
blue stripes, and set it up before the 
medicine-hut. Then the precious birgi- 
box was taken down and the sag/red 
hocus-pocus performed with it. / On 
the analogy of the Mandan beljef (see 
above, p. 140) we may conjeciture that 
the summer-birds, whose skinyS were kept * * 
inthemystic box, symbolisedl the various ‘ ~ 
fruits ofthe earth, whichthe ceremony 
was designed to quickén. 

L 

146 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cCuav. 

commonly known, was applied to them by their neighbours 
the Mandans. From the French traders they received, very 
unjustly, the epithet Gvosventres. When the tribe was 
visited by Lewis and Clark in 1804, they occupicd villages 
on the Knife River. The remnant of the tribe, together 
with the survivors of the Mandans and the Arickarees, now 
inhabit the vijlage of Fort Berthold on the Missouri in North 
Dakota. A remote affinity may be traced between the 
languages of the Minnetarees and the Mandans, but none 
between these languages and that of the Arickarees, with 
whom they live; a competent observer was not able 
to detect a single word alike in the Mandan and Arickaree 
tongues. On the other hand the language of the Minne- 
tarees or Hidatsas is more nearly related to that of the , 
Upsarokas or Crows, and it appears that these two tribes 
are immediate subdivisions of the same people. But though 
the speech of the Minnetarees or Hidatsas differs somewhat 
widely from that of the Mandans, the two tribes have been 
intimately connected with each other for centuries, and their 
Theirmode culture, civil and religious, is of the same type. The 
eae Minnetarees or Hidatsas built commodious and comfortable 
and crafts. houses of the same pattern as the Mandans; they cultivated 
maize, beans, pumpkins, and tobacco; they built boats of 
buffalo-hide ; they manufactured pottery, made mats and 
baskets of various sorts, and fashioned arrow-heads out of 
flintand horn. They garnished their clothing with porcupine 
quills, which they coloured brilliantly with dyes of Indian 
discovery. They even knew how to manufacture glass and 
make rude beads and pendants out of it ; and they possessed 
various pigments with which they recorded events in symbolic 
pictures. Yet though they were settled in villages and tilled 
the ground their staple food down to about 1870 was buffalo 
flesh, and their principal standard of value was a buffalo- 
horse, that is, a horse fleet enough to run down a young 
bisffalo bull. With the nomadic tribes they exchanged their 
agr¥cultural produce for horses. When the Dacotas saw a 
certain flower (Liatris punctata) blooming on the prairies, 
they knew that the corn was ripe, and they repaired to the 
villages Of the farming Indians to trade. From the time 
they came fn sight over the bluffs in the distance till the 

xvI ZOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 147 

moment they disappeared behind them again, there’was a 
truce to the warfare between these Bedouins of the prairie 
and the village Indians... We have seen that the Minnetarees, 
like the Mandans, performed magical dances or ceremonies 
to ensure a supply of their two staple foods, buffalo meat 
and maize; and annually in July they celebrated their 
great medicine-dance or dance of penitence, at which their 
young warriors, like those of the Mandans, voluntarily 
submitted themselves to excruciating tortures? It was thd Morgan's 
opinion of L. H. Morgan that the partial civilisation of th¢ Newea 
tribes of the Upper Missouri valley, characterised by agricul- ewilisation 
ture, communal timber-framed houses, and a peculiar system aed 
of religion or magic, was imported into this region by the Missouri 
Minnetarees when they immigrated thither from the south reel 
and imparted their superior knowledge to the Mandans, who a 
had been settled in that country before them. Certainly : 
the Mandans could not have learned either agriculture or 
house-building from the Sioux or Dacotas, for that nation 
of roving hunters was ignorant of both these arts. In . 
personal appearance the Minnetarees and Mandans were 
among the finest specimens of the Red Man in North 
America. Prince Maximilian describes with admiration the 
tall well-built figures of the Minnetarees, their long plaited 
hair decked with feathers, and the beautiful bronze colour of 
their skin set off by the red paint on their faces and the 
strings of white and sky-blue beads which they wore.® 

The Minnetarees or Hidatsas are, or were, divided into 

seven exogamous clans as follows :—® 

1 Washington Matthews, thno- 
graphy and Philology of the Hidatsa 
indians, pp. 17 59q., 23 sgqg., 85; L. 
H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity 
and Affinity, pp. 185 sg. 3 z., Ancient 
Society, p. 158; Handbook of American 
Indians north of Mexico, i. 547 sg. 

2 Above, pp. 140 note!, 142-144. 
3 Edwin James, Account of an Ex- 

sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 181-186; 
2@., Ancient Society, pp. 158 sg. 

6 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Reise 
in das Innere Nord-America, i. 411 3 
L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, p. 
159. 

6 L. H. Morgan, Axctent Soczety, 
p. 159. As to this list the Rev. J. 
Owen Dorsey observed that ‘ Dr. 
Washington Matthews could have 

pedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky 
Mountains (London, 1823), i. 254- 
256; Washington Matthews, Azhzo/ogy 
and Philology of the Hidatsa Indians, 
PP- 45 5g- 

+L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 

furnished a corrected list from his own 
notes had they not unfortunately been 
destroyed by fire” (‘‘ Siouan Socio- 
logy,” Fifteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1897), p. 242). 

Exogamous 
clans of 
the Minne- 
tarees or 
Hidatsas. 

Right to 
marry a 
wife's 
younger 
sisters, 

The 
levirate. 

Avoidance 
of a wife's 
mother. 

The classi- 
ficatory 
system of 
relation- 
ship among 
the Minne- 
tarees or 
Hidatsas. 
Terms for 
father and 
mother. 

148 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

1. Knife. 2. Water. 3. Lodge. 
4. Prairie Chicken. 5. Hill People. 6. Unknown Animal, 
7. Bonnet. ‘ 

The large proportion of artificial objects in this list is 
suspicious, but L. H. Morgan, to whom we owe it, seems to 
have entertained no doubt that the clans so named were of 
the ordinary type. Intermarriage within the clan is forbidden; 
descent is in the female line; and both property and the 
office of sachem are hereditary in the clan. A man who 
marries the eldest of several sisters has a claim to the others 
as they grow up, and he generally marries them, unless in 
the meantime they have formed other attachments and 
refuse to live with him. As certain female cousins ‘are 
regarded as younger sisters, a man has often much latitude 
in choosing wives under this law. As a rule, the Minnetarees 
or Hidatsas observe the law of the levirate ; that is, a man 
usually takes to wife the widow ‘of his deceased brother, 
unless she expresses unwillingness, and he may adopt the 
orphans as his own children.2. Like other Indian tribes of 
the Siouan or Dacotan stock, the Minnetarees deem it 
improper for a man to hold a direct conversation with his 
mother-in-law ; but this custom seems to be falling into 
disuse.® 

Further the Minnetarees or Hidatsas have as usual the 
classificatory system of relationship; but their form of the 
system is characterised by one anomalous feature, and by 
another which deviates from every form we have hitherto 
met with, though it has its counterpart, as we shall see, in 
the system of the Gulf nations. In the generation above 
his own a man calls his father’s brother “my father” 
(Zé-ta2) and his mother’s sister “my mother” (//-4é); but 
his father’s sister he calls “my grandmother” (Kd-ru-hd), 
and his mother’s brother he calls “my elder brother ” (A/e- 
4-ka). This is an anomalous relationship in which the system 
of the Minnetarees and the Crows differs from that of all 
other tribes of American Indians. A Crow man calls his 

1L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, Indians, p. 53- 
Pp. 159. 

2 Washington Matthews, Z7/hnor 3 Washington Matthews, of. czt. 
graphy and Philology of the Hidatsh pp. 54. 

xvi LOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 149 

father’s sister, not like a Minnetaree, “my grandmother,” but 
“my mother ” (E ~ke-d).. 

In his own generation a Minnetaree or Hidatsa man 
calls his male and female cousins, the son and daughter of 
his father’s brother, “my elder brother” (JZee-d-kd), “my 
younger brother” (JZat-so-gé), “my elder sister” (AZat-td- 
we-d), “my younger sister ” (J7d-td-ka-zhd), according to the 
sex and age of the person. But his male cousin, the son of 
his father’s sister, he calls “ my father” (Zd-ta), and hig 
female cousin, the daughter of his father’s sister, he call¢ 
“my mother ” (//-ké). Conversely he calls his male cousin, 
the son of his mother’s brother, “ my son ” (A/d-de-shd), and 
his female cousin, the daughter of his mother’s brother, he 
calls “my daughter” (474-24). A woman applies the same 
terms to her cousins, the children either of her father’s sister 
or of her mother’s brother ; that is, she calls them not her 
cousins but her father or mother, her son or daughter, according 
to their sex and according as theyare the children of her father’s 
sister or of her mother’s brother. This treatment of cousins, the 
children of a brother and sister respectively, will meet us 
again in the system of the Gulf Indians. It differs from the 
treatment of such cousins among the Omahas, Kansas, and 
other tribes of the Dacotan stock, in as much as, unlike the 
system of these tribes, which assigns seniority to the brother’s 
child over the sister’s child,’ it assigns seniority to the sister’s 
child over the brother’s child, thus shewing a preference for 

_ the female line. For of cousins, the children of a brother and 
a sister respectively, it is the children of the sister who rank 
as “father” and “ mother” of their cousins ; and it is the 
children’ of the brother who rank as “son” and “ daughter ” 
of their cousins. 

In the generation below his own a Minnetaree or Hidatsa 
man calls his brother’s son and daughter “my son” (Ma-de- 
shd) and “my daughter” (J7é-ké) ; but his sister’s son and 
daughter he calls “my younger brother” (JZat-so-gé) and 
“my younger sister” (M/d-td-ka-shd). This remarkable 
deviation from the ordinary form of the classificatory system 
is shared by the Upsarokas or Crows, and it is peculiar 
to these two tribes. A woman calls her sister’s son and 

l See above, pp. 115-117, 128, 133. 

Terms for 
cousins, 

Preference 
shewn for 
the female 
line. 

Terms for 
nephews 
and nieces. 

Terms for 
wife and 
wife's 
sisters, for 
husband 
and 
husband’s 
brothers. 

Belief of 
the Minne- 
tarees or 
Hidatsas 
that there 
is a cave 
where 
children 
live, who 
can enter 
into women 
and be born 
of them. 

130 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

daughter “my son” (MM4d-de-shd) and “my daughter” 
(Md-ké) ; but her brother’s son and daughter she calls “my 
grandchild” (Met-a-wi-pish-sha). This last denomination 
is a deviation from the common form of the classificatory 
system.) ¢ 

Further, it deserves to ‘be noticed that a man applies 
the same term ctadamia to his wife and to her sisters, 
especially to her younger sisters, which is natural enough, 
since they are his potential wives, he having a customary 
right to marry them in his wife’s lifetime. But the wife 
applies quite different terms to her husband -(4zda) and to 
his brothers (¢szé¢sz), which is also natural, since they have 
not the right to marry her in their brother's lifetime, though 
they have at least a preferential right to marry her after his 
death.” * 

It deserves to be noted jthat the Minnetarees or Hidatsas 
entertained a belief as to the birth of children which closely 
resembles the Central Australian theory of conception.’ 
We possess two independent accounts of the Minnetaree 
belief. The older of the two, which we owe to Major 
Long’s expedition of 1819-1820, runs thus: “At the 
distance of the journey of one day and a half from Knife- 
creek, which divides the larger arid smaller towns of the 
Minnetarees from each other, are situate two conical hills, 
separated by about the distance of a mile. One of these 
hills was supposed to impart a prolific virtue to such squaws 
as resorted to it for the purpose of crying and lamenting, 
for the circumstance of their having no male issue. A 
person one day walking near the other mount, fancied he 
observed upon the top of it two very small children. 
Thinking they had strayed from the village, he ran towards 
them to induce them to return home; but they immediately 
fled from him, nor could his utmost speed overtake them, 

iL. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 188 sg. 
and Table II. pp. 293 sgg. Compare 
Washington Matthews, Zthnography 

actual wife from her sisters. Similarly 
he has terms by which he can distinguish 
his actual father from his father’s 
brothers and his actual mother from his 

and Philology of the Hidatsa Indians, 
PP. 55-57- 

2 Washington Matthews, of. cz. pp. 
56, 57. But aman has another term 
(za) by which he can distinguish his 

mother’s'sisters (Washington Matthews, 

Pp. 55-57). ; 
3 As to the Australian theory, see 

vol. i. pp. 93 5g., 182 sg., 188 599., 
576 s99. 

xvi ZJOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 151 

and in a short time they eluded his sight. Returning to the 
village, the relation of his story excited much interest, and 

an Indian set out next day, mounted on a fleet horse, to 
take the little strangers. On the approach of this individual 

to the mount, he also saw the children, who ran away as 
before, and although he endeavoured to overtake them by 
lashing the horse into his utmost swiftness, the children left 

him far behind. But these children are no longer to be 
seen, and the hill once of singular efficacy in rendering th¢ 
human species prolific, has lost this remarkable property.” * 

However, the property in question, or at least the faith Dr. _ 

of the Indians in it, seems to have survived much longer Washington 

Matthews’ 
than the explorers imagined ; for Dr. Washington Matthews, account of 

whose account of the tribe was published in 1877, speaks of Wee 
the belief as if it were still entertained by some of the ‘' House 
Hidatsas. He says: “The other famous oracle, to which et 
they now often refer, as they have still some fancies con- to which 
nected with it, was the Makadistatz, or ‘House of the ina 
Infants, a cavern, near the Knife River, which they supposed pee in 
extended far into the earth, but whose entrance was only a obtain 
span wide. This cave, they say, was inhabited by pigmies, oPrins- 
or mysterious infants, who came out only at night, and then 

with great caution, lest they should be observed, and who 
followed a wise and watchful leader that knew the scent of 

a man and snuffed the air as he advanced, like the leader of 

a band of antelope. They suppose that if he detected the 
presence of a human being, he gave the alarm and all 
retreated. After rainy nights, they saw tracks of some 
animals going from and returning to the cave, which tracks 

they said were those of the infants. The oracle was thus 
consulted: The childless husband, after a long fast, would 

repair to the neighborhood of the cave at night, and secrete 
himself behind a bowlder, to the leeward, to watch; if, in 

his hunger-weakened brain, he had a vision of the infants, 

he returned hOme, confident that he would be a father 
within a year. The barren wife who desired children would, 

at sunset, lay at the mouth of the cave_a tiny play-ball and 

a little bow and arrow. If the ball was missing in the 

1 Edwin James, Account of an Expedition trom Pittsburgh to the Rocky 
Mountains (London, 1823), i. 253 sg. 

Analogy 
of the 

Hidatsa or 
Minnetaree 
belief to 

that of the 
Central 
australians, 

152 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnap, 

morning, she believed that within a year she would be the 
mother of a girl; while if the bow and arrow were missing, 
she supposed she would be the mother of a boy. If neither 
were ‘taken,’ she went back with. little hope, and could not 
consult the oracle again until a year had elapsed. There 
are those among them who imagine that, in some way or 
other, their children come from the Alakadistati; and marks 
of contusion on an infant, arising from tight swaddling or 
other causes, are gravely attributed to kicks received from 
his former comrades when he was ejected from his subter- 
ranean abode.” ? 

According to this last account it appears that some at 
least of the Hidatsas or Minnetarees imagine the “ House of 
the Infants” to be inhabited by spirit children, who can 
project themselves into barren women and be born of them. 

. This belief is identical with that of the Arunta and other 

tribes of Central Australia, and also with that of the 
Melanesians of the Banks’ Islands.* <A similar belief is 
entertained in certain circumstances by the Baganda of 
Central Africa. For in Uganda still-born babes and children 
born feet foremost are buried at cross-roads, and mounds 
are raised over their remains; and when women or girls 
pass by such a grave, they throw' grass, sticks, or dust on 
it for the purpose, so they say, of preventing the ghost of 
the child from entering into them and being reborn.’ 
Finding this crude theory of conception at points so distant 
from each other, we can hardly doubt that it has been held 
by savages far more commonly than would appear from the 
few instances of it which have been recorded. As I have 
already repeatedly pointed out, such primitive theories 
probably furnish the starting-point of totemism ; and it is 
therefore not without significance that they are held in what 
may be called the classic lands of totemism, the heart of 
America, the heart of Africa, and the heart of Australia. 

A Siouan or Dacotan tribe closely akin by blood and 

1 Washington Matthews, Zfhno- J. Roscoe, who had already described 
graphy and Philology of the Hidatsa the custom somewhat more briefly. 

Indians (Washington, 1877), P- 51. See his ‘*Further Notes on the 
2 See above, vol. i. pp. 182 sg., Mannersand Customs of the Baganda,” 
188 sgg., vol. ii. pp. 89 599. Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 

3 From notes furnished by the Rev. = xxxii. (1902) p. 30. 

xvl ZTOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 153 

language to the Minnetarees or Hidatsas are the Upsarokas The 

or Crows. In 1804 they were found by Lewis and Clark UR@rots 

on the Knife River. Unlike their kinsmen the Minnetarees, a Siouan 
: : : tribe of 

who were agricultural and. village Indians, the Crows were a punters. 

roving tribe of hunters, who neither dwelt in villages nor 

tilled the ground, except that they grew a little tobacco. 

With their skin tents they moved about from place to place 

on horseback, hunting the buffaloes and every sort of game. 

They were a haughty tribe, who looked down with contempt 

on the whites. A troop of these barbarous cavaliers was A 

picturesque sight, as they sat their fine horses on panther- 

skins, their bronzed faces painted with many colours, their 

long hanging hair, of which they were very proud, decked 

with fluttering feathers, their bows and arrows slung on their 

backs, and guns or spears in their hands. When Prince 

Maximilian travelled in their country, they were reckoned 

to number four hundred tents and to muster from nine to 

ten thousand horses, some of them very fine animals. They 

roamed the prairies from the Yellowstone and Cheyenne 

Rivers to the Big Horn River and the Rocky Mountains. 

Their foes were the Dacotas, Blackfeet, and Cheyennes ; 

their friends the Minnetarees and Mandans.' 

According to L. H. Morgan, the Crows were divided Exogamous 

‘ . 2 clans of 
into the following exogamous clans :— ihe Crows: 

1. Prairie Dog. 2. Bad Leggings. 

3. Skunk. 4. Treacherous Lodges, 
. 5. Lost Lodges. 6, Bad Honours, 

7. Butchers, 8. Moving Lodges. 

g. Bear’s Paw Mountain. to. Blackfoot Lodges. 
11. Fish Catchers. 12. Antelope. 

13. Raven. : 

Only two or three of these names appear to be totemic ; 
the others resemble those of the dancing bands or societies, 

1 History of the Expedition under of Mexico, i. 367 sgq. The name 

the Command of Captains Lewis and 
Clark to the Sources of the Missouri, 
etc. (London, 1905), i. 187; Maxi- 
milian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse in das 
Innere Nord-America, i. 395 59-5 398 
sqg.3 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
Sanguinity and Affinity, p. 1853 
Handbook of American Indians north 

Crow as applied to this tribe is a trans- 
lation through the French gens des 
corbeaux of their own name for them- 
selves, namely, <dsdéroke, which means 
crow, sparrow-hawk, or bird people. 

2L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
p- 159. 

It seems 
doubtful 
whether 
the Crow 
clans are 
totemic. 

Rules of 
marriage 
and 
descent. 

Right of 
aman to 
marry all 
shis wife's 
‘younger 
« sisters in 
her lifetime, 
Frequency 
of this 
custom 
among the 
American 
Indians. 

134 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cua. 

which are common in Indian tribes. Morgan himself was 
inclined for atime to take the same view; however, he 
says that the organisation of the Crows in clans or gentes, 
as he calls them, was clearly established by their rules ot 
descent, marriage customs, and laws of inheritance with 
respect to property. His interpreter among the Crows 
was Robert Meldrum, then a factor of the American Fur 
Company, who had lived in the tribe for forty years, was 
one of their chiefs, and had mastered their language so 
perfectly that he thought in it. The rules of marriage, 
descent, and inheritance among the Crows were the same 
as among the Minnetarees; that is, no man might marry a 
woman of the same clan, children belonged to the clan of 
their mother, not of their father, and property was hereditary 
in the clan.’ 

The Crows observed a remarkable marriage custom 
which we have already met with among other Indian 
tribes. If a man married the eldest daughter of a family, 
he had a right to marry all her younger sisters when they 
grew up, even in the lifetime of his first wife, their eldest 
sister. He might waive the right; but if he insisted, his 
claim to the women would be admitted by their clan. 
Morgan found the same custom with regard to the marriage 
of sisters practised by at least forty other Indian tribes. 
Such a custom, taken together with the custom of the 
levirate, which allows brothers to marry the same woman 
successively, appears to be most naturally explicable on the 
hypothesis that it has survived from a time when a group 
of brothers regularly married a group of sisters.* 

The last tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock which 
we shall notice here, though it does not belong to the 

1. H. Morgan, Anctent Society, 
p- 159. Prince Maximilian says that 
the Crows were divided into eight 
bands or societies, each of them with 
its own dance. Among the names of 

these bands were Buffalo-bulls, Prairie- - 

foxes, Shorn Heads, Little Dogs, and 
Big Dogs, See Maximilian Prinz zu 
Wied, Reise in das Innere Nord- 
wmerica, i. 401. The Prince's 

evidence is in favour of the view that 
the divisions of the Crows were not 
totemic clans, but dancing bands or 
societies. We shall deal with these 
bands or societies later on. 

2 See above, pp. 65, 85, 127, 136, 
148. 

3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, 
P., 160. 

4 See also above, vol. ii. pp. 266 sy. 

xvt ZOTEMISM AMONG OTHER DACOTAN TRIBES 155 

Missouri valley, are the Biloxi. They were a small tribe The Biloxi, 
living in the southern part of what is now the State of aces 
Mississippi. Formerly they were reckoned to the Musk- south. 
hogean stock, which comprised the Indian tribes occupying 

the south-east portion of the United States. But the 
researches of Messrs. A. S, Gatschet and J. Owen Dorsey 

have proved that the language of the, Biloxi was Siouan. 

The tribe is nearly or actually now extinct. A few Their 
survivors whom J. Owen Dorsey visited in 1892 and 1893 > . 
at Lecompte in Louisiana gave him the names of three of 

their clans, the Deer, the Bear, and the Alligator. Descent 

was traced in the female line. Though the exogamy of 

the clan appears to have broken down, the Biloxi retained 

the classificatory system of relationship in a peculiarly elab- 

orate form. Thus they had terms for at least three degrees The classi- 
beyond grandparents ; they had distinct terms and groups speed 
for father’s elder sister, father’s younger sister, fathcr’s clder of rela- 
brother, father’s younger brother, and similarly for the erate 
mother’s elder and younger brothers and sisters. They Biloxi. 
distinguished between the son of an elder sister and the son 

of a younger sister, and similarly between the daughter of 

an elder sister and the daughter of a younger sister. A man Marriage 
might not marry the daughter of his brother’s wife nor the pean 6 
sister of his wife’s father; but he might marry his deceased wife's sister 
wife’s sister, and a woman might marry her deceased eerie 
husband’s brother.’ It is interesting, but not surprising, to busband’s 
find the classificatory system of relationship outlasting the "°!*- 

exogamy of the totemic clans. 

§ 11. Totemism among the Gulf Nations 

The south-eastern portion of what is now the United The Gul 

States, from the Mississippi on the west to the Atlantic on es 
the east, and from the Tennessee River on the north to the Seminoles, 
Gulf of Mexico on the south, was inhabited by five principal ca 

Indian nations, which, following Morgan, we may call the saws, and 
Cherokees, 

1 The Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, J. Mooney, Zhe Siouan Tribes of the 
«*Siouan Sociology,” Fifteenth Annual East (Washington, 1894), pp. 14-17 3 
Report of ‘the Bureau of Ethnology Handbook of American Indians north 
(Washington, 1897), pp. 243 sg.3 of Mexico, i. 147 5g. 

* The Musk- 
hogean 
family. 

These 
nations 
were * 
settled 

and agri- 
cultural 
The Musk- 
hogean 
con- 
federacies, 

The con- 
federacy of 
the Creeks. 

156 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnar. 

Gulf nations. These were the Creeks, the Seminoles, the 
Choctaws, the Chickasaws, and the Cherokees. Of these 
the first four belonged to the same linguistic stock, which 
has been called the Muskhogean, from JA/uskogee, more 
properly JZaskoki, the name by which the Creeks, the lead- 
ing nation of the four, called themselves. The Choctaws 
and Chickasaws were subdivisions of the same people ; their 
dialects are closely allied. But the variation between the 
Creek and the Choctaw dialects is very great. The 
Seminoles are derived from the Creeks. On the other hand 
the Cherokees belonged to an entirely different linguistic 
family, being an outlying branch of the Iroquoian stock. 
The territory occupied by the Muskhogean peoples comprised 
the present States of Mississippi and Alabama, with parts of 
Tennessee, Georgia, Florida, and South Carolina. All the 
nations of this region had ;made considerable progress in 
culture. They were sedentary and agricultural, inhabiting 
large villages or rather towns of substantially built houses. 
Politically the Muskhogean nations were organised in con- 
federacies, each of which was governed, by a federal council 
composed of representatives, who met annually or as occasion 
required at a place and time appointed by the chief. Each 
town was in like manner ruled by'a council of its own, a 
miniature of the federal council. Thus the constitution of 
these Indians bore some resemblance to that under which the 
same region is still governed by a white race instead of a red. 

Among these nations the confederacy of the Creeks 
formed the largest division of the Muskhogean family. In 
early times they occupied the greater part of Alabama and 
Georgia, and for about a century before they were finally 
removed, between 1836 and 1840, to the Indian Territory 
west of the Mississippi, they owned some fifty towns.? The 
confederacy included six tribes, namely the Creeks proper 
or Muskogees (A/askoki), as they called themselves, the 
Hitchetes, Yoochees, Alabamas, Coosatees, and Natchez, all 

tL. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- tion Legend of the Creek Indians, i. 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 189 sg.; (Philadelphia, 1884) pp. 53 sqq. 
Handbook of American Indians north 2 James Adair, History of the 
of Mexico, i. 245 sqg-, 961 sg. As American Indians (London, 1775), 
to the languages of the Muskhogean p. 257; Handbook of American 
family, see A. S. Gatschet, 4 Alzgra- Indians north of Mexico, i.+362 sg. 

XVI LOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 

157 

of whom spoke dialects of the same language, with the excep- 
tion of the Natchez, who were admitted to the confederacy 
after their settlement on the lower Mississippi had been 
broken up and the tribe dispersed by the French in 1730." 
Taken altogether the Creeks were the most powerful and 
notable Indian nation in the southern territories of the 
United States? Their land is a pleasant one and the 
climate salubrious. The winters are soft and mild, and the 
summers sweet and wholesome. Running waters an 
constant breezes temper the heat of summer, and in the 
autumn the air is fragrant with the perfume of the ripening 
aromatic shrubbery, which abounds throughout the country. 
In the eighteenth century the towns and villages of the The towns 
Creeks were built along the banks of rivers, where the eS 
land was fertile, the water clear, and the air pure. The 
number of houses in them varied from twenty to two 
hundred. A distinction was drawn between the Red or 
War towns and the White or Peace towns; the Red towns 
were governed by warriors only, and the White towns by 
civil officers. These towns were distinguished from each 
other by red and white poles respectively. In the centre 
of each town was the public square, which was the place for 
public meetings and the celebration of festivals, especially 
for the annual busk or feast of first fruits in autumn, when 
the new maize was eaten with solemn rites.* A Creek town 

have referred 

1L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
pp. 160 sg. ; compare za@., Systems of 
Consanguinity and Affinity, p. 189; 
Handbook of American Indians north 
of Mexico, i. 362 sg. As to the 
Natchez (Waktche), see A. S. Gatschet, 
A Migration Legend of the Creek 
Indians, i. 34 599. 

2 A. S, Gatschet, op. cet, i. 118, 

3 J. Adair, Westory of the American 
Indians, p. 257; W. Bartram, Odser- 
vattons on the Creek and Cherokee 
Indians (1789), with prefatory and 
supplementary notes by E. G. Squier, 
p. 614; A. S. Gatschet, 4 Aftgration 
Legend of the Creek Indians, i. 120- 
122; Caleb Swan, in H. R. School- 
craft’s Indian Tribes of the United 
States, v. 258, 262 sgg., 279. The 
article of W. Bartram to which I 

(Observations on the 
Creek and Cherokee Indians), is, I 
understand, an extract from the Zrans- 
actions of the American Ethnological 
Society, vol. iii, Part i. (1853). I 
possess a copy of the article, but 
without the general title. As to the 
Creek festival ot the new fruits at 
harvest, see J. Adair, /istory of the 
American Indians (London, 1775), 
pp. 96-111; W. Bartram, 7Zravels 
through North and South Carolina, 
Georgia, East and West Florida, ete. 
(London, 1792), pp. 507 s¢.3 A, 
Hodgson, Letters from North America 
(London, 1824), i, 13% 5¢7.3 B. 
Hawkins, ‘‘Sketch of the Creek 
Country,” Collections of the Georgia 
Historical Society, iii. (Savannah, 1848) 
pp. 75-78; A. A. M‘Gillivray, in 

Creek agri- 
culture. 

158 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

had generally a large tract of excellent arable land adjoin- 
ing or near it. The crops raised by the inhabitants included 
maize, rice, sweet potatoes, beans, pumpkins, and water- 
melons. The whole population planted their crops in one 
vast field together, yet every family or household had its 
own plot, which was marked out from the rest by ‘a narrow 
strip of grass or any other natural or artificial boundary. 
Thus the whole plantation was an assemblage of lots adjoin- 
ing each other, all comprised within one enclosure or general 
boundary. In the spring, after the ground had been already 
prepared, early one morning the sound of a conch shell 
summoned all the people to meet in the public square. 
Thither accordingly they repaired with their hoes and axes, 
and thence they proceeded to the fields, where they began 
to plant, not every one in his own plot, but all together 
working at one part of the field till it was finished. And 
when the rising crops were ready for dressing and cleansing, 
the people wrought all together in the same manner. When 
the harvest was come and the busk or feast of first fruits was 
over, every man carried off the ripe grain from his own patch 
and laid it up in hisown granary. But before the crops were 
brought home from the field, a large crib or granary called 
the king’s crib was set up in the plantation, and in it each 
family deposited as much or as little of the fruits of the 
earth as they thought fit. The grain and other fruits thus 
laid up in the king’s crib served the king or chief (sco) as 
a public treasure over which he had control for the general 
good. Besides their cereals and roots the Creeks cultivated 
peaches, oranges, plums, and figs; several species of palms 
furnished them with a variety of agreeable and nourishing 
food ; and grapes they had in abundance. They extracted 
a sweet oil from acorns and made use of it in their cookery. 
And in addition to the common field or public plantation 
every householder in a town enclosed a garden next to his 
house, where he planted maize, rice, squashes and so forth ; 
and these, being planted earlier and tended more carefully, 
bore fruit before the crops in the common field were ripe.’ 

H. R. Schooleraft’s Jndian Tribes of the festival based on the original authorities 
United States, v. 267 sg. Elsewhere (Zhe Golden Bough,? ii. 329 sqq.). 
I have given a description of this YW. Bartram, Zravels through 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 159 

At the head of every Creek town was a chief (sco), Each 
whom the whites commonly called the king. He was eee 
elected for life from one particular tribe or totemic clan ; governed 
for example, in one town he was always chosen from the Cen al 
Eagle clan. On his death, if his nephews were fit for office, council. 
one of them always succeeded his uncle; but if they were 
unfit, another of the next of kin was chosen, the office 
always descending in the female line. It was the king’s Duties of 
duty to convene the council and preside over its deliberations '?* kis- 
in the public square. The council heard complaints, judged 
disputes, and decided questions of peace and war as well 
as all other matters of public concern. The king was little His mode 
more than its president, and though he was treated with % 
profound respect he dressed like an ordinary citizen, hunted 
with his family, and even worked daily in the field with his 
axe and hoe. His house was distinguished from those of 
other people only by its size. The king’s body was beauti- 
fully tattooed in blue with figures of the sun, moon, and 
stars, animals of the chase, landscapes, battles, and so forth. 

The royal standard, which the Creeks always carried with 

them to-battle, was made from the tail feathers of a species 

of vulture. Next in dignity to the king was the War Chief, The War 

who commanded the army. He was appointed to office by ehiet 

the king. Further, in every town there was a High Priest The High 
. oe Priest or 

or chief Medicine-man, a person of great power and conse- nie 

quence in the state. The council never decided on an ex- Medicine- 

pedition against an enemy without his advice and assistance, 

He foretold, and even professed to produce, rain, thunder, . 

and lightning; he claimed to heal diseases, to practise witch- 

craft, and to invoke or exorcise evil spirits. Sometimes the 

king combined the offices of War Chief and High Priest 

with his proper regal functions, and then his power became 

very formidable and dangerous to the liberty of the citizens ; 

and he must be a very cunning man if he died in his bed 

North and South Carolina, Georgia, 
Last and West Florida, ete. (London, 
1792) pp. 509-5113 za., Observations 
on the Creek and Cherokee Indians 
(1789), with prefatory and supplement- 
ary notes by E. G. Squier, pp. 39-41, 
_ 47-49. For a detailed account of the 

various Creek towns, their situation, 
fields and orchards, see Col. Benjamin 
Hawkins, ‘*A Sketch of the Creek 
Country in the years 1798 and 1799,” 
Collections of the Georgia Historical 
Society, vol. iii. Part i, (Savannah, 

1848) pp. 19 sgq. 

The annual 
new fire. 

The 
houses of 
the Creeks, 

160 ZJOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

and not by the rifle or the tomahawk.’ One of the duties 
of the High Priest was to make the new fire annually at 
the Feast of the First Fruits in autumn. This he did by 
rubbing two dry sticks against each other. Ill the fires in 
the town or nation had previously been put out and they 
were afterwards rekindled with the new fire. A perpetual 
fire burned in a large circular building commonly called the 
Rotunda. It was guarded by priests, and no woman might 
set foot within the building under pain of death.’ 

The houses of well-to-do people among the Creeks 
consisted of four buildings arranged round a square court- 
yard. One of these buildings served as a kitchen and 
winter lodging-house ; another as a summer lodging-house 
and hall for receiving visitors ; a third consisted of a ware- 
house for storing skins and furs ; and the fourth, completing 
the square, was commonly in two stories and comprised a 
granary, a storeroom, & parlour, and a spacious and airy 
pavilion on the upper floor, where the head of the family 
reposed and received his guests in the hot weather. Smaller 
or less wealthy families contented themselves with houses 
composed of one, two, or three buildings.’ 

The Creeks were divided into more than twenty-two 

1B. Hawkins, “Sketch of the 
Creek Country,” Collections of the 

of the Creek Country,” Collections of 
the Georgia Historical Soctety, vol. ili. 

Georgia Historical Soctety, vol. iii. 
Part i, (Savannah, 1848) pp. 68, 69 
sqg.;3 W. Bartram, Zravels through 
North and South Carolina, Georgia, 
East and West Florida, etc. (London, 
1792) Pp. 149, 492-495; 2d., Observa- 
tions on the Creek and Cherokee Indians 
(1789) with prefatory and supple- 
mentary notes by E. G. Squier, pp. 19, 
23 sgq.; Caleb Swan, in H. R. School- 
eraft’s /udian Tribes of the United 
States, v, 279; A. S. Gatschet, 4 
sWigration Legend of the Creek Indians, 
pp. 156 sg. 

2 W. Bartram, Observations on the 
Creck and Cherokee Indians, with pre- 
fatory and supplementary notes by 
&. G. Squier, pp. 26 sg.; J. Adair, 
History of the American Indians 
(London, 1775), pp. 105-108. As to 
the Rotunda, which stood near the 
public square, see B. Hawkins, ‘‘ Sketch 

Part i. (Savannah, 1848) pp. 71 sg., 
from whose description we should not 
infer that any special sanctity attached 
to the fire in the Rotunda. He says: 
*<In the centre of the room, on a small 
rise, the fire is made, of dry cane or 
dry old pine slabs, split fine, and laid 
in a spiral circle. This is the assembly 
room for all people, old and young ; 
they assemble every night, and amuse 
themselves with dancing, singing, or 
conversation. And here, sometimes, 
in very cold weather the old and naked 
sleep.” See further Caleb Swan, in 
H. R. Schoolcraft’s Jrdian Tribes of 
the United States, v. 265 sg.; A. S. 
Gatschet, 4 Migration Legend of the 
Creek Indians, i. 174-176. 

3 W. Bartram, Observations on the 
Creek and Cherokee Indians, with pre- 
fatory and supplementary notes by 
E.G. Squier, pp. 55 54. 

XvI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 

161 

exogamous clans, of which the following have been Exogamous 

recorded :— rail the 
1. Wolf. 2. Bear. 3. Skunk. 
4. Alligator. 5. Deer. 6. Bird. 
7. Panther. 8. Wind. g. Toad. 
10, Mole. 11. Fox. 12. Raccoon. 
13. Fish. 14. Maize. 15. Sweet potato. 
16. Hickory nut. 17. Salt. 18, Wild-cat. 
19. Beaver. 20. Otter. 21. Buffalo. 
22. Snake, 

and several others, whose native names are recorded, though 
their meanings have been forgotten.’ 

In the eighteenth century James Adair rejected “the 
wild notion which some have espoused of the North 
American Indians being Prae-Adamites,” but adopted what 
he conceived to be the rational view that they were lineally 
descended from the ancient Israelites, either while that 
Chosen People was still a maritime power (whenever that 
may have been), or more probably after the captivity? He 
was personally acquainted with the Creek, Choctaw, Chikasaw, 
and Cherokee nations, and appears to have been an accurate 
observer, however little we may now be disposed to accept 
his genealogical theories and his attempts to resolve Indian 
words into Hebrew. On the totemism of these nations his James 
observations deserve to be quoted, though we cannot say eee e 
how far they apply to the Creeks in particular: He says : totemism 
“As the Israelites were divided into tribes, and had chiefs ee 
over them, so the Indians divide themselves: each _ tribe this region. 
forms a little community within the nation, and as the 
nation hath its particular symbol, so hath each tribe the 
badge from which it is denominated. The sachem of each 
tribe is a necessary party in conveyances and treaties, to 
which he affixes the mark of his tribe, as a corporation with 

1L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
p. 161; A. S. Gatschet, 4 Migration 

by Morgan nor Gatschet. As to these 
two last, see below, pp. 162,163. Com- 

Legend of the Creek Indians, i. 155 sg. 
The two lists given by these writers 
are independent and for the most part 
in agreement with each other. The 
Beaver and Otter clans are not men- 
tioned by Morgan; and the Buffalo 
and Snake clans are mentioned neither 

VOL. Il 

pare H. R. Schoolcraft, /ndian Tribes 
of the United States, i. 275, where the 
Creek clans mentioned are those of the 
Tiger (Panther), Wind, Bear, Wolf, 
Bird, Fox, Root, Alligator, and Deer. 
2 J. Adair, History of the American 
Indians, (London, 1775), Pp. 11 599. 

M 

Closeness 
of the 
social tie 
between 
members 
of the same 
clan, 

162 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cniav. 

us doth their public seal. If we go from nation to nation 
among them, we shall not find one, who doth not lineally 
distinguish himself by his respective family. The genea- 
logical names which they assume are derived, either from 
the names of those animals, whereof the cherubim are said 
in revelation to be compounded, or from such creatures as 
are most familiar to them. They have the families of the 
eagle, panther, tyger, and buffalo; the family of the dear, 

deer, racoon, tortoise, snake, fish, and likewise of the wind... . 

The Indians, however, bear no religious respect to the 
animals from which they derive the names of their tribes, 
but will kill any of the species,‘when opportunity serves. 
The wolf, indeed, several of them do not care to meddle 
with, believing it unlucky to kill them; which is the sole 
reason that few of the Indians shoot at that creature, 
through a notion of spoiling their guns.” ! 

Thus it appears from Adair’s account that among the 
Creeks and kindred nations men had no superstitious regard 
for their totemic animals. On the other hand, we learn 
from him that the social tie, which knits together members 
of the same totemic clan, was strong among these nations. 
For after describing what he calls the tribes or families 
named after animals, that is, the totemic clans, he proceeds 
thus: “I have observed with much inward satisfaction the 
community of goods that prevailed among them, after the 
patriarchal manner, and that of the primitive christians ; 
especially with those of their own tribe. Though they are 
become exceedingly corrupt, in most of their ancient com- 
mendable qualities, yet they are so hospitable, kind-hearted, 
and free, that they would share with those of their own 
tribe the last part of their provisions, even to a single ear 
of corn. . . . When the Indians are travelling in their own 
country, they enquire for a house of their own tribe; and if 
there be any, they go to it, and are kindly received, though 
they never saw the persons before—they eat, drink, and 
regale themselves with as much freedom as at their own 
tables.”? It would seem that the relationship between 
members of the same clan, who inhabited different towns, 

1 J. Adair, History of the American Indians (London, 1775), Pp. 15 54¢- 
2 J, Adair, of. cz’. p. 17. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 163 

was closer than that between members of different clans 
who inhabited the same town. For Adair tells us that 
“when a warrior dies a natural death (which seldom 
happens) the war-drums, musical instruments, and all other 
kinds of diversion are laid aside for the space of three days 
and nights. In this time of mourning for the dead, I have 
known some of the frolicksome young sparks to ask the 
name of the deceased person’s tribe ; and once, being told it 
was a racoon (the genealogical name of the family), one of 
them scoffingly replied, ‘Then let us away to another town, 
and cheer ourselves with those who have no reason to weep ; 
for why should we make our hearts weigh heavy for an 
ugly, dead racoon?’ But notwithstanding they are 
commonly negligent of any other tribe but their own, they 
regard their own particular lineal descent in as strict a 
manner as did the Hebrew nation.” 

Amongst the clans mentioned by Adair are those of the Bufato 
Buffalo and the Snake. These seem to have become extinct an¢ Snake 
since his time, for they are not noticed by Morgan or 
Gatschet, our principal modern authorities. However, the 
Buffalo clan is mentioned by Major Caleb Swan, who 
travelled among the Creeks in the winter of 1790-1791. 

He says: “On the post, or on a plank over each of the Totemic 
cabins, are painted the emblems of the family to whom it e™Plems. 
is allotted, to wit: the buffalo family have the buffalo painted 

on their cabin; the bear has the bear, and so on.” ? 

Marriage between persons of the same clan was for- Rules of 
bidden, and among the Creeks, as among the Seminoles and at ee 
all the. nations of the Muskhogean family, descent was in descent. 
the female line. Children took their clan from their mother, 
not from their father. Property and the office of head chief 
or king (w#co) were hereditary in the clan. The king, as 
we have seen,? could only be chosen from one particular 
clan, but the royal clan differed in different towns. In one 
town it was the Eagle clan, in another the Raccoon clan, in 
another the Bear clan, and in another probably the Wind 
clan. In cases of adultery and murder, only the relations 

1 J. Adair, Mestory of the American Indian Tribes of the United States, v. 
Indians, p. 18. 265. 
2 C. Swan, in H. R. Schoolcraft’s 3 Above, p. 159. 

1644 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

of the injured person who belonged to his clan had the 
right of judging and obtaining satisfaction: the king and 
the council were debarred from any interference.! 

Trace Amongst the Creeks and kindred nations it appears that 

He the law of the levirate was observed in a somewhat peculiar 
form ; for James Adair, sniffing about for traces of Judaism 
among the Indians, thought he detected a particularly strong 
scent in the relation of a widow to her deceased husband’s 
brother. After mentioning the Hebrew law which obliged 
a man to raise up seed to his deceased brother by marrying 
his childless widow, he goes on: “ The Indian custom looks 
the very same way; yet it is in this as in their law of 
blood—the eldest brother can redeem. Although a widow 
is bound, by a strict penal law, to mourn the death of her 
husband for the space of three or four years; yet, if she be 
known to lament her Idss with a sincere heart, for the space 
of a year, and her circumstances of living are so strait as 
to need a change of her station—and the elder brother of 
her deceased husband lies with her, she is thereby exempted 
from the law of mourning, has a' liberty to tie up her hair, 
anoint and paint herself in the same manner as the Hebrew 
widow, who was refused by the surviving brother of her 
deceased husband, became free to marry whom she pleased. 
The warm-constitutioned young widows keep their eye so 
intent on this mild beneficent law, that they frequently 
treat their elder brothers-in-law with spirituous liquors till 
they intoxicate them, and thereby decoy them to make 
free, and so put themselves out of the reach of that 
mortifying law.”? This account seems to shew that an 
old custom, which obliged an elder brother to marry the 
widow of his deceased younger brother, had dwindled away 
to a custom which allowed the widow to marry whom she 
pleased, if only the elder brother of the deceased had once 
exercised his marital right. 

The classi- The Creeks, like all the other Gulf nations, including 

oie the Cherokees, possessed the classificatory system of relation- 
relation- ship, though in a form which presents certain anomalies. 
ship among 
the Creeks. 

1A, S. Gatschet, A Afigration Society, p. 161. 
Legend of the Creek Indians, i. 153, 2 J. Adair, History of the American 
154. Compare L. H. Morgan, Anctent Indians, pp. 189 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 165 

Thus among the Creeks, in the generation above his own Classifica- 
a man called his father’s brother “my little father” (,‘ems 
(Chul-kit-che) and his mother’s sister “my little mother ” and mother. 
(Chuch-kii-ce); but his mother’s brother he called “my 

uncle” (Chu-pd-wé), and his father’s sister he called “ my 
grandmother ” (Chu-pil-se). 

In his own generation he called his cousins, the children Classifica- 
of his father’s brother, “my other brother” (Un-dt-te-cha- (Ory Sims 
ke-to) and “my sister” (Chu-wun-wd); and he called hib 
cousins, the children of his mother’s sister, “ my elder brother ” 
(Chu-hla-hd), “my younger brother” (Chu-chii-se), and “my 
sister” (Chu-wun-wé), according to their sex and age. But, 
as usually happens under the classificatory system,his relations 
to his other cousins, the children either of his father’s sister or 
of his mother’s brother, were different. He called his male 
cousin, the son of his father’s sister, “my little father” (Chuhl- 
kit-che), and he called his female cousin, the daughter of his 
father’s sister, “my grandmother ” (Chu-pi-se). Conversely, 
he called his male cousin, the son of his mother’s brother, 

“my son” (Chup-pii-che); and he called his female cousin, 

the daughter of his mother’s brother, “my daughter” 
(Chuch-hus-te). A woman likewise called her female cousin, 

the daughter of her father’s sister, “my grandmother” 
(Chu-pit-se) ; and, conversely, she called her female cousin, 

the daughter of her mother’s brother, “my grandchild” 
(Um-os-sits-wa). But her male cousin, the son of her 
father’s sister, she called “my little father” (Chuhl-kii-che) ; 

and her male cousin, the son of her mother’s brother, she 

called “my grandchild ” (Us-os-sus-wa). In this treatment Preference 
of cousins, the children of a brother and sister respectively, ee. 
the Creek form of the classificatory system agrees with the line. 
Minnetaree form in assigning to the cousin who is the 

child of the sister seniority of rank over the cousin who 

is the child of the brother. For the son of the sister is 

“little father” to his cousin, the son of the brother; and 

the daughter of the sister is “grandmother” to her cousin, 

the daughter of the brother. Thus, like the Minnetaree, 

and unlike the Omaha form of the classificatory system,' 

the Creek form shews a preference for the female line; 

1 See above, pp. 115-117, 149. 

Classi- 
ficatory 
terms for 
nephews 

and nieces, 

Peculiari- 
ties of the 
Creek 
form of 
the classi- 
ficatory 
system. 

166 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA CHAP. 

and this is natural enough, since the Creeks have retained 
maternal descent or mother-kin. 

In the generation below his own a Creek man calls his 
brother’s son and daughter “my son” (Chup-pil-che) and 
“my daughter” (Chu-chus-te); but his sister's son and 
daughter he calls “my nephew” (Ux-ho-piie-waé) and “my 
niece ” (Un-hdk-pu-te). In the generation below her own a 
woman calls her sisters son and daughter “my little 

(Cuch-ho-sit-che) and “my daughter” (Chu-chus-wéa). 
Thus far the relationships between a Creek man and 
woman and what we should call their nephews and nieces 
are normal according to the classificatory system, except 
that a woman calls her sister’s son “my little son” instead 
of “my son.” But when we come to the relationship 
between a woman and her brother's children, the Creek 
form of the classificatory system presents an anomaly ; ; 
for instead of calling them “my nephew” and “ my niece,” 
as she would do in the normal form of the system, she 
calls them both “my grandchild ” (Um-os-sus-wa) A 
similar anomaly occurs in the’ Choctaw form of the 
classificatory system.” 

The reader is perhaps now sufficiently familiar with 
the classificatory system of relationship to percejve for 
himself the other points in which the Creek form of it 
diverges from the normal pattern. But it may not be 
amiss to indicate some of them. In the-first place, then, 
a man distinguishes his father’s brother from his father by 
calling him “ my little father,” and similarly he distinguishes 
his mother’s sister from his mother by calling her “ my 
little mother.” This change marks an advance; the 
father’s brother is no longer confounded with the father 
nor the mother’s sister with the mother. Again, in his own 
generation, while he continues to call his male cousins, the 
sons of his mother’s sister, “my elder brother” and “my 
younger brother,” according to. their ages, he gives a quite 
different name (translated by Morgan “ my other brother ”) to 
his male cousins, the sons of his father’s brother. This also 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- sg. (where the system presented 7 is 
sanguinity and Afinity, Table II. the Choctaw, not the Creek). 
PP. 293 sgg.; compare zd. pp. 190 2 See below, pp. 176 sg. 

xVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 167 

marks an advance ; certain cousins are no longer confounded 
with brothers. Lastly, the treatment of cousins, who are the 
children not of two brothers or of two sisters, but of a brother 
and a sister, also differs from that accorded to them in the 
ordinary type of the classificatory system; for whereas 
under the ordinary form of the system these children 
would be cousins to each other, just as with us, under 
the Creek form of the system they are little father and ' 
son, little father and daughter, or grandmother and grand- 
child. Similar, but not identical, treatment of such cousins 
occurs in the Minnetaree and Choctaw forms of the 
classificatory system.) 

The Seminole Indians of Florida are a branch of the The 
Creeks, from whom they seceded and by whom they were Ree 
looked down upon as outcasts. Their language does not a branch of 
differ appreciably from the Creek. But they pe ee 

NEVET Indians, 
attained the same power and importance as the parent 
stock, though they offered a stubborn resistance both to 
the Spaniards and to the troops of the United States.” 
Indeed the Government of the United States, on the 
confession of one of its citizens, has never been able either 
to conciliate or to conquer these intractable Indians. The 
mass of the Seminoles has been deported from their native 
country to the Indian Territory west of the Mississippi, 
but in 1880 more than two hundred Seminoles still 
remained in Florida, spread in scattered settlements over 

1 See above, p. 149, and below, Creek and Seminole dialects differ so 

PP. 175 Sg. 

2 As to the history of the Seminoles, 
see A. S. Gatschet, A Afigration 
Legend of the Creek Indians, i. 66 sqq. 
The attempt of the United States 
Government in 1832 to banish the 
Seminoles from Florida to the west 
of the Mississippi resulted in a war 
which raged with unabated fury for 
five years, entailing an immense 
expenditure of blood and _ treasure. 
As to the identity of the Seminole 
and Creek language, see A. S. 
Gatschet, of. cit. i. 73. On the 
other hand it has been said that the 

‘of the United States, v. 260. 

widely as to be hardly intelligible ; 
but this statement is made on the 
authority of General M‘Gillivray, who, 
although he was called their great 
chief by the Seminoles, had seldom, 
if ever, visited their country, and few 
of them had ever seen him, See 
H. R. Schoolcraft, The Jndian Tribes 
The 
Creek chief, Alexander McGillivray, 
was the son of a Scotch trader by a 
half-breed mother. See J. Mooney, 
‘* Myths of the Cherokee,” Meveteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology, Part i. (Washington, 1900) 
Pp. 209 sg. 

The 
country 

of the 
Seminoles, 

Fertility 
of the 
country. 

168 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA chap. 

an otherwise almost uninhabited region and rarely seeing 
the face of a white man. Their country is a vast and 
nearly unbroken plain, which exhibits a remarkable alterna- 
tion of the most exuberant fertility and almost absolute 
sterility. For miles the traveller may pass over low ridges 
of dry dazzling white sand interspersed with a growth of 
dwarf palmetto and of sparse pinewoods, which afford little 
or no shade from the burning rays of the nearly tropical 
sun. Then for miles again he may splash through sedgy 
swamps or shallow lakes, for so level is the country that 
the sluggish streams have no proper banks and the water 
overflows on all sides in reedy grass-fringed meres and 
morasses. Where the ground rises a few inches above the 
dead flat it is commonly covered with dark pines or oaks, 
which rise like islets above the marsh. Where it sinks a 
few inches, the swamp i§ generally filled with cypress trees, 
forming sombre sharply-marked thickets. Again, it is a 
far-spreading .savannah of springy turf, a great expanse of 
green lawns and swelling knolls, over which the traveller 
passes with delight to rest from time to time in the shade 
of noble woods of intermingled pines and oaks, of beeches 
with massive trunks like the shafts of a cathedral aisle, of 
palms and magnolias, of luxuriant groves of oranges and 
lemons, spangled with their golden fruit, and mirrored in the 
still clear water of a glassy lake. Over all is spread the 
serenity of a sky of eternal summer ; for lying on the edge 
of the tropics the country, where it is not a sandy waste, 
jis green throughout the year with a profusion of foliage, 
fruit,.and flowers, It was well named by the Spaniards 
Florida, the Flowery Land." 

The country abounds with game, and the waters with 
fish, and the soil, where it exists, being a soft black loam, is 
of such fertility that it needs only to be cleared of trees, 
vines, and underwood and to be planted, in order to yield 
an abundant return of maize, sweet potatoes, melons, or 
anything else that thrives in a warm and equable climate. 

1W. Bartram, Travels through Indians of Florida,” Fifth Annual 
North and South Carolina, Georgia, Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
East and West Florida, the Cherokee (Washington, 1887), pp. 477 5g.» 

Country, etc. (Lomdon, 1792), pp. 168+ 504, 508, 512, §27-529. 
216; Clay MacCauley, ‘‘ The Seminole 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 169 

Indeed nature has here been so bounteous to man and 

made life so easy for him, that it might seem as if his 
energy, unbraced by any serious difficulties to contend with, 

must in time be sapped and he must sink into languor and 
indolence, content with the present and heedless of the 
morrow. At all events, from whatever cause, the Seminoles 

.never played the conspicuous part in history which was 
sustained by their kinsfolk the Creeks. Yet a modern Character 
American observer of the remnant of the tribe in its native iM 
haunts has drawn a very favourable picture of their physical 
appearance and character. The men are tall, strong, hand- 
some, and well-built, the women very comely. They are 
intelligent, affectionate, and industrious, the men working 
with the women in the fields, as well as hunting and fishing 
for the support of their families. The women are virtuous 
and modest ; there are no half-breed whites among them; 
death at the hand of her relations would be the penalty 
inflicted on the woman who gave birth to such a child. 
They dislike the Government of the United States and 
everything even remotely connected with it, and they have 
probably good reasons for doing so. Not less favourable w. 
is the portrait painted of the Seminoles and their country Barram's 
by a traveller towards the end of the eighteenth century, at of the 

a time when the tribe had not yet been conquered in war Peas 
and banished for the most part from its native land to a 
remote region of the West. He says: “The Siminoles are 

but a weak people with respect to numbers. . . . Yet this 
handful of people possesses a vast territory ; all East Florida 

and the greatest part of West Florida, which being naturally 

cut and divided into thousands of islets, knolls, and eminences 

by the innumerable rivers, lakes, swamps, vast savannas and 

ponds, form so many secure retreats and temporary dwelling 

places, that effectually guard them from any sudden invasions 

or attacks from their enemies ; and being such a swampy, 
hommocky country, furnishes such a plenty and variety of 
supplies for the nourishment of varieties of animals, that I 

can venture to assert, that no part of the globe so abounds 

1 Clay MacCauley, ‘‘The Seminole (Washington, 1887), pp. 479, 481, 
Indians of Florida,” Fifth Annual 482, 490 sgg., 504, 529-531. 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 

Exogamous 
clans of the 
Seminoles. 

Rules of 
marriage 
and 
descent. 

170 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA nap. 

with wild game or creatures fit for the food of man. Thus 
they enjoy a superabundance of the necessaries and con- 
veniences of life, with the security of person and property, 
the two great concerns of mankind. The hides of deer, 
bears, tigers and wolves, together with honey, wax and other 
productions of the country, purchase their clothing, equipage, 
and domestic utensils from the whites. They seem to be 
free from want or desires. No cruel enemy to dread; 
nothing to give them disquietude, but the gradual encroach- 
ments of the white people. Thus contented and undistyrbed, 
they appear as blithe and free as the birds of the air, and 
like them as volatile and active, tuneful and vociferous, 
The visage, action, and deportment of the Siminoles form 
the most striking picture of happiness in this life; joy, 
contentment, love, and friendship, without guile or affecta- 
tion, seem inherent in them, or predominant in their vital 
principle, for it leaves them but with the last breath of 
life. It even seems imposing a constraint upon their ancient 
chiefs and senators, to maintain a necessary decorum and 
solemnity, in their public councils ; not even the debility and 
decrepitude of extreme old age is sufficient to erase from 
their visages this youthful, joyous simplicity ; but like the 
gray eve of a serene and calm day a gladdening, cheering 
blush remains on the western horizon after the sun is set.”? 
Since Bartram thus wrote, the birds to which he compared 
the Seminoles are mostly flown and their nests are empty. 
The small remnant of the tribe still living in Florida in 
1880-1881 was found to be divided into at least nine 
exogamous clans, of which the names were as follows :—’ 

1. Wind. 2. Tiger (Panther). 3. Otter. 
4. Bird. 5. Deer. 6, Snake. 
7. Bear. 8. Wolf. g. Alligator. 

Thus the clans, so far as they go, agree with those of the 
Creeks.2 No man is allowed to marry a woman of his own 
clan; the children belong exclusively to the mother and 

1 W. Bartram, Travels through North Indians of Florida,” Fifth Annual 
and South Carolina, Georgia, Eastand Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
West Florida, the Cherokee Country, (Washington, 1887), p. 507. 
etc. (London, 1792), pp. 209 sg. 

2 Clay MacCauley, ‘‘The Seminole 3 See above, p. 161. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 171 

take their clan from her, not from their father. The two 
hundred and eight persons who made up this fragment of 
the tribe consisted of thirty-seven families, and these were 
distributed into twenty-two camps, in each of which, with 
one apparent exception, all the persons but the husbands 
belonged to a single clan.’ Nothing is known as to any 
religious or magical rites practised by the totemic clans. If 
we may judge by the analogy of their kinsmen the Creeks, 
who are said to have no respect for their totemic animals,’ 
it seems probable that among the Seminoles also the 
superstitious side of totemism has long fallen into decay. 
The principal ceremony in which the native religious beliefs The Green 
of the Seminoles find expression is the Green Corn Dance, £2", 
held at the time when the maize is ripe in May and June. 
It resembles the Creek Feast of First Fruits, being an annual 
purification and rejoicing to celebrate the eating of the new 
corn. But the details of the festival are unknown. Maize 
is the principal product of Seminole agriculture, but the 
people also highly value an edible root called oonti, which 
yields an excellent flour, They say that when Jesus Christ 
was incarnated on earth He came down first at Cape Florida 
and there bestowed this valuable root on the Red Man.* 

A more important tribe than the Seminoles were the The 
Choctaws, who in the eighteenth century were perhaps the Choctaw®. | 
most numerous branch of the Muskhogean stock. They branch of 
held the middle and southern parts of what is now the ie 
State of Mississippi, where they had, according to early stock. 
authors, from fifty to seventy villages. Their territory began 
some two hundred miles north of New Orleans and extended 
from the Mississippi on the west to the Tombigbee River 
and east of it. It is, or was in those days, a pleasant land 
of rich pastures, watered by numerous springs and _ brooks, 
broken here and there by hills, and shaded by fine timber, 
such as oak, hickory, walnut, and poplar. The climate is 

1 Clay MacCauley, ‘*The Seminole Indians of Florida,” /i/th Annual 
Indians of Florida,” 7k Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 1887), pp. 499, 510, 
(Washington, 1887), pp. 507, 508. 522 sg. ; 

2 Above, p. 162. 4 Clay MacCauley, of. c7t. pp. 4995 

3 Clay MacCauley, ‘*The Seminole 504, 513 599-, 519. 

Their 
devotion to 
the French. 

Their 
character, 
a 

Totemic 
and 
exogamous 
clans of the 
Choctaws, 

172 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

happy and healthy. The towns of the Choctaws, who were 
a settled and agricultural people, stood on the banks of the 
small streams which ‘flow into the Mobile River. The tribe 
waged constant war with their kinsmen the Creeks and 
Chickasaws. In the long struggle between France and 
England for the possession of America, the Choctaws sided 
with the French ; they received an annual subsidy from the 
French court. The Englishman Adair paints their character 
in the datkest colours, the only virtues he allows them 
being their intense love of their native Jand and their ytter 
contempt of danger in the defence of it. Even the French 
traveller Bossu, while he speaks of their devotion to France 
and their warlike character, has little good to say of their 
intelligence and their morals. In the early part of the 
nineteenth century, about 1832, the Choctaws migrated or 
were transferred to a rich; and beautiful country on the Red 
River, to the west of the Mississippi.’ 

The Choctaws were divided into totemic and exogamous 
clans. The first, apparently, to observe and record their 
totemic system was an Englishman, Adam Hodgson, who 
travelled among them in 1820. He says: “ My half-breed 
Choctaw also informed me, that there were tribes or families 
among the Indians, somewhat sirhilar to the Scottish clans ; 
such as, the Panther Family, the Bird Family, the Racoon 
Family, the Wolf Family. He belonged to the Racoon 
Family, but his children to the family of his wife ; families 
being perpetuated in the female line—an institution originat- 
ing, perhaps, in polygamy. By marriage, the husband is 
considered as, in some degree, adopted into the family of 
his wife; and the mother’s brothers are regarded as, in 
some respects, entitled to more influence over the children 
than their own father. The suitor always consults them 
(sending them the usual propitiatory offering of a blanket) 
when he wishes to marry their niece; and, if they approve, 

1 J. Adair, History of the American can Indians, Fourth Edition (London, 

A. S. 

Indians (London, 1775), pp. 282-285 ; 
Bossu, Nouveaux Voyages aux Indes 
Occidentales, Seconde Edition (Paris, 
1768), ii. 87 sgg., 100; G. Catlin, 
Litters and Notes on the Manners, 
Customs, and Condition of the Ameri- 

1844), ii, 45 sg., 122 59.3 
Gatschet, 4 Aligration Legend of the 
Creek Indians, i. 100 sgqg.; Handbook 
of American Indians north of Mexico, 
j. 288 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 173 

the father consents as a matter of course. I have since had 
this confirmed by information from many different sources. 
Those of the same family or clan are not allowed to inter- 
marry; although no relationship, however remote, can be 
traced between them ; and although the ancestors of the two 
parties may have been living, for centuries, in different and 
distant nations. A marriage between a brother and a sister 
would not excite a stronger sensation, or be more loudly con- 
demned. Indeed, wherever any of the family or clan meet, 
they recognise one another as brothers and sisters ; and use 
one another’s houses, though personally strangers, withcut 
reserve.”' The same traveller also tells us that “the 
Choctaws formerly placed their dead on a scaffold, in a large 
chamber, called the House of Bones, a particular portion of 
which was reserved for each particular family, as the Racoon 
Family, or the Panther Family.” ? 

According to L. H. Morgan, the Choctaws were divided Morgan's 
into-eight exogamous clans, which were equally distributed ae 
between two phratries as follows :—? clans. 

TOTEMIC SYSTEM OF THE CHOCTAWS 

Phratries. Clans. 

Reed. 

Law Okla. 
Lulak. 
Linoklusha. 

I. Divided People . . ‘ | 

Ne 

Beloved People. 
Small People. 
Large People. 

. Cray Fish. 

II. Beloved People . 

Pyyr 

It will be observed that none of the totemic clans 
mentioned by Hodgson (namely, the Panther, Bird, Raccoon, 

1 Adam Hodgson, Letters from North 2 Adam Hodgson, of. cit. pp. 258 sg- 
America written during a Tour in the 
United States and Canada (London, 3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, 
1824), i. 244-246. p- 162. 

174 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

and Wolf clans) are noticed by Morgan; but on the other 
hand all of them are included in his list of the Chickasaw 
clans.’ It is possible, therefore, that Hodgson’s informant, a 
half-blood Choctaw, whose wife was a Chickasaw and whose 
hut stood on the frontier between the two tribes,” referred to 
the Chickasaw, and not to the Choctaw clans. But it is also 
possible that the Panther, Bird, Raccoon, and Wolf clans 
among the Choctaws were overlooked by Morgan, or that 
they had become extinct before his time. 
Rules of No man might marry a woman of any clan in his own 
ia phratry, but he might marry a woman of any clan in the 
descent. other phratry. Descent was in the female line. Both 
property and the office of sachem were hereditary in the 
Though clan. A Choctaw once expressed to Dr. Cyrus Byington, 
Paced ti who laboured devotedly in the tribe as a missionary for 
the female forty-five years, a wish that !he might be made a citizen of 
cage tag the United States in order that his children might inherit 
saat his property instead of his clan kindred, who would take it 
children, under the old clan law. For Choctaw custom distributed a 
eee man’s property after his death among his brothers and sisters 
might help and the children of his sisters, all of whom were members of 
ial his own clan, whereas his children belonged not to his clan 
from the but to their mother’s. However, a man was allowed to give 
pt aaapetied his property in his lifetime to his own children, and if he 
line. did so, they could hold it against the members of their 
father’s clan. Many Indian tribes now have considerable 
property in domestic animals, houses, and lands owned by 
individuals, and in these tribes it has become a common 
practice for a father to bestow his property during his life upon 
his children in order that it may not pass from them to his 
clan kindred after his death. As property increases, the 
disinheritance of a man’s children under a rule of maternal 
descent arouses more and more opposition ; hence in some 
Indian tribes, including the Choctaw, the law of inheritance 
has been changed and the right of succession invested ex- 
clusively in the children of the deceased owner.2 Thus the 

growth of private property has been a powerful agent 

1 See below, p. 179. 3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
2 Adam Hodgson, Letters from North pis. 162 5g. 
America, i. 240. 

* XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 175 

in shifting descent from the female to the male line, and 
thereby substituting father-kin for mother-kin. 

The Choctaws tell a story to account for the origin of their Legend of 
Cray-fish clan. They say that the ancestors of the clan were ieee 
a species of cray-fish who lived long ago under ground, going fish clan 
on their hands and feet in a great cave where there was no phe Sie 
light for miles. They neither spoke nor understood any 
language, but they used to come up through the mud into 
the sunshine. The Choctaws watched for them and tried 
to talk to them and to strike up an acquaintance, but the 
cray-fish escaped back into their cave. However, one day 
the Choctaws contrived to smoke a parcel of them out of 
their den, and treated them kindly, taught them the Choctaw 
language, taught them to walk on two legs, made them cut ‘ 
off their toe nails, and pluck the hair from their bodies, and 
after that they adopted them into the Choctaw nation, 

But the rest of the cray-fish are still cray-fish under 
ground." 

The Choctaws possess the classificatory system of The classi- 
relationship in a form closely similar to that of their kinsmen italy 
the Creeks. Thus, in the generation above his own a man of rela- 
calls his father’s brother “ my father” (4-47) and his mother’s Sayer ene 
sister “my mother” (Ush-£2) ; but his mother’s brother he Choctaws. 
calls “my uncle” (Uim-ush-t) and his father’s sister he 
calls “my aunt” (A-huk-ne). 

In his own generation a Choctaw man calls his cousins, Classifica- 
the children either of his father’s brother or of his (ov Werhs 
mother’s sister, “my elder brother” (Um-un-nz), “my 
younger brother” (Suh-nék-fish), and “ my sister” (An-take), 
according to their age and sex; whereby it is to be 
observed that, as in some other forms of the classificatory 
system, while there are two quite distinct words for “elder 
brother” and “younger brother,” there is only one word for 
“sister,” whether elder or younger. But as usual the 
relationship between cousins, who are the children of a 
brother and sister respectively, differs from that between 
cousins, who are the children of two brothers or of two sisters. 

Thus, a Choctaw man calls his male cousin, the son of his 

} Geo. Catlin, Letters and Notes on of the North American Indians, Fourth 
the Manners, Customs, and Condition Edition (London, 1844), ii. 128, 

Preference 
shewn for 
the female 
line. 

Classifi- 
catory 
terms for 
nephews 
and nieces. 

176 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA chav. 

father’s sister, not “my brother” nor yet “my cousin,” but 
“my father” (4-472); and, similarly, a woman calls her male 
cousin, the son of her father’s sister, “my father” (4-20). 
A man calls his female cousin, the daughter of his father’s 
sister, not “my sister” nor yet “my cousin,” but “my aunt” 
(A-huc-ne) or “my mother” (Ush-k7); but a woman 
calls her female cousin, the daughter of her father’s sister, 
“my grandmother” (Uf-puk-ne) or “my mother” (Ush-22). 
Conversely, a man calls his cousins, the children of his 
mother’s brother, “my son” (Sz-sih) and “my daughter” 
(Suh-suh-take), according to their sex; and, similarly, a woman 
calls her cousins, the children of her mother’s brother, “my 
son” (Suh-sith) and “my daughter” (Suh-suh-take). Thus 
in the Choctaw as in the Creek form of the classificatory 
system a preference is shewn for the female line by making 
the cousin who is the son jor daughter of the sister senior 
in rank to the cousin who is the son or daughter of the 
brother. For the son of the sister ranks as “father” to 
his cousins, the son and daughter of the brother; and 
the daughter of the sister ranks as “aunt” or “ mother” to 
her male cousin, the son of the brother, and she ranks as 
“grandmother” or “mother” to her female cousin, the daughter | 
of the brother. And on the other hand, the son and daughter 
of the brother rank as “son” and “daughter” to their male 
and female cousins, the son and daughter of the sister.’ 

In the generation below his own a Choctaw man calls 
his brother’s son and daughter “my son” (Sw#h-sih) and 
“my daughter” (Suh-stih-take); but his sister’s son and 
daughter he calls “my nephew” (Sudb-az-yih) and “my 
niece” (Suh-bih-take). A woman calls her sister’s son and 
daughter “my son” (Swh-s7ih) and “my daughter” (Swh-szh- 
take). So far the relationships of a Choctaw man and 
woman to what we should call their nephews and nieces are 
entirely normai according to the classificatory system ; but 

1 The following tree will make the relationships of these cousins clear :— 

BroTHER SISTER 
| | I a | 
a & ¢ d 
son daughter son 5 daughter 
(sontocandd) (daughtertocandd) (father to a and 4) (aunt or mother to a 

grandmother or 
mother to 4) 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 

177 

the relationship between a woman and the children of her 
brother, is anomalous, for whereas according to the normal 
type of tle classificatory system she should call them “my 
nephew” and “my niece,” she actually calls them “my 
grandson” (Sup-uk-ndk-ne) and “my _ granddaughter” 
(Sup-uk).' We have seen that a similar anomaly occurs in 
the Creek form of the classificatory system.” 

To the north of the Choctaws lay the territory of their 
kinsmen but enemies the Chickasaws, a still more warlike 
tribe, who were as steady in their loyalty to England as the 
Choctaws in their devotion to France. The dialects of the 
two tribes were closely allied and they differed little in their 
manners and customs, except that the Choctaws were more 
sedentary and devoted to agriculture, the Chickasaws more 
restless and turbulent.? But if the Chickasaws paid less 
attention to their fields, they seem to have paid more to 
their persons. A traveller passing from the Choctaws to 
the Chickasaws noticed the greater magnificence of dress 
among the latter tribe and the far greater profusion of silver 
ornaments which they wore. Thus adorned, he says, they 
cut a splendid figure as they galloped through the woods.‘ 
Their country was situated in the north of what is now the 
State of Mississippi. “The Chikkasah,” says Adair, “ live 
in as happy a region as any under the sun. It is temperate ; 
as cool in summer as can be wished, and but” moderately 
cold in winter. There is frost enough to purify the-air, but 
not to chill the blood ; and the snow does not lie four-and- 
twenty hours together. This extraordinary benefit is not 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 190 sg., 
and Table II. pp. 293.5¢g. Morgan 
here gives two forms of the Choctaw 
system, which differ somewhat from 
each other. Thus in one form a 
father’s sister’s daughter ranks as 
‘‘ mother ” to her cousins, the son and 
daughter of her mother’s brother ; in 
the other form she ranks as ‘‘ aunt” to 
her male cousin, the son of her mother’s 
brother and as ‘‘ grandmother” to her 
female cousin, the daughter of her 
mother’s brother. In the text I have 
not noted all the variations of the two 

VOL. WI 

forms. 

2 Above, p. 176. 

3 J. Adair, History of the American 
Indians (London, 1775), pp- 352 599-5 

358; Le Page du Pratz, History of 

Louisiana (London, 1774), p. 310; 
L. H. Morgan, Systems of Consan- 
guinity and Affinity, p. 189; A. S. 
Gatschet, 4 Afigration Legend of the 
Creek Indians, i. 90 sqq.; Handbook 
of American Indians north of Mexico, 
i. 260 599. 

* Adam Hodgson, Letters from 
North America (London, 1824), i. 
255 sg. 

“ N 

The 
Chicka- 
saws, 

The 
country of 
the Chicka- 
saws. 

Totemic 
and 
exogamous 
clans of the 
Chicka- 
saws. 

178 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuavp. 

from its situation to the equator, for the Cheerake country, 
among the Apalahche mountains is colder in a surprising 
degree, but from the nature and levelness of the extensive 
circumjacent lands, which in general are very fertile.”* A 
traveller passing through the Chickasaw country on the borders 
of Mississippi and Alabama describes with delight the prospect 
which suddenly opened out when, after journeying for days 
through dense forests, he at last emerged on the brow of a 
hill and saw spread out below and beyond him a wide 
expanse of wooded and broken country with a romantic 
river winding through it. All was solitude and _ silence 
except for the warbling of birds in the branches; the only 
signs of human habitation were a solitary hut and a patch 
of Indian corn. Yet the fragrance of the woods, the mag- 
nificence of the forest-trees, the cooing of doves, and the 
ethereal charm of the delicious climate of Mississippi softened 
or dissipated the impression of melancholy which the sight 
of this savage wilderness, stretching away to the horizon, 
naturally made upon the mind; and it was with regret that 
towards evening the traveller passed from the land of the 
Chickasaws into the settlements of the whites.’ 

Like their kinsmen but hereditary foes, the Creeks and 
Choctaws, the Chickasaws were divided into totemjc and 
exogamous clans, and these clans were distributed into two 
phratries. The social organisation of the tribe, according 
to L. H. Morgan, was as follows :—* 

1 J. Adair, History of the American watered district in the Indian Territory 
Indians (London, 1775), p. 357+ west of the Mississippi. See H. R. 
2 Adam Hodgson, Letters from Schoolcraft, Judian Tribes of the 
North America (London, 1824), i. Untted States, i. 312. 
262-266. Afterwards the Chickasaws 3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, 
were removed to a fertile and well- p. 163. 

[Tarte 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 179 

TOTEMIC ORGANISATION OF THE CHICKASAWS 

Phratries. Clans, 

Wild Cat. 
Bird. 
Fish, 
Deer. 

I. Panther . 

ee 

Raccoon. 
Spanish. 
Royal. 
Hush-ko-ni. 
Squirrel. 
Alligator, 
Wolf. 
Blackbird. 

II. Spanish . 

Sy ome yp om 

. . 
—_—_—_—_'|_§-—_———__ ——— 

This list of the Chickasaw clans was obtained by Morgan 
from the Rev. Chas. C. Copeland, an American missionary 
residing with the tribe. Another list, which omits some of 
the foregoing clans, mentions in addition a Tiger clan, a 
Catamount clan, and a Skunk clan, the last being the least 
respected of all.) No man was allowed to marry a woman Rules of 
of his own clan;- descent was in the female line, children panes 
belonging to the clan of their mother, not of their father ; descent. 
and both property and the office of sachem were hereditary 
in the clan? The head chief, or king (zuko), as he has 
been called, was always chosen from the Royal clan; the 
office was hereditary in the female line.® 

The Chickasaws possess the classificatory system Of The 
relationship in a form like that of their near kinsmen the pean 
Choctaws ; many of the terms of relationship are verbally system of 
the same.* It would be needless, therefore, to repeat the ne 
account of the system which has been given above.’ 

1 A. S. Gatschet, 4 JAfigration applied to the chief or king of the 

Legend of the Creek Indians, i. 96 sq., 
on the authority of Gibbs. 

2L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, 
p. 163. 

3 H.R. Schoolcraft, Zndian Tribes 
of the United States, i. 3113 A. S. 
Gatschet, 4 Migration Legend of the 
Creek Indians, i. 97. The title wzz#zko 

Chickasaws is clearly idemival with 
mico, the title which the Creeks 
bestowed on their head chiefs or kings. 

4L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, Table IT. pp. 
293 599- 

5 See above, pp. 175-177- 

The 
Caddos. 

The old 
country 
of the 

Caddos. 

The 
Caddos 

a settled 
agricul- 
tural tribe. 

180 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuapr. 

The Caddos, a name contracted from Kadohadacho, that 
is, “the real Caddo,” formed one of the chief tribes of a 
confederacy, which embraced about a dozen tribes and- 
claimed as their original territory the whole of the lower 
Red River and adjacent country in Louisiana, Easterrr Texas, 
and Soythern Arkansas. They formed the southern group — 
of a linguistic family, of which the northern group included 
the Arickarees of North Dakota, and the middle group the 
Pawnees.| The charm and beauty of the old homes of the 
Caddos on the Red River in Texas are described in en- 
thusiastic terms by the painter Catlin. He says that as he 
and his companions sat their horses on a bluff in the prairie 
and drank in with their eyes the landscape, as it rolled away 
before them till its swelling waves of deepest green melted 
into the blue of the mountains which rimmed the horizon, 
far- far away, the very horses on which they rode seemed 
sensible of the beauty of the scene and forgot to graze, as 
with deep-drawn sighs, high-arched necks, and starting eye- 
balls they gazed into the distance. For days they had been 
travelling, now over ridges sprinkled with oak-woods, where 
the ground was mantled with vines laden with clusters of 
delicious grapes ; now they would be trailing through verdant 
valleys where the way was often blocked by tangled thickets 
of plum-trees bent to the earth with the weight of their 
purple fruit, while the intervening ground was variegated by 
beds of wild roses, wild currants, and gooseberries, interlaced 
here and there with huge masses of prickly pears.” 

The Caddos early came into contact with the Spaniards 
and the French, and from the oldest records and traditions 
it would seem that so far as memory goes back they and 
the kindred tribes of the confederacy have always been 
tillers of the soil. Their fields extended round their villages 
and yielded them large crops of maize, pumpkins, and 

4 

1 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 179, 182, 638; 
J. Mooney, ‘‘The Ghost-Dance Re- 
ligion,” Fourteenth Annual. Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology, Part ii. 
(Washington, 1896) p. 1092. As 
to the Arickaree language, see above, 
p- 146. 

2 Geo. Catlin, Letters and Notes on 

the Manners, Customs, and Condition 
of the North American Indians, Fourth 
Edition (London, 1844), ii. 45 sg. 
The point where Catlin was especially 
struck by the beauty of the landscape 
was at the meeting of the waters of 
the Red and False Washita rivers, with 
Texas on the opposite bank. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 181 

melons, their staple foods. They lived in conical huts 
thatched with grass and grouped round an open space 
which served for social and ceremonial gatherings. Couches 
covered with mats ran round the interior of the house, 
serving as seats by day and as beds by night. The fire 
was in the centre. They cooked their food in earthenware 
vessels, made baskets, and wove cloth of vegetable fibres. 
Their mantles adorned with feathers were much admired by 
the French. Besides bracelets, necklaces, and ear-rings, 
they wore rings in their noses, which earned for them thé 
epithet of “Pierced Noses.” They did not hunt the buffalo 
until they came out into the plains. Though they were a 
brave people, they boasted that they had never shed a white 
man’s blood. 

The Caddo or, to give them their full name, the Kado- The — 
hadacho, are divided into ten totemic clans, which are ‘*™'< 

clans of the 
named as follows :— Caddos. 
1. Bear (Mawots?). 2. Wolf (Tasha). 3. Buffalo (Zahndhd). 
4. Beaver (Zao). 5. Eagle (/w2). 6. Raccoon (Od). 
7. Crow (Kagiath). 8. Thunder (Aagé- 9. Panther (A7%sA2). 
10, Sun (S7ko). hinin). 

Of these the Bear clan is the most numerous. The 
Buffalo clan is sometimes called the Alligator (Koko), 
because both animals bellow in the same way. Members of Respect of 
a clan will not kill the animal from which their clan takes paca 
its name.” The writer to whom we are indebted for these their 
particulars says nothing as to the rules of marriage and ‘°"* 
descent in the clans. But we may perhaps assume that the 
clans are, or were, exogamous, and that descent is in the 
female line; in other words, that no man may marry a woman 
of his own clan, and that children take their clan from their 
mother, not from their father. That amongst the Caddos 
descent was traced through the mother is expressly 
mentioned by another writer? 

While no Caddo would kill an animal of his own 
particular totemic species, all Caddos without distinction of 

1 Handbook of American Indians (Washington, 1896) pp. 1094 sq. 
north of Mexico, i. 179 sqg., 1823 J. 3 : 
Mooney, “The Ghost-Dance Re- J+ Mooney; :op.-@t Ps 1093. 
ligion,” Fourteenth Annual Report 3 Handbook of American Indians 
of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part ii. north of Mexico, i. 181. 

Respect of 
the Caddos 
for the 
eagle: 
ceremonies 
observed 
at killing 
the bird for 
the sake of 
its feathers. 

182 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cCuap. 

totemic clan abstained from killing eagles and panthers. 
With them, as with other Indian tribes, the eagle was a 
sacred bird, and in the old times only a few medicine-men, 
who knew the sacred formula, would dare to kill an eagle 
for the sake of its feathers. Were any one else to slay an 
eagle, it'was believed that his family would die or some 
other great misfortune would befall him. The formula con- 
sisted of certain secret prayers and rites. The eagle-killer 
always took a robe or some other valuable offering with 
him, and after he had shot the eagle, he recited the prayer, 
pulled out the tail and wing feathers, and covered the body 
of the dead bird with the robe, which he left there as a peace 
offering to the spirit of the eagle.’ This general respect for 
the eagle is not totemic, because it is shared by the whole 
tribe instead of being qonfined to the members of a particular 
clan. Totemism implies that within the tribe there are 
groups of kinsfolk, each group respecting its own species of 
natural or occasionally artificial objects, that is, its totem, 
but not respecting the totems of ;the other groups. Hence 
an animal which is revered by all the members of a tribe 
without distinction is not strictly speaking a totem at all, 
and ought not to be so designated. It may indeed have 

“ been originally a totem, that is, the sacred animal of a 

The 
Cherokee 
and their 
mountain 
country. 

particular clan within the tribe. But there is no necessity 
that it should ever have been so; the respect for the animal 
may have sprung from causes quite independent of totemism. 

The Cherokee were the mountaineers, the Indian Swiss, 
of the South. They held the whole region of the Alleghany 
Mountains, from the head-streams of the Kanawha and the 
Tennessee southward almost to the site of Atlanta, and from 
the Blue Ridge on the east to the Cumberland Range on 
the west. The country, comprising an area of 40,000 
square miles, is now included in the States of Virginia, 
Tennessee, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and 
Alabama.* The Cherokee divided their territory into two, 

1 J. Mooney, ‘* The Ghost-Dance to eagles, see below, pp. 187 sg. 
Religion,” Fourteenth Annual Report 2 J. Mooney, ‘* Myths of the 
of the “Bureau of Ethnology, Part li. Cherokee,” Nineteenth Annual Report 

(Washington, 1896) pp. 1093, 1100. of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
As to the Cherokee practice in regard Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 14. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 183 

the lowlands and the highlands, the former intersected by the 
head-waters of the beautiful meandering Savannah River, the 
latter by the streams that flow westward to join the Mississippi. 
The climate even of the lowlands strikes a native of Carolina 
as sharp and cold in winter, but that of the highlands is much 
more severe. For there the mountains are high, and on 
their northern slopes the ice and snow last till late in. the 
spring. In this lofty rugged chilly country the towns of 
the Cherokee were widely scattered, being built for thé 
most part on stretches of level and fertile land beside some 
river or creek shut in by frowning mountains, whose tops 
were veiled in black and blue clouds or lit up fitfully by 
scattered rays of sunshine. The Indian paths wound along 
the foot of the mountains, following the beds of the streams, 
and were so steep in places that horses often pitched and 
reared in the attempt to scramble up them. Yet there is 
not, says an old writer, a more healthful region under the 
sun than this country ; for the air is commonly open and 
clear, and abundance of wholesome water gushes from every 
hillside to join the cold crystalline rivers. For the most 
part the rivers are very shallow and pleasant to the eye, 
their limpid streams flowing swiftly along without over- 
flowing their banks. But when heavy rain has fallen on the 
snow of the high mountains, the swollen torrents, whirling 
blocks of ice in their current, come rushing down the crags 
with tremendous violence, and sweep away rocks, pinewoods, 
and oakwoods in their impetuous career.’ 

The Cherokee belong to the stock of the Iroquois, as 
is proved by their language, which is spoken in several 

dialects.” They are amongst the most civilised of American The 
Indians. Like the Creeks, Choctaws, and Chickasaws, they le 

lived in settled villages or towns and practised agriculture, she moet : 
eo * & elvilised 0 
raising crops of maize and_ beans. 

Their houses were american 
oblong in shape, built of logs and plastered with clay both Indians. 
1 J. Adair, History of the American 

pp. 306 sgg., especially pp. 328 sg., 
Indians (London, 1775), pp. 226-230, 350 5gg., 360 sgg. 
233, 236. For detailed descriptions of 

2 J. Mooney, ‘* Myths of the Chero- 
the beautiful scenery in the Cherokee kee,” Wixeteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part i. 
(Washington, 1900) p. 16; Handbook 
of American Indians north of Mexico, 

i. 245 sg. 

country, see W. Bartram, TZvravels 
through North and South Carolina, 
Georgia, East and West Florida, the 
Cherokee Country, etc. (London, 1792), 

Their 
houses. 

‘The 
perpetual 
fire. 

The 
Cherokee 
alphabet, 
national 
press, and 
national 
constitu- 
tion. 

184 ZJOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuapr. 

outside and inside, the whole being roofed with bark or 
shingles. Each house was partitioned transversely into 
three apartments, and had besides a small conical hut, 
called the winter or hot house, distant a few yards from the 
front door. The town-house or council-house was a rotunda 
built of wopd and sometimes raised on an artificial mound. 
In the middle of the town-house was a fire-pit in which 
burned or smouldered a perpetual fire in charge of a fire- 
maker. All the fires in the town were obtained from the 
one in the town-house. The council of the village or town 
held its meetings in this circular building, and here too the 
annual Green-Corn Dance and other national ceremonials 
were celebrated. Couches or seats ran round the inside of the 
building for the accommodation of spectators. The only 
entrance to the edifice was a narrow door; window or 
chimney there was none.! The smoke escaped by the door.) 

In the early part of the nineteenth century a Cherokee 
of mixed blood named Sequoya, or, as the whites called 
him, George Gist, after years of patient study invented a 
syllabary or alphabet to represdnt the sounds of the 
Cherokee language. It was adopted by his nation, whom 
it at once raised to the rank of ‘a literary people. In the 
course of a few months the Cherokee were able to read ‘and 
write in their own language. Types were cast and books 
and newspapers printed in the native tongue. One of the 
newspapers was published in English and Cherokee and dis- 
tributed free at the expense of the nation. Simultaneously 
with the institution of a national press the Cherokee, in 
a general convention of delegates held for that purpose 
in 1827, adopted a national constitution based on the 
assumption of a distinct and independent Cherokee 
nationality. Thus with a political constitution, a national 
press, a well-developed system of industries and home 
education, and a government administered by educated 
Christian men, the Cherokee were now justly entitled to 

1 W. Bartram, 7razels through North Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 
and South Carolina, Georgia, East and i. (Washington, 1900) pp. 395 sg., 502 
Hest Florida, the Cherokee Country, sg.3 id. ‘‘ Cherokee Mound-building,” 
etc. (London, 1792), pp. 365-367; American Anthropologist, ii. (1889) 
J. Mooney, ‘* Myths of the Cherokee,” pp. 167-171. 

Wineteenth Annual Report of the 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 185 

be considered a civilised people." The prospect was fair, 
but it was soon clouded. 

The! neighbouring States, and Georgia in particular, Expulsion 
coveted the territory of the Cherokee, and when violence Beet, 
and chicanery alike failed to shake the attachment of the from their 

patriots to their native land, the United States Government rae se 
in 1838 sent troops, drove the Indians from their homes States 
at the point of the bayonet, and forced them to emigrate errs 
on foot and in waggons, in the dead of the winter, to the 

lands which had been assigned to them in the Indian 
Territory beyond the Mississippi. On that march of death, 

as it has been called by an American writer, the exiles 
perished by the hundred and the thousand. In their new 

home they set themselves bravely to retrieve their shattered 
fortunes. The national government was reorganised, the 
national press restored, the missions revived, and the work 

of civilisation again taken up. At the close of the Civil Broken 
War, in which the Cherokee suffered severely for their (th of 
adhesion to the South, the Government of the United States States 
pledged its faith to leave them in undisturbed possession Cove"™ 
of their lands and to guard them against intrusion. The 
pledge was not kept. The whites again encroached, and 

again, after long but vain resistance the Indians yielded 

to the inevitable. Only a few years ago—in 1906—the Abolition 
national government of the Cherokee was abolished and eae 
their lands divided. The Cherokee nation as such ceased constitu- 
to exist. The despoiled Indians dream of quitting the joran4 
country of their fathers and seeking in some foreign land, their lands. 
in Mexico or South America, a haven of rest, where the oe 
long arm of the United States can reach and harass them 
no more. A remnant of the tribe, who fled to the 
mountains in 1838, contrived to elude the man-hunt of the 
soldiers, and their descendants still cling to the old ancestral 

home among the mountains, the woods, and waters of the 
Alleghanies. They are a peaceable, law-abiding folk, kindly 

and hospitable, providing for their simple wants by their 
industry and neither asking nor receiving help from Govern- 

1 J. Mooney, ‘* Myths of the Chero- Part i. (Washington, 1900) pp. 108- 
kee,” Nineteenth Annual Report of 113. 
the Bureau of American Ethnology, 

Exogamous 
clans of the 
Cherokee. 

The classi- 
eficatory 
system of 
relation- 
ship. 

The 
Cherokee 
have many 
super- 
stitious 
beliefs and 
customs in 
regard to 
animals 
and plants, 
which are 
independ- 
ent of 
totemism, 

186 TOTEMISM 1N UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

ment. Their fields, orchards, and fish-traps, with .a few 
domestic animals and a little hunting, supply them with 
food, while, by the sale of ginseng and other simples 
gathered in the mountains, as well as by fruit and honey 
of their own raising, they procure what additional comforts 
they need from the traders. The old folk still cleave to 
their ancient rites and sacred traditions, but the dance and 
the once favourite ball-play are neglected, and the long 
Indian day draws fast to evening.’ 

According to L. H. Morgan, the Cherokee were 
anciently divided into ten exogamous clans, which were 
named as follows :— 

1. Wolf. 2. Red Paint. 3. Long Prairie. 4. Deaf (a bird). 
5. Holly. 6. Deer. 7. Blue. 8. Long Hair, 
g. Acorn. 1o. Bird. 

Of these ten clans the two last were extinct when 
Morgan wrote. Marriage within the clan was forbidden. 
Descent was in the female line? The Cherokee possess 
the classificatory system of relationship in a form agreeing 
so closely with that of the Choctaws that it need not be 
considered separately.’ 

While the clans of the Cherokee had animals and plants 
for their totems, it should be: observed that these Indians 
entertained many superstitious beliefs and observed many 
superstitious practices in reference to animals and plants 
which had no connection whatever with totemism. This 
observation is the more necessary because with some writers 
there appears to be a tendency, whenever they find super- 
stitious beliefs and practices concerned with animals and 
plants, to derive them all from totemism, actual or hypo- 

1 Charles C. Royce, ‘* The Cherokee 
Nation of Indians,” Fifth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1887), pp. 129 sgg.3 J. 
Mooney, ‘* Myths of the Cherokee,” 
Nineteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part i. 
(Washington, 1900) pp. 114-181: 
Handbook of American Indians north 
of Mexico, i. 246 sg. 

2L. H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, 
p- 164. A list of seven Cherokee 

clans is given by Mr. A. S, Gatschet 
on the authority of Mr. Richard Wolf, 
a delegate of the Cherokee people to 
the United States Government. So 
far as this list goes, it seems to agree 
with that of Morgan. See A. S. 
Gatschet, 4A Afigration Legend of 
the Creek Indians, i. 27. 

3 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
Sanguinity and Affinity, p. 192, Table 
II. pp. 293 sgg. 

XVI ZTOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 187 

thetical. Such a derivation is by no means _ necessary. 
There appears to be no reason why even among totemic 
peoples there should not be many superstitions connected 

with animals and plants which are and always have been 

quite independent of totemism. If we doubted this, the 
example of the Cherokee might suffice to satisfy us. Thus, Cherokee 
for instance, the eagle and the snake were not totems of Si" 
the Cherokee, yet these Indians regarded eagles and snakes about the 
as sacred or supernatural beings and treated them °8'* 
accordingly. The eagle, we are told, is the great sacred 

bird of the Cherokee, as of nearly all the Indian tribes, and 

it figures prominently in their ritual, especially in everything 

that pertains to war. The particular species on which so 

high a value was set was the golden or war eagle (Aquila 
chrysoetus), called by the Cherokee the “ pretty-feathered 
eagle,’ on account of its beautiful tail feathers, white 
tipped with black, which were in great demand for 
ceremonial and decorative purposes. Among the Cherokee Ceremonies 
in old times the killing of an eagle was an event which eee 
concerned the whole settlement and could be undertaken its feathers, 
only by the professional eagle-killer, who was chosen for 

the work because he was an adept in eagle-lore, having 
learned the ceremonies which had to be observed and 

the prayers which had to be said in order to obtain pardon 

for the sacrilege and ward off vengeance from the tribe. 

The eagle might be killed only in the winter or the late 
autumn, when the crops were gathered in and the snakes 

had retired to their dens for their winter sleep. They 
thought that if an eagle were slain in summer, a frost 
would blight the maize, and the songs of the Eagle dance, 
danced when the feathers were brought home, would so 

anger the snakes that they would become doubly dangerous. 

So the Eagle songs were never sung till the snakes had 

gone to sleep for the winter and could not hear them. 
When the people of a Cherokee town decided to hold an 

Eagle dance, they hired a professional eagle-killer to procure 

the feathers for the occasion. He repaired alone to the 
mountains with his gun or bow and arrows, and there, 

after a long vigil of prayer and fasting, he hunted till he 

had killed a deer. Having exposed the carcase in a 

Apologies 
offered to 
the dead 
eagle. 

Super- 
stitious 
respect 

of the 
Cherokee 
for snakes, 

188 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Chap. 

prominent place on one of the highest cliffs, he hid himself 
hard by and sang in a low undertone songs to draw down 
eagles from the sky. When an eagle had swooped on the 
carrion, he shot the bird and standing by its dead body 
prayed that it would not wreak its vengeance on his tribe, 
because it was not a Cherokee but a Spaniard who had 
done the foul deed, Then leaving the dead eagle on the 
ground, he hastened to the town and announced that a 
snowbird had died. This he did to deceive the eagles, 
in order that they might think he had only killed a poor 
little snowbird and not one of their fierce and majestic 
selves. Four days later hunters went out and brought 
back the eagle feathers to the town, where a dish of venison 
and corn was set on the ground before them and they were 
invited to eat, because it was thought that they must be 
hungry after their journey. And the carcase of the deer, 
which the eagle-killer had shot, was left lying on the 
ground beside the carcase of the eagle as a sacrifice to 
the eagle-spirits. The same day on which the feathers 
were brought in, the Indians danced the Eagle dance.! 
Again, snakes are not totems of the Cherokee, yet these 
Indians hold the creatures in awe and are very careful 
not to offend them. All snakes are regarded by them 
as supernatural (anzda'weh?) and as endowed with a certain: 
influence over the other animals and plants. It is said” 
that the snakes, the deer, and the ginseng are allies, and 
that an injury done to any one of them is avenged by all. 
He who kills snakes will see, or fancy he sees, them swarm- 
ing about him with glistering eyes and darting tongues, 
till the sight drives him crazy and he roams the woods 
unable to find the way out. Certain songs, such as those 
of the Townhouse dance, are offensive to snakes, therefore 
they are not danced till late in the autumn when the 
snakes have withdrawn to their dens for the winter. And 
for fear of hurting the feelings of the reptiles, it is never 
said that a man has been bitten by a snake, but only 
that he has been scratched by a brier. Moreover, when 

1 J. Mooney, ‘Myths of the Part i, (Washington, 1900) pp. 281- 
Cherokee,” Nineteenth Annual Report 233. 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 189 

a man merely dreams that he has been bitten by a snake, 
he must be treated in exactly the same way as if he had 
been actually bitten; for in fact a snake ghost has stung 
him, and if the sufferer were not so treated, the place would 
certainly swell and ulcerate, not perhaps at the time, but 
sooner or later, it may be years afterwards. The rattlesnake Respect for 
is deemed by the Cherokee to be the chief of the snake ‘De rtle- 

) 
tribe, and they fear and respect him accordingly. Few which is 
Cherokee will dare to kill a rattlesnake, unless they are ener 
actually compelled to do so, and even then they will atone of snakes. 
for the crime by begging pardon of its ghost, either in 
their own person or through the medium of a priest. 
Otherwise the kinsfolk of the slain rattlesnake would send 
one of their number to track down the murderer and sting 
him to death. Nevertheless, rattlesnakes are killed by the 
Cherokee for the sake of their rattles, teeth, flesh, and oil, 
which are greatly prized for occult or medical uses. But Ceremonies 
the slaughter is done only by certain priests who know the te 
rites and prayers necessary for obtaining pardon from the snake. 
victim and his injured fellow-snakes. Whenever a rattle- 
snake is killed, its head must be cut off and buried in the 
ground and the body must be buried in a hollow log. 

For if the remains were left exposed to the weather, the 
angry snakes would send such torrents of rain that all the 
streams would overflow their banks. Moreover, they would 
tell their friends the deer and the ginseng in the mountains 
what had been done, so that the deer and the ginseng would 
hide themselves, and the hunter would seek for them in vain.? 

The respect and fear naturally entertained for such The 
powerful and dangerous creatures as the eagle and the a 
rattlesnake are quite sufficient to explain these superstitious for the 
beliefs and practices of the Cherokee ; we need not_ resort ee 
to an hypothesis that the eagle atid the rattlesnake were nee 
once totems of the Cherokee, of which there is no record or : 
evidence whatever. 

Further, it may be observed that while the deer and 

the wolf are certainly Cherokee totems, certain superstitions 

1 J. Mooney, ‘Myths of the Parti. (Washington, 1900) pp. 294- 
Cherokee,” Nineteenth Annual Report 296. 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 

Super- 
stitious 
beliefs and 
customs 
of the 
Cherokee 
about deer. 

Super- 
Stitious 
beliefs and 
customs 

of the 
Cherokee 
about 
wolves, 

190 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuapr, 

attaching to these animals are not limited to members of 
the Deer and Wolf clans, but appear to be shared by all 
members of the tribe. Thus, the deer, which still ranges 
the mountains, was the main stand-by of the Cherokee 
hunter and consequently figures prominently in Cherokee 
myth, folk-lore, and ceremonial. Rheumatic pains were 
supposed tod be inflicted by the ghosts of angry deer, 
which the heedless hunter had omitted to appease. For 
the deer tribe is ruled by a powerful chief called Little Deer, 
who watches over his people and takes care that none of 
them is wantonly put to death. Though none but the 
greatest masters of the huntsman’s craft can see him, this 
chief of the deer tribe hastens to the spot where a deer has 
been killed, and bending low asks the blood stains on the 
ground whether they have heard, that is, whether the hunter 
has begged pardon for the life which he has taken. If the 
blood stains say yes, all is well: the hunter has recited the 
necessary formula and so atoned for his crime. But if the 
blood stains say no, then Little Deer tracks the huntsman 
to his house by the blood drops on the trail, and unseen and 
unsuspected he insinuates into the rash man’s body the 
spirit of rheumatism which will rack him with aches and 
pains from that time forth.’ 

Again, though the wolf is the totem of the largest 
Cherokee clan, the reverence for the formidable animal is 
not restricted to members of the Wolf clan, but is shared by 
Cherokee hunters generally. The ordinary Cherokee will 
never kill a wolf if he can help it, but will let the beast 
go unscathed, believing that the kindred of a slain wolf 
would surely avenge his death, and that the weapon with 
which the deed had been done would never shoot straight 
again till it had been cleaned and exorcised by a medicine- 
man. However, when a man’s fish-traps or cattle have 
suffered much from the raids of wolves, he will sometimes 
hire a professional wolf-killer to abate the nuisance. This 
man of skill can slaughter wolves with impunity, because he 
knows the proper rites of atonement. After he has killed 
a wolf, he prays the animal not to avenge his death on the 

1 J. Mooney, ‘‘Myths of the ¢, the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Cherokee,” Nineteenth Annual Report art i, (Washington, 1900) pp. 263 57- 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 191 

tribe, because the burden of guilt really rests on other people. 
And he cleanses the gun which has shot the wolf by un- 
screwing the barrel, inserting seven small sour-wood rods in 
it, and leaving it overnight in a running stream.? 

Further, the Cherokee ascribe mysterious properties and syper- 
perform curious rites to plants which are not and, so far as Stitious 
-we know, never have been their totems. The Cherokee are ae 
an agricultural tribe, and accordingly of all vegetables the eae 
one which holds the first place in their domestic economy which they 
and ceremonial observances is maize (se/z). In their sacred asa 
formulas they invoke the plant under the name of the Old Woman. 
.Woman, because they have a legend that maize sprang from 
the blood of an old woman slain by her disobedient sons, 
Formerly the most solemn ceremony of the tribe was the the Green- 
annual Green-corn dance, celebrated as a preliminary to aca 
eating the new corn. It was at once an expiation for the ceremony 
sins of the past year, an amnesty for public criminals, and a esha 
prayer for happiness and prosperity in the year to come. eating the 
Only such as had duly prepared themselves by prayer, fast- "°Y °™™ 
ing and purification were allowed to partake of this solemn 
sacrament ; and till then no one dared to taste the new 
corn. Seven ears from the last year’s crop were always put 
carefully aside in’ order to “ attract the corn” until the new 
crop had ripened ; and when the harvest was come and the 
Green-corn dance was danced, these seven ears were eaten 
with the rest.2 At the Green-Corn Dance in ancient 
times it was customary for each household to procure 
fresh fire from a new fire kindled in the town-house.* 

Much ceremony also attended the planting and tending Ceremonies 
of the maize, Thus, when the corn was growing, a priest Be 
went into the field with the owner and built a small id J 
‘inclosure in ‘the middle of it. ‘There the two ‘sat ae 
themselves on the ground, and the priest, rattle in hand, ; 
sang songs of invocation to the spirit of the corn. Soon 
a loud rustling sound would be heard. It was the Old 
Woman bringing the corn into the field; but neither of the 

1 J. Mooney, ‘*Myths of the 2 J. Mooney, of. cet. pp. 242 599., 
Cherokee,” Weneteenth Annual Report 423. 2 Sate ; 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 3 J. Mooney, ‘Cherokee Mound- 
Part i, (Washington, 1900) pp. building,” American Anthropologist, 
264 sq. it. (1889) p. 167. i 

The 
weeping 
and wailing 
for the 
corn. 

Story of 
the death 
oftheCorn- 
Woman, 
and of the 
fertilising 
virtue of 
her blood. 

192 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnuar. 

men crouching among the corn might look up till the song 
was finished. This ceremony was repeated on four successive 
nights ; then when seven more nights had gone by, during 
which no one might enter the field, the priest himself would 
come to it and, lo! the young ears would be upon the 
stalks. Moreover, care was always taken to keep a clean 
trail from the field to the house, so that the corn might be 
encouraged’ to stay at home and not go wandering else- 
where. Again, soon after the maize had_been. sown, the 
owner, or a priest, would stand at each corner of the field 
one after the other, and weep and wail loudly ; but why 
they did so, the priests cannot now say. It was perhaps 
as has been suggested, a lament for the bloody death of the 
corn-goddess, the Old Woman who had been slain by he: 
sons, : 

The story of her death was this. Once upon a tim 
there was a woman and ‘her name was Corn (selu). Shi 
was the wife of a hunter and lived with him at Pilot Knob 
They had an only child, a little boy. But the boy had ; 
playmate, a Wild Boy, who sprang from the blood of som 
game which the woman had washed’ beside the river. Thi 
Wild Boy called himself the little boy’s elder brother 
Well, one day it happened that, the two boys were very 
tired and hungry and asked their mother for something t< 
eat. She told them to wait and she would fetch it. So 
off she went with a basket to the storehouse. The store- 
house stood on poles high above the ground to keep it out 
of reach of the animals, and there was a ladder to climb up 
to it, and a door, but no other opening. Every day when 
Corn, which was the woman’s name, made ready to cook 
the dinner she would go to the storehouse with a basket, 
and bring-it back full of corn and beans. The storehouse 
was not large, and the boys, who had never been in it, 
wondered where all the corn and beans could come from. 
So no sooner was their mother’s back turned than the Wild 
Boy said to his brother, “ Let us go and see what she does.” 
They ran and climbed up at the back of the storehouse, 
pulled out a piece of clay from between the logs, and peeped 

1 J. Mooney, “ Myths of the Chero- Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 
kee,” Nineteenth Annual Report of the i, (Washington, 1900) pp. 423 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 193 

in. What should they see but their mother standing in the How 
middle of the room with the basket in front of her on the ae 
floor ; and‘there she was rubbing her stomach, so, and then produced 
the basket was half full of corn ; and then she rubbed under peane hum 
her armpits, so, and the basket was now full to the brim her body, 
with beans, The two boys looked at each other and said, 

“ This will never do. Our mother is a witch. If we eat 

any of that stuff, it will poison us. We must kill her.” 

When the boys came back to the house, their mother read 

their thoughts and said, “So you are going to kill me?? 

“ That we are,” said the boys; “you are a witch.” “ Well,” 

said the mother, “when you have killed me, clear a large 

piece of ground in front of the house and drag my body 

seven times round the circle. Then drag me seven times 

over the ground inside the circle, and stay up all night and 

watch, and in the morning you will have plenty of corn, 

The boys killed her with their clubs, cut off her head, put it How she 
on the roof of the house with her face to the west, and told 1) ey 
her, with cutting sarcasm, to look for her husband. Then the com 
they set to work to clear the ground in front of the house, ;Pr7t 
but instead of clearing the whole piece they only cleared blood. 
seven little spots. That is why corn now grows only in a 

few places instead of over the whole wide world. They 
dragged the body of their mother Corn round the circle, 

and wherever her blood fell on the ground, corn sprang up. 

But. instead of dragging her body seven times across the 
ground, they dragged it only twice, and that is why the 
Indians still hoe their fields only twice. The two brothers, 
having disposed of their mother, sat up and watched their corn 

all night, and in the morning it was full-grown and ripe. 

In this story and these customs we may see in germ a Myth and 
myth and ritual of a mother goddess of the corn; yet Gui% 
although the story and the customs are found among a goddess 
totemic people, there is no ground whatever for connecting” ®"™ 
them with totemism. 

Again, the Cherokee have many superstitious beliefs and 
practices connected with ginseng, yet the plant is not one 
of their totems. They gather it on the mountains, use it in 

1 J. Mooney, ‘‘ Myths of the Chero- Bzveau of American Ethnology, Part i. 
kee,” Nineteenth Annual Report of the (Washington, 1900) pp. 242, 244 sg. 
vol. Mt fo) 

Super- 
stitious 
beliefs and 
customs 
of the 
Cherokee 
about 
ginseng. 

Cherokee 
super- 
Stitions 
about the 
cedar and 
the laurel. 

194 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cap. 

medicine, and sell large quantities of it to the traders. The 
priests address the plant as “Littlhe Man” or “ Little Man, 
Most Powerful Magician” on account of the resemblance 
which the root often bears to a man’s body. The doctor 
speaks constantly of it as of a sentient being, and it is 
thought to be able to make itself invisible to such as are 
unworthy to gather it. In the search for it the first 
three plants are passed by and the fourth is taken, but not 
until the doctor has humbly entreated the Great Magician 
to let him take a small piece of his flesh. Having dug up 
the plant he drops a bead into the hole and covers it up, 
leaving it there by way of payment to the plant spirit. 
After that he gathers the other ginseng plants as he finds 
them without further ceremony.’ 

Again, with the Cherokee, as with nearly all Indian 
tribes, the cedar is a! sacred tree, but it is not a totem. 
They burn the small green twigs as incense in certain cere- 
monies, especially to counteract the effect of evil dreams ; 
for they think that the malicious demons who cause such 
dreams cannot endure the smell of burning cedar. But 
cedar-wood is too sacred to be used as fuel. They say that 
the red tinge of the wood comes from the blood of a wicked 
magician whose head was hung on the top of a tall cedar.’ 
Again, the Cherokee never burn the laurel, yet it is not one 
of their totems. They use it in medicine and carve spoons 
and combs out of its close-grained wood. The reason why 
they will not burn it is simply that in the fire laurel leaves 
make a hissing, sputtering sound like winter winds or falling 
snow; so the Cherokee think that to burn them would 
bring on cold weather.? Thus the ground of their objection 
to putting laurel in the fire is not totemism, but the fallacy 

J. Mooney, ‘‘ Myths of the Chero- ington, 1889) p. 144. The same 

kee,” Wineteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part i. 
(Washington, 1900) p. 425. 

2 J. Mooney, of. cit. p. 421. In 
order to drive away ghosts from sick 
people, the Tetons make a smoke with 
cedar-wood, or they will fasten the 
wood at the smoke-hole, or lay it down 
outside the hut. See the Rev. J. 
Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ Teton Folk-lord,” 
American Anthropologist, ii. (Wash- 

mythical explanation of the redness 
of cedar-wood which is given by the 
Cherokee is alleged also by the Yuchi 
Indians. See A. S. Gatschet, ‘* Some 
Mythic Stories of the Yuchi Indians,” 
American Anthropologist, vi. (1893) 
pp. 281 sg. 

3 J. Mooney, ‘“‘ Myths of the Chero- 
kee," Nineteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part i. 
(Washington, 1900) p. 422. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE GULF NATIONS 195 

which underlies homczopathic magic, namely, the assumption 
that effects resemble their causes. 

With these instances before us—and instances of the Totemism 
same sort might be multiplied indefinitely—we must beware Eo ore 
of reducing to totemism all the superstitious beliefs and forms oe 
practices which even a really totemic people entertain and Sh" 
observe in regard to animals and plants. Totemism in concerned 
fact, as I have said before, is only one of the multitudinous eas 
forms in which such superstitions have crystallised. It is and plants. 
indeed a common crystal, but there are many others of 
diverse shapes and colours. In a treatise on totemism 
it is legitimate and even necessary to emphasise the dis- 
tinction, because there is a common tendency to confound 
all sacred animals and plants with totems. The example 
of the Cherokee, to which I have just called attention, may 

serve aS a warning against this confusion. 

§ 12. Totemism among the Pueblo Indians 

Amongst the most interesting and important aborigines ThePueblo 
of North America are the Pueblo or Village Indians of o Village 
. : ean : : ndians of 
Arizona and New Mexico. Their importance arises neither arizona 
from their numbers nor the part which they have played in raed 
history ; for their numbers are inconsiderable and they have 
always been a quiet pacific people, more concerned to support 
themselves by their own industry than to overrun and 
conquer their neighbours. But in their institutions they 
form a link or intermediate stage between the barbarous 
tribes to the north and the civilised Indians of Mexico, 
Central America, and'Peru. They are settled in substantially 
built villages or towns, to which the Spaniards gave the 
name of pueblos; they subsist mainly by agriculture ; and 
they exhibit some degree of skill and taste in the arts of 
pottery and weaving. The material basis of their indigenous 
civilisation was supplied by a single cereal, maize; by a 
single textile plant, cotton; and by the sandstone or the 
sun-dried bricks of which they constructed their two-, three-, 
or four-storied dwellings." 

1L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- A convenient summary of information 
sanguinily and Affinity, pp. 254 sgg. on the Pueblo Indians, compiled from 

Ruins of 
Pueblo 
villages are 
scattered 
over a 
wide area. 

The 
natural 
features 
and land- 
scape of 
the Pueblo 
country. 

The table- 
lands and 
canyons. 

196 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Cuav. 

Although the Pueblo Indians are now confined to a 
limited area in Arizona and New Mexico, the abundant 
ruins of their deserted towns and villages prove that at 
one time or another they must have occupied the whole 
region from the Great Salt Lake in Utah southward into 
Mexico, and from the Grand Canyon of the Colorado 
eastward’ to the prairies beyond the Rio Grande. Within 
this great area, covering about a hundred and fifty 
thousand square miles, the ruined Pueblos may be numbered 
almost by thousands.’ 

The natural features of the Pueblo country are very 
remarkable and have done much to mould the character and 
institutions of the natives. For the most part the land is 
an arid wilderness, almost a desert, where animal life is very 
scarce and vegetation sparse and stunted. These character- 
istics it owes partly tolits great elevation, which varies from 
six to eight or even nine thousand feet above the sea, and 
partly to the lack of rain and running water, an effect of the 
extreme dryness of the air. Thesurfaceis generally smooth 
or slightly undulating. Were a traveller suddenly set down 
in the midst of one of these high tablelands, he might at 
first sight imagine it an ideal country for journeying in. 
But he could not go far without being undeceived. For 
sooner or later he would find himself on the brink of a 
yawning chasm which opened suddenly at his feet ; or 
mounting to higher ground he would see, spread out below 
him, a bewildering network of jagged ravines, a confused 
tangle of cliffs and gorges, barring his progress. In fact the 
apparent level of the plateau is gashed and seamed at 
frequent intervals by tremendous gullies or canyons, as they 
are called in the country, which nature has scooped and 
carved to giddy depths out of the sandstone rock. To put 

the original sources, is furnished by 
Mr. Fritz Krause, “Die Pueblo- 
Indianer, eine historisch-ethnograph- 
ische Studie,” Nova Acta, Abhand- 
lungen der Kaiser. Leopoldin.-Carolin. 
Deutsch. Akademie der Naturforscher, 
Ixxxvii. (Halle,, 1907) pp. 1-218. 
For a graphic picture by an eye- 
witness of the country and life of 
the Pueblo Indians a book of the 
late Captain J. G. Bourke (Zhe Snake- 

Dance of the Moguis of Arizona, 
London, 1884) may be recommended. 

1 Victor Mindeleff, “‘A Study of 
Pueblo Architecture in Tusayan and 
Cibola,” Zighth Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1891), p. 133; Cosmos Mindeleff, 
**Localisation of Tusayan Clans,” 
Ninteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 
ii, (Washington, 1900) p. 639. 

"xvi TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 197 

it otherwise, the country consists of an endless series of 

isolated tablelands, of no great extent, each terminating in 

steep rugged slopes or sheer precipices and divided from its 

neighbours, sometimes merely by a deep and narrow ravine, 

sometimes by a broad stretch of flat ground. These table- 

lands are what the Spaniards, the former lords of the iand, 

used to call the esas, and the name still survives in the 

common speech of the inhabitants. The cliffs which bound 

the tablelands sometimes run in the same general direction 

for miles, winding in and out so as to form a long succession 

of bays and capes, of alcoves and bastions, in the wall o 

precipice. For the most part the soil is utterly barren, 

Even near the villages, which are commonly built for safety Situation 

on the summit of some beetling crag or jutting ledge of ore 
ges, 

rock, there are wide expanses where not a green blade is to 

be seen, nothing but a waste of drifting sand or a labyrinth 

of rugged rocks piled in confusion at the foot of the cliffs, 

The beds of the rivers themselves, except after heavy rain, aridity and 

are generally dry, consisting merely of sandy stony hollows, rete 

like the wadies of the Arabian desert. Such scanty vegeta- scenery, 

tion as contrives to find a foothold in the thirsty soil has 

little in it to relieve the dreary monotony of the landscape ; 

for it consists usually of scrubby dwarf pines and cedars, 

gnarled bushes of prickly greasewod, or clumps of sad- 

coloured sagebrush. Yet desolate as the scenery undoubtedly 

is, it possesses nevertheless a certain charm of its own. The The req 

sandstone rocks, of which the country is chiefly composed, “"* 

are of many tints, most commonly of a bright red; and in 

the clear desert air, under a sky of the deepest blue, their 

mighty precipices, soaring pinnacles, and swelling buttresses 

present a wonderful spectacle as they recede, crag beyond 

crag, tillthey melt away in the distance. But the character- 

istic landscape of the Pueblo region is a dull monotonous 

expanse of plains bounded only far away by cliffs of 

gorgeous colours; in the foreground a soil of bright yellow 

or ashy grey; and over all the most brilliant sunshine, 

while distant features are softened by a blue haze. For a 

few weeks in early summer the tablelands are seen at their 

best. The open stretches are then carpeted with verdure 

almost hidden under a profusion of flowers. Then, too, the 

The bloom 
of early 
summer, 

The 
landscape 
in winter. 

198 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuarp. 

grey and dusty sagebrush takes on a tinge of green: even 
the furzy greasewood drapes itself in flakes of golden bloom ; 
and every thorny green tablet of the prickly pear seems 
grafted with rosebuds. Fantastic cactuses of many kinds vie 
with each other in putting forth the gayest flowers, scentless 
but gorgeous. But soon all this brightness fades, and the 
country resumes its habitual aspect of sterile monotony.’ 

Very different, however, is the appearance which the 
landscape wears in mid-winter, especially if we view it on a 
day when the Indians of some high-perched village are busy 
celebrating one of those elaborate religious rites, to which in 
the dead season of the year the natives of .-these bleak 
uplands devote much time and thought. Snow then covers 
the earth with a mantle of dazzling white; the valley below 
is white; and white without a speck are the slopes of the 
tablelands, except whdre a solitary clump of pines, seen 
through the distant haze, shews like a blue stain on the 
blanched hillside. In the foreground the bands of Indians 
intent on their sacred mission, as they flit about in their 
bright dresses across the snow, présent a constantly shifting 
kaleidoscope of colours, the effect of which is heightened by 
the crisp frosty air. The gay scene lasts all the winter day, 
till the stars begin to sparkle overhead, and in the west the 
orange light of evening dies away.” 

1 Victor Mindeleff, **A Study of 
Pueblo Architecture in Tusayan and 
Cibola,” Eighth Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1891), pp. 42-44; A. M. Stephen, 
‘‘The Navaho,” American Anthro- 
pologist, vi. (1893) pp. 345-3473 
Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘‘ The Cliff Ruins 
of Canyon de Chelly, Arizona,” Six- 
teenth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of American Ethnology (Washington, 
1897), pp. 82-84; 7d. ‘‘ Navaho 
Houses,” Seventeenth Annual Report of 
the Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 
ii, (Washington, 1898) pp. 477-481 ; 
zd. ‘* Localization of Tusayan Clans,” 
Nineteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 
li, (Washington, 1900) pp. 640-642 ; 
Walter Hough, ‘‘ The Hopi in relation 
to their Plant Environment,” American 

Anthropologist, x. (1897) pp. 33 5g. 

- The monotony of the landscape is even 

more marked in Tusayan, the home of 
the Hopi Indians, because there the 
sandstones are mostly of a neutral tint, 
and consequently there is less of that 
warmth and play of colour which else- 
where in the Pueblo country goes far 
to relieve the dullness of the scenery. 

2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
“The Zuiii Indians,” Twerty-third 
Annual Report of the Bureau: of 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1904), p. 119. I have borrowed 
from Wordsworth the description of 
a winter sunset :— 

the stars 
Eastward were sparkling clear, and in 
the west 
The orange sky of evening died away. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 

199 

The great lack of the Pueblo country is water. The Scarcity of 
rainfall, in years when it rains at all, is less than ten inches ee 
and dew is rare. Great tracts in the mountains would be country 
utterly uninhabitable for want of water if it were not for 
the snow which lies deep in winter and percolating through 
the porous sandstone soil issues in small springs at the foot 
.of the tablelands or in the recesses of the ravines. But such 
springs. are few and far between; they are reached by 
tortuous trails often known only to the Indians; and they 
fail in the hot summer days, when the withered grass is dry 
and brittle and the whole country is parched. In winter 
the Navaho shepherds and their sheep depend wholly on 
snow water; and it is the melting snow in spring which 
causes the grass to grow and vegetation to sprout. Yet The Pueblo 
meagre as plant life is in this arid region, the Pueblo Indians, ee 
till they obtained some sheep and cattle from the whites, native state 

: : : depended 

supported themselves entirely by agriculture or horticulture ; entirely 
for they are gardeners rather than farmers. Indeed they 0 agri- 
had no alternative. They could not be hunters, because a 
there is little game to hunt; they could not be fisher- 
men, because there is little fish to catch. Accordingly 
in their natural state these Indians subsisted almost wholly 
on vegetable food except for a stray rat, rabbit, or prairie- 
dog which occasionally went to the pot. A religious 
fraternity of the Hopi Indians did indeed solemnly turn out 
once a year and hunt the neighbourhood ; but twenty-five 
men on horseback and many men on foot have been known 
to scour the country for miles and knock down one rabbit. 
It seems clear that in such regions man could not live by 
rabbits nor yet by rats and dogs alone ; he must have some- 
thing else to eat or perish. He found the staple of life in 
maize." 

1 Walter Hough, “The Hopi in pp. 478-482; 7d. ‘Localization of 

relation to their Plant Environment,” 
American Anthropologist, x. (1897) 
PP. 33 599.3 Victor Mindeleff, ‘A 
Study of Pueblo Architecture in Tusayan 
and Cibola,” Eighth Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1891), pp. 42 sg. ; Cosmos Mindeleff, 
«« Navaho Houses,” Seventeenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part ii. (Washington, 1898) 

Tusayan Clans,” ineteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part ii. (Washington, 1900) 
pp. 640-643; Jesse Walter Fewkes, 
‘“*Two Summers’ Work in Pueblo 
Ruins,” Zwenty-second Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Part i. (Washington, 1904) p. 194. As 
to sheep and cattle of the Zufii Indians, 
see Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 

200 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap, 

The * Thus the prime necessity of these tribes, when they first 
ago He migrated or were driven by foes into their present country, 
pata was to discover arable land and to settle near it. Except 
originated in the valleys of the so-called rivers or rather wadies such 
in the need land is to be found only here and there in small patches, 
andof little sheltered nooks of the tablelands or fertile bottoms of 
a rich alluvial ‘soil in the depth of the canyons. Beside ore 
as within reach of these favoured spots the Indians were com- 

pelled to fix their abodes. They had no choice. Whatever 
happened, the crops must be sown and reaped ; their failure 
involved the death of the people. At first, perhaps, when 
the Indians entered the country they may have lived dis- 
persed in small groups wherever they met with a plot of 
arable land sufficient for their wants; for it is likely enough 
that they moved into these deserts only under the pressure of 
stronger tribes, and that fer a while they had no formidable 
rivals to dispute the possession of the steppes. But as time 
went on their enemies would follow on their heels, and the need 
of protecting themselves and their fields from raids and depre- 
dations would be more and more felt. Thus they would 
naturally gather for mutual defence in large fortified villages or 
towns. Such were in all probability the circumstances which 
created the peculiar type of Indian village or town known 
asa Pueblo. These villages were built for safety in positions 
of great natural strength such as in that rugged and broken 
country can everywhere be found, whether on the projecting 
spur of a tableland with access from one side only, or on a 
pinnacle wholly surrounded by precipices and steep slopes, 
which could be reached only by a long and arduous climb 
up a winding and difficult path. For example, the Hopi 

<‘The Zufi Indians,” Twenty-third Report of the Bureau of American 

annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1904), p. 368. The Navahoes are 
not Pueblo Indians, but their country 
adjoins thé Pueblo country on the 
north and partakes of its character. 
As to the annual rabbit-hunt of the 
Pueblo Indians, see Dr. P. G. S. Ten 
Broeck, in H. R. Schoolcraft’s Judian 
Tribes of the United States, iv. 78; 
Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, ‘‘ The 
Zuni Indians,” Zwenty-third Annual 

Ethnology (Washington, 1904), pp. 
89-94. From the detailed account 
given by Mrs. Stevenson it would seem 
that the hunt is a religious or magical 
rite specially designed to bestow fertility 
on women as well as to ensure a supply 
of game and rain. According to her, 
the ceremony is celebrated quadrenni- 
ally, but may be held oftener in time 
of great drought. 

1 Cosmos Mindeleff, “‘ The Localiza- 
ion of Tusayan Clans," Mineteenth 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 201 

or Moqui villages are built like eagles’ eyries on the crests 
of perpendicular sandstone bluffs at a height of from five 
hundred to eight hundred feet above the springs on which 
the villagers depend for their supply of water. All the 
water used in such a village is carried on the backs of 
women who patiently trudge up and down the steep and 
giddy tracks cut in the side of the precipice, each bearing 
a brimming or an empty pot on her shoulders. It is a 
common sight to see them toiling slowly up the almpst 
vertical face of the cliff wrapped in their faded blue blankets 
and bending under a weight of which the strongest man 
would soon grow weary. 

The plan of a Pueblo village differs from that of all The plan 
other Indian villages in North America. It consists of long 24 arch 
rows of quadrangular flat-roofed chambers rising in a series a Pueblo 
of terraces, one row of chambers above the other, to a height Ve" 
of two, three, four or even five stories, in such a way that ak 
each story recedes by a space of ten feet or more from the annie 
front wall of the story immediately below it, and hence the above each 
inmates of the upper stories can walk out on the flat roofs sas ne 
of the houses below them and use them as promenades. the steps of 
The whole structure viewed from the front thus presents the cape 
appearance of a gigantic staircase; viewed from the back it 
is one perpendicular wall. Such rows of chambers, each 
chamber forming a separate house with its own fire-place 
and chimney, may be two or three hundred feet long; and 
the ground floor,on which all the receding upper stories rest, 
may be a hundred feet deep. Access from one story to 
another is obtained by ladders placed against the outside 
walls ; sometimes the upper stories are connected by stair- 
cases. In the old villages the ground-floor rooms had no 
doors opening on the street or public square; the only 
entrance was a hole in the roof, so that in order to enter 
one of them it was necessary first to ascend a ladder to the 
roof and then to descend another ladder into the chamber. 

Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 1897), p. 
American Ethnology, Part ii. (Wash- 194. 

ington, 1900) pp. 639-646; compare 

id, ‘*The Cliff Ruins in the Canyon 1 J. G. Bourke, Zhe Snake-Dance of 
de Chelly, Arizona,” Sixteenth Annual the Moquis of Arizona (London, 1884), 
Report of the Bureau of American pp. 104, 155, 272. 

The 
building- 
materials, 
stone and 
sun-dried 
bricks. 

202 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap, 

This arrangement was adopted for the purpose of defence ; 
for it enabled the inmates, on the approach of an enemy, to 
retire to the upper stories, draw up the ladders behind them, 
and then assail the attacking party with a shower of missiles 
from a position of comparative safety. For a similar reason 
the tiers of houses were arranged round a square or court- 
yard in such a way that they presented their terraced front 
to the square and turned their perpendicular back walls to 
the open country, thus offering a formidable obstacle to 
assailants possessed of no better artillery than bows and 
arrows. But in positions where the nature of the ground 
furnished a sufficient defence, the tiers of houses were some- 
times arranged not in a square but in streets. However, 
now that the strong arm of the United States Government 
protects these peaceful Indians from the depredations of 
their fiercer neighbours, the ;,Navahoes and Apaches, the old 
type of a fortified village has undergone some modifications, 
and the population shews a tendency to disperse into a 
number of lesser settlements planted more conveniently on 
lower ground near the cultivated lands." 

Nearly all the ancient Pueblo villages, at least in the 
provinces of Tusayan and Cibola, were built of the native 
limestone, a stone which readily breaks into small pieces of 
regular shape suitable for use in simple masonry without the 
need of being artificially dressed. The chinks were filled 

1L, H. Morgan, Systems of Con- Indians 1 may cite what Captain 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 262; Bourke says of the Hopis or Moquis: 
Victor Mindeleff, “A Study of ‘‘ They are avaricious in the extreme, 
Pueblo Architecture,” Zighth Annual vacillating and timid, and generally do 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology not impress one as being so reliable 

(Washington, 1891), pass?n ; Cosmos 
Mindeleff, ‘ Localization of Tusayan 
Clans,” Wineteenth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Eth- 
nology, Part ii. (Washington, 1900) 
pp. 639-646; Mrs. Matilda Coxe 
Stevenson, ‘*The Zufii Indians,” 
Twenty-third Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology 
(Washington, 1904 5g.), pp. 349 Sg. 3 
Fritz Krause, ‘‘ Die Pueblo-Indianer,” 
Nova Acta, Abhandlungen der Katser?. 
Leopold. Carol. Deutschen Akademie 
der Naturforscher, \xvii. No. 1 (Halle, 
1907), pp. 40 sgg. With reference to 
the pacific character of the Pueblo 

as their immediate neighbours, the 
Apaches and Navajoes. They have not 
been known to engage in hostilities 
with the whites or Indians since the 
date of American occupation” (J. G. 
Bourke, The Snake-Dance of the 
Moguts of Arizona, p. 255). Another 
writer observes of the Hopis that 
‘‘they are an undersized puny race, 
> content with what they have and asking 
only to be left alone” (Cosmos 
Mindeleff, ‘* Navaho Houses,” Sevez- 
teenth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of American Ethnology, Part i. 
(Washington, 1898) p. 486). 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 203 

with smaller stones and a mortar of mud. The practice of 
building with sun-dried bricks instead of stone is now 
commoh, but it appears to be comparatively recent, and 
was perhaps learned by the Indians from the Spaniards. 
As the bricks which the Indians make are of inferior quality 
and the walls too thin to bear the weight of the upper 
stories, houses constructed of this material are apt to fall 
into ruins.? 

An interesting feature in the architecture of a Pueblo The sacred 
village is the iva, or the estufa, as it used to be called by pas pi 
the Spaniards. This is a sacred chamber in which the civil ¢st«/as) of 

: the Pueblo 
and religious affairs of the people are transacted. It also vinages. 
forms a place of resort, a club, or lounge for the men. No 
women frequent these sacred chambers; indeed they never 
enter them except to plaster the walls at customary periods 
or during the celebration of certain ceremonies. A village 
may have several kvas; for example, the village of Walpi 
(Hualpi) has five, and the large village of Oraibi has ten. 

Some of these sacred chambers belong each to a particular 
totemic clan; thus among the Hopis or Moquis we hear of 

kivas of the Butterfly, Rabbit, Oak, Corn, and Eagle clans, 

Many of them have been built by religious societies, which 

hold their stated observances there ; but no &zva now serves 
exclusively for religious purposes. In the province of 
Tusayan the &zvas are quadrangular, like the rest of the 
chambers ; but elsewhere they are sometimes circular, as in These 
the village of Taos; and in many of the older ruins the eae 
same shape is found. This circular.£éva, differing from all are some- 
the other rooms of the village, which are regularly quad- oes 
rangular, is probably a survival from the time when the and prob- 
ancestors of the Pueblo Indians dwelt in circular huts or oat 
tents. Religious conservatism has retained the ancient original 
form for the sacred buildings long after considerations of SP* 
utility had abolished it from purely secular edifices. Fora 
similar reason, probably, the entrance to a #zva is never by 

a door but always by a hole in the roof, through which you 
descend into the room by a ladder. Further, it seems to 

have been a common requirement throughout the Pueblo 

1 Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘“‘A Study of Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
Pueblo Architecture,” Eighth Annual (Washington, 1891), pp. 137-140. 

Population 
of the 
Pueblo 
villages, 

‘The agri- 
culture of 
the Pueblo 
Indians. 

The maize 
is kept in 
store- 
rooms. 

203 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cHap. 

country that the £¢va should be wholly or partially under- 
ground, as it still is in Tusayan. 

The population of a large Pueblo village often numbered 
from a thousand to fifteen hundred persons.? In 1852 the 
seven Hopi or Moqui villages were estimated to contain 
eight thousand inhabitants ; and the population of a single 
large village, Zufii, was put as high as four thousand? If 
these estimates were correct, the Pueblo Indians have since 
diminished in number; for in 1896 the population of the 
village of Zufii was given at 1621 persons, and the total 
number of Pueblo Indians in Arizona and New Mexico was 
said to be 10,287.* 

The principal crop raised by the Pueblo Indians is 
maize, and they cultivate several varieties of this cereal. 
The fields, of which some are artificially irrigated by water 
led to them in channels from springs, often lie at consider- 
able distances from the main settlement; hence many of 
the Indians have been accustomed to leave their villages in 
summer and take up a temporary abode in farm-steadings 
near their fields. In peaceful times such as the present 
these summer farm-steadings tend to develop into permanent 
villages. The soil is hoed with prjmitive implements, and 
when the corn has been gathered and brought home, it is 
spread on the terraced roofs of the houses to dry before it is 
husked and stacked in the store-rooms. Experience has 
taught the Pueblo Indians to store corn as a provision 
against a possible failure of crops. ‘The harvests of one or 
even two years may sometimes be seen piled in large 
granaries. The corn is ground into flour between millstones, 
kneaded into a paste, and baked on flat stones into wafers 
no thicker than sheets of paper, and of interminable length. 
Besides maize the Indians also grow large quantities of 

1 Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘A Study of 
Pueblo Architecture,” Eighth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1891), pp. III sgg.; 
zd. ‘*The Cliff Ruins of Canyon de 
Chelly,” Stxteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology (Wash- 
ington, 1897), pp. 174 sgg.3 J. G. 
Bourke, Zhe Snake-Dance of the 
sUoguis of Arizona (London, 1884), 
PP- 119-133, 151, 332. 

2 Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘* Localization 
of Tusayan Clans,” Nineteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part ii. (Washington, 1900) 
Pp. 643. 

3 Dr. P. G. S. Ten Broeck, in H. 
R. Schooleraft’s Jrdian Tribes of the 
United States, iv. 80, 85. 

4 F. W. Hodge, ‘* Pueblo Indian 
Clans,” American Anthropologist, ix. 

(1896) p. 346. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 205 

beans, melons, pumpkins, and onions, and these they also Other 
store for winter use. From the whites they have obtained ‘Ps. 
wheat, peaches, apricots, and other plants, which they 
cultivate to some extent. Of peaches they are extravagantly 
fond, and every village has its peach orchards. When the 
fruit is ripe, people who have orchards move to them and 
live there in temporary or permanent huts till the peaches 

are gathered and sometimes dried. It is a happy season 

for the Indians, and especially for the children, who spend 
their days eating peaches and rolling on the sandhills. 
Cotton and tobacco are raised in small quantities; in old 
days the cultivation of native cotton was much more 
extensive.’ 

In modern times the Pueblo Indians, having acquired Flocks and 

sheep, goats, and cattle from the whites, have become to Hele 
some extent a pastoral people. They eat the flesh of these Weaving 
animals and weave the wool of the sheep into blankets, ae 
which they adorn with parti-coloured patterns. Their woven 
stuffs are durable and shew a considerable variety of fabric. 
Pottery is made by the women without the use of the wheel. 
In many villages the pots are undecorated, the surface being 
finished in plain black or red. But in other villages the 
pottery is adorned with paintings of animals, plants, flowers, 
‘and so forth. Some of the designs are said to be totemic. 
The vessels themselves are sometimes moulded in the form 
of animals. On ancient vases the figures of beasts and 
birds are sometimes executed in so purely conventional'a 
style that only the initiated can decipher them. Certain 
superstitions attend the making of pottery; for example, a 
bit of wafer bread is deposited in each pot, that the spirit of 
the pot may consume its spiritual essence.’ 

1 Dr, P. G. S. Ten Broeck, in H. 
R. Schooleraft’s Zdian Tribes of the 
United States, iv. 76, 86; Walter 
Hough, ‘The Hopi in relation to 
their Plant Environment,” American 
Anthropologist, x. (1897) p. 353 Mrs. 
Matilda Coxe Stevenson, ‘‘ The Zuili 
Indians,” Twenty-third Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology 
(Washington, 1904), pp. 350-354, 361 
599.3; Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘‘ Localization 
of Tusayan Clans,” Wineteenth Annual 

Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part ii. (Washington, 1900) 
pp. 640 sgqg. ; Handbook of American 
Lndians north of Mexico, i. 565 sq. 

2 Dr. P. G. S. Ten Broeck, in 
H. R. Schooleraft’s Judian Tribes 
of the United States, iv. 723 J. G. 
Bourke, Zhe Snake-Dance of the 
Moguis of Arizona (London, 1884), 
pp. 262 sgg.; Mrs. Matilda Coxe 
Stevenson, ‘‘ The Zufi Indians,” 
Twenty-third Annual Report of the 

206 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA chap. 

Govern- Among the Hopi or Moqui Indians, one of the principal 

ment of F 

the Pueblo branches of the Pueblo peoples, the governing body is com- 

villages. posed of a council of hereditary clan-elders and chiefs of 
religious fraternities. Of these officials one is a speaker- 
chief and another a war-chief ; but there has never been a 
supreme chief among the Hopis. Each village has its own 
hereditary chief who directs certain communal works, such 
as the cleaning of springs’ The government of Zujfii is 
described as hierarchical, being in the hands of various 
priesthoods and other religious fraternities, of whom the 
Rain Priests, eight men and one woman, form the dominant 
body. The civil branch of the government consists of a 
governor with four assistants, and a lieutenant-governor, also 
with four deputies. ‘These men are all nominated by the 
Rain Priests, The governor is elected for one year, but 
he may be re-elected. He and his staff attend to such 
secular affairs as do not require the intervention of the 
priests,’ 

The Pueblo While Indians of the Pueblo type of culture appear from 

Indians are the ryins of their villages to have at one time occupied the 

at present 2 : z 
restricted great region of arid plateaus which stretches from central 

‘oasmall Utah on the north to the Mexican boundary and beyond it 
New to the south, their descendants or successors are now restricted 
Mexico to. a comparatively small area in Western New Mexico and 

Arizona. Eastern Arizona, over which their villages, about thirty in 
number, are irregularly distributed. Most of them are 
scattered along the upper course of the Rio Grande and its 
tributaries in New Mexico; and a few of them, situated 
partly in Western New Mexico and partly in Eastern 
Arizona, lie in the ancient provinces of Cibola and Tusayan, 

There are which are drained by the Little Colorado. Locally, the 

ae of Pueblo villages may be said to fall into three groups, an 

them; an eastern group on the Rio Grande, a central group on the 

Bureau of American Ethnology (Wash- Ethnology (Washington, 1891), p. 
ington, 1904), pp. 368, 372-3773; 22. 

Handbook of American Indians north 1 Handbook of American Indians 
of Mextco, i. 566. Sheep and cattle worth of Afextco, i. 565. 

were obtained by the Pueblo Indians 2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
from the Spaniards in the seventeenth ‘The Zufi Indians,” Twenty-third 
century. See Victor Mindeleff, “A .fiunual Report of the Bureau of 
Study of Pueblo Architecture,” Zzghth American Ethnology (Washington, 
annual Report of the Bureau of 1904), pp. 289 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 207 

Zufi plateau, and a western group in Tusayan.’ But eastern 

though the Pueblo Indians inhabit contiguous districts, and 804p on 
though their general character and type of culture are the Grande, 
"same, it is remarkable that they speak languages of four pborae 
different stocks, and therefore presumably belong to four the Zuii 

different families. The four stock languages spoken by eet 
these people are the Tanoan, Keresan, Zufiian, and western 
Shoshonean; and of these the Tanoan language is, or Tysayan, 

rather used to be, spoken in five different dialects, the Tano, They 
the Tewa, the Tiwa, the Jemez, and the Piro. The Taho jek 
are now extinct as a tribe, but their descendants are still of four 
scattered throughout the other Pueblo villages, most of them ecru 
being at Santo Domingo on the Rio Grande. The Tewa 
occupy the villages of San Juan, Santa Clara, San Ildefonso, 
Pojoaque, Nambe, and Tesuque, all on or near the Rio 
Grande, together with the village of Hano among the Hopi 

in Tusayan.” The Tiwa, called by the Spaniards Tigua, 
inhabit the villages of Taos, Picuris, Sandia, and Isleta, all 

in the valley of the Rio Grande. The Jemez live in the 
single village of that name, which stands on a small western 
tributary of the Rio Grande. The Piros, who are now 
almost completely Mexicanised, are found, mixed with some 

Tiwa, at the villages of Senecu and Isleta del Sur, below E) 

Paso, on the Rio Grande in Texas and Chihuahua. The 
Indians who speak the Keres or Keresan language occupy 

the villages of Acoma, Laguna, Sia, Santa Ana, San Felipe, 
Santo Domingo, and Cochiti, all in the Rio Grande valley. 

1 Victor Mindeleff, ‘A Study of joins in all the feasts. It seems a 

Pueblo Architecture in Tusayan and 
Cibola,” Eighth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
1891), p. 13, with the map. 

2 The difference of language between 
the people of Hano or Harno and the 
Hopi or Moqui by whom they were 
surrounded was long ago noted by Dr. 
P. G. S. Ten Broeck, who, writing of 
the Hopi or Moqui villages, observes 
that ‘‘ they all speak the same language 
except Harno, the most northern town 
of the three, which has a different 
language and some customs peculiar to 
itself, It is, however, considered one 
of the towns of the confederation, and 

very singular fact that, being within 
150 yards of the middle town, Harno 
should have preserved for so long a 
period its own language and customs. 
The other Moquis say the inhabitants 
of this town have a great advantage 
over them, as they perfectly understand 
the common language, and none but 
the people of Harno understand their 
dialect” (Dr. P. G. S. Ten Broeck, in 
H. R. Schoolcraft’s Zndian Tribes of 
the United States, iv. 87 sg.). Com- 
pare J. W. Fewkes, ‘*The Kinship 
of a Tanoan-speaking Community in 
Tusayan,” American Anthropologist, 
vii. (1894) pp. 162 sg. 

208 FOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

The people who speak the Zuni language are confined to 
the single large village of that name, situated about midway 
between the Pueblos on the Rio Grande and the Pueblos of 
the Hopis or Moquis in Arizona. Lastly, the Shoshonean 
language is spoken by the Hopis or Moquis who occupy the 
ancient province of Tusayan in North-eastern Arizona: their 
villages or towns are Oraibi, Walpi, Sichimovi, Mishongnovi, 
Shupaulovi, and Shongopovi.' This diversity of tongues 
among groups of Indians, all living side by side within a 
comparatively small area and characterised by the same 
general type of culture, seems to shew that these groups 
are descendants of different races who have been driven, 
probably by the pressure of stronger tribes, into these arid 
and semi-desert regions ; and that the similarity of their 
civilisation is to be ascribed, not to derivation from common 
ancestors, but to the effect of peculiar natural surroundings 
acting alike upon them all, and aided, no doubt, by inter- 
communication between them.” 
The Pueblo The Pueblo Indians are divided into a large number of 
mom totemic and exogamous clans, and the clans are further 
intomany grouped in phratries. In former times marriage within the 
Reon clan, and sometimes within the phratry, was rigorously 
clans with forbidden ; members of the samé clan were regarded as 
descent brothers and sisters. But nowadays the old rule of exogamy 
line, has to some extent broken down and in many villages a 
man may marry any woman who will have him, without regard 
to her clan or her phratry. The Pueblo Indians are mono- 
gamists. When a man marries, he goes to live in his wife’s 
house. Descent and inheritance are in the female line ; 
children belong to the clan of their mother, not to that of 
their father. Women own the houses, crops, sheep, and 
orchards, all in fact that pertains to the comfort of the 
family. The men own the horses and donkeys. No man 

This 
diversity of 
languages 
seem to 
shew that 
the Pueblo 
Indians 
belong to 
different 
races. 

1 F. W. Hodge, ‘ Pueblo Indian 
Clans,” American Anthropologist, ix. 
(1896) pp. 345 sg., with Mr. Victor 
Mindelefi’s map (Plate I.), in Eighth 
«lnnual Report of the Bureau of Eth- 
nology (Washington, 1891), prefixed to 
page 13. Authorities differ in their 
spelling of the names of the Hopi 
villages. TI follow Mr. J. W. Fewkes, 

in the Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 561 sg. 

2 Compare Fritz Krause, “Die 
Pueblo-Indianer,” Nova Acta, Abhana- 
lungen der Kaiserl. Leopold. Carol. 
Deutschen Akadentte der Naturforscher, 
lyxxvii. No. 1 (Halle, 1907), pp. 
108 sg¢. : 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 209 

will sell anything in a house without his wife’s consent, and 
when anything is sold the price received belongs to her. At 
a woman’s death her property descends to her daughters, 

The most westerly group of Pueblo Indians are the The Hopis 
Hopis or, as they used to be called, the Moquis. The name sare 
Hopi is a contraction of Hopitu, “ peaceful ones,” or Hopztu- westerly 
shinumu, “ peaceful all people,” the name by which they call Soup 
themselves. The origin of the name Moqui or Moki, by Indians. 
which these Indians have been popularly known, is uncertain. 

Their country lies just west of the boundary between New 
Mexico and Arizona, north and east of the Little Colorado 
River, and some sixty or seventy miles south of the Grand 
Colorado. The Hopi villages are seven in number, each Their 
built on the crest of a sandstone precipice in a position Yijaves. 
which must have rendered it practically impregnable to 
aboriginal foes. They fall into three groups, an eastern, a 
central, and a western. The eastern group comprises three 
villages all situated very close together on what is called the 
Eastern Tableland (A/esa), The names of the three villages, 
beginning at the east, are Hano (or Tegua), Sichomovi 
(Suchongnewy), and Walpi (Hualpi). Of these three Hano, 

as we have seen,® is not strictly speaking a Hopi village, 
being inhabited by Indians who speak a different language. 

A broad valley of seven miles of sand, interspersed with the 
corn, bean, and melon patches of these Indian farmers, 
divides the Eastern Tableland from the abrupt promontory 

on which perches, first, the romantic village of Mishongnovi 

1 The Rev. Samuel Gorman, quoted 
by L. H. Morgan, Azcient Society, 
p. 180 (as to the Laguna Indians) ; 
J. G. Bourke, The Snake-Dance of the 
Moguis of Arizona (London, 1884), 
pp. 135 sg-, 230, 248 (as to the 
Moquis or Hopis); Victor Mindeleff, 
“A Study of Pueblo Architecture,” 
Eighth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1891), 
p. 24 (as to the Hopis) ; Mrs. Matilda 
Coxe Stevenson, ‘* The Sia,” Eleventh 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Eth- 
nology (Washington, 1894), pp. 19-21 
(as to the Sia); zd. ‘The Zuii 
Indians,” Twenty-third Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology 
(Washington, 1904), p. 291 (as to the 

VOL, II 

Zuni) ; F. H. Cushing, ‘‘ Outlines of 
Zuni Creation Myths,” TZhérteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Eth- 
nology (Washington, 1896), p. 368 
(as to the Zufii); Cosmos Mindeleff, 
** Localization of Tusayan Clans,” 
Nineteenth Annual Report ofthe Bureau 
of American Ethnology, Paxt ii. (Wash- 
ington 1900), p. 647. Compare Fritz 
Krause, ‘* Die Pueblo-Indianer,” ova 
Acta, Abhandlungen der Kaiserl. Leo- 
pold. Carol. Deutschen Akademie der 
Naturforscher, \xxxvii. No. 1 (Halle, 
1907), pp. 84 59. ” 

2 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 560. 

3 Above, p. 207, note 2, 

Clans and 

phratries of 

the Indians 
of Walp 
and 
Sichomov1. 

210 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnuar. 

(Mushangnewy) ; above it, looking like the stronghold of 
a German robber-baron of the Middle Ages, appear the 
masonry walls of Shupaulovi (Shupowlewy); and three 
miles away, on the other wall of a wide and deep ravine, 
the fortress of Shongopovi (Sumopowy). Nearly ten miles 
west of Shongopovi is the solitary village or rather town of 
Oraibi (Oraybe), the largest and most westerly of the Hopi 
settlements: It occupies a strong position on the summit 
of a lofty bluff. The inhabitants studiously hold aloof from 
their kinsmen in the other villages, and their pronunciation 
of the common Hopi language differs somewhat from 
that of their fellows. The village of Walpi (Hualpi or 
Gualpe, as the Spaniards called it) is regarded as the 
most ancient of the Hopi settlements in Tusayan: it 
dates from before the middle of the sixteenth century. 
Some thirty years ago! the population of Oraibi was 

estimated at not less than fifteen hundred.’ 

The Indians of Walpi and its neighbour village of 
Sichomovi are or were divided into twelve phratries, and 
each of these phratries is subdivided into a number of 

totemic clans. 
as follows :—? 

1 J. G. Bourke, The Snake-Dance of 
the Moguis of Arizona (London, 1884), 
pp. 226 sg., 329 sg.; J. W. Fewkes, 
‘*Tusayan Migration Traditions,” 
Nineteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part ii. 
(Washington, 1900) pp. 579 sqg.3 zd. 
in Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mextco, i. 560 sgg. The 
forms of the names in_ brackets 
are those given by Captain Bourke. 
For a detailed description of the 
Hopi (Moqui) villages, with illustra- 
tions and plans, see Victor Mindeleff, 
““A Study of Pueblo Architecture 
in Tusayan and Cibola,” ighth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1891), pp. 45 5gg. The date assigned 
to Walpi in the text rests on the 
authority of Mr. J. W. Fewkes 
(‘*Tusayan ‘Migration Traditions,” p. 
579). Elsewhere Mr. Fewkes argues 
that Walpi was not founded on itd 
present site til! about 1700. SeeJ. W, 

The names of these phratries and clans are 

Fewkes, ‘‘ The Kinship of the Tusayan 
Villages,” American | Anthropologist, 
vii. (1894) pp. 394 599. 

2jJ. W. Fewkes, in Handbook of 
American Indians north of Mexico, i. 
562. This is the latest and presum- 
ably the most complete list. For 
earlier lists of Hopi (Moqui) clans, see 
Dr. P. G. S. Ten Broeck, in H. R. 
Schoolcraft’s Jndian Tribes of the 
United States, iv. 86 (repeated by L. 
H. Morgan, Ancient Soctety, p. 179) 
J. G. Bourke, The Snake-Dance of the 
Moguts of Arizona (London, 1884), 
pp. 116 sg., 335 sg. 3 Victor Mindeleff, 
SA Study of Pueblo Architecture,” 
Eighth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1891), pp. 
3859.3; J. W. Fewkes, ‘The Kinship of 
the Tusayan Villages,” American An- 
thropologist, vii. (1894) pp. 400 sgq. ; zd, 
*‘Tusayan Migration Traditions,” Vme- 
teenth Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Partii. (Washing- 
ton, 1900), pp. 582 sgg.; Cosmos ; 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 211 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION OF THE HOPI AT WALPI AND SICHOMOVI 

t 

Phratries. | Clans. 

| 1. Horn(4/a); 2. Mountain sheep; 3. Deer; 
4. Antelope; 5. Elk; 6. Seed grass; 7. Ant; 
8. Red ant; 9. Black ant; ro. Great ant; 11. 
Tiny ant; 12. Blue flute; 13. Drab or All| 
colours flute. 

I. Horn-flute (4 /a- | 
1. Water-house (Pa/k); 2. Corn; 3. Rain- 

Lengya) 

cloud; 4. Rainbow; 5. Lightning; 6. Agave; 
7. Rabbit-brush; 8. Aquatic animal [Duck]; 
gy. Frog; 10. Tadpole; 11. Bean; 12. Water- 
melon; 13. Rain. 

1, Snake (Chua); 2. Puma; 3. Dove; 4. 
Columnar cactus; §. Cactus fruit; 6. Opuntia; 
7. Opuntia frulescens; 8. Marmot; 9. Skunk ; 
to. Raccoon; 11. Sorrow; 12. Squash; 13. 
Crane; 14. Pigeon-hawk; 15. Thistle. The 
last five of these clans are extinct. 

1. Reed (Pakad); 2. Eagle; 3. Hawk; 4. 
Turkey; 5. Sun; 6. Paluna (Twin-brother of 
IV. Reed (Pakat) Pibakongherays 7. Star; * Chicken-hawk ; 
| 9. Willow ; 10. Greasewood. 

II. Waterhouse or 
Cloud (Path?) 

III. Snake (Chua) 

i [Continued on p. 272. 

Mindeleff, ‘‘ Localization of Tusayan plant, and Reed-grass clans. Captain 
Clans,” zézd. p. 651. The earliest of | Bourke enlarged the list to twenty- 
these lists (that of Dr. Ten Broeck) _ three, arranged in ten phratries with one 
comprised only seven clans, namely, clan over. His list (Zhe Snake-Dance 
the Deer, Sand, Water, Bear, Hare, of the Moguzs of Arisona (London, 
Prairie-wolf, Rattlesnake, Tobacco- 1884), p. 336) is as follows :— 

Phratries. Clans. | Phratries. Clans. 
| 
1. Parrot. 13. Bear. 
: Pir 2. Cottonwood, Viotaraey { 14. Hemlock. 
3. Macaw. 15. Rattlesnake. 
Il. Phrat 4. Corn. wae Phratry { 16. Dove, 
heey { 5. Frog. VIII. Phratr 17. Tobacco, 
6. Turkey. ; y { 18, Cotton-tail Rabbit. 
Ith. Phratry 7. Eagle. 19. Blue-seed-grass. 
8. Sun. 20. Buck-grass. 
IV. Ph { 9. Badger. PS Phratry { 21. Deer, 
AON tp Butterfly. xX. Phratry {| 2 Yellow Wood. 
V. Phrat 11, Coyote. m1 ia {| 23. Squash, 
+ £A7a7Y | 12. Skeleton. 
| 

Small size 
of the Hopi 
clans, 

212 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Chav. 

Phratries. Clans. 

Yellow fox; 5. Grey fox; 6. Zrohona (small 
mammal); 7. J/asz (Afasauu, dead, skeleton, 
Ruler of the Dead); 8. Pifion; 9. Juniper; ro. 
Bow; 11. Szkyacht (small yellow bird); 12. 
Tuvuchi (small red bird). 

I, Cottontail rabbit (Zase); 2. Jackrabbit. 

V. Wood 
(Kokop) 
i 

| 1. Wood (Aokop); 2. Coyote; 3. Wolf; 4. 
VI. Cottontail 

rabbit (Zado) i 

1. Kukuch (kind of lizard); 2. Bachipkwast 
(kind of lizard); 3. Mavanawi (kind of lizard) ; 
4. Afomobi (kind of lizard); 5. White sand; 6. 
Red sand (Zuwa); 7. Mud; 8. Flower; 9. 
Small striped squirrel. 

1. Bear (Yonau); 2. Wild-cat ; 3. Blue-bird; 
4. Spider; 5. Fir. 

VII. Sand or Earth 
1 Guoesd Danese | I. jSacred Dancer (Kachina); 2. Paroquet ; 

(Tuwa) 

VIII. Bear (Honaz) 

; 3. Raven; 4. Yellow bird; 5. Blackbird; 6. 
(Kachina) Spruce ; 7. Cottonwood. : 

1. Tansy mustard (4sa); 2. Blackearth 

Sacred Dancer (Kachina); 3. Oak; 4. Chap- 

paral cock; 5. Magpie; 6. Snow- bunting; 

7. Boomerang rabbit-stick ; 8. Field-mouse. 

XI. Tobacco (Pzba) 1. Tobacco (Pzba) ; 2. Pipe. 

1, Badger (Honani); 2. Porcupine; 3. Turkey- 

a ae | buzzard; 4. Hutterfly; 5. Evening primrose; 6. 

Sacred Dancer (Kachina) 

X. Tansy mus- 
tard (Asa) 

This gives a total of one hundred and two, or rather one 
hundred and one clans for the two villages of Walpi and 
Sichomovi, one of the clans (Sacred Dancer, Kachina) 
occurring in two phratries. But of these clans five are 
now extinct, so that the number of existing clans in these 
two villages seems to be ninety-six. As the total population 
of the two villages at the census of 1900 was only 324, 
it follows that the average strength, or rather weakness, of 
each clan in these villages was three persons and a fraction, 
all told. These very remarkable figures deserve to be 
borne in mind in considering the present state of totemism 

1jJ. W. Fewkes, in Handbook of claimed two hundred and five, and 
American Indians north of Mexico, Sichomovi had to be content with 
i. 562. Of this grand total Walp{ one hundred and nineteen. 

XVI 

among the Hopis. 
gamous, 

TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 

213 

No wonder the Hopi clans are exo- 
A man could not have a very large choice of 

wives in his own clan, when the rest of it, exclusive of 
himself, is composed of two whole persons and a fragment 
of a third, all, or rather both, of whom may possibly be 

males. 

Most of these clans occur in the other Hopi villages, pistri. 

though not in Hano. 

The Bear clan is supposed to be the 

oldest in Tusayan, and the Snake clan is said to have beer 

among the first to settle in the district. 

Together, the 

Snake and Horn people control the Antelope and Snake 
fraternities and possess the fetishes and other paraphernalia 

of the famous Snake dance. 
is kept at Walpi. 

The palladium of this people 
The Flute people, once very numerous, The Fiute 

bution of 

the Hopi 
clans in 
other 
v.llages. 

are now nearly extinct in the Hopi villages of the Eastern People. 

Tableland. 

The chief of the Flute priesthood controls the 

Flute ceremony, which occurs biennially, alternating with 

the Snake dance. 

There are two divisions of the Flute 

fraternity, one known as the Drab Flute and the other as 

the Blue Flute. 

There are Horn people in most of the The Horn 

Hopi villages, and clans belonging to this phratry are People. 

generally named after horned animals. 
Snake priest in the Antelope rites of the Snake dance. 

They now join the 
The 

The Cloud 

Water-house or Cloud (Patk2) phratry includes a number of P°°?'* 
clans which came to the Hopi country from the south, 
bringing with them a high form of sun and serpent worship, 
which is still prominent at the Winter Solstice ceremony. 
The Sun priests, who are found in most Hopi villages 
and are especially strong at Walpi, accompanied the Cloud 

people.’ 

from a Snake-woman, who had the power of changing from 

a snake into a woman. 

The Snake clan at Walpi is said to be descended The Snake 

clan is 
descended 

She married a man and gave birth si a 

nake- 

first to snakes but afterwards to human beings, from whom woman, 

the Snake clan is descended. 

worship at Walpi, from which 
villages,” 

1J. W. Fewkes, in Handbook of 
American Indians north of Mexico, 
i, 562 sg. 

2 J. G. Bourke, Zhe Snake-Dance of 
the Moquts of Arizona (London, 1884), 

They established the Snake 
it spread to the other Hopi 

p- 1773; H.R. Voth, Zhe Traditions of 
the Hopi (Chicago, 1905), pp. 30-35 
{Field Columbian Museum, Publication 
96). A considerable number of other 
traditions relating to the Hopi clans 

who gave 
birth to 
snakes. 

The clans 
of the 
village of 
Hano. 

The Hopi 
phratries 
seem to 

have arisen is also that of a clan included within it. 

by sub- 

214 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

The village of Hano, though it ranks with the Hopi 
Pueblos, is inhabited, as we have seen, by Indians of a 
different stock. In 1893 the native population of the 
village of Hano, exclusive of twenty-three husbands of Hano 
women, numbered one hundred and forty persons. These were 
divided into eight clans, namely, the Bear, Corn, Tobacco, Pine, 
Cloud, Eatth, Sacred Dancer (Kachina), and Sun. Formerly, 
they included also the Crane, Timber, Pink Conch, Herb, 
Turquoise Ear Pendant, Stone, and Grass clans; but these 
have died out since the Hano people settled in Tusayan.’ 

From the table of the Hopi phratries and clans given 
above ® it will be seen that each phratry bears a name which 
This points to the 

division of SUbdivision of an original clan of that name into a number 
the original of new clans, all but one of which took new names for the 

clans. 

sake of distinction. Qn this subject the remarks of Mr. 
Cosmos Mindeleff deserve to be quoted. Speaking of the 
Hopi clans he says that under the rule of female descent, by 
which children belonged to their mother’s clan, not to their 
father’s, “a clan in which there were many girls would grow 

have been recorded ; but as they appear 
to relate mainly to the migrations of 
the people and to throw little or no 
light on totemism, that is, on the 
relation of the people to their totems, 
they need not be considered in this 
work. See Victor Mindeleff, ‘A 
Study of Pueblo Architecture,” Eighth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1891), pp. 
16 sgg.3 J. W. Fewkes, ‘* Tusayan 
Migration Legends,” Nineteenth An- 
nual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Part ii. (Wash- 
ington, 1900) pp. 577 sgg.,; H. R. 
Voth, Zhe Traditions of the Hopi 
(Chicago, 1905), pp. 16-48. From 
Mr. Voth’s book we gather that the 
clans at the village of Oraibi include 
the Bear, Spider, Lizard, Sand, 
Rattlesnake, Badger, Butterfly, and 
Divided Spring (Batkz) clans; and 
that the clans in the village of 
Mishongnovi include the Divided 
Spring (Batk), Sand, Bear, Parrot, 
Crow, Crane, Eagle, Corn-Ear, and 
Sacred Dancer (Kachina) clans. Fo 
a list of clans in these and the other 

“Hopi villages, as they existed about 
1883, see Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘* Local- 
ization of Tusayan Clans,” Mineteenth 
winnual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Part ii’ (Wash- 
ington, 1900) p. 651. 

1 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 531. Captain J. 
G. Bourke, writing in 1884, says that 
the Tegua (Tewa) Indians of Hano 
were divided into nine clans named as 
follows: Sun, Corn, Snake, Tobacco, 
Cottonwood, Pine, Cloud, Bear, and 
Parrot. See J. G. Bourke, The Snake- 
Dance of the Mogquis of Arizona 
(London, 1884), p. 335. According 
to Mr. Cosmos Mindeleff, about the 
year 1883 there were at Hano families 
belonging to the following clans: Bear, 
Eagle, Sun, Cottonwood, Tansy 
Mustard (fsa), Water (Corn), Water 
(Cloud), Lizard, Tobacco, and Coyote! 
See Cosmos Mindeleff, *¢ Localization 
of Tusayan Clans,” Nineteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part ii, (Washington, 1900) 
p. 651. 

2 See pp. 211 sg. 

XVI ZTOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 215 

and increase in importance, while one in which the children 
were all boys would become extinct. There was thus a 
constant ebb and flow of population within each clan and 
consequently in the home or houses of each clan. The 
clans themselves were not fixed units; new ones were born 
and old ones died, as children of one sex or the other 
predominated. The creation of clans was a continuous 
process. Thus, in the Corn clan of Tusayan, under favour- 
able conditions there grew up subclans claiming connection 
with the root, stem, leaves, blossom, pollen, etc.”’ Thus, we 
can understand why lists of totemic clans drawn up at 
different times among the same people may differ from each 
other considerably, and yet all of them be correct for the 
time to which they refer. 

The Pueblo Indians of the Zufiian stock are comprised The zuaj 
within the single large village of Zufii, which in 1896 was /dans. 
reported to contain 1621 inhabitants.” Their country lies 
between Tusayan, the land of the Hopi Indians, on the west 
and the Rio Grande valley, the home of the Eastern group 
of Pueblo Indians. It appears to correspond to the ancient 
province of Cibola.* The present village of Zufii, which is The 
the largest of all modern Pueblo villages, stands on a knoll Silage ce 
beside the Zufi River. The position is not naturally a Zuai. 
strong one, and appears to have been chosen merely because 
it is conveniently near to a large stretch of arable land 
watered by what is rare in the land of the Pueblos, a perennial 
stream. Three miles to the east of it rises the conspicuous The ruins 
and beautiful tableland of red and white sandstone known as Of the old 

7 ‘ . : r village of 
Thunder Mountain, on the summit of which lie the ruins of Zuii. 

1 Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘* Localization 
of Tusayan Clans,” Nineteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part ii. (Washington, 
1900) p. 647. Similarly, speaking of 
the old Hopi gentes (clans), Mr. Victor 
Mindeleff observes: ‘‘There are, 
moreover, in addition to these, many 
other gentes and sub-gentes of more 
recent origin. The subdivision, or 
rather the multiplication of gentes may 
be said to be a continuous process ; as, 
for example, in ‘corn’ can be found 
families claiming to be of the root, 
stem, leaf, ear, blossom, etc., all be- 

longing to corn; but there may be 
several families of each of these com- 
ponents constituting district sub- 
gentes.” See Victor Mindeleff, “A 
Study of Pueblo Architecture,” £zghth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1891) p. 38. 

2 F. W. Hodge, ‘Pueblo Indian 
Clans,” American Anthropologist, ix. 
(1896) pp. 346, 348. 

3 Victor Mindeleff, ‘*A Study of 
Pueblo Architecture,” Zighth Annual | 

Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1891), p. 80. 

Totemic 
clans of 
the Zuni. 

216 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA ciav. 

old Zufii. Its situation, unlike that of the modern village, 
is impregnable; for the tableland is a thousand feet above 
the plain and almost inaccessible, the sides being for the 
most part too precipitous to be scaled. Two foot- paths 
traversing abrupt slopes, where holds for hands and feet 
have been chipped out of the rock, furnish a precarious 
approach to, the summit. Many legends and superstitions 
of the Zufii cluster round these airy ruins ; and amongst the 
crags, hidden away in secluded nooks or perched on nearly 
unapproachable pinnacles and slopes, are many shrines and 

sacred objects to which the Indians go on pilgrimage." 
The Indians of Zufi are or were till lately divided into 
twenty-four totemic clans, of which the names are as 

follows :-—? 

1. Crane or Pelican. 

3. Yellow-wood or Bieiuieen ake 
5. Coyote. 

7. Tobacco. 

g. Badger. 

tr, Antelope. 

Sun. 

15. Eagle. 

Water. 
Parrot-Macaw. 
21. Cotton-tail rabbit. 
23. Tortoise. 

2. Grouse or Sagecock (Chap- 
paral Cock). 
4. Bear. 
6. Red-top plant or Spring-herb., 
8. Maize-plant. 
10. Deer. 
12. Turkey. 
14. Sky. 
16, Toad or Frog. 
18. Rattlesnake. 
20. 'Wood, 
. Black Corn. 
. Sun Flower. 

1 Mrs. Tilly E. Stevenson, ‘‘ The 
Religious Life of the Zuni Child,” 
Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington), 1887), pp. 
539 sg. 3 Victor Mindeleff, ‘‘ A Study 
of Pueblo Architecture,” L£ighth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1891), pp. 80, 
89 59.5 97 59 

2 ¥. H. Cushing, ‘‘ Outlines of 
Zuiii Creation Myths,” Zhzrteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1896), p. 368 ; 
Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, ‘‘ The 
Zuni Indians,” Twenty-third Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology (Washington, 1904), p. 292; 
J. G. Bourke, ‘*Notes upon the 
Gentile Organization of the Apaches 
of Arizona,” Journal of American 

Folk-lore, iii. (1890) p. 116. Mrs. 
Stevenson gives a list of sixteen exist- 
ing and four extinct clans, which agrees 
with that of Mr. Cushing except that 
(1) she omits the Water and Rattle- 
snake clan ; (2) she adds the Wood, 
Cotton-tail rabbit, and Black corn 
clans ; (3) she translates the native 
word Pichikwe as ‘‘ Dogwood,” whereas 
Cushing translates it ‘* Parrot-Macaw.” 
Elsewhere Mrs. Stevenson records a 
tradition that the Pchtkwe (Dogwood 
clan) was divided into a Macaw (.1/e/a) 
section and a Raven (Adéé) section 
(op. cit. p. 40). Captain Bourke gives 
a list of fourteen clans. In the text 
the first nineteen clans are taken from 
Mr. Cushing’s list, the next three from 
Mrs. Stevenson’s, and the last two 
from Captain Bourke’s. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 217 

With regard to the rules of marriage in Zufii we have 

unfortunately no information; but we may presume that 
the Zufii clans, like those of other Pueblo Indians, are or 
once were exogamous, that is, that no man was allowed to 
marry a woman of his own clan. We are told that descent Descent 
and inheritance are in the female line,’ which implies that Piel: 
children belong to the clan of their mother, not to that of tine. 
their father. But “while descent is through the maternal 
side, the offspring is also closely allied to the father’s clan. 
The child is always referred to as belonging to the mother’s 
clan and as being ‘the child’ of the father’s clan.”? Further, 
the Zufi clans, says Mr. Cushing, are “totemic; that is, 
they bear the names and are supposed to have intimate 
relationship with various animals, plants, and objects or 
elements.”*® But what precisely the relationship is supposed 
to be between a person and his or her totem, Mr. Cushing 
omits to say, nor is the omission, so far as I know, supplied 
by any other writer. Here, as in the case of most of the 
tribes within the area of the United States, we are left 
without exact information as to the essence of totemism, 
that is, the nature of the relation which is supposed to exist 
between a totemic clan and its totem. 

The Eastern group of Pueblo Indians occupy, as we The 
have seen, a considerable number of villages scattered Eastern 
about in the valley of the Rio Grande, and they belong to picha’ 
two linguistic stocks, the Tanoan and the Keresan. Like fe mice 
their western brethren in Zufii and Tusayan, they are of the Rio 
divided into totemic clans, of which the names, if little else, C™"4* 
have been recorded. One of the villages inhabited by The 
Indians of the Keresan stock is Acoma, strongly situated on {vtemic 
a high rock in New Mexico, about sixty miles west of the Acoma. 
Rio Grande. It is said to enjoy the distinction of being 
the oldest inhabited settlement within the United States. 

The Spaniards, who visited it in 1583, and estimated its 

1F. H. Cushing, ‘‘Outlines of American Ethnology (Washington, 
Zufii Creation Myths,” ZAzréeenth 1904); p. 291. 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, /.c. 
Ethnology (Washington, 1891), p. The statement is obscure, but I have 
368 ; Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, no means of elucidating it. 
‘“‘The Zufi Indians,” Twesty-third 3 F. H. Cushing, dc. 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 4 Above, pp. 206 sg. 

Totemic 
clans 

of the 
Laguna, 
a Pueblo 
people 
of the 
Keresan 
stock, 

218 ZOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnuap. 

population at six thousand persons, speak of the dizzy path 
that leads up.to the town and mention the cultivated fields 
two leagues away. The number of inhabitants in 1902 had 
dwindled to five hundred and sixty-six. They were divided 
into twenty clans named as follows :— 

1. Water. | 2. Yellow corn. 3. Red corn. 4. Blue corn. 
5. Brown corn. 6. White corn. 7. Eagle. 8. Parrot. 

g. Sun. 1o, Road-runner. 11. Oak, 12. Rattlesnake. 
13. Bear. 14. Turkey. 15. Calabash. 16. Antelope. 
17. Sky. 18. Buffalo. 19. Fire. 20. Ant. 

Four of these clans (namely, Blue corn, Brown corn, 
Buffalo, and Fire) were extinct in Ig02. Nothing is said 
as to the rules of marriage and descent, and nothing as 
to the relation of people to their totems.’ On the analogy 
of those Pueblo Indians as to whose social system we are 
better informed, we may perhaps assume that the Acoma 
clans are or were once exogamous, and that the children 
belong to their mother’s clan. 

Laguna is the name of another tribe of Pueblo Indians 
speaking the Keresan language. They have their principal 
village on the bank of the San José River in New Mexico, 
about forty-five miles west of Albuquerque. In 1851 the 
population of the village was estimated at nine hundred 
persons ;* in 1905 the whole tribe numbered 1384 souls, 
divided into twenty clans, which were named as follows :-— 

1. Bear, 2. Sun. 3. Badger. 
4. Eagle. 5. Watersnake. 6, Rattlesnake, 
7. Coyote. 8. Corn (divided into 10. Water. 
8. Yellow corn and 
9. Red corn). 
yi. Turkey. 12. Wolf. 13. Earth. 
14. Mountain lion. . 15. Parrot. 16. Turquoise. 
17. Chapparral-cock. 18. Antelope. 19. Lizard. 
20. Oak. ; 

Two of these clang (namely, Earth and Mountain lion) 
were extinct in 1905. Most of the clans were grouped 
1F, W. Hodge, in Handbook of 2 Dr. P. G. S. Ten Broeck, in 

American Indians north of Mexico, H.R. Schoolcraft’s Jndzan Tribes of 
i, 10 sg. the United States, iv. 75 49. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 219 

together in phratries, of which the following have been Grouping 

recorded :—. Loe 
4 clans in 
Phratries. Clans. Phratries. Clans. phratries. 
1. Bear. 1. Water-snake. 
I. Peta} 2 re THI. Pay} a eee 
4. Wolf. 4. Earth. 
Il. Phratry { : erie LV. Phratry { 7 rr 

4 

The writer who gives us this information says nothing 
as to the rules of marriage and descent in the tribe. 
Fortunately in the case of the Laguna people we are 
not left merely to conjecture. An older writer, the Rev. 
Samuel Gorman, has supplied the requisite information. 
Writing of the Pueblo Indians in 1860, he says: “ Each Rules of 
town is classed into tribes or families, and each of these M6 

and 
groups is named after sgme animal, bird, herb, timber, descent 

planet, or one of the four elements. In the pueblo of Tac 
Laguna, which is one of above one thousand inhabitants, 
there are seventeen of these tribes; some are called bear, 
some deer, some rattlesnake, some corn, some wolf, some 
water, etc. etc. The children are of the same tribe as their 
mother. And, according to ancient custom, two persons of 
the same tribe are forbidden to marry ; but, recently, this 
custom begins to be less rigorously observed than anciently.”? 
Thus the totemic clans of the Laguna Indians are or were 
exogamous, with descent in the female line; which agrees 
with the few statements on that subject which have been 
vouchsafed with reference to the other Pueblo Indians. 

The Sia are ariother Pueblo people of the Keresan The Sia, 
stock. Their village stands on high ground beside the pects 

Jemez River, a western tributary of the Rio Grande. The of the 
Keresan 
people are poor and shrunken in numbers, inhabiting only a ocx. 

small group of houses among the extensive ruins of what 

1F, W. Hodge, in Handbook of of New Mexico, quoted by L. H. 
American Indians north of Mexico, Morgan, Anctent Society, p. 180. 
i. 752 sg. 3 F, W. Hodge, ‘ Pueblo Indian 
2 The Rev. Samuel Gorman, in Clans,” American Anthropologist, ix. 
an address to the Historical Society (1896) p. 346. 

Totemic 
clans o1 
the Sia. 

Marriage 
customs of 

the Sia. 

220 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuaP. 

was formerly one of the largest towns of this region. 
According to the census of 1890 they numbered only one 
hundred and six persons. So scanty is the supply of water 
that the Sia cannot grow enough grain to supply their 
needs ; but the women labour industriously at the manu- 
facture of pottery, and the men barter their wares for corn 
and wheat with their neighbours! The Sia were formerly 
divided into at least twenty-three totemic and exogamous 

clans, of which the names have been recorded as 
follows :—? 

1. Corn. 2. Coyote. 3. Squash. 

4. Tobacco. 5. Bear. 6. Eagle. 

7. Star. 8. Moon. g. Sun. 

10. Deer, 11. Antelope. 12. Cougar. 

13. Cloud. 14. Crane. 15. Oak. 

16. Fire. 17. Parrot. 18. White shell bead. 

19. Ant. 20. Granite. 21. Cactus. 

22. Turtle Dove. 23. Sage Brush. 

However, by 1890 all but the first six of these clans 
were extinct, and even of the first six the Eagle, Bear, and 
Squash clans were almost extinct, being represented only by 
one old man each, though the Squash clan had in addition a 
second man from Tusayan. The Tobacco clan was repre- 
sented by a single family. The only two clans numerically 
well represented were the Corn and the Coyote? The old 
custom of the tribe forbade a man to marry a woman either 
of his father’s or of his mother’s clan; but in 1890, when 

1 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, At the time of Captain Bourke’s visit 

“The Sia,” Zleventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Wash- 
ington, 1894), pp. 9-11. 

2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
op. cit. p. 19; J. G, Bourke, 
“‘ Notes upon the Gentile Organiza- 
tion of the Apaches of Arizona,” 
Journal of American Folk-lore, iii. 
(1890) p. 117. Captain Bourke, 
who visited Zia (Sia) in 1881, gives a 
list of eight clans (Turtle Dove, Native 
Tobacco, Bear, Corn, Eagle, Coyote, 
Sage Brush, Pumpkin). Mrs. Steven- 
son, who visited Sia in 1890, gives a 
list of twenty-one, of which, however, 
all but six (Corn, Coyote, Squash, 
Tobacco, Bear, Eagle) were extinct. 

there were only fifteen families living 
at Sia, so that the number of members 
of each clan must have been very 
small. 

3 Mrs. , Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
‘*The Sia,” Eleventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1894), p. 19. Mrs. Coxe left 
Washington in March 1890 to study 
the Sia and continued her researches 
among them to the end of the fiscal 
year (of. c7t. p. xxx.). Six years later, 
in 1895, Mr. F. W. Hodge reported a 
somewhat different state of things at 
Sia. According to him there were then 
sixteen clans in existence, while twenty- 
one had become extinct. As the 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 221 

the remnant of the tribe was investigated, the numbers were 
so shrunken that the Sia had to break through the old 
exogamous rules or perish. Accordingly marriages with 
the forbidden clans were looked upon with disfavour but 
tolerated. The older men watched jealously over the 
younger men, lest they should seek brides among other 
tribes; and beautiful as the Sia maidens are esteemed, few 
suitors came awooing them from other villages ; for accord- 
ing to tribal custom a husband takes up his abode in his 
wife’s home, and there is little to attract well-to-do Indians 
to the ruinous, poverty-stricken village of Sia. -“ Though. Loose 
the Sia are monogamists, it is common for the married, as Papel at 
well as the unmarried, to live promiscuously with one among the 
another ; the husband being as fond of his wife’s children as 
if he were sure of the paternal parentage. That these people, 
however, have their share of latent jealousy is evident from 
the secrecy observed on the part of a married man or woman 
to prevent the anger of the spouse. Parents are quite as 
fond of their daughter’s illegitimate offspring, and as proud 
of them, as if they had been born in wedlock ; and the man 
who marries a woman having one or more ‘illegitimate 
children apparently feels the same attachment for these 
children as for those his wife bears him. . . . These loose 
marriage customs doubtless arise from the fact that the Sia 
are now numerically few and their increase is desired, and 
that, as many of the clans are now extinct, it is impossible 
to intermarry in obedience to ancient rule.” * 

Another Pueblo tribe of the Keresan stock are the 

Cochiti. Their village of the same name stands on the 
average number of members in each Cloud, Crane, Crow, Dance- Kilt, 
of the existing clans was 6°62, the Dove, Hawk, Ivy, Lizard, Moon, 

population of the village had practically 
remained stationary since Mrs. Steven- 
son’s visit, though there had been 
apparently a curious revival of extinct 
clans, due perhaps to the importation 
of fresh blood from other villages. At 
the time of Mr. Hodge’s visit the 
existing clans were the Antelope, 
Badger, Bear, Calabash, Chapparal 
Cock, Corn, Coyote, Deer, Eagle, Fire, 
Parrot, Rattlesnake, Sun, Tobacco, 
Turkey, and Water; and the extinct 
clans were Ant, Arrow, Buffalo, 

Mountain Lion, Oak, Pegwood (?), 
Pifion, Salt, Shell bead, Star, Stone, 
Turquoise. Mr. Hodge visited the 
Pueblo villages of New Mexico in the 
summer and autumn of 1895. See F. 
W. Hodge, ‘ Pueblo Indian Clans,” 
American Anthropologist, ix. (1896) pp. 
345, 347, 348 sgg., with the table. 

1 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
“The Sia,” Eleventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1894), pp. 19-21. 

The clans 
of the 
Cochiti, 

a Pueblo 
people 

of the 
Keresan 
stock, 

Clans of 
Santa 
Domingo, 
a Pueblo 
village 

of the 
Keresan 
stock. 

222 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA char. 

west bank of the Rio Grande in New Mexico, twenty-seven 
miles south-west of Santa Fe. In 1907 they numbered 
three hundred persons and were divided into clans, of which 
the following nineteen names have been recorded :— 

I. Sun, 2. Water. 3. Cottonwood. 
4. Turquoise. 5. Mountain Lion. 6. Bear. 

7. Calabash. | 8. Coyote. g. Oak. 

ro, Corn. 1x. Fire. 12. Eagle. 

13. Turkey. 14. Antelope. 15. Rattlesnake. 
16. Dance-Kilt. 17. Reindeer (?). 18. Ivy. 

19. Mexican Sage. 

The last eight of these clans were extinct in 1907. 
Nothing is said as to the rules of marriage and descent in 
the tribe.’ We may conjecture that the clans are or were 
exogamous, and that descent was in the female line. 

Another Pueblo village inhabited by Indians speaking 
the Keresan language is Santo Domingo? on the Rio 
Grande in New Mexico. It was visited in 1881 by Captain 
J. G. Bourke, who found the inhabitants divided into eighteen 
clans, bearing the following names :— 

1. Eagle. 2. Water. 3. Toad. 

4. Macaw-Parrot. 5. Snake. 6. Sun. 

7. Bear. 8. Mountain Lion. g. Crane, 

1o. Yucca or Soap-weed. 11. Sage Brush. 12. Badger. 

13. Buffalo. 14. Coyote. 15. Antelope. 
16. Tortoise. 17. Evergreen Oak. 18. Maiz (Corn). 

Some of these clans were represented by only two or 
three survivors. Though he does not expressly record the 
rules of marriage and descent among these Indians, Captain 
Bourke makes a statement from which we may infer that the 
clans are, as appears to be usual with the Pueblo Indians, 
exogamous, with descent in the female line. He says that 

1 F. W. Hodge, in Handbook of Coyote. See J. G. Bourke, ‘* Notes 

American Indians north of Mexico, i. 
317 sg. Captain J. G, Bourke visited 
Cochiti in 1881 or 1882 and has 
recorded the names of twelve clans as 
follows: I. Macaw; 2. Melon; 3. 
Eagle; 4. Sun; 5, Water; 6. Ever- 
green Oak; 7. Antelope; 8. Badger; 
9. Com; 10. Bear; 11. Turkey ; 12. 

upon the Gentile Organization of the 
Apaches of Arizona,” Journal of 
American Folk-lore, iii. (1890) p. t17. 

2 F, W. Hodge, ‘* Pueblo Indian 
Clans,” American Anthropologist, ix. 
(1896) p. 346; zd. in Handbook of 
American Indians north of Mexico, 
i, 6715. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 223 

an Indian of Santo Domingo “asserted that he was a 
member of the Chamisa or Sage Brush clan, his father was 
of the Maize or Corn clan, his wife and children of the 
Coyote, and his wife’s father of the Aguzla or Eagle.”* 

The remaining two Pueblo villages of Indians speaking Clans of 
the Keresan languages are Santa Ana and San Felipe, the ees 
latter situated on the Rio Grande and the former on its 
western tributary the Jemez River? In 1881 or 1882 the 
Indians of Santa Ana were divided into ten clans, of which 

the names were these :-—® 

1. Turkey. 2. Chalchthuitl. 3. Turtle Dove. 
4. Coyote, 5. Macaw. 6. Corn. 

7. Eagle. 8. Snake. 9g. Badger. 

to. Bear, 

In the year 1895 the Indians of San Felipe were divided Clans of 
‘ ‘ . San Felipe, 
into twenty-one clans, of which three were nearly extinct ; 
and they remembered nine more clans which had become 

extinct. 

The names of these clans are as follows :—* 

e 
1. Ant. 2. Antelope. 3. Arrow.* 
4. Bear. 5. Calabash. 6. Chapparal Cock.* 
7. Coral. 8. Corn. 9. Coyote, 
Io. Crow.* Ir. Deer.* 12. Dove. 

1 J. G. Bourke, The Snake-Dance 
of the Moguis of Arizona (London, 
1884), pp. 49 $9. 

2 F, W. Hodge, ‘Pueblo Indian 
Clans,” American Anthropologist, ix. 
(1896) p. 346, with the map of the 
Pueblo country, in Lighth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1891), Plate I., facing 
. 13. 

r 3 J. G. Bourke, ‘Notes upon the 
Gentile Organization of the Apaches of 
Arizona,” Journal of American Folk- 
fore, iti. (1890) p. 116. In 1895 
Mr. F. W. Hodge recorded only seven 
clans at Santa Ana, as follows: 1. 
Corn; 2. Coyote; 3. Dove; 4. Eagle; 
5. Fire; 6. Parrot; 7. Turkey. See 
F. W. Hodge, ‘‘ Pueblo Indian Clans,” 
American Anthropologist, ix. (1896) 
pp. 348 sgg., with the table, Plate VII. 

4 F. W. Hodge, of. cit. pp. 348 s99., 

with the table, Plate VII. The clans 

whose names are distinguished by an 
asterisk were extinct at the time when 
Mr. Hodge wrote. Captain Bourke 
visited San Felipe in 1881 or 1882 and 
has recorded sixteen clans as follows : 
1. Eagle; 2. Sun (almost extinct) ; 3. 
Water; 4. Antelope; 5. Corn; 6, 
Frog; 7. Turkey; 8. Coyote; 9. 
Turtle Dove; 10, Bunchi (native 
tobacco); 11. Chalchthuzt]; 12. Snake 
(extinct); 13. Evergreen Oak (ex- 
tinct); 414. Badger (extinct); 15. 
Macaw (extinct); 16, Bear (extinct), 
See J. G. Bourke, ‘‘ Notes upon the 
Gentile Organization of the Apaches of 
Arizona,” Journal of American Folk- 
fore, iii. (1890) p. 116. In regard 
to these and other discrepancies between 
lists of totem clans recorded at different 
times we must always bear in mind the 
more or less constant flux to which 
totem clans are subject. See above, 
Pp. 214 s¢. 
‘ 

Clans of 
the Pueblo 
Indians 

of the 
Tanoan 
stock. 

224 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Cuar. 

13. Duck. 14. Eagle. 15. Earth.* 

16. Fire. 17. Flower (red and 18. Frog or Toad. 
white). 

19. Humming-bird. 20. Ivy. 21. Moon.* 

22. Mountain Lion.* 23. Oak. 24. Parrot. 

25. Salt.* 26. Sun. 27. Swallow. 

28. Tobacco. 29. Turkey. 30. Turquoise,* 

31, Water. 

The writer who has recorded the names of these clans 
says nothing as to the rules of marriage and descent. But 
on the analogy of the other Pueblo Indians, about whom 
these particulars have been given, we may conjecture that 
the clans of Santa Ana and San Felipe are or were at one 
time exogamous, and that children belong to their mother’s 
clan. 

Lastly, the Pueblo Indians who speak dialects of the 
Tanoan language, and occupy a considerable number of 
villages in the valley of the Rio Grande,’ are or have been 
divided into many clans, of which not a few are now extinct. 
The following names of their clans, existing or extinct, have 
been recorded ‘by Mr. F. W. Hodge :—?! 

1. Ant. 2, Antelope. 3. Axe. 

4. Badger. 5. Bear. 6. Bluebird. 

7. Buffalo. 8. Calabash. g. Cloud. 

to. Coral. ir. Corn. 12. Corn (black). 
13. Corn (blue). 14. Corn (red). 15. Corn (sweet). 
16. Corn (white). 17. Corn (Yellow). 18. Cottonwood. 
19. Coyote. zo. Crane or Heron. 21. Crow. 

22. Deer. 23. Eagle. 24. Eagle (painted). 
25. Earth. 26. Feather. 27. Fire. 

1 For the names of their villages, see 
above, p. 207. 

2 F. W. Hodge, ‘‘ Pueblo Indian 
Clans,” American Anthropologist, ix. 
(1896) pp. 348 sgy., with the table, 
Plate VII. Two of these villages, 
namely, Jemez on the Jemez River in 
New Mexico and Isleta in Texas, were 
visited by Captain Bourke in 1881, and 
he has recorded the names of their clans. 
In Jemez, of which the population was 
401 in 1881, Captain Bourke recorded 
the names of ten clans as follows: 1. 
Chalchthuitl; 2. Coyote; 3. Corn; 
4. Pine; 5. Evergreen Oak; 6. Sun; 

7. Eagle; 8. Badger; 9. Pumpkin ; 
10. Crow (only one man left), In 
Isleta, which in 1881 was almost com- 
pletely Mexicanised and contained 
thirty-six families and four widows, 
Captain Bourke recorded the names of * 
twelve clans, as follows: 1. Corn; 
2. Eagle; 3. Sun; 4. Water; 5. 
Chalchihuitl ; 6. Bear; 7. Turtle 
Dove; 8. Rabbit; 9. Watermelon, or 
Pumpkin ; 10. Goose, or Turkey ; 11. 
Coyote (extinct); 12. Snake (extinct). 
See J. G. Bourke, ‘‘ Notes upon the 
Gentile Organization of the Apaches of 
Arizona,” Journal of American Folk- 
lore, iii, (1890) p. 117. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 225 

28. Firewood or Timber. 29. Flower (genus 30. Goose. 
Dandelion). 

31. Gopher. 32. Grass. 33. Hawk. 

34. Herb (species 35. Knife. 36. Lizard. 

unknown). 

37. Marten. 38. Mole. 39. Moon. 

40. Mountain Lion. 41. Oak. 42. Parrot. 

43. Pine. 44. Sacred Dancer. 45. Shell (pink 

conch). 

46. Shell Bead. 47. Stone. 48. Sun. 

49. Tobacco. 50. Tree (probably 51. Tree (probably 
birch). spruce). 

52. Turkey. 53. Turquoise. 54. Water. 

55. Water Pebble(boulder). 56. Willow. 57. Wolf. 

These clans are variously distributed among the villages 
of the Tanoan-speaking Indians. Some of them are repre- 
sented only in a single village, others in two, three, four, and 
soon. The total population of the Tanoan-speaking villages, 
including the village of Hano, was reported in 1896 to 
number three thousand two hundred and sixty-six... The 
writer who has recorded the names of the Tanoan clans says 
nothing as to their rules of marriage and descent. But on 
the analogy of other Pueblo Indians we may conjecture that 
the clans are or were at one time exogamous, and that 
children belong to their mother’s clan. 

Amongst the Hopis, and perhaps among the other Pueblo Among 
Indians, though as to them we have no information, personal oe 
names regularly refer to the clan totem of the giver, not the personal 
bearer, of the name. When a child is twenty days old, it h™meste® 

to the 
receives its first names from the grandmother or, if she be totem of 

not living, from some aunt or other near relative on the ea hea 
mother’s side, and from other women. All these women bearer, of 
must belong to the clan of the mother and child. Of the nee 
names thus bestowed one usually sticks and is called the 
“child-name.” It is retained until the child is initiated into 
some order or society, when it receives a new name from 
the godfather or godmother who presents it for initiation. 
Sometimes a new name is also given at these initiations by 

1 F, W. Hodge, ‘‘ Pueblo Indian which is situated among the Hopis 
Clans,” American Anthropologist, ix. (Moquis) Indians in Tusayan, see 
(1896) p. 346, with the table, Plate above, p. 207 note 2. 

VII. As to the village of Hano, 

VOL. III Q 

Members 
of each 
clan and 
phratry 
seem 
formerly 
to have 
dwelt 
together 
in the 
villages. 

226 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA Chap. 

the leaders of the ceremony. Such initiations, however, are 
by no means confined to the age of childhood, but may 
take place at any time. A few specimens will illustrate the 
relation of Hopi personal names to the clan totems of the 
persons who bestow them. Thus a member of the Bow 
clan may bestow the personal name of “ Arrow.” A member 
of the Crane clan may give the name of “ Crane.” A member 
of the Squash clan may give the name of “ The one that 
figures a Bldssom ” ; a member of the Bluebird clan may give 
the names of “ Bluebird,” “ Little Bluebird,” “ Follow the Blue- 
bird,” “Bluebird Walk,” “ Bluebird Hunt,” and so forth. A 
member of the Bear clan may give the names of “ Bear,” 
“ Little Bear,” “ Bear Maiden,” “Bear Claw.” A member of 
the Parrot or Macaw clan may give the names of “ Parrot 
Maiden,” “ Parrot Tail,” “ Parrots Alighted,” “ Parrots Flown 
Away,” and so on. A member of the Spider clan may give 
the name of “ Spider Web.” A member of the Eagle clan 
may give the names of “ Eagle Man,” “ Eagle Sits,” “ Eagles 
Stand,” and so on. And similarly with other clans.' 

In old days apparently each clan and each group of 
clans, which we call a phratry, dwelt by itself in its own 
cluster or row of houses in the common Pueblo village ; and 
to some extent this local grouping of kins may still be 
traced in the villages and towns of these Indians. “ Re- 
lated clans,” we are told, “commonly built together, the 
newcomers seeking and usually obtaining permission to 
build with their kindred; thus clusters of rooms were 
formed, each inhabited by a clan or a phratry. As occu- 
pancy continued over long periods, these clusters became 
more or less joined together, and the lines of division on 
the ground became more or less obliterated in cases, but the 
actual division of the people remained the same and the 
quarters were just as much separated and divided to those 
who knew where the lines fell. But as a rule the separation 
of the clusters is apparent to every one; it can nearly 
always be traced in the ground plans of ruins, and even in 
the great valley pueblos, which were probably inhabited 
continuously for several centuries, the principal divisions 

1H. R. Voth, Hopi Proper Names . sq., 81 sgg., 88, 91 sg. (Field 
(Chicago, 1905), pp. 67 597., 74, 76 59., olumbian Museum, Publication 100), 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 

227 

may still be made out. Inthe simpler plans the clusters 
are usually well separated.”’ “ At the present time the house 
of the priestess of the clan is considered the home of that . 
clan, and she has much to say about proposed marriages 
and other social functions.” ? 

Each Pueblo clan has its totemic badge, which consists Totemic 
of a conventional representation or symbol of the clan Da0ges of 
totem. Such badges or crests serve members of the clan as Indians. 
signatures, and they are worn by persons who represent the 
clan at foot-races and other ceremonies. For example, if a 
dancer is of the Eagle clan, he will be decorated on his 
breast or back with an eagle or with some conventional 
mark which everybody knows to be the badge of the Eagles. 
Similarly with representatives of the Corn, Tobacco, Bear, 
Badger, and other clans? 

The Pueblo Indians are an eminently religious people, Religious 
and devote much time, especially in winter, to the perforin- pian Sys 
ance of complicated rites intended to ensure an adequate the Pueblo 
supply of rain, the growth of corn, and other blessings. a 
Many of these ceremonies are dramas in which the parts of masked 
gods and goddesses or other supernatural beings are played peaenail 
by masked men and women, or by men disguised as women. 804s. 
Such mystery plays are acted in the piazza or square of the 
village and are watched with enthusiasm by the inhabitants 
of both sexes seated on the terraced roofs of the houses, as 
on the tiers of a great theatre or amphitheatre. If any 
doubt existed as to the essentially religious or rather perhaps 
magical origin of the drama, the elaborate ritual of the 
Pueblo Indians, with its personation of gods and goddesses 
by masked men, might help to dissipate the doubt. Such 

maskers and masquerades are known among the Hopis as 

1 Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘* Localization 
of Tusayan Clans,” Nineteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part ii. (Washington, 1900) 
p- 648; compare the same writer’s 
whole discussion of the subject, pp. 
646-653. Captain Bourke also ob- 
serves that each clan lives in its own 
section or ward of the village (Zhe 
Snake-Dance of the Moquts of Arizona, 
p. 229). 

2 Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘ Localization 
of Tusayan Clans,” Nineteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology, Part ii. (Washington, 
1900) p. 653. 

3 J. G. Bourke, Zhe Snake-Dance 
of the Moguis of Arizona (London, 
1884), p. 229; J. W. Fewkes, 
“ Tusayan Totemic S‘gnatures,” 
American Anthropologist, x. (1897) PP- 
I-1t. 

The 

masks are 
thought to 
transform 
the actors 
into the 
gods whom 
they per- 
sonate. 

The 

Hopi rites 
are based 
in the main 
on sympa- 
thetic 
magic. 

228 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

kachinas, and the same name is applied by them to the 
supernatural beings themselves who are personated. “ By 
the use of these masks or helmets,” we are told, “the parti- 
cipant is supposed to be transformed into the deity repre- 
sented.” But when we speak of gods, deities, and worship 
in this connection it should be borne in mind that “we 
undoubtedly endow the subject with conceptions which do 
not exist in the Indian mind, but spring from philosophic 
ideas resulting from our higher culture. For the first two 
the more cumbersome term ‘supernatural beings’ is more 
expressive, and the word ‘spirit’ is perhaps more convenient, 
except from the fact that it likewise has come to have a 
definite meaning unknown to the primitive mind. Worship, 
as we understand it, is not a proper term to use in the 
description of the Indian’s methods of approaching his 
supernal beings. It involves much which is unknown to 
him, and implies the existence of that which is foreign to his 
conceptions. Still, until some better nomenclature, more 
exactly defining his methods, is suggested, these terms from 
their convenience will still continue in common use.”? 
“The Hopi ritual is extraordinarily complex and time- 
consuming, and the paraphernalia required is extensive. 
Although the Hopi cultus has become highly modified by a 
semi-arid environment, it consisted originally of ancestor- 
worship, embracing worship of the great powers of nature— 
sky, sun, moon, fire, rain, and earth. A confusion of effect 
and cause and an elaboration of the doctrine of signatures 
pervade all their rites, which in the main may be regarded 
as sympathetic magic.” ” 

1 Jesse Walter Fewkes, ‘‘ The Group 
of Tusayan Ceremonials called Xaz- 
cinas,” Fifteenth Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1897), pp. 
251-263, etc. ; the quotations in the 
text are taken from pp. 263 and 253 
respectively, Elsewhere Mr. Fewkes 
has argued that the maskers called 
Kachinas (Katcinas) ‘‘ represent the 
dead or the totemic ancients of clans ; 
or, in other words, thespirits of deceased 
members of the clan with totemic 
symbolic paraphernalia characteristic 
of the ancients.” See his article, ‘* An 
Interpretation of Katezxa Worship,” 

Journal of American Folk-lore, xiv. 
(1901) pp. 81-94. As to the Hopi 
religion in general and the Aachinas (or 
Katcinas) in particular see also J. W. 
Fewkes, in Handbook of Americar 
Indians north of Mexico, i. 566 sq. 
The masked dances of the Pueblo 
Indians were first described by Dr. 
P. G. S. Ten Broeck in 1852. See 
H. R. Schooleraft’s Zudian Tribes of 
the United States, iv. 83-85. 

2J. W. Fewkes, in Handbook of 
\American Indians north of Mexico, i. 
567. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 229 

At the present day the religious or rather perhaps These 
magical rites of the Pueblo Indians appear to be performed ae 
for the most part by religious fraternities, the members dramas 
of which are not restricted to any particular totemic pea Ae 
clan. Accordingly a full consideration of the elaborate by fraterni- 

* 4h: ties, the 
ritual of these people does not fall within the scope of a ji. 

treatise on totemism, and I shall not attempt it. But it of which 
may be remarked that many of these rites, though now confnea 

no longer totemic, may have been so originally ; in other to any one 
words, they may in former times have been performed only a ok 
by members of a particular totemic clan and the intention eety 

of the ceremonies may have been to multiply or otherwise the cere- 

influence the totem for the common good. There is Dam 
certain amount of evidence that this was so. For example, been _ 

in regard to the most famous of all the Pueblo ceremonies, aa 

the Snake Dance, we are told by the chief authority on teey 
the subject, Mr. Jesse Walter Fewkes, that “no one can cebrated 

now doubt that the Snake dance was primarily a part by mem- 
: ._ bers ofa 
of the ritual of the Snake clan, and that ancestor worship totemic 
is very prominent in it. We need only look to the clan Sei 
relation of the majority of priests in the celebration to tion or 
show its intimate connection with the Snake clan, for the se ane 

Snake chief, the Antelope chief, and all the adult men of totem. 

the Snake family participate in it. The reverence with gs" 

which the ancestor, and particularly the ancestress, of the dance may 
. es . : have 
Snake clan, viz., Tciiamana, is regarded, and the personation {von a 

of these beings in &zva rites, certainly gives strong support ceiaas 
o gs . t 
to a theory of totemistic ancestor worship.” * Siauk 

The Snake Dance was witnessed by Captain J. G. Bourke clan 
of the United States Army at the Hopi village of Hualpi Captain 

Bourke’s 

(Walpi) on the twelfth of August 1881 ; and his description description 

was the first to attract general attention to the rite. The i 

ceremony, which is not confined to the Hopis or Moquis, Dance at 

though perhaps it originated with them, has since been often rite 

described. Its main feature is a dance performed by men, 188. 
each of whom holds a live serpent between his teeth. It is 

1 Jesse Walter Fewkes, ‘‘ Notes on ii. (Washington, 1900) p. 965 ; com- 
Tusayan Snake and Flute Ceremonies,” pare zd. ‘* The Growth of the Hopi 
Nineteenth Annual Report of the Ritual,” Journal of American Folk-lore, 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part xi. (1898) pp. 190 sg. 

The 
scattering 
of the 
sacred 
meal. 

The 
serpents 
placed 
in the 
hands of 
boys and 
then set 
free. 

Bull-roarers 
whirled to 
make wind 
and rain. 

230 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuav. 

said that most of the serpents used in the rite are venomous, 
and that nothing is done to render them innocuous, though 
men distract the attention of the reptiles from the dancers 
by tickling them with sacred wands, which have incised on 
them the figure of a long green snake and are tipped with 
eagle feathers. The weird procession of the dancers marches 
round and round a sacred rock which rises from the ground 
in the piazza at Walpi. Women, both maidens and matrons, 
scatter sacred corn-meal on the serpents and on the dancers 
from beautifully decorated baskets which they carry in their 
hands, till the air is misty with the flour and the ground is 
white as driven snow. This scattering of the corn-meal has 
a sacred significance ; and the lips of the women engaged in 
it may be seen moving in prayer. After the serpents have 
been spat out on the ground by the dancers and sprinkled 
with meal by the women,! most of them are placed for a 
moment or two in the hands of little boys, who handle them 
apparently without fear. Finally, the serpents are carried 
by runners at full speed down the precipitous path which 
leads from the village to the plain, where the reptiles are set 
at liberty. All the time the men are racing down the steep 
slope with their wriggling burdens, an old man whirls a 
bull-roarer so as to produce a humming, whirring sound like 
that of rain driven by the wind. The same sound is made 
in the same way when the head of the sacred procession 
first emerges to view on the piazza." A medicine -man 
informed Captain Bourke that by making this sound they 
compelled the wind and rain to come tothe aid of the 
crops. At a later time the same officer found the bull-roarer 

1 J. G. Bourke, Zhe Snake-Dance 
of the Moguts of Arzzona (London, 
1884), pp. 122, 151-169, with Plate 
II. at the end. For other accounts of 
the Snake Dance and other ceremonies 
with snakes among the Pueblo Indians, 
see Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
“The Sia,” Eleventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1894), pp. 86 sgg.; J. Walter 
Fewkes, “A Comparison of Sia and 
Tusayan Snake Ceremonials,” American 
Anthropologist, viii. (1895) pp. 137 
sqg.3 7@. “The Oraibi Flute Altar,” 

Journal of American Folk-lore, viii. 
(1895) pp. 273-282; zd. ** Tusayan 
Snake Ceremonies,” Sixteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology (Washington, 1897),pp.27 3- 
312; zd. ‘* Notes on Tusayan Flute 
and Snake Ceremonies,” Vineteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology, Part ii. (Wash- 
ington, 1900) pp. 963-986; F. W. 
Hodge, ‘* Pueblo Snake Ceremonials,” 
American Anthropologist, ix. (1896) 
yP- 133-136. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 231 

used by the Apaches for the same purpose.’ The time 
occupied by the whole ceremony was not more than half or 
three-quarters of an hour. More than a hundred snakes 

were used in it? The ceremony appears to take place 
regularly in August, but the days on which it is held are 

known to have varied at the village of Walpi in different 

years from the 12th to the 21st of the month.2 The meaning Theory 
of the Snake Dance is very uncertain. Mr. J. W. Fewkes, oa 
who has studied it carefully, inclines to believe that the Dance is 
dance “ has two main purposes, the making of rain and the Sarai 

make the 
growth of corn, and renewed research confirms my belief, rain fall 

elsewhere expressed, that ophiolatry has little or nothing pues 
to do with it.’* In this connection it deserves to be 
noted that a part of the Snake Dance, as it was witnessed 
by Captain Bourke, who had no such theory of its meaning, 
consisted in an imitation of corn-planting performed by the 
dancers as they slowly pranced by twos, arm in arm, round 
the sacred rock. 

The theory that the Snake Dance was originally a 
totemic ceremony performed by persons of the Snake clan and 
by them alone is confirmed by a statement of Nanahe, a Hopi 
(Moqui) Indian, an intelligent, quiet, and well-behaved man, 
whose evidence was interpreted to Captain Bourke by Mr. 
Frank Cushing. This man said that he was a member of ° 
the Maize or Corn clan of the Moquis, but also a member of 
the Snake Order, a secret society to which is entrusted the 
preparation and care of the dance. By a rule of the Moquis Statement 
none but a member of the Snake clan may belong to the 2 Hopi 

Indian 
Snake Order; only when a member of the Snake clan dies, that only 

TOW. 

, 1 J. G. Bourke, ‘*The Medicine- (1895) p. 277. At other Pueblo 
men of the Apache,” Vinth Annual villages the snake ceremonies of 1896, 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology spread over nine days, lasted variously 

(Washington, 1892), pp. 476 sg. from the 11th to the 24th of August. 
2 J. G. Bourke, The Snake-Dance of See J. W. Fewkes, ‘‘ Tusayan Snake 
the Moguis of Arizona, p. 169. Ceremonies,” Sixteenth Annual Report 

3 Captain Bourke witnessed it onthe of ¢he Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
12th of August 1881 (Zhe Snake- ton, 1897), p. 275. 
Dance of the Moguis of Arizona, p. 4 J. W. Fewkes, ‘‘ Tusayan Snake 
156); in 1891 the dance took placeon Ceremonies,” Stxteenth Annual Report 
August 21st, in 1893 on August 14th, of the Bureau of American Ethnology 
and in 1895 on August 18th. See J. (Washington, 1897), p. 307. 
W. Fewkes, ‘* The Oraibi Flute Altar,” 5 J. G. Bourke, Zhe Snake-Dance of 
Journal of American Folk-lore, viii. the Moguzts of Arizona, p. 161. 

members 
of the 
Rattle- 
snake clan 
or their 
sons may 
belong to 
the Snake 
Order, 
the secret 
society 
which 
manages 
the Snake 
dance, * 

Ceremony 
performed 
by the 

Frog clan 

232 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cna. 

his son is allowed to participate in the sacred drama. On 
the subject of the Snake Order and its relation to the Snake 
clan the Indian’s evidence ran thus: “ You must not ask me 
to give you any information about that order. I am a 
member of it. It is a secret order, and under no circum- 
stances can any of its secrets be made known. Very few 
people, even jamong the Moquis, know anything about it, 
and its members would be more careful to keep its affairs 
from the knowledge of the Moquis, not members, than they 
would from you. This order was first organised in the 
Grand Cafion of the Rattlesnakes, the Grand Cafion of the 
Cohoninos, the Cafion of the Ava-Supais, and our people in 
their migration from that point eastward brought the secret 
with them. At first all members of the order were members 
of the Rattlesnake gens [clan], but as time passed the 
descendants of that clan became too numerous and were 
mixed up with all the other gentes [clans] of our people. 
To keep the order from getting too big, no members were 
taken in unless they were members of the Rattlesnake gens, 
or sons of the members of that gens, as in my case. But 
if a man had no other claim than by inheritance, and did 
not possess the qualifications demanded: of aspirants, he 
would surely be rejected; while [ think that a man of 
brave heart and good character, willing to comply with all 
the rules imposed, would be likely to be admitted without 
consideration of his father’s or his mother’s want of connec- 
tion with the Rattlesnake gens. From the Moqui villages 
the order spread to other villages; the headquarters, how- 
ever, always remained among the Moquis.”* This account 
of the manner in which the rites of the Snake clan 
gradually passed out of the exclusive possession of the clan 
and were transferred to a secret society known as the Snake 
Order may very well apply, with the necessary modifications, 
to the development of many secret societies out of totem 
clans, 

Again, the Frog clan of the Zufi Indians performs an 
annual ceremony, which reminds us of the ztichzuma or 
magical rites performed by totem clans in Central Australia 

1 J. G. Bourke, The Snake-Dance of the Moguis of Arizona (London, 1884), 
pp. 180 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 233 

for the multiplication of their totems. In the arid land of the Zuai 
inhabited by the Pueblo Indians the great want is water ; the making 
accordingly rain is the prime object of their prayers and of rain. 
ceremonies, the constant preoccupation of their minds.’ Now 

the frog is an animal associated with water ; hence the Frog 

clan is naturally charged with the performance of ceremonies 

for the procuring of rain. About five miles to the east of 

the present village of Zufii there is a spring of water which 

flows into a rocky basin some twenty feet long. , Terraced 
ledges, whether natural or artificial is uncertain, run round 

the basin under the surface of the water. This spring is 
cleaned out by members of the Frog clan after the installa- 

tion of a new Sun Priest (pekw2x) and at such other times 

as may be deemed necessary. On the day appointed the 

Sun Priest, accompanied by men and women of the Frog” 

clan, repairs to the pool. There the Frog men, descending 

into the pool, scoop up the water in bowls and pass it to 

the women, who pour it out. When the basin has thus 

been nearly emptied, feathers are attached to the bowls, 

and the Sun Priest then deposits them on the ledges of 

rock. These ledges are literally covered with bowls which 

have been thus ‘deposited from time immemorial. After 

that the Sun Priest takes a bunch of feathers or prayer- 
plumes (¢elzkinawe), weights them with a stone, and throws 

the feathers and stone together into the water of the spring, 

now only a few inches deep. As he does so, he utters Prayer to 
the following prayer: “We pray that the Rain-makers ceria 
(uwannam?) will work for us, that our crops and the crops 

of all the world may be watered and be plentiful, that our 
people and all people may be happy, that our people may 

not die but sleep to awake in Kothluwalawa.”? The 

1 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
“The Zufi Indians,” Twenty-third 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1904), pp. 21, 175. Compare the 
observations of Mr. Walter Hough : 
‘The aridity of the climate has had a 
profound effect on the religious beliefs 
and practices of the Hopi. To the 
traveler going for the first time among 
the white people experiencing . the 
severe probation of this region, water 

would seem to be the chief good. One 
might think that no conversation was 
ever carried on in Arizona in which the 
subject of the lack of water was not a 
primary topic ” (“* The Hopi in relation 
to their Plant Environment,” American 
Anthropologist, x. (1897) pp. 33 59.) 
2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
“The Zufii Indians,” Twenty-third 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1904), pp. 58-60. Kothluwalawa is 

The Rain- 
makers are 
thought 

to be dead 
Zuii people 
who pour 
water from 
vessels on 
the earth. 
Raising a 
smoke is 
resorted 
toasa 
means of 
producing 
clouds 
and rain 
on the 
principle 
of sym- 
pathetic 
magic. 

The Rain 
Priests of 
the Zunis. 

234 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuar. 

prayer-plumes (¢e/¢zkinawe) are supposed to waft the prayers 
to the supernatural beings to whom they are addressed. 
Such plumes play.a great part in Zufii myth and ritual. 
Thousands of them are offered every year to the various 
gods and goddesses of the Zufii pantheon.’ The Rain- 
makers thus invoked by the Sun Priest are the spirits 
of the dead Zufi men and women and children, who are 
supposed to, pass to and fro in the upper air, hidden from 
the sight ,of the living by cloud masks, but carrying vases 
and gourds full of water, which they pour down on earth 
in the form of rain. “ The clouds are produced by the breath 
of the gods and by smoke; hence smoking as a means of 
producing clouds and rain is a conspicuous feature in Zufii 
ritual. There is a time at the summer solstice when torch- 
bearers set fire to grass, trees, or whatever comes in their 
way in order to make a reat cloud of smoke, while two 
men whirl bull-roarers with a booming sound like rain or 
thunder, imploring the Rain-makers to water the earth.? 
This attempt to produce rain-clouds by smoke is clearly a 
case of sympathetic or imitative magic: the desired effect 
is supposed to be produced by imitating it. Taken with 
the prayers, which are purely religious, this smoke-making 
ceremony shews that the Zufiis, like so many other peoples 
who have risen above the lowest level of savagery, seek to 
compass their ends by combining magic with religion. 

But while the Frog clan of the Zufiis performs a ceremony 
of which the intention seems to be to ensure rain for the 
crops, the function of procuring the necessary showers is 
committed by the Zufiis mainly to a body of Rain Priests 
(Ashiwanni), whose business it is to fast and pray for rain, 
but who are not drawn from any one totem clan. It is 
possible that just as the Snake Order among the Hopis 
appears to have been developed out of the Snake clan, ‘so 
the Rain Priests of the Zufiis have been developed out of 

a salt lake at some distance from Zufii, 
to which the souls of the dead are 
supposed to go immediately after their 
decease. A solemn pilgrimage is 
made to the lake by some of the 
Zufis every year about the summer 
solstice. See Mrs. Matilda Coxe 

Stevenson, ‘The Zufi Indians,” 

Twenty-third Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology (Wasb- 

ington, 1904), pp. 20, 153 sgq. 
1 Mrs. Matilda 
op. cit. pp. 171 sg. 
2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
op. cit. pp. 20 sg., 158. 

Coxe Stevenson, 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 235 

the Rain or the Cloud clan; but this is merely a conjecture, 

I know of no evidence in support of it. The Rain priest- 

hood is indeed confined to certain families, but these families 
belong to several clans, among which the Rain and Cloud 

clans appear not to be included. The methods adopted by 

the Rain Priests to procure rain for the people combine the 
principles of magic and religion. No secular work is done 

by these men; they are set apart for the discharge of their 
solemn duties, and their daily life must be such as not to 
offend the Council of the Gods, who control and direct the 
Rain-makers. Each of these priests possesses certain fetishes Fetishes 
or sacred instruments (¢¢ov2) which he uses in his professional een 
business. They are hollow reeds, some filled with water Priests, 
and others with edible seeds of all the kinds known to the 
Zufiis. In one of the water-filled reeds there is kept a small 

toad (Bufo punctatus), which seems to thrive in its cramped 
quarters, These fetishes are said to symbolise the Earth 
Mother, rain, vegetation, and everything that nourishes man- 

kind. Ata rain-making ceremony in winter the priest draws 

a picture of a cloud with pollen and meal on the ground 

and places the water-filled and seed-filled reeds on the 
picture. This is the most solemn part of the ceremony ; 

the hearts and minds of all concerned are now filled with 
adoring wonder at these holiest of fetishes and with a 
trembling hope that the gods will thus be moved to water 

the earth. It is a supreme moment with the Zufiis and has 

been compared by an eyewitness to the administration of 

the Holy Eucharist in the Catholic Church. Afterwards 

the priest with the assistance of a female associate conse- 
crates a mixture of water, meal, and a powdered root in a 

bowl, and standing up whirls a bull-roarer, while the associate 
whips the contents of the bowl into frothy suds symbolic of | 
clouds, and another associate plays the flute. ‘All this,” 

we are told, “is an invocation to the gods for rain—the one 

great and perpetual prayer of the people of this arid Jand.” 

Next the priest, laying aside the bull-roarer, dips two eagle 
feathers in the holy water and with it sprinkles the offerings. 

All night long the appeal to the gods is crooned in low, Prayer to 
weird, yet musical tones, It runs in a set form, of which an sea 
the following is part :— ; 

Mimic 
thunder 
made as a 
means of 
producing 
rain, 

The Zufi 
dance of 
the Corn 
Maidens, 

236 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuapr. 

‘“ All come out and give us your showers and great rains ; all come 

“That the seeds may be strong and come up, that all seed plants may 
come up and be strong. 

“Come you that all trees and seeds may come up and be strong. 

“Come you hither; all come. 

“Cover my Earth Mother four times with many flowers. 

“Let the heavens be covered with the banked-up clouds. 

“ Let the earth be covered with fog ; cover the earth with rains. 

‘Great waters, rains, cover the earth. Lightning cover the eartl.. 

“Let thunder be heard over the earth; let thunder be heard ; 

“Let thunder be heard over the six regions of the earth. 

‘“‘ Rain-makers, come out from all roads that great rivers may cover the 
earth ; 

“That stones may be moved by the torrents ; 

*‘ That trees may be uprooted and moved by the torrents. 

“‘ Great rain-makers, come out from all roads, carry the sands of our 
Earth Mother of the place. 

“‘ Cover the earth with her heart, that all seeds may develop, 

“That my children may have al] things to eat and be happy ; 

“That the people of the outlying villages may all laugh and be happy ; 

“ That the growing children may all have things to eat and be happy.” 

In a summer ceremony for the making of rain the Rain 
Priest and his associates roll thunder-stones along the ground 
from a cloud-picture made of meal to a disk of corn pollen, 
which is called the house of the thunder-stones. At the 
same time the invocation to the Rain-makers is chanted. 
The stones called thunder-stones are amongst the most 
sacred possessions of the Zufiis, who believe that they were 
dropped to earth by the Rain-makers at their sports in the 
upper air.' The rolling of these stones is clearly an imita- 
tion of thunder, and the ceremony thus partakes of the 
nature of imitative or homeopathic magic, the performers 
mimicking the result which they wish to produce. It is 
not unreasonable to conjecture that such magical rites were 
once the special function of a Rain or Water clan, like the 
similar rites called zxtichizuma by the Arunta in Central 
Australia. 

Every four years in August, when the corn is a foot 
high, two bands of Zufii maidens, ten in each band, personate 
the mythical Corn Maidens, carrying baskets of corn and 

1 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, American Ethnology (Washington, 
“The Zufi Indians,” Zwesty-third 1904), pp. 21, 163-177, 416, 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 237 

other seeds on their heads, and dancing to the music of two 
choirs in order that the rains may fall and the corn may 
grow. They are assisted in this solemn rite by various 
youths and maidens, including water-sprinklers, a man of 
the Frog clan, and another who personates the Great Father 
of Corn and dances in order that the ears of corn may be 
perfect. In his dance this man wears a perfect ear of corn 
(not a grain of it may be missing) in the back of his belt. 
While the dancers are dancing, the choirs sing songs to the 
Great Mother Corn imploring her to give many of her 
children in the coming year, and also entreating the Sun 
Father to embrace the Earth Mother that she may bestow 
the fruits of her being. The man of the Frog clan smokes 
a cigarette of native tobacco over vessels of water and stalks 
of green corn, while both choirs sing that the earth may be 
abundantly watered. After that the water-sprinklers sprinkle 
water over a symbolic cloud, baskets of corn, and all persons 
present. The corn from the baskets is finally put away, 
kept separate from all the other corn in the house and 
planted as seed the following year. The whole ritual is 
elaborate and aims at ensuring a supply of rain and the 
growth of corn by a combination of religion and magic.’ 
We may surmise that originally such rites were the exclusive 
property of the Corn clan, though there is now no such 
restriction. Here, as in the case of the Snake Order and 
the Rain Priests, the magical rites of one totemic clan have 
perhaps broadened out into a religion of the whole tribe. 
The Indians of Zufii celebrate elaborate rites at both the 
solstices, which the Sun Priest determines by observing the 
points of the mountains where the sun rises on the shortest 
and sets on the longest day. The ceremonies include at 
both seasons the kindling of new fire by the friction of 
wood. At the winter solstice the chosen fire-maker collects 
a faggot of cedar-wood from every house in the village, and 
each person, as he gives the fire-maker the wood, prays that 
the crops may be bountiful in the coming year. For several 
days before the fire is kindled, no ashes or sweepings may 

1 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, American Ethnology (Washington, 
‘©The Zufii Indians,” Twenty-third 1904), pp. 31 sg, 48 59, 51-57, 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 180-204. 

a ceremony 
intended 

to ensure 
rain and an 
abundant 
crop of 
corn, 

The Zuni 
ceremonies 
of making 
new fire 
by the 
friction of 
wood at 
thesummer 
and winter 
Solstices, 

The makers 
of the new 
fire. 

238 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

be removed from the houses and no artificial light may 
appear outside of them, not even a burning cigarette or the 
flash of fire-arms. It is the belief of these Indians that no 
rain will fall on the fields of the man outside of whose 
house a light has been seen at this season. The exact 
moment for the kindling of the new fire is fixed by the 
rising of the Morning Star. The flame is produced by 
twirling an upright stick between the hands on a horizontal 
stick laid upon the floor of a sacred chamber, the sparks 
being caught by a tinder of cedar-dust. It is forbidden to 
blow up the smouldering tinder with the breath, for that 
would offend the gods. After the fire has been thus cere- 
monially kindled, the women and girls of all the families in 
the village clean out their houses. They carry the sweepings 
and ashes in baskets or bowls to the fields and there deposit 
them. To the sweepings the woman says: “I now deposit 
you as sweepings, but in one year you will return to me as 
corn.” To the ashes she says: “I now deposit you as 
ashes, but in one year you will return to me as meal.” At 
the summer solstice the sacred fire which has been obtained 
by the friction of wood is used to kindle the grass and trees, 
that there may be a great cloud of smoke, while bull-roarers 
are swung and prayers are uttered'that the Rain-makers will 
water the earth. 

We might be disposed to conjecture that the duty of 
kindling the sacred new fire at the solstices had been 
originally discharged by members of the Sun clan; but the 
facts do not seem to support this conjecture. For we learn 
that “the office of fire-maker is filled alternately by a 
member of the Badger clan and a child of that clan,”? that 
is, by a man whose father is a member of the Badger clan, 

xxvi. 

Society of Natural History, 
422-458. 

1 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
“The Zufii Indians,” Twenty-third 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 

American Ethnology (Washington, 2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 

1904), pp. 408-141, 148-162, ‘The Zuiii Indians,” Zwenty-third 
especially pp. 108, 109, I14 5g., Annual Report of the Bureau of 
120 59., 130 59., 132, 148 5g.,1575g. American Ethnology (Washington, 
Among the Hopi Indians of Walpi 1904), p. 114. The writer is here 

new fire is ceremonially kindled by 
friction in November. See J. W. 
Fewkes, “‘The Tusayan New Fire 
Ceremony,” Proceedings of the Boston 

speaking of the new fire at the winter 
solstice. It does not appear whether 
the same man kindles the fire also at 
the summer solstice. . 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 239 

but who is not himself a member of that clan, since children 

take their clans from their mothers, not from their fathers. 
Formerly each Pueblo village seems to. have regularly The 
maintained a sacred fire, which was tended by old men and eee 
never allowed to go out.’ But no such perpetual fire has inga 
been kept up by these Indians since they procured matches oo 
and could gather fuel in the neighbourhood without the risk died out 
of being surprised and cut off by prowling enemies. In ee 
former times the scarcity of wood near home and the 
necessity of carrying it on their backs for long distances (for 

they had no beasts of burden till they got them from the 
Spaniards), compelled them to husband their fuel with the 
strictest economy, and led to the institution of a central fire 

in every village, from which the householders might obtain 

a light when they needed it. But with changed conditions 

the need, and with it the custom, of keeping up a perpetual 

fire has passed away.” 

In considering the elaborate religious ritual of the Pueblo The 
Indians we must not forget that they have been subject for sestohad 
centuries to Christian and especially to Catholic influence ; ritual of 
for the Spaniards established missions among them early e,Pucble 
in the seventeenth century. It is therefore by no means may 
impossible that the native beliefs and customs of these eh ean 
Indians have been modified by missionary teaching.? For influenced * 
example, the Indians of Laguna, we are told, “ believe that ian 
on a certain day (in August, I think) the dead rise from of the old 
their graves, and flit about the neighboring hills, and on 

Spanish 
mission- 

1 Jn 1851 and 1852 Dr. P. G.S. 
Ten Broeck reported this for the 

102; Victor Mindeleff, ‘‘ A Study of ries: 
Pueblo Architecture,” Zivhth Annual 

villages of the Laguna and the Moquis 

(Hopis). See H. R. Schoolcraft, The 

Indian Tribes of the United States, 
iv. 76, 86. 

2 Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, 
‘'The Zufii Indians,” Twenty-third 
annual Report of the Bureau of 
wlmerican Ethnology (Washington, 
1904), p. 121. 

3H. L. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, p. 256; A, 
F. Bandelier, ‘*An Outline of the 
Documentary History of the Zufii 
Tribe,” Journal of American Ethnology 
and Archaeology, iii. (Boston and New 
York, 1892) PP: 79; 80, 94, 95 Sq-, 

Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1891), pp. 21 sg. 3 J. 
W. Fewkes, ‘* The Group of Tusayan 
Ceremonials called Katcinas,” Fifteenth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1897), p. 306; 
7d. **Tusayan Migration Traditions,” 
Nineteenth Annual Report of the 
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 
ii. (Washington, 1904) pp. 581 sg. 
The missionaries made themselves very 
unpopular, not only by their attempts 
to uproot the native religion, but by 
imposing a system of forced labour on 
the Indians, who in their exasperation 
rose on the monks and massacred them. 

240 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuav. 

that day, all who have lost friends, carry out quantities of 
corn, bread, meat, and such other good things of this life as 
they can obtain, and place them in the haunts frequented by 
the dead, in order that the departed spirits may once more 
enjoy the comforts of this nether world. They have been 
encouraged in this belief by the priests, who were in the 
habit of sending out and appropriating to themselves all 
these things, and then making the poor simple Indians 
believe that the dead had eaten them.”! At first sight we 
might think that this Indian custom of entertaining . the 
spirits of their dead once a year was nothing but an adapta- 
tion of the Catholic feast of All Souls on the second of 
November ; but such festivals have been held by so many 
purely pagan peoples? that we need not suppose the 
Pueblo Indians to have learned the custom from the priests. 
But on the On the whole, the religiovg ritual of the Pueblo Indians, so 
whole it far as it has been described by eye-witnesses, appears to be 

seems to be . ee ; 
agenuine in the main a genuine product of the aboriginal American 
a “mind hardly affected by foreign influence. 
With regard to the system of relationship recognised 
by the Pueblo Indians we have unfortunately almost 
Morgan's no information. Many years ago L. H. Morgan made 
aes strenuous efforts to ascertain it and exhausted every 
the system available resource in the prosecution of the enquiry, but 

qisetne with extremely little success; and he complained with 
aoe justice that “although the New Mexican Village Indians 
"are now under the supervision of the national govern- 
ment, through superintendents and agents, their country 

seems, notwithstanding, to be hermetically sealed, so far 

as ethnological investigations are concerned, unless they 

are made in person. India and China are both much 

more accessible.”* Forty years and more have passed since 

the greatest of American ethnologists wrote thus. In the 
interval a national Bureau of Ethnology has been established 

in the United States, and its agents have spent years in 
investigating the customs of the Pueblo Indians, yet nothing 

1 Dr. P. G. S. Ten Broeck, in H. see my Adonis, Attis, Ostris, Second 
R. Schoolcraft’s Jzdian Tribes of the Edition (London, 1907), pp. 301- 
Onited States, iv. 78. 318. 

2 For examples of similar festivals 3-L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
of the dead in other parts of the world sanguinity and Affinity, p. 260. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE PUEBLO INDIANS 241 

more appears to be now known as to the systems of 
relationship of this people than was known in Morgan’s time. 
It is to be hoped that Norgan’s successors in America, who 
have given us many minute and valuable descriptions of the 
elaborate Pueblo ceremonies, may yet turn their attention 
to the Pueblo systems of consanguinity and affinity and 
supply us with the necessary information before the oppor- 
tunity of obtaining it shall have passed away for ever. 

In regard to the Pueblo Indians of Laguna it was Traces of 
ascertained by L. H. Morgan that they have separate terms re aaa 

ficator! 
for elder and younger brother (Sé&¢-tum-s¢-ya and Titm-mii+ system 
hd-mdsh) and for elder and younger sister (Sd-gwets-sz-yd ee 
and Sé-gue-sd-ha-mdsh); that a man calls his father’s among the 
brother “ my father” (WVish-te-d), but his mother’s brother hora 
“my uncle” (Sd-nou-wa); that he calls his father’s (not his 
mother’s) sister “my mother” (Vz-ya) ; and that he calls his 

cousin, the son of his father’s brother, “my brother” (77és- 

mit) So far as they go, these terms point to the existence 

of the classificatory system of relationship among the 

Pueblo Indians. 

§ 13. Exogamy among the Navahoes and Apaches 

Bordering on the peaceful agricultural Pueblo Indians are The 
two Indian tribes of a different stock and a different character. oe 
These are the once fierce and warlike Apaches and Navahoes, 

Navahoes or Navajoes. The two tribes are closely akin in re ae 
blood and language; both belong to what is called the spread Atha- 
Athapascan or Athabascan family, of whom by far the family. 
greater part inhabit the distant territories of the Hudson’s 

Bay Company, British Columbia,and Alaska. This family is 

indeed the most widely distributed of all Indian families in 

North America. All the tribes of this stock call themselves 

by a name which means “men” or “ people” and is more 

or less similar in all the dialects. It has been variously repre- 

sented as Tinneh, Dené, Dindje, and so forth. The Navahoes 

call themselves Tinneh or Diné, and the Apaches call them- 

selves Ndé. These two tribes are the most southerly representa- 

tives of the stock, forming as it were an isolated vanguard 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity, p. 262. 
VOL, III R 

The Atha- 
pascans 
have been 
for the 
most part 
hunters 
and fishers. 

Cultivation 
of maize 
by the 
Navahoes. 

242 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

which has straggled far away from the main army. With 
the exception of the Navahoes no tribe of this great family 
originally tilled the ground. In thg bleak regions of north- 
west America bordering on Hudson’s Bayand the Arctic Ocean 
agriculture was impossible on account of the cold ; and in the 
southern division, the home of the Apaches and Navahoes, 
it was at least very difficult, without artificial irrigation, on 
account of the aridity and heat of the climate. Accordingly 
the Athapascan tribes have been for the most part hunters 
and fishers. Even from fishing both the Apaches and the 
Navahoes were excluded by a strong prejudice against eating 
fish ; and though bears are numerous in their country and 
their forests abound with wild turkeys, the Navahoes would 
not touch the flesh of these creatures. The mainstay of 
the nomadic Apaches was the American aloe, the so-called 
mescal or agave, which was cut down by the women and 
baked in pits. The Navahoes seem always to have been 
acquainted with maize, but so long as they remained a 
hunting tribe they detested the labour of planting. It was 
only when their numbers increased and game grew scarce 
that necessity compelled them to cultivate corn somewhat 
more systematically. Having obtained sheep and goats 
from the whites they have become'mainly a pastoral people ; 
their country is indeed better fitted for raising sheep than for 
anything else. Their reservation occupies an area of over 
12,000 square miles in the extreme north-eastern corner of 
Arizona and the north-western corner of New Mexico. 
According to the latest census the Navahoes now number 
more than 27,000; but it is said that this estimate is too 
high, and that the actual number is about 20,000.) 

1 L, H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 230 sg., 
241; Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 63 sgg., 108 sgg. ; 
Jona, Letherman, ‘‘Sketch of the 
Navajo Tribe of Indians,’’? TZesth 
Annual Report of the Smithsonian In- 
stitution (Washington, 1856), pp. 290 
sg.3 A. M. Stephen, ‘‘ The Navajo,” 
American Anthropologist, vi. (1893) 
PP. 345, 347 59-, 349, 357; J. G- 
Bourke, On the Border with Crook 
(New York, 1891), pp. 125, 129 59-3 

Father A. G. Morice, ‘‘ Notes on the 
Western Dénés,” 7ransactions of the 
Canadian Institute, iv. (1892-93) pp- 
8 sgg.; Cosmos Mindeleff, ‘*‘ Navaho 
Houses,” Seventeenth Annual Report of 
the Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Part ii. (Washington, 1898) pp. 481 
sg.; Washingtun Matthews, Navaho 
Legends (Boston and New York, 1897), 
pp: 1, 5,9 5g.. 12 sg. ; Father Leopold 
Ostermann, ‘‘The Navajo Indians of 
New Mexico and Arizona,” Azthropes, 
iii, (1908) pp. 857 sgy. As to the 

xvi EXOGAMY AMONG NAVAHOES AND APACHES 243 

Both the Apaches and the Navahoes are divided into a The 
large number of exogamous clans with descent in the female ee 
line, but the names of the clans appear to be local, not hoes are 
totemic; with the single exception of the Navaho name, eae 
- “Many Goats,” which must be a modern designation, no number of 

. . exogamous 
clan bears the name of an animal. Lists of the Apache glans with 
clans were obtained by Captain J. G. Bourke,’ and of the erieie 
Navaho clans by Dr. Washington Matthews.? The list line. 
given by the latter includes fifty-one names of Navaho clans. 

They are such as “ House of the Black Cliffs,” “ Bend in a 
Canyon,” “Encircled Mountain,” “Among the Waters,” 

“ Sage-brush Hill,” “ Willows,” “Red Flat,” “Lone Tree,” 

“ Overhanging Rocks,” “ Salt,” “ Beads,” and so forth, The The 
Navaho clans are further grouped together in phratries, but age 
as to the number of the phratries our authorities differ, grouped in 
varying in their statements from eight to twelve. Captain Pee 
Bourke obtained a list of eleven Navaho phratries with three 
independent clans. According to tradition the Navaho 
phratries have been produced both by segmentation and by 
aggregation of the clans, but oftener apparently by aggrega- 

tion than by segmentation. In Navaho legend there are 
frequent allusions to ties of friendship formed between clans 

of such a nature that marriage between members of these 

clans was precluded. At the present day no Navaho may Navaho 
marry a woman of his own clan or phratry ; neither may he ace 
marry a woman of his father’s clan or phratry. They believe 

that if they married women of their own clan, “ their bones 
would dry up and they would die.” Every Navaho belongs 
to his or her mother’s clan and bears its name.* It is very 

noticeable that according to Dr. Washington Matthews, our 

wide diffusion of the Athapascan or 
Tinneh stock in North America com- 
pare H. H. Bancroft, The Native Races 
of the Pacific States, iii. (London, 
1875) pp. 583 sg. 

1 J. G. Bourke, ‘‘ Notes upon the 
Gentile Organization of the Apaches of 
Arizona,” Journal of American Folk- 
Zore, iii. (1890) pp. LIT sqg. 

2 Washington Matthews, ‘‘ The 
Gentile System of the Navajo Indians,” 
Journal of American Folk-lore, iii. 
(1890) pp. 103 sg.3; t@., Navaho 

Legends (Boston and New York, 1897), 
Pp. 29 599. 

3 Washington Matthews, ‘* The 
Gentile System of the Navajo Indians,” 
Journal of American Folk-lore, iii. 
(1890) pp. 103-110; 7@., Navaho 
Legends, pp. 29-33; J. G. Bourke, 
The Snake-Dance of the Moguis of 
Arizona (London, 1884), p. 279; 
Father Leopold Ostermann, ‘ The 
Navajo Indians of New Mexico and 
Arizona,” -4nthropos, iii. (1908) p. 
801. 

‘There are 
no special 
names 
for the 
Navaho 
phratries. 

Among the 
Navahoes 
the House 
and the 
domestic 
gear belong 
to the wife, 
and the 
father has 
little or 
nothing to 
do with 
his own 
children. 

244 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA chap. 

best authority on the subject, the Navahoes give no formal 
names to their phratries, When a man is speaking of his 
phratry he will often refer to it by naming some one clan in 
it, usually the most ancient or the most numerous clan. It 
is easy to suppose, as Dr. Washington Matthews justly 
observes, that this tendency to name a phratry after one of 
its clans might end in the permanent and universal use of 
such a name fora phratry.1 Thus when we find, as we have 
often found among the Indian tribes of America, a phratry 
named after the same animal as one or more of its com- 
ponent clans, it is not necessary to infer, as following 
Morgan I have commonly done, that the phratry represents 
an original totemic clan which has been subdivided into 
the existing clans. It may have been so, but the other 
possibility, indicated by the Navaho practice, must also be 
borne in mind. In any case the existence of phratries or 
exogamous classes without names for them is significant, 
and, supported as it is by the analogy of the Melanesians,” 
it confirms the view which I have taken that the absence of 
names for some of the Australian exogamous classes is no 
proof that these classes once had names but have lost them? 
Polygamy is general among the Navahoes. The custom is to 
have two wives, but many men have three, and a few have four 
or five. Girls are betrothed very young.* By common consent 
the house and all of the domestic gear belong entirely to the 
wife ; the husband owns a few blankets, his saddle and horse 
trappings, his weapons, ornaments, and a few odds and ends ; 
but all else that the house covers is his wife’s property. If 
she does not already possess a cornfield by inheritance or 
purchase, the husband must plant one for her. She has her 
own sheep and horses, and her husband has no claim on 
them. The children belong to her wholly, and she has entire 
control of the domestic life. The father has nothing or 
very little to say with regard to his children, even by way of 
correction or discipline, and his property does not descend 

1 Washington Matthews, ‘‘ The 4 A.M. Stephen, ‘‘The Navajo,” 
Gentile System of the Navajo Indians,” American Anthropologist, vi. (1893) 
Journal of American Folk-lore, iii. p. 356; compare Father L. Oster- 
(1890) p. 110. mann, ‘‘ The Navajo Indians of New 

2 See vol. ii. p. 70. Mexico and Arizona,” Axthropos, iii- 

3 See vol. i. pp. 264 sg. (1908) p. 862. 

EXOGAMY AMONG NAVAHOES AND APACHES 

XVI 245 

o 

to them at his death, it goes to his nephews or nieces, no 
doubt the children of his sisters. But if he chooses to dis- 
tribute his property to his own children in his lifetime, the 
disposition will be recognised.1. Among the Navahoes brother Navaho 

and sister may not touch one another nor receive anything “som of 
directly from each other’s hands. Thus, if asister wishes to between 

give anything to her brother, she places it on the ground ae 

and he picks it up.2 Similarly among the Arapahos, an 
Algonkin tribe of the plains, a brother and sister may not 
speak to each other more than is necessary, and a sister is 
supposed to sit at some distance from her brother.? A like 
custom of avoidance between brothers and sisters has met 
us elsewhere and an explanation of it has been suggested.‘ 

Dr. Washington Matthews, who spokewith authority on the Evidence 
subject, was of opinion that the Navaho clans were originally eae 
and indeed till quite recently local exogamous groups and clans were 
not true clans. At the same time he found evidence in fon, 
legend that some of them had once been totemic; for it is 
said that when they set out on their journey each clan was 
provided with a different pet, such as a bear, a puma, a 
deer, a snake, and a porcupine, and that when the clans 
received their local names, these pets were set free.® The Navaho 
Navahoes observe certain taboos in regard to animals, but sonia 
apparently these taboos are not totemic, since they are not animals. 
limited to any one clan but are shared by the whole Navaho 
tribe or nation. On this subject Mr. A. M. Stephen, who 
knew the Navahoes well, writes as follows: “ Several other 
taboos are also rigidly observed; they must never touch 
fish, and nothing will induce them to taste one; their forests 
abound with wild turkey, but they are strictly forbidden to 

eat them; bears are quite numerous, but as they are also 

otemic, 

1 Jona. Letherman, ‘‘ Sketch of the 
Navajo Tribe of Indians, Territory of 
New Mexico,” Zenth Annual Report 
of the Smithsontan Institution (Wash- 
ington, 1856), pp. 294 sg; A. M. 
Stephen, “The Navajo,” .4merican 
Anthropologist, vi. (1893) p- 3543 
Father Leopold Ostermann, in 7- 
thropos, iii. (1908) p. 862. 

2 A. M. Stephen, ‘‘The Navajo,” 
American Anthropologist, vi. (1893) 
p- 358. 

3 A. L. Kroeber, Zhe Arapaho, p. 
11 (Bulletin of the American Museum 
of Natural History, vol, xviii, Part i. 
1902). 

4 See above, vol. i. p. 542, vol. ii. 
PP. 77 599-5 124, 131, 147, 188 sg., 
343) 344- 

* Washington Matthews, ‘ The 
Gentile System of the Navajo Indians,” 
Journal of American Folk-lore, iii. 
(1890) pp. 104 sgg.; 1a., Navaho 
Legends, p. 31. 

Names of 
Apache 
clans. 

Female 
descent ; 
power of 
the mother. 

Marriage 
witha wife's 
younger 
sisters, 

The 
levirate. 

Order of 
battle. 

246 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cnap. 

taboo they will not even touch a bearskin robe; nor must 
any one plant a tree; and the flesh of swine they abominate 
as if they were the devoutest of Hebrews. The wood of the 
hunting corral in which they trap the antelope is also tabooed. 
They observe many curious ceremonies before and during a 
hunt, and all of the tree limbs forming the hunt corral are 
held as having been sacrificed to the hunting deities. Not 
only do they abhor food cooked on a fire of wood obtained 
from these enclosures, but they also keep at a distance from 
such a fire, dreading to feel its warmth or inhale its smoke.” ! 

Among the names of Apache clans collected by Captain 
Bourke are “Red Rock,” “ Red Paint,” “ The Fallen Cotton- 
wood,” “ Salt Springs,” “White Mountain,” “ Acorn,” “ Sun- 
flower,” “Pine,” “People of the Canyon,” “Grassy Hill 
People,” “Water Tanks,” “Walnut,” “Juniper,” “Rush,” 
“Willow,” “Broad River,” arid so forth” The names appear to 
be local or topographical ; yet the clans are true exogamous 
clans ; for no man may marry a woman of hisownclan. The 
children belong to the clan of their mother, who has more 
authority than the father over them. Polygamy is the custom. 
A man will marry his wife’s younger sisters as fast as they grow 
to maturity. If his wife has no sisters, he will try to obtain 
another wife from the same clan as his first wife. A man 
marries his deceased brother’s widow ; but he must exercise 
this right within a year of his brother’s death, otherwise the 
widow is free to marry whom she pleases. On the war-path 
Apache clans camp together, and go into battle side by side, 
as my gallant correspondent, the late Captain Bourke, of the 
United States cavalry, had good opportunity for observing on 
his campaigns against these truculent Indians? 

1 A. M. Stephen, ‘‘ The Navajo,” 
American Anthropologist, vi. (1893) 
pp. 357 sg. As to fish Dr. Wash- 
ington Matthews writes: ‘ The 
Navahoes do not eat fish and fear fish 
in many ways. A white woman, for 
mischief, emptied over a young Navaho 
man a pan of water in which fish had 
been soaked. He changed all his 
clothes and purified himself by bathing. 
Navahoes have been known to refuse 
candies which were shaped like fish ” 
(Navaho Legends, p. 239). The Apaches 
and Zujiiis also refuse to eat fish. See 

J. G. Bourke, Ov the Border with Crook 
(New York, 1891), p. 125; Washington 
Matthews, ‘‘ Ichthyophobia,” Journal 
of American Folk-lore, xi, (1898) pp. 
105-112, The same curious aversion to 
eating fish is entertained by many savage 
tribes, especially in Africa, and must to 
some extent restrict their dietary. See 
above, vol. ii. p. 382. 

2 J. G. Bourke, ‘‘ Notes upon the 
Gentile Organization of the Apaches of 
Arizona,” Journal of American Folk- 
lore, iii. (1890) pp. TIT sgg. 

3 J. G. Bourke, of. c¢#. pp. 118 sg. 

xvi EXOGAMY AMONG NAVAHOES AND APACHES 247 

Among both Navahoes and Apaches a man avoids his Avoidance 
wife’s mother. From the time that a Navaho is married, he awa 
and his mother-in-law may never look each other in the face among the 
again ; otherwise they fear they will go blind. Hence they N*”**°** 
carefully shun.each other; they will not sit in the same 
room and if they meet by accident, they abruptly turn 
away and get out of each other's sight as fast as they can. 

Their word for mother-in-law is therefore Doyzshinz, that is, 
“Whom I do (or may) not see.” Yet it is the Navaho 
custom for the husband to live with his wife’s people, and 

the, commonest sounds in a Navaho camp are the friendly 

shouts warning men and their mothers-in-law to keep apart. 

To avoid these embarrassments a man will sometimes marry Marriage 
the mother first and then the daughter so as to make the io re 
mother-in-law also a wife, thus disarming her of her terrors.” law. 

A similar custom of marrying, or at least lying with, the 
mother-in-law before marriage is practised, as we saw,” by the 
Wahehe of East Africa, and probably for the same reason. 
Among the Apaches also no man will speak to his wife’s Avoidance 
mother, nor will she speak to him; and they avoid meeting Mies 
each other. Rather than face his mother-in-law a desperate among the 
Apache, the bravest of the brave, has been seen clinging to peeeeet 
rocks, from which had he fallen he must inevitably have been 

dashed to pieces or at least broken several of his limbs.’ 

After repeated and persevering efforts continued through 
several years L. H. Morgan failed to ascertain the Apache 
system of relationship,’ nor has anything, so far as I know, 
been done since his time to supply this blank in our 
knowledge. 

§ 14. Traces of Totemism among the Mohaves 

While the tribes of California, so far as is known, had The 
neither totemism nor a system of exogamous clans, some Mobaves 
traces of totemic clans have been detected among the Gases 

iver. 

1 J. G. Bourke, Sxake-Dance of the Anthropos, iii. (1908) p. 862. 

Moguis of Arizona (London, 1884), 2 See above, p. 113. 
p- 247; A. M. Stephen, ‘* The e i 
Navajo,” American Anthropologist, J. G. Bourke, On the Border with 
vi. (1893) pp. 357, 3583 Father Crook (New York, 1891), p. 132. 
Leopold Ostermann, ‘“ The Navajo 4 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 
Indians of New Mexico and Arizona,” = sangutnity and Affinity, p. 241. 

Their 
country. 

Their mode 
of life. 

Exogamous 
clans of the 
Mohaves. 

248 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA cuap. 

Mohaves, a tribe whose narrow strip of country lies half 
in Arizona and half in California, so that the Mohaves are 
situated midway between the totemic and exogamous tribes 
of Arizona and New Mexico on the one hand and the non- 
totemic and non-exogamous tribes of California on the other 
hand. Their territory lies along both banks of the Colorado 
River, where; that -stream forms the boundary between 
Arizona and California, for about two days’ journey south- 
ward from the southernmost part of Nevada. The scenery 
is sullen but impressive. The swift current of the turbid 
river sweeps along betwixt islets of bleak sand; and lofty, 
rugged, naked mountains shut in the valley on either side. 
The surrounding country is a desert ; but stretches of land 
along the river are rendered arable by being annually 
flooded. Like the other agricultural tribes of this arid 
region, the Mohaves raised crops of maize, pumpkins, melons 
and beans. They hunted little, but fished more. Their 
dwellings were scattered. They had no large villages and 
no sacred chambers like the Azvas of the Pucblo Indians. 
Their houses were low four-sided structures, slightly rounded, 
with the door to the south." 

Captain J. G. Bourke visited the Mohaves in February 
1886, and reported that they were divided into fourteen 
exogamous families or clans bearing the following names :——? 

1. Moon (/ual-ga). 2. Rain-cloud (O-cha). 

3. Caterpillar (a-ha). 4. Sun (Nol-cha). 

5. Coyote (H7-pa). 6. Ocatilla or Iron Cactus 
(Ku-maa-ha). 

7. Tobacco (Va-had-ha). 8. Beaver (Shul-ya). 

9. Mescal or Tobacco (Kot-ta). 10. Mescal ( 77-Ail-ya). 

11, A green plant, not identified 12. Coyote (.Ma-si-pa). 

(bi-ma-ga). 
13. Ma-li-ka (not identified). 14. Mesquite (Jus). 

1A. L. Kroeber, ‘ Preliminary 
Sketch of the Mohave Indians,” 
American Anthropologist, New Series, 
iv. (1902) pp. 276 sg. As to the 
scenery of the river see J. G. Bourke, 
‘Notes on the Cosmogony and 
Theogony of the Mojave Indians of 
the Rio Colorado, Arizona,” Journal 
of American Folk-lore, ii. (1889) p. 

172. As to the Mohaves, see also 
Handbook of American Indians north 
of Mexico, i. 919 sg. 

2 J. G. Bourke, “ Notes on the 
Cosmogony and Theogony of the 
Mohave Indians of the Rio Colorado, 
Arizona,” Journal of American Folk- 
lote, ii. (1889) pp. 180 sg. 

xvi TRACES OF TOTEMISM AMONG THE MOHAVES 249 

Men and women of the same clan may not marry under Marriage 

any circumstances. A man marries but one wife at a time; ae 
he marries his deceased brother’s widow, if he happens to be The 
single at the time of the death. Children belong to their "** 
father’s clan.1 According to Mohave tradition their clans 
were instituted by the water-god Mustam-ho, who created 
men and women. The legend of the institution of the clans, Tradition 
as related to Captain Bourke by a Mohave Indian of the See 
Tobacco clan, runs thus: “ Mustam-ho divided our people of the 
up. He said: ‘You remain together and take this name for ey 
distinction, and you others take that name’; and so on. 
Now, he said, ‘When you want to marry, you Va-ha-dha 
[Tobacco] men cannot marry Va-ha-dha [Tobacco] women, 
because they are your sisters; you must marry some one 
else, of another name. You must have but one wife at a 
time, but, if you don’t like her, send her away and get 
another one.’ ”? 

Captain Bourke’s account of the clan system of the 
Mohaves was obtained from a single Mohave Indian, a man 
of the Tobacco clan; but there seems to be no reason to 
question its substantial accuracy. If it is correct, it would 
seem that the Mohaves have, or formerly had, exogamous 
and totemic clans of the ordinary pattern with descent in 
the male line. But the tribe has since been more carefully mr. a. L. 
investigated by Mr. A. L. Kroeber in 1900 and 1902, and Kreeber's. 
he reports a somewhat different state of things. It will be the social 
best to subjoin his report in his own words. He says: 95° 
“The Californian tribes, so far as known, all lack any Mohaves. 
gentile or totemic system. Among the tribes of the South- 
west it is a marked feature of the social organization. 
Among the Mohave there is no full gentile system, but 
something closely akin to it, which may be called either an 
incipient or a decadent clan system. Certain men, and all 
their ancestors and descendants in the male line, have only 
one name for all their female relatives. Thus, if the female 

name hereditary in my family be Maha, my father’s sister, 

1jJ. G. Bourke, ‘* Notes on the Jove, ii. (1889) pp. 181, 185, 188. 
Cosmogony and Theogony of the 2 J. G. Bourke, of. ce’, pp. 173, 
Mohave Indians of the Rio Colorado, 174, 182. 

Arizona,” Journal of American Folk- 

Common 
names for 
female 
relatives in 
the male 
line. 

250 TOTEMISM IN UNITED STATES AND CANADA CH. xvi 

my own sisters, my daughters (no matter how great their 
number), and my son’s daughters, will all be called Maha. 
There are about twenty such women’s names, or virtual 
gentes [clans], among the Mohave. None of these names 
seems to have any signification. But according to the 
myths of the tribe,certain numbers of men originally had, 
or were given, guch names as Sun, Moon, Tobacco, Fire, 
Cloud, Coyote, Deer, Wind, Beaver, Owl, and others, which 
correspond exactly to totemic clan names; then these men 
were instructed by Mastamho, the chief mythological being, 
to call all their daughters and female descendants in the 
male line by certain names corresponding to these clan 
names. Thus the male ancestors of all the women who at 
present bear the name Hipa, are believed to have been 
originally named Coyote. It is also said that all those with 
one name formerly lived in ong area, and were all considered 
related. This, however, is not the case now, nor does it 
seem to have been so within recent historic times. It 
should also be added that many members of the tribe are 
not aware of the connection between the present women’s 
names and the totemic names of the myth, *1 Tt must be 
left for future enquiry to unravel this curious system, and to 
determine how far it tallies with the social state of the 
Mohaves as described some sixteen or eighteen years 
previously by Captain Bourke. 

1A. L. Kroeber, ‘‘ Preliminary .dmerican Anthropologist, New Series, 
Sketch of the Mohave Indians,” iv. (1902) p. 278. 

CHAPTER XVII 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA 

§ 1. The Races of North-West America 

THE north-western parts of North America, including British ‘rhe two 
Columbia, Alaska, and the region of British America which Saar 
adjoins Alaska on the east, are inhabited by two entirely west 
distinct races of men, the Eskimo and the Indians, of whom eed 
the Eskimo occupy the extreme northern and north-western and the 
portions, while the Indians extend eastward and southward '"4i"s. 
from them to the borders of the United States. The vast 
region occupied by these two races is drained by three great 
rivers, the Mackenzie River flowing into the Arctic Ocean 

and the Yukon and Fraser Rivers flowing into the Pacific. 

The Eskimo or Innuit,as they call themselves, are a peaceful the 
race of fishers and hunters, without chiefs and happily ignorant Peas on 
of war. Asarule, they dwell on or near the sea-coast, seldom 
wandering inland more than thirty miles; though formerly 

they extended two hundred miles up the Mackenzie River, 

till they were driven out by the Indians. The people The 
known as Aleuts, who inhabit the Aleutian Islands stretch- “!™: 
ing westward from Alaska, are a branch of the Eskimo 

or Innuit stock and speak a language of the same type. 
Physically as well as in respect of language and customs 

the Eskimo differ from the Indians; their complexion 

is a light fresh yellow, their faces broad and round, their 

eyes straight and black, their cheek-bones high, their noses 
prominent, and their mouths somewhat thick-lipped.| They 

1 W. H. Dall, Alaska and its Re- id. ‘On the Distribution and Nomen- 
sources (London, 1870), pp. 373 sgg-3 clature of the Native Tribes of Alaska 

251 

Principal 
Indian 
stocks of 
North- 
West 
America, 

‘The 
‘Tinnehs 
or Dénés, 

The 
Tlingits or 
Tlinkits, 

The 

Haidas. 

‘The 
Tsimshians, 

The 
Kwakiutl, 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

252 

have no regular system of totemism, though some traces of 
it are reported to have been detected among them.' 

The Indian tribes of North-West America fall into 
several distinct groups or stocks, of which the principal, to 
enumerate them from north to south, are as follows :-— 

t. The Tinnehs or Dénés, a branch of the widespread 
Athapascan family, of which the Navahoes and Apaches in 
Arizona and Néw Mexico are the most southerly members. 
These Tinnehs or Dénés are the most northerly of all the 
Indians of America; on the north and west they are 
conterminous with the Eskimo. For the most part they 
inhabit the interior of Alaska and the adjacent British 
territory ; but they extend westward nearly to the delta of 
the Yukon River and they actually reach the sea-coast at 
Cook’s Inlet and the mouth ofthe Copper River. Eastward 
they stretch over a vast area to the watershed which divides 
the Mackenzie River and Lake Athabasca from the streams 
which flow into Hudson’s Bay. The name Tinneh (¢cnneh, 
tana, or tena) is a native word meaning “men,” “ people.” * 

2. The Tlingits, Tlinkits, Thlinkets, or Thlinkeets, as the 
name is variously spelled, otherwise called the Koloshes, 
inhabiting southern Alaska. 

3. The Haidas, occupying the Queen Charlotte Islands 
and the southern part of the Prince of Wales Archipelago. 
Their name, like that of the Tinneh, signifies “ people.” 

4. The Tsimshians, inhabiting the valleys of the Nass ° 
and Skeena Rivers and the adjacent islands of British 
Columbia. . 

5. The Kwakiutl, inhabiting the coast of British 

and the Adjacent Territory,” Costribu- 
tions to North American Ethnology, i. 
(Washington, 1877) pp. 7 sqgg.3 H. 
H. Bancroft, Native Races of the 
Pacific States, i. (London, 1875) pp. 
40 sgg.3 J. Deniker, Zhe Races of 
Man, pp. 519 sgg.; Handbook of 
American Indians north of Mexico, i. 
36 sq., 433 599. 
1 See below, pp. 368 sg. 

2 E. Petitot, A/onographie des Dine- 
Dindjié (Paris, 1876), pp. 23 sg¢.; 
W. HE. Dall, in Contributions to 
North American Ethnology, i. 24 sq. 3 

Father A. G. Morice, ‘‘ The Western 
Dénés, their Manners and Customs,” 
Proceedings of the Canadian Institute, 
Toronto, Third Series, vii. Fasciculus 
No. 1 (October, 1889), pp. 109 sgg. 3 za. 
** Notes, Archaeological, Industrial and 
Sociological, on the Western Dénés,” 
Transactions of the Canadian Institute, 
iv. (1892-93) pp. 8 sgg.3 ¢d. ‘* The 
Canadian Dénés,” in Annual Archaeo- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), pp. 
187 sgg.3; J. Deniker, Zhe ANaces of 
Aan, pp. 524 599.3; Handbook of 
American Indians north of Mexico, i 

108 sq. 

XVII THE RACES OF NORTH-WEST AMERICA 253 

Columbia from Gardiner Channel to Cape Mudge, except 
the country about Dean Inlet and the west coast of 
Vancouver Island. 

6. The Nootkas, inhabiting the west coast of Vancouver The 
Island. Nootkas, 
7. The Salish, inhabiting the coast and the eastern part The 

of Vancouver Island south of Cape Mudge, and the southern lish. 
part of the interior of British Columbia as far as the crest 
of the Selkirk Range and the northern parts of Washington, 
Idaho, and Montana. On the coast of British Columbia 
this important and widespread stock is represented by two 
groups of tribes, one being the Bella Coola or Bilqula of 
Dean Inlet and Bentinck Arm, the other the Coast Salish. 

8. The Kootenay, Kutenai, or Kutonaqa, inhabiting the The 
valley of the Upper Columbia River, Kootenay Lake and *tenay. 
River, and the adjoining parts of the United States,’ 

Of these eight Indian stocks the Tlingits, the Haidas, Group 
and the Tsimshians may be grouped together on the ground se 
of their physical resemblance and similarity of culture ; Haidas, 
while language and social organization indicate a still closer 710°" 
affinity between the Tlingits and the Haidas. On the other 
hand the language of the Tsimshians is strikingly different 
and must be placed by itself among the Indian tongues of 
North-West America.2 Again, the Kwakiutl and Nootka Group 
stocks are grouped together by ethnologists under the 2.4 
name of Wakashan or Wakashes on account of the affinity and 

i Nootkas. 
of their language.* ootkas 

1 F. Boas, in Fifth Report of the 
Committee on the North-lWestern Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 8 sgg. (Report of the 
British Association, Newcastle-on- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint); zd. 
‘The Social Organization and the 
Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl 
Indians,” Report of the United States 
National Museum for 1895 (Washing- 
ton, 1897), pp. 320 sg. Compare W. 
H. Dall, in Contributions to North 
American Ethnology, i. 25 sqy.3 J. 
Deniker, Zhe Races of Alan, pp. 
531 39.3 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 141, 740. 

2 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 270, 520 sg. Com- 
pare F. Boas, in 7welf/th Report on the 

North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 
667 sg. (Report of the British Associa- 
tion, Bristol, 1898). Among the 
peculiarities of the Tsimshian language 
is a very complex system of numerals, 
different sets of numbers being used 
for various classes of objects. Further, 
words are formed almost exclusively by 
means of prefixes, but the pronouns are 
suffixed to the verb. 

3 F. Boas, ‘‘The Social Organiza- 
tion and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl,” Report of the United States 
National Museum for 1895 (Washing- 
ton, 1897), p. 320; J. Deniker, 7he 
Races of Man, p. 532; Handbook of 
American Indians north of Mexico, i, 

745- 

Natural 
features 
and climate 
of the 
interior of 
North- 
West 
America, 

Natural 
features 
and climate 
of the coast 
of North. 
West 
America, 

254 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

a 

In respect of natural features and climate the interior 
of North-Western America differs widely from the coast. 
The difference is due mainly to the disposition of the 
mountains, which run in a series of high and rugged chains 
parallel to the sea and at short distances from it, often 
indeed plunging into its waters abruptly in lofty cliffs. By 
this mighty mountain barrier, the peaks of which rise above 
the level of perpetual snow, the moisture-laden winds from 
the sea are arrested and their watery burden discharged in 
the shape of snow and rain. East of the mountains the 
land slopes gently away in one continuous and almost level 
plain to the far-distant waters of Hudson’s Bay. It is for 
the most part a dreary region of rocks and marshes, of, 
shallow lakes and treacherous rivers, which form an intricate 
network so linked together that it is almost possible to boat 
from Hudson’s Bay without a break to the mouth of the 
Mackenzie River on the Arctic Sea. This whole vast 
region is bleak and barren except along the valley of the 
Mackenzie, which in some places is well wooded. The 
climate is extremely severe, varying from intense cold in 
winter to great heat in summer. Winter sets in early and 
lasts till May or even June. The thermometer falls to 40° 
or 50 below zero: snow lies deep on the ground for 
months ; and the waters of the Mackenzie River freeze to 
a depth of five and a half feet. However, the fur-bearing 
animals which roam over these immense solitudes attract 
the hunter and afford the wandering tribes of Indians a 
precarious subsistence. Myriads of water-fowl swarm about 
the lakes and rivers in spring and autumn, and the waters 
yield a fair supply of fish. But the rigorous climate forbids 
the growth of cereals. Such is the land of the Tinneh 
Indians.’ 

Very different is the face of nature when we cross the 
mountains westward by one of the high passes where the 
snow lies till late in summer and the declivities on either 
hand are lined with glaciers. Descending the pass to the 

1 °C. Hill-Tout, Zhe Far West, the (Paris and Lyons, 1897), pp. 61 59.3 7d. 
Home of the Salish and Déné(London, *‘ Notes, Archaeological, Industrial and 
1907), pp. 2, 6, 13 sg.3 A. G. Morice, Sociological, on the Western Dénés,” 

elu Pays de ?Ours Noir, ches les Transgctions of the Canadian /nstitute, 
Sauvages de la Colombie Britannique iv. (1892-93) p. II. 

XVII THE RACES OF NORTH-WEST AMERICA 255 

sea we shall probably find ourselves on the shore of one of 
those long winding inlets which cut deep into the land, and 
might fancy ourselves standing at the head of a Norwegian 
fjord. There are the same high misty mountains, the same 
sombre pine-forests, the same dark water lapping softly on 
the cliffs, the same waterfalls dissolving into spray as they 
seem to drop from the same grey clouds. Here and there 
a white scar in the prevailing mantle of gloomy green shews 
where an avalanche has torn its way from the mountain 
top through the pine forest to the water’s edge; and 
occasionally, at the head of some profound ravine, the eye 
is caught by the shining front of a glacier contrasting 
sharply with the dense foliage on either side. With the 
scenery, too, the climate has changed. From the clear 
dry cold or clear dry heat of the interior we have passed 
into a softer air, a ‘mild moist atmosphere, like that of the 
West of Scotland or even of Devonshire. The chances 
are that the weather is rainy and the sea veiled in mist ; 
for on this wild coast, rent by deep fjords and studded 
with innumerable islands, the rainfall is one of the heaviest 
and most constant in the world. These steady rains and The Japan 
pervading mists are an effect of the warm Japan current, as urentane 
it is called, the Gulf Stream of the Pacific, which sweeps theclimate. 
along the coast, tempering the summer heat and winter cold, 
but wrapping land and sea in clouds and fog. The warm 
waters of this current keep the straits and channels open 
for navigation throughout the year; even in the coldest 
winters a sheet of ice forms only at the heads of the fjords 
and at the mouths of the rivers. Few rivers, however, force 
their way at long intervals through narrow and profound 
canyons to the Pacific. For the most part the mountains fall} 
so steeply into the sea that no room is left for the course of 
considerable streams. And for the same reason communi- 
cation along this iron-bound coast is chiefly maintained by 
boat or canoe, the countless inlets, sounds, and narrows, 
sheltered from the open sea by capes and islands, offering 
to the natives a natural highway which the rugged nature 
of the country denies them by land. Yet the navigation 
has its perils even for large vessels; for in these tortuous 
channels the tides run fast and high, forming eddies and 

The chief 
natural 
wealth of 
the country 
consists of 
the forests 
of fir and 
cedar and 
the shoals 
of fish, 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

256 
whirlpools, and suriken reefs abound, on which, before he is 
aware, the mariner may run in the fog, the ominous grating 
of the keel and the vibration of the ship first announcing 
to him that he is on the rocks." But, in the long summer 
days, when the weather is fine, the atmosphere is sometimes 
clear as crystal and the scenery fairly sparkles’ in the 
brilliant light. (It is then that the landscape wears its most 
pleasing aspect. The snowy peaks glitter in the sunshine 
against the blue; the glaciers gleam like fire in their clefts 
and ravines ; the huge landslides stand out conspicuous on 
the sidcs of the mountains; and everywhere the soft green 
foliage meets and refreshes the eye of the traveller sailing 
along this grand and beautiful coast. 

On the whole, the coasts of Southern Alaska and British 
Columbia are so mountainous and the climate so wet that 
the cultivation of cereals is generally impracticable.” The 
chief natural wealth of the country consists, first, of the 
dense forests, mostly of fir and cedar, which clothe its 
rugged fastnesses ; and, second, of the shoals of fish which 
swarm in its seas or ascend its rivers in almost incredible 
numbers. Through the excessive rainfall the vegetation of 
the coast is astonishingly luxuriant. Up to a height of 
about two thousand feet the pine-woods reign almost 
unbroken, only yielding here and there in more than 
usually damp spots to alders, poplars, and willows, or on 
very steep slopes to birch. No better district for lumberipg, 

1 W. H. Dall, -laska and its Re- 
sources, pp. 270, 285, 444-446, 
450 sg.; Commander R. C. Mayne, 
Four Years in British Columbia and 

of the British Association, Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne, 1889, separate reprint) ; 
zd. ‘ The Social Organization and the 
Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl,” 

Vancouver [sland (London, 1862), pp. 
370 sg.; Fr. Whymper, 7ravel and 
Adventure in the Territory of Alaska 
(London, 1868), pp. 18 syg.; G. M. 
Sproat, Scenes and Studies of Savage 
Life (London, 1868), pp. 13 sgg.3 A. 
Krause, Die Tlinkit-Indianer (Jena, 
1885), pp. 75-84; A. P. Niblack, 
“The Coast Indians of Southern 
Alaskaand Northern British Columbia,” 
Report of the United States National 
Museum for 1888 (Washington), pp. 
231, 2353 Fr. Boas, in Fifth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 6 sg. (Report 

Report of the United States National 
Museum for 1895 (Washington, 1897), 
pp. 235 sg.; C. Hill-Tout, Ze “ar 
West, the Home of the Salish and 
Déné, pp. 2-6. 

2W. H. Dall, Alaska and its 
Resources, p. 4523 A. Krause, Dze 
Tlinkit-dndzaner, pp. 88, 93; BR. C. 
Mayne, Four Years in British 
Columbia and Vancouver Island, pp. 
390 sg.; G. M. Sproat, Scenes and 
Studies of Savage Life, p. 16. 

3 A. Krause, Die 7Vinkit-Indianer, 
p. 84. 

XVII THE RACES OF NORTH-WEST AMERICA - 257 

as it is called, can be imagined, for the: means of transport 
by water are everywhere to hand, and the mountain-sides 
are ‘so steep that you have only to make a slide out of the 
less valuable timber and to shoot the logs down it to the 
sea: Some of the firs which clothe the land to the water's 
edge are enormous, measuring twenty-five feet in girth and 
three hundred feet in height, the trunks hardly tapering at 
all for half that altitude. Especially notable in the dense The 
woods is the American white cedar, the Thuja gigantea of sesh 
the botanists. These giants of the forest not uncommonly (Thuja 
attain a diameter of fifteen or twenty feet at the butt, #77): 
The tree was invaluable to the Indians in their native 
state. It served them as the coco-nut palm served the 
South-Sea Islanders, With its wood the men built their 
houses and carved their domestic utensils, their treasure- 
chests, canoes, totem posts, and heraldic emblems. Its 
outer bark they made into ropes and slow matches for 
carrying fire on journeys; while the women wove its 
inner bark into garments and its split roots into heautiful 
water-tight baskets. Indeed there was hardly any part of 
the tree which they did not apply to some useful purpose. 
In time of famine its cones even provided them with a 
food sufficient to stay the pangs of hunger. Flowering 
shrubs abound in the more open glades of the forest, in 
the upper valleys, and on the slopes of the mountains ; 
and many of them yield edible berries, which are gathered 
and preserved by the women and girls in autumn days. 
Ferns and mosses of many kinds flourish in rank The 
luxuriance ; among them are the magnificent stag and "**- 
fern mosses, the exquisite tree and maiden-hair ferns, and 
the tall fronds of the common bracken, which grows so high 
in many places as to overtop a man’s head riding on horse- 
back. It is not only over the fallen and mouldering tree- 
trunks that the mosses spread a mantle of beautiful but 
treacherous verdure ; they clasp the great boles of the living 
trees with wreaths and cushions of emerald green. So dense The dense 
is the underwood of these forests that it is often practically "de"wood. 
impenetrable. To shoot birds here is for the most part 
labour in vain, for if they drop in the thicket even a few 
1 W. H. Dall, Alaska and its Resources, p. 456. 
VOL, II 

The woods 
in early 
summer. 

258 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

paces from the path they are lost. Only the axe can cleave 
the matted undergrowth ; fire is powerless to spread a con- 
flagration among Woods saturated with moisture. Perhaps 
the sylvan scene is viewed to most advantage from a boat 
gliding down between the wooded banks of a broad river in 
early summer. The eye then never tires of ranging over 
the varied tints of the fresh green foliage, the maple, the 
white and black thorn, the tall shivering rustling poplar, 

. mingled with the clustering white flowers of the wild apple- 

‘The game 
in the 
woods. 

The coast 
Indians 
depended 
mainly on 
the sea for 
their sub- 
sistence ; 
they were 
essentially 
fishermen. 

tree in full bloom and perfuming the air with its delicious 
fragrance. Above all tower the pines and prodigious firs, 
dark, stately, and solemn. When the current sweeps the 
boat from sunshine into the dappled shade of a leafy canopy 
of overhanging boughs, the effect is enchanting.’ 

In these wild woods game abounds ; indeed the country 
is a paradise for the hunter. Among the larger animals are 
the American elk, the caribbo, the moose, several species 
of deer, the mountain goat, the big-horn sheep, the puma 
or mountain lion, the wolf, and the black, the brown, and 
the grizzly bear. Among the smaller animals are the 
beaver, martin, otter, raccoon, and squirrel.” But the main 
dependence of the coast Indians in the old days was on 
the sea: such is the abundance of animal life in it that 
the natives lived almost solely on the food which it 
supplied. They were therefore essentially fishermen, all 
other pursuits being of secondary importance. They hunted 
the sea-otter, the fur-seal, the hair-seal, and the sea-lion both 
for their flesh and their fur. But the characteristic product 
of the waters of British Columbia is the salmon. Nowhere 
in the world is this fish found in such numbers and varieties 
as on the North Pacific coast of America. The swarms 
that pass up the rivers and streams to spawn are prodigious, 
In the narrows of the Fraser River or at any point where 
the progress of the fish is impeded by natural or artificial 

1 C. Hill-Tout, Ze Har West, the .- 

Home of the Salish and Déné, pp. 6-9, 
103 sgg.; W. H. Dall, Alaska and its 
Resources, pp, 452 sgg.; A. Krause, 
Die Tlinkit-Indianer, pp. 84 sg. 3 
R. C. Mayne, Four Years in British 
Columbia and Vancouver Island, pp. 

390 59g. 

2 Fy. Boas, in Fifth Report of the 
Committee of the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 7 (Report of the British 
Association, Newcastle-upon- Tyne, 
1889, separate reprint) ; C. Hill-Tout, 
The Far West, the Home of the Salish 
and Déné, pp. 9 sgo; W- H. Dall, 
wpske and its Kesources, pp. 498 s99. 

XVIT THE RACES OF NORTH-WEST AMERICA 259 

obstacles such as a waterfall or a weir, the salmon are said 

to congregate below in such quantities that it is almost 
possible to cross the river on their backs. Hence, before The 
the Indians came into contact with traders they subsisted 4!" 
chiefly on salmon, that fish taking the same place with them 

that bread does with us or rice with the Hindoos. The 
salmon and the cedar, it has been said, are the foundations 

of the Indian culture on the north-west coast of America. 

The sturgeon, which grows to an enormous size, the cod, The 
the halibut, and the oolachen or candle-fish (Thaleichthys colachen 
pacificus), also figure largely in the dietary of the coastal fish. 
tribes. The oolachen is a small silvery fish of a delicious 
flavour, and so full of fat or oil that the dried fish are used 

as torches, burning with a bright flame; the oil is also 
extracted and kept in bottles. In such prodigious swarms 

do these little fish ascend the rivers that they literally choke 

the waters and can be scooped up in bucketfuls ; even wild 
beasts draw them out of the stream with their paws. 
Another product of the sea of which the Indians made The clam, 
great use was the clam. This shell-fish is found in large 
quantities on all the tidal flats. The coastal Indians not 
only ate these shell-fish, but also dried, cured, and bartered 
them with the inland tribes. Vast heaps of their shells 
testify to the extent to which the clam was eaten by the 
Indians of old. Among some tribes of the interior who 

live far from salmon rivers the flesh of deer or cariboo 
takes the place of salmon as the staple food." 

Part of the year the coast Indians dwell in permanent The Indian 
villages. These villages consist of large wooden houses he oe 
solidly built of heavy cedar planks, beams, and posts. The 
houses stand in a row facing the sea, and the canoes are 
drawn up on the beach before the village. In olden times 
the dwellings of the northern tribes were of moderate size, 

about thirty feet square, and 

1. Hill-Tout, The Far West, the. 
flome of the Salish and Déné, pp. 
11-13, 89 sgq., 99 sg.; W. H. Dail, 
Alaska and its Resources, pp. 481 
sgq-3 Fr. Boas, in Fufth Report on 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
pp. 7, 19 sgg. (Report of the British 
Association, Newcastle-upon- Tyne, 

partly excavated out of the 

1889, separate reprint); zd, ‘The 
Social Organization and the Secret 
Societies of the Kwakiut! Indians,” 
Report of the United States National 
Museum for 1905 (Washington, 1907), 
p- 318; C. Hill-Tout and Fr. Boas, 
in Annual Archaeological Report, 1905 
(Toronto), pp. 234, 235 59. 

Great 
communal 
houses of 
the coast 
Salish. 

Carved 
decorations 
of wood- 
work. 

, Pottery 
unknown. 

Clothing. 

Spinning 
and 
weaving. 

260 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

ground, with the fire in the centre, and a hole in the roof 
above it to let the smoke escape. A house is generally 
inhabited by four families, each of them occupying one 
corner. The houses of the coast Salish are of a different 
type, consisting of great communal dwellings, stretching 
under a single roof in an unbroken line for two, four, six, 
eight, or even ten hundred feet in length. Each of these 
huge houses is subdivided by temporary hangings or 
permanent walls into compartments, which are occupied 
by separate families. The building of these houses was 
laborious, and required considerable skill in carpentry at 
a time when the Indians were ignorant of metal tools and 
could only work with implements of stone, horn, or wood. 
They felled trees with stone axes, split them into planks 
by means of wooden or horn wedges, and carved them 
with stone knives. Stone hammers are still in use among 
the tribes. The carved ‘decorations of their household 
utensils, canoes, and of nearly all wooden objects employed 
by them are elaborate and characteristic. The patterns 
regularly consist of representations of those animals, or of 
parts of those animals, which play a part in their mythical 
tales and tribal legends. Geometrical designs are almost 
wholly absent, except in Southern Alaska, where they are 
employed to decorate baskets. The art of pottery was 
unknown to these Indians in their native state; but they 
supplied the want of earthenware with vessels of wood and 
baskets." The principal part of the native clothing is the 
blanket, which is either made of tanned skins or more 
frequently woven of mountain sheep’s wool, dog’s hair, or 
of a mixture of both. The thread is spun on the bare leg 
by means of a stone spindle, and is then woven into 
blankets on a solid frame. Another kind of blanket is 

woven of soft cedar-bark. Weaving is the work of the 

women.” 

1 Fr. Boas, in Fifth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 21 599., 36 
(Report of the British Assoctation, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1889, separate 
reprint) ; C. Hill-Tout and Fr. Boas, 
in Annual Archeological Report, 1905 
(Toronto), pp. 232 sg., 236 sgg.3 C. 

Hill-Tout, Zhe Far West, the Home 
of the Salish and Déné, pp. 51 59¢.5 
109 sgq. 

2 Fr. Boas, in Fifth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 20 sg. (Report 
of the British Association, Newcastle- 
apon-Tyne, 1889, separate reprint) ; 

XVI THE RACES OF NORTH-WEST AMERICA 261 

Society among the Indians of the North Pacific coast The four 

was divided into four classes: chiefs, nobility, common “lasses of 
: society = 

people, and slaves. The children of nobles were born chiets, 
common people, and remained so until they either became pale 
members of a secret society or gave a great feast and took and slaves." 
anew name. All along the coast the giving of presents is 
employed as a means of attaining social distinction. There 
are very few common people, for whoever can afford to do 
so lets his child enter a secret society immediately after 
birth by proxy. The child thus becomes a noble. hs 
more feasts he gives, the higher grows his rank; but ro 
noble can ever become a member of the chiefly class, 
When a chief dies, his office devolves upon his younger 
brother, then upon his nephew, and, if he had none, then 
upon his niece. The chief has many prerogatives, but 
exercises comparatively little influence over the members of 
his tribe. He has to carry out the decrees of the council of 
nobles, which decides all important questions concerning the 
tribe and acts as a criminal court. Nobody who has not 
taken a name, or who is not a member of a secret society, may 
share in the deliberations of the council. The mother’s brother 
represents his nephews. A woman is only admitted if she 
is the head of a family. However, the social organisation 
differs somewhat from tribe to tribe. For example, among 
the Salish tribes of the coast and the lower delta of the 
Fraser River the chieftainship, which is elective among the 
interior tribes, is strictly hereditary, passing automatically 
from fathers to sons. On the whole the rigidity of the The 
system of ranks increases greatly as we pass from the eee ed 
roving tribes of the interior to the settled tribes of the coast of social 
and islands, among whom the barriers between the various GUS". 
classes are said to be almost as inflexible as between the we pass 
castes of the Hindoos? The existence of social ranks fom)" 

roving 
distinguishes the Indians of North-West America from the tribes of 

C. Hill-Tout, in Avzzual Archeological 
Report, 1905 (Toronto), pp. 234 5g. 3 
td., The Far West, the Home of the 
Salish and Déné, pp. 63 59g. 

1 Fr. Boas, in Fzfth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 34-36 (Report 
of the British Assoctation, Newcastle- 

upon-Tyne, 1889, separate reprint) ; 
id. in Annual Archeological Report, 
1905 (Toronto), p. 242. 

2 C, Hill-Tout, in Annual Archeo- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), pp. 
226-228; id., The Far West, the 
Home of the Salish and Déné, Ppp. 
158-160. 

the interior 
to the 
settled 
tribes of 
the coast. 

Highly 
developed 
system of 
barter and 
credit. 
Currencies 
of various 
kinds, 
shells, 
blankets, 
copper 
plates, etc. 

The 
potlatch, 
a festival 

262 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

tribes in the United States to the east of the Rocky 
‘Mountains, and may be regarded as marking a relative 
advance in civilisation, though the material base of life 
remains at a lower level; for whereas many of the demo- 
cratic tribes of eastern North America subsisted to a large 
extent by agriculture, the more aristocratic tribes of the 
North-West depended purely on fishing, hunting, and the 
search for berries and roots. Another sign of progress 
among the North-Western Indians was a highly developed 
system of barter and credit. For these tribes have always 
been great traders and had currencies of various sorts. In 
olden times dentalia-shells, elk-skin blankets, canoes, and 
slaves served as standards of value; while marmot-skins 
sewed together were used as a smaller currency. Certain 
large copper plates of a peculiar shape but of no practical 
use are highly valued by these Indians, sometimes indeed at 
fabulous prices; and among the Kwakiutl small copies of 
these plates, each about an inch long, are used as a form of 
money. The Tsimshians used to exchange oolachen oil 
and carvings of mountain-goat horn for canoes. At the 
present time the blanket is the unit of value, prices being 
calculated in blankets. A vast system of credit has grown 
up among all the tribes of the North Pacific coast. It 
seems to have been based originally on the custom of 
lending property before the assembled tribe as a means of 
ensuring a public record of the transaction. This apparently 
was the fundamental idea of the so-called potlatch, which at 

for the dis- the present day is simply a great festival at which the host 

tribution of 

property. 

distributes the whole of his property among his friends 
either to obtain social distinction or in the expectation of 
being repaid with interest at a future time. The distribution 
of property at a potlatch may therefore be regarded as an 
investment by which the distributor or his family after him 
hopes to benefit ; for all who receive anything at a potlatch 
must repay double the value at a future day. At every 
potlatch which he gives a man acquires a new and more 
honourable name.’ 

1 Fr. Boas, in Fifth Report of the Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1889, separate 
Committee on the North-Western reprint); zd. in Twelfth Report of the 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 36, 38 s9. enna on the North-Western 
(Report of the British Association, vibes of Canada, pp. 681 sg. (Report 

xVII THE RACES OF NORTH-WEST AMERICA 263 

Many but not all of the Indian tribes of North-West Totemism 
America are organised in totemic and exogamous clans. aS any 
This social system is found among the Tinnehs or Dénés of practised 
the interior as well as among the tribes of various stocks on py omy, 
the coast. On the other hand totemism appears to be of the 
wholly wanting among the Kootenay and most, if not all, Soe 
of the inland tribes of the Salish stock, such as the West 
Thompson Indians. In the opinion of the experienced anes 
missionary, Father A. G. Morice, who has given us much 
valuable information on the Tinnehs or Dénés, these 
Indians have unquestionably derived their clan totems from | 
the tribes on the coast ;” and among the coastal tribes, 
according to Dr. Franz Boas, the Tlingits and the Haidas 
have exerted a very strong influence over the social system 
of their neighbours.2 We shall therefore begin our survey 
of totemism in North-West America with the Tlingits and 
the Haidas ; we shall then, moving southward, deal with the 
other tribes of the coast; and afterwards, retracing our 
steps northward, we shall examine the totemic system of 
the Tinnehs or Dénés of the interior. 

of the British Association, Bristol, 
1898) ; za. ‘©The Social Organization 
and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl 
Indians,” Report of the United States 
National Museum for 1895 (Washing- 
ton, 1897), pp. 341 sgg.; 27@.in Annual 
Archeological Report, 1905 (Toronto), 
pp. 242 sg. As to the fot/atch see 
further G. M. Dawson, Report on the 
Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878 (Mon- 
treal, 1880), pp. 125 B-127 B (Geological 
Survey of Canada). As to the copper 
plates, see G. M. Dawson, of. cit. p. 
‘135 B; Franz Boas, ‘‘The Social 
Organization and the Secret Societies 
of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of 
the United States National Museum 
Jor 1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 344 
sqgqg. Anearly account of these coppers, 
as they are commonly called, is given 
by John Dunn, in his Aéstory of the 
Oregon Territory (London, 1844), p. 
288. He says: ‘A little to the 
northward of this there is a tribe called 
the Chilkasts. In their country great 
quantities of virgin copper are found. 
Some of it is worked by the natives 
into a kind of shield, about two feet 

and a half long, and one foot broad, 
with figures of men and animals 
engraved upon it. The labour and 
ingenuity expended in working one of 
these shislds give them great value. 
One of them is estimated as worth nine 
slaves, and is transmitted as a precious 
heirloom from father to son.” 

1 Fr. Boas, in Fefth Report of the 
Committee on the North- Western 
Tribes of Canada, p. 23 (Report 
of the British Association, Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne, 1889, separate reprint); J. 
Teit, Zhe Thompson Indians of British 
Columbia, p. 290 (The Jesup North 
Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the 
American Museum of Natural History, 
April 1900); Handbook of American 
Lndians north of Mexico,i. 741. As 
to the Salish tribes, see below, pp. 338 
$99- 

"% Rev. A. G. Morice, ‘The 
Canadian Dénés,” in Annual Archeo- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 203. 

3 Fr, Boas, ‘‘The Tribes of the 
North Pacific Coast,” in Axnual 
Archeological Report, 1905 (Toronto), 
p. 240. 

The 
Tiingits or 
Thiinkeets, 
called 
Koloshes 
by the 
Russians, 

The 
country 
of the 
Tlingits. 

The Tlingit 
villages, 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

264 

§ 2. Totemism among the Tlingits 

The Tlingits or Thlinkeets inhabit the mountainous, 
densely wooded, and rainy coast of Southern Alaska from 
latitude 60° to latitude 55°, that is, nearly from Mount St. 
Elias, the highest mountain in North America, southward to 
the boundary of British Columbia.’ The name of the tribe, 
which is spelled in many different ways by different writers, 
means “men” or “ people.” By the Russians these Indians 
were called Koloshes.2 Their country is so mountainous 
that farming is possible only in a few limited areas; and 
the severe climate, with its long winters, wet summers, late 
springs, and early autumnal frosts, greatly restricts the 
number of plants which can be cultivated. There are no 
large pasture-lands where cattle could be kept, and the 
heavy rains make it difficult to procure sufficient fodder to 
feed the beasts through the long months of winter. Even 
the chase could only support a scanty population; for the 
game in the woods is not very plentiful, and persistent 
hunting on a great scale would rapidly reduce, if not 
exterminate, the supply of sea-mammals, as has happened 
with the sea-otters. Hence the catch of fish, which abound 
in these waters, remains the chief source of subsistence for 
the inhabitants ; and accordingly in choosing the site of a 
settlement the first consideration with the Tlingits is to find 
a spot near good fishing-grounds and a beach where the 
canoes can land. Accordingly their villages are commonly 
built on the flat sandy shore of some sheltered bay or strait 
or at the mouth of a river; and with their rows of regularly 
and solidly built wooden houses, and their canoes and 
fishing-tackle drawn up on the beach, they present a 
pleasant picture in the wilderness, which calls up memories 
of home in the mind of a European, till the sight of the tall 

1 A, Krause, Die Tlinkit-[ndianer 
ree 1885), p. 75. iy 

J. Holmberg, “Uber die 

Ge des russischen Amerika,” 

Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae, 

iv. (Helsingfors, 1856) pp. 289 sg. ; 

T. de Pauly, Description ethno- 

graphique des peuples de la Russie 
(St. Petersburg, 1862), Peuples de 
P Amérique russe, p. 11 ; Ivan Petroff, 
Report.on the Population, Industries, 
and Resources of Alaska, p. 1653 A. 
Krause, Die Tlinktt-[ndianer, pp- 95 
pe 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TLINGITS 265 

totem-poles .and Indians muffled in blankets remind him 
that he is in a foreign land.’ 

The Tlingits are divided into two exogamous classes The 
or phratries, which bear the name of the Raven and the Tiingits 

3 . . ., are divided 
Wolf respectively, though in the northern part of the Tlingit into two 
territory the Wolf class is also known as the Eagle, The rae 
rule of exogamy is, or was, strictly observed : no man may phratries, 
marry a woman of his own class; a Raven man must marry eee 
a Wolf woman, and a Wolf man must marry a Raven class and 
woman. Descent is in the female line: children belong to ha em 
their mother’s, not their father’s class. If she is a Raven, class with 
the children are Ravens; if she is a Wolf, they are Wolves. pose" 
The two classes trace their descent from two mythical heroes maternal 
or gods who in the beginning of time by their deeds and ay 
supernatural power conferred on mankind various benefits 
which they still enjoy. These two heroes were Yehl or 
Yeshl, the ancestor of the Raven class, and Kanook, the 
ancestor of the Wolf class. Yet those ancestors are not 
thought of as having been a raven and a wolf respectively ; 
Yehl is indeed said to have had the power of transforming 
himself into a raven; but there is no tradition of Kanook 
ever assuming the shape of a wolf. 

Further, both the Raven class and the Wolf class are Each class 
subdivided into a number of clans which are named after aa 
various animals, and which are no doubt exogamous since the into a 
classes which include them are so. Thus, the Raven class is oe 
subdivided into the Raven, Frog, Goose, Sea-lion, Owl, clans, 
Salmon, Beaver, Codfish, and Skate clans ; the Wolf class is ici 
subdivided into the Wolf, Bear, Eagle, Whale, Shark, Auk, after 
Gull, Sparrow-hawk, and Thunder-bird clans. The Tlingit —_— 
classes and clans may be exhibited in the following table, 

which, however, does not claim to be complete :— 

1 A. Krause, Die Thinkit-Indianer, pp. 93, 123 5g. 

[TABLE 

265 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 
SOCIAL SYSTEM OF THE TLINGITS 
Class. Clans. Class. Clans. 
| (Raven Wolf 
Frog Bear 
Goose Eagle 
Sea-lion Killer- Whale (De/- 
Raven Owl Wolf phinus orca) 
Salmon (Eagle) Shark 
Beaver Auk 
Codfish Gull 
Skate Sparrow-hawk 
Thunder-bird 

The The classes and clans do not live separately, each by 

Tne itself; on the contrary they are mixed up together. The 
ns ly : * 

mixed up members of each class and clan are distributed among many 

together. villages, and each village contains members of both classes 

The and of several clans. Finally, the clans are in turn subdivided 
penta 4 into families or households, which may occupy one or more 
into houses. The families generally take their names from places. 
families, 

Members of the same class speak of each other as Achchani, 
that is, “ compatriots,” or Achgakau, that is, “friends.” They 
speak of the members of the other class as Kunyetkanagi, 
that is, “not here” or “strangers.” But in their presence 
they address members of the other class as Achssani, that is, 
“uncles,” or Achkantz, that is, “ sons-in-law ” or “ brothers-in- 
law,” because they are always related to them by marriage. 
Though the Raven class perhaps ranks higher in virtue of 
their descent from Yehl, the great benefactor of mankind, 
yet the Wolf class also enjoys distinction by reason of its 
numbers, superior courage, and deeds of valour.’ 

1H. J. Holmberg, “ Uber die Jndustries, and Resources of Alaska, 

Volker des russischen Amerika,” 4cta 
Soctetatis Sctentiarum Fennicae, iv. 
(Helsingfors, 1856) pp. 292 sg., 338, 
342; T. de Pauly, Description ethno- 
graphique des peuples de la Russie 
(St. Petersburg, 1862), Peuples de 
PAmérique russe, pp. 11, 123 Ivan 
Petroff, Report on the Population, 

pp- 165, 166; A. Krause, Die Tlinkit- 
Indianer, pp. 112 sg., 122, 220; Fr. 
Boas, in /2fth Report of the Cont- 
mittee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p, 25 (Report of the British 
Association, Newcastle - upon - Tyne, 
1889, separate reprint); John R. 
Pwanton, ‘*Sacial Condition, Beliefs, 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE TLINGITS 267 

Besides the two great classes or phratries of the Raven The 
and the Eagle, there is or used to be among the Tlingits a Rid 
small group, the Nexadi of Sanya, which stood outside of outside of 
both the principal classes and could marry into either of nas 
them. This group is characterised principally by the 
possession of the Eagle crest and Eagle personal names.’ 

Each Tlingit clan has its badge or crest, which commonly Crests or 
consists of some easily-recognised part of its totemic animal te pia: 
or bird. Such crests are or were carved or painted on houses, clans. 
canoes, paddles, household utensils, blankets, shields, and 
wooden hats or helmets ; and on solemn occasions such as 
dances, memorial feasts, and funeral ceremonies men often 
appeared completely disguised in the shape of their totemic 
animals.” Theoretically, the crests used by members of the 
Raven class differ from those used by members of the Wolf 
or Eagle class; all Raven clans are supposed to have a 
right to the Raven crest, and most Wolf clans use the Wolf 
crest. But a man of high rank might temporarily borrow a 
crest from his brother-in-law, who in virtue of the law of 
exogamy necessarily belonged to a different clan with a 

and Linguistic Relationship of the 
Tlingit Indians,” 7wenty-Sixth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 

the Whale. Men may not marry in 
their own clan, children belong to 
the clan of their mother” (Report on 

Ethnology (Washington, 1908), pp. 
398, 423 sg. The list of clans 
in the text is given on the 
authority of Mr, F. Boas. | The list 
given by Holmberg (‘‘ Uber die 
Volker des russischen Amerika,” Acta 
Soctetatis Scientiarum Fenntcae, iw. 
(Helsingfors, 1856) p. 293) agrees, 
so far as it goes, with that of Mr. 
Boas, but it omits the last three of 
the clans in each class. Most of these 
writers refer to the exogamy of the two 
classes or phratries {the Raven and the 
Wolf) without saying whether the 
clans into which these two classes are 
subdivided are also exogamous or not. 
However, Petroff observes: ‘* The 
curious totemic system is more fully 
developed here than it has been found 
with any other-tribe. The ties of the 
totem or clanship are considered far 
stronger than those of blood relation- 
ship. 
the Raven, the Bear, the Wolf, and 

The principal clans are those of © 

the Population, Industries, and Re- 
sources of Alaska, p. 165). This seems 
clearly to imply that the rule of exo- 
gamy is not limited to the two classes 
or phratries, but extends also to the 
clans ; and indeed if the rule of exo- 
gamy applies strictly to the two classes, 
it necessarily applies to all the clans 
included under them. 

1 J. R. Swanton, ‘‘ Social Condi- 
tion, Beliefs, and Linguistic Relation- 
ship of the Tlingit Indians,” Z7wemnty- 
Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau 
of American Ethnology (Washington, 
1908), pp. 398, 409. 

2H. J. Holmberg, ‘Uber die 
Volker des russischen Amerika,” Acta 
Soctetatis Scientiarum Fenntcae, iv. 
(Helsingfors, 1856) pp. 293 sg.3 I. 
Petroff, Report on the Population, In- 
dustries, and Resources of Alaska, 
p- 166 (where ‘‘horses” is a mis- 
print for ‘“‘houses”); W. H. Dall, 
Alaska and its Resources, p. 414. 

268 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP, 

Myths told different crest. Some families are too poor to have a crest ; 
eatin but on the other hand it is said of some great ones that 
of the they are rich enough to use any crest whatever. The 
Grizly possession of a particular crest by a clan is often explained 

me crest by a myth about the ancestor of the clan. Thus a wooden 
el hat or helmet shaped like a grizzly bear is used as a crest 

who by a clan who say that a man of their clan once married a 
married a . 

grizly female grizzly bear. Members of the Kagwantan clan, who 
bear, tell the same story, go about with the ears of bears fastened 

to the sides of their heads as their crest, and some members 
of this clan wear shirts made out of grizzly bear hides. Yet 
the Kagwantans are members of the Wolf class and highly 
value the Wolf crest. Members of another clan tell how at 
the time of the Great Flood a grizzly bear and a mountain 
goat climbed a mountain in company to escape from the 
rising tide of water ; and in memory of that event the clan 
still uses as its crest the skin of a grizzly bear combined 
with the head of a mountain goat, but it is prouder of the 
Eagle bearskin than of the goat’s head. The Nexadi of Sanya 
plone - base their claim to the possession of the eagle crest on the 
trans- belief that one of their people was once helped by an eagle 
formation and finally turned into the bird. The Eagle crest is now 
eagle. generally employed by the northern Tlingits of the Wolf 
class ; hence they have come to be called Eagles instedd of 
The same Wolves. It is to be observed that the same crest may be 
he wed and is used by different clans, and further that any one clan 
by several may have several crests, though it generally holds: only one 
ee or two of them in particular esteem. For example, the 
clanmay Petrel crest is explained by a myth that the hero Raven 
have 1 obtained fresh water from the petrel; yet the crest is said 
crests, to be used by the Wolves as well as by the Ravens. Again, 
some members of the Wolf class claim the right to use the 
Raven crest on the ground that the hero Raven dragged a 
house full of fishes ashore at their village. The Luqaxadi 
of Chilkat make so much of the Raven crest that they are 
often called Real Ravens. Members of another clan, have a 
hair ornament shaped like the beak of a raven, which hangs 
Frog crest down the back of a dancer at the potlatch. The Frog crest 
and storyof was a special possession of the Kiksadi, who claimed it 
who because persons of their clan had had special dealings with 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE TLINGITS 269 

frogs. The Ganaxadi of Tongas tell a story of a woman of married 
their clan who married a frog; probably they also claim the * "°% 
Frog crest by right of marriage. At Sitka another clan 
recently attempted to adopt the Frog crest, but the claim 
was deemed groundless by other people and led to a riot. 
The Ganaxadi, who say that one of their women married a Wood- 
frog, also allege that another of their women suckled Beta 
monster woodworm, and for that reason the Woodworm a woman 
crest is a special possession of the clan. The common whale Mesa é 
hat is worn by several Raven clans. Two clans wear hats wood- 
representing king-salmon, and one of them wears a swan fe nae 
also. The Kikasadi, who pique themselves on their Frog ae 
crest, also wear hats shaped like geese: further, they use the seni 
cry of the sea-lion because they once heard that cry at Cape , 
Ommaney when the sea-lions were fighting with the killer- 
whales. And in former days, when members of this clan Trans. 
charged down on their enemies they used to hoot like owls, (mien | 
because one of their women was once turned into an owl. into an 
Thus it appears that one clan may claim affinity with several as 
animals. Such claims are perhaps to be explained by 
marriages of members of the clan with members of other 
clans who had these animals for their crests. But while the 
Tlingit crests are generally in the shape of animals, they are 
not all-so. Thus, the Nastedi use as a crest a big rock 
called Fort-Far-Out, where Petrel, from whom Raven stole 
the fresh water, had his spring. All kinds of birds build 
their nests on the rock, and when members of the Nestedi Dance in 
clan dance they imitate the birds. Two clans lay claim to are. 
the hero Blackskin and carve his figure on posts with the 
guts of sea-lions wrapped about his head. Two clans set 
up as their heraldic device posts carved to resemble the 
Spirit of Sleep. Another clan took as their crest a mountain 
at Cape Fairweather and also a rock; the mountain was 
represented on their hats." 

Besides being carved or painted on posts, houses, hats, The crests 
and so forth the crests are also painted on the faces of the 2 @lso 

2 aks inted 
clanspeople, though these facial paintings are often so purely the faces of 

the clans. 
1 J. R. Swanton, ‘Social Condi- Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau people. 
tion, Beliefs, and Linguistic Relation- of American Ethnology (Washington, 
ship of the Tlingit Indians,” Zwentys 1908), pp. 415-418. 

‘Totem- 
poles or 
totem- 
posts. 

Totemic 
house- 
poles. 

Totemic 
grave- 
poles. 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP, 

270 

conventional that their meaning could hardly be understood 
without verbal explanations. They consist of bands, spots, 
or daubs of various colours, red, blue, yellow, and green, 
which stand for a raven’s wings, raven’s tracks, a goose’s head, 
a whale’s jaw, a whale’s tail, a wolf’s mouth, a mouse’s feet, 
bear’s feet, bear’s tracks, bear’s blood, sea-lions, slugs, the sun, 
stars, mountains, rocks, clouds, waves, glacial ice, canoes with 
people in them, and so forth. Sometimes, however, animals, 
fish, or birds are painted on the face in full and with a fair 
attempt at realism; such, for example, are figures of the 
killer-whale, porpoise, salmon, black sea-bass, goose, swan, 
and puffin, These facial paintings are often used along 
with hats which also exhibit the crest of the clan.’ 

The most conspicuous and best-known representations 
of Indian totems in North-West America are the figures carved 
and painted on great wooden poles. These totem-poles, or 
totem-posts, however, are not so common among the Tlingits as 
among their southern neighbours the Haidas and Tsimshians. 
There seem to be two sorts of them, namely, house-poles 
and grave-poles. House-poles, are set up by rich chiefs 
beside the doors of their houses and’ sometimes measure as 
much as fifty feet in height. Each is made of a single tree- 
trunk and displays various figures of men and animals, the 
successive ancestral totems, carved and painted in bright 
colours and grouped together in the most diverse fashions. 
The pole is usually capped by the totem of the man who set 
it up. Sometimes the pole is placed directly in front of the 
house with the doorway of the house cut through the block, 
which is often of enormous size.? The grave-poles either 
support boxes containing the ashes of the dead, or they contain 
cavities in which the ashes are deposited. Sometimes the 
ashes are placed in a mortuary house in one part of the 
village, while a memorial pole is set up elsewhere. These 
grave-poles are also decorated with the carved and painted 
crests of theclan. The crests are commonly carved one above 
the other. For example, a large pole erected at Wrangell 

1 J. R. Swanton, ‘‘Social Condi- 1908), pp. 418 sg., with Plates 
tion, Beliefs, and Linguistic Relatione XLVIII.-LVI. 
ship of the Tlingit Indians,” Zwemty- 2 W. H. Dall, Alaska and its Re- 
Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau sources, p. 414; A. Krause, Die 

of American Ethnology (Washington, 

Tlinkit-Indianer, pp. 130 sg. 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TLINGITS 271 

shews at the top the Raven-at-the-head-of-Nass-river (Mas- 
caki-yel), the highest being in Tlingit mythology, with Raven 
(Yel) on his breast; below him appears another being “wearing 
a hat and the red snapper coat with which he used to murder 
his children” ; underneath this unnatural parent again is the 
frog, and at the bottom the thunder-bird.! 

The totem-poles of the Tlingits, together with their Lisiansky's 
totemic system, were described at the beginning of the nine- oe 
teenth century by the Russian explorer, Lisiansky, who poles and 
circumnavigated the world in the years 1803-1806 by comh- cai 
mand of the Czar Alexander the First. His account refers of the 
especially to the Tlingits or Koloshes of the island of Sitka. i tad 
As it possesses an historical interest, it may be quoted. 

“The manners and customs of the Sitca people, in general,” 
he says, “so nearly resemble those of the island of Cadiack, 
that a description would be a repetition. The Sitcans 
appear, however, to be fonder of amusements ; for they sing 
and dance continually. There is also a great difference in 
their treatment of the dead. The bodies here are burned, 
and the ashes, together with the bones that remain uncon- 
sumed, deposited in wooden boxes, which are placed on 
pillars, that have different figures painted and carved on 
them, according to the wealth of the deceased. On taking 
possession of our new settlement, we destroyed a hundred at 
least of these, and I examined many of the boxes.”? “ What 
I have said of the Sitcans applies alike to all the inhabitants 
residing between Jacootat, or Behring’s Bay, to the fifty- 
seventh degree of north latitude, who call themselves 
Colloshes or Collushes. These people live in different 
settlements, independent of one another ; though they speak 
the same language, and are almost all related. They amount 
to about ten thousand, and are divided into tribes; the 
principal of which assume to themselves titles of distinction, 
from the names of the animal which they prefer; as, the 

1 J. R. Swanton, “ Social Condition, 
Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship of 
the Tlingit Indians,” 7wenty - Sixth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1908), pp. 431-434. What a ‘red 
snapper coat ” may be, I have not the 

advantage of knowing, nor am I aware 
how the garment in question was used 
as a lethal weapon. 

2 U. Lisiansky, 4 Voyage round the 
World in the Years 1803, 4, 5, and 6 
(London, 1814), pp. 240 5g. 

Personal 
names 
derived 
from the 
totems. 

272 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

tribe of the bear, of the eagle, the crow, the porpoise, and 
the wolf. The tribe of the wolf are called Coquontans, and 
have many privileges over the other tribes. They are con- 
sidered as the best warriors, and are said to be scarcely 
sensible to pain, and to have no fear of death. If in war a 
person of this tribe is taken prisoner, he is always treated 
well, and in general is set at liberty. These tribes so greatly 
intermix, that families of each are found in the same settle- 
ment. These families, however, always live apart ; and, to 
distinguish the cast (ste) to which they belong, they place 
on the top of their houses, carved in wood or painted, the 
bird or beast that represents it.” + 

Each clan has not only its crest or crests but also its 
personal names, which, like the crests, are derived from the 
totem of the clan. The connexion between the name and 
the totem is sometimes not very clear, but it always exists. 
Here, for example, are some personal names used by members 
of Tlingit clans in the Stikin tribe :-— 

In the Wanaari,a Bear clan of the Wolf class or phratry, 
we find as names of men Zlucke “ Ugly” (Danger Face), in 
reference to the bear; Gague, “Crying Man,” with reference 
to the howling wolf; Se&tudlgetl, “ Scared of his Voice” (to 
wit, the wolf’) ; Axkaguts, “ Bear in Snow.” 

In the Detlkoede, a Raven clan! of the Raven class or 
phratry, we find the personal names Vetl rede, “Little 
Raven”; Zlenegk, “One Alone” (the raven on the beach) ; 
Higte tlen, “Great Frog”; Yetl ku djat, “ Raven’s Wife.” * 
Other Tlingit personal names are Silver Eyes, with reference 
to the eyes of the raven; Shaggy, with reference to the 
thick hair of the grizzly bear; Frog-sitting-in-the-road ; and 
Lively-frog-in-lake. In the Wolf class or phratry the 
personal names are mostly derived from the wolf, grizzly 
bear, killer-whale, petrel, and, among the northern Tlingit, 
from the eagle. In the Raven class or phratry the personal 

1 U, Lisiansky, 4 Voyage round the pp. 31-34, 67 59.5 95. 
World in the Years 1803 4,5, and 6 
(London, 1814), pp. 243 sg. For 2 Fr. Boas, in Fifth Report of the 
some illustrated descriptions of totem- Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
poles among the Tlingits and Haidas, of Canada, pp. 25 sg. (Report of the 
see E. P. Pond, in Zhe Alaskan British Association, Newcastle-upon- 
Monthly, May, June, and July 1906, Tyne, 1889, separate reprint), 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TLINGITS 

273 

names have mostly reference to the raven, frog, hawk, black 
whale, and eagle among the Southern Tlingits,’ 

With regard to the relationship which is supposed to According 

exist between a man and his totem, we are told that the ee 
Tlingits do not believe themselves to be descended from Tlingits do 
their totems, nor do they imagine that at death their souls peiie 
will transmigrate into their totem animals, birds, or fish, descent 
They certainly believe in the transmigration of souls, but yin 
they think that in their transmigrations the souls of men animals. 
and animals are restricted to their proper species. Thus 
they affirm clearly and plainly that a man will be born 
again as a man, a wolf as a wolf, and a raven as a 
raven. Nevertheless they consider the members of a clan 
to be related in some way to their totemic animal. For 
example, members of the Wolf clan will pray to the 
wolves, “We are your relations; pray don’t hurt us.” 
But though they ask the wolves not to hurt them, they 
do not themselves scruple to hurt the wolves, for they will 
hunt ‘them without hesitation. They appear always to 
explain their relation to their totem by a legend that a 
mythical ancestor of their. clan had an encounter with an 
animal of the totemic species.” 

Such is the account which Dr. Franz Boas, a high But the 
authority, gives of the relationship which is supposed to %0Ués told 

- to explain 
exist between people and their totems. He may be right some of 
. : ae : : + the t 
in saying that the Tlingits do not now believe in their scr aNilg 

descent from the totemic animals ; yet the myths told to beliefin 
explain some of the totems or crests seem to indicate the ain 
prevalence of that belief in former times. Such myths are totemic 
the stories of the two women who married a grizzly bear and ne 
a frog respectively, of the woman who suckled a woodworm, 
and of the member of the Eagle clan who was turned into 
aneagle.2 These tales have the true totemic ring about 
them ; they point clearly to the former identification of the 
clanspeople with their totems, which is only another way of 

1 J. R. Swanton, ‘ Social Condition, 
Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship 
of the Tlingit Indians,” 7wenty-Sixth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1908), pp. 421 59. 

VOL, II 

2 ¥r. Boas in Fifth Keport of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 23-25 (Report of the 
British Association, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint). 

3 See above, pp. 268, 269. 

T 

274 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

saying that the present people are supposed to be descended 
from the totemic animals. 
Belief of When a pregnant woman dreams of a dead relation, the 
eee Tlingits think that the soul of the deceased has entered 
‘ incarnation into her and will be born again. And when a new-born 
ofthe dead- child resembles a dead kinsman or kinswoman, they conclude 
that it is the dead person come to life again, and accordingly 
they give it his or her name. Anda Tlingit may often be 
heard to say, “When I die, I should like to be born again 
in such and such a family”; or, “If only I were killed, I 
Measures might return to the world in happier circumstances.” 1 Not 
taken by only do the Tlingits believe, that the dead are reborn as 
the Tlingits ye 
toensure men and women, but they used to take steps to facilitate 
otdcanaald their rebirth, Thus, when a beloved person died, the 
relations often took the nail from the little finger of his right 
hand and a lock of hair on the right side of his head and 
put them into the belt of al young girl of his clan, who was 
just reaching maturity. Afterwards she had to lead a very 
quiet life for eight months and fast for as many days, unless 
she were delicate, when half as many days sufficed. In the 
former case she fasted steadily for! four days, rested two 
days, and then fasted for the remaining four. After her fast 
was over, and just before she ate, she prayed that the dead 
person might be born again from her.2. In this custom the 
placing of the finger-nail and hair in the belt of a girl who 
has just attained the power of becoming a mother appears to 
be a mode of impregnating her by inserting the soul of the 
dead in her womb. Substantially, therefore, this custom and 
the belief which it implies agree with the Central Australian 
theory of conception.? Again, at a Tlingit funeral measures 
were taken to secure the rebirth of the soul of the dead. 
The corpse was generally burned, and before it was placed on 
the pyre, they used to turn it round four times in the 
direction which they conceive the sun to follow; then they 
laid the body down with the head to the sunrise. This was 

1H. J. Holmberg, Uber die Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship 
Volker des russischen Amerika,” c/a of the Tlingit Indians,” T2wenty-Sixth 
Societatts Scientiarum Fennicae, iv. Annual Report of the Bureau of 
(1856) p. 345; W. H. Dall, Alaska American Ethnology (Washington, 
and its Resources, p. 423. 1908), p. 429. 

2 J. R. Swanton, ‘Social Condition, ; 3 See vol. i. PP- 93 59-5 188 399. 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TLINGITS 275 

done, we are told, to enable the soul of the deceased to be 
born again, for if he were laid with his head to the setting 
sun he would never come back.’ Clearly the rising sun 
was thought to bring in his train the souls of the dead to be 
born again, while the setting sun carried them away with him 
for ever. This belief perhaps throws light on the burial 
customs of other totemic peoples, who inter their dead 
according to certain fixed rules with their heads turned to 
particular points of the compass. 

At funerals all the duties of an undertaker were per- A funerals 
formed by persons of the other class or phratry, and they 2st) 
alone were invited to the funeral feast. For example, if the the dead 
deceased was of the Raven class, the invited guests would all ee sene 
be Wolves, not Ravens ; and these Wolves would.perform the Persons of 
last offices of respect to the dead Raven.’ Indeed, we are a 
told that a Tlingit employed persons of the other class or Phratry. 
phratry to do everything for him—to build his house, to set 
up his totem pole, to pierce the lips and ears of his children, 
to initiate them into the secret societies, and so on. For 
these services he paid them and thereby shewed his respect 
for them. “The idea of giving property to a member of 
one’s own phratry or of employing him in putting up the 
house was altogether abhorrent to Tlingit notions of 
propriety.”"* Yet “according to the unwritten Tlingit 
law it was incumbent upon every one belonging to a phratry 
to house and feed any other member of that phratry who 
should visit him, no matter from how great a distance he 
might come.” ° 

“In their dances the Tlingits made much use of their Tlingit 
totemic badges or crests, the dancers appearing clad in reir 
dresses, masks, and so forth which represented the totemic dancers 

animal or thing, while they also mimicked the totem by eked 

1 J. R. Swanton, ‘‘ Social Condition, 
Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship 
of the Tlingit Indians,” Zzeerty-Sixth 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
American Ethnology (Washington, 
1908), p. 430. 

2 See above, vol. i. pp. 454 599.5 
vol, ii, p. 190. bs 

3-H. J. Holmberg, ‘Uber die 
Volker des russischen Amerika,” Acta 

Soctetatis Scientiarum Fennicae, iv. 
(Helsingfors, 1856) p. 324; A. Krause, 
Die Tlinkit-Indianer, p. 223; J. R. 
Swanton, *‘ Social Condition, Beliefs, 
and Linguistic Relatjonship of the 
Tlingit Indians,” 7wenty-Sixth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of American 
Ethnology (Washington, 1908), p. 430. 

4 J. R. Swanton, of. cét. p. 435+ 

5 J. R. Swanton, of. ctt. p- 427- 

and dis- 
guised to 
imitate 
their 
totems. 

276 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

their gestures. 1Even such totems as mountains and rocks 
were imitated. For example, a dancer who represented a 
mountain would imitate the clouds which rested on its side 
in fine weather or completely covered it in bad.’ When a 
monument was to be set up to the memory of a dead man, 
the Tlingits used to celebrate a great festival, to which guests 
were invited, from far and near. However, such festivals 
were rare on account of their costliness. Sometimes the 
host would give away the whole of his property and that of 
his wife too, and would spend the rest of his days in abject 
poverty, living on the glorious memory of these few days of 
prodigal munificence. On the evening before the end of 
this great celebration, the host, who was generally a chief, 
retired with a slave to another apartment and there attired 
himself in a singular costume, which was often an heirloom, 
handed down with the greatest respect from many generations 
and never used but on such solemn occasions. It differed 
in different families, but always represented the totem either 
in part or complete, and was further adorned with scalps, 
human teeth, ribands, ermine skins, and so forth. The slave 
who helped to attire his master in this dress always received 
his freedom for the service. Thus disguised in the likeness 
of his totem the host came forth from his place of conceal- 
ment and presented himself to his guests. At the same 
moment a cry was raised in imitation of the cry of the 

Sacrifice of totemic animal. On the precise manner of the cry depended 

slaves at 
funerals. 

the life of several slaves ; for if it was uttered in a peculiar 
way they were immediately put to death. Then the host 
and his family sang their ancestral songs, setting forth the 
origin of the family and the deeds of their fathers. After 
that the host sat down and distributed the presents among 
his guests. Having performed this rite he was entitled to 
assume the name of a deceased ancestor on the paternal 
side. The whole festival was called “elevating the dead.”? 
We may conjecture that the meaning of the ceremony is 

1 J. R. Swanton, ‘‘ Social Condition, 2H. J. Holmberg, “Uber die 
Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship Vélker des russischen Amerika,” Acta 
of the Tlingit Indians,” Tzwesty-Sixth Soctetatis Scienttarum Fennicae, iv. 
Annual Report of the Bureau of (1856) pp. 327-329; W. H. Dall, 
American Ethnology (Washington, Alaska and its Resources, pp. 418- 
1908), pp. 435 sg. ! 420. 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TLINGITS 

277 

explained by the Tlingit theory of reincarnation; it was 
probably supposed that the dead ancestor came to life again 
in the person of the descendant who assumed his name. 
Similarly the Hurons, the Iroquois, and other Indian tribes 
of the United States used to raise up the dead, as they 
imagined, by bestowing the name of the deceased upon a 
living person.’ 

Polygamy is or used to be common among the rich Polygamy 
Tlingits ; but the first wife enjoyed precedence and authority. ie 
A chief on the Nass River is reported to have had forty 
wives. According to the devoted Russian missionary, Secondary 
Father Innocentius Veniaminoff, who laboured among the Seapenys 
natives of Alaska in the first half of the nineteenth century, generally 
Tlinglit women had secondary husbands or legalised lovers, Coouaay 
who were always either the brothers or near relations of the husband. 
primary husband.? The custom perhaps points to a former 
practice of fraternal polyandry among the Tlingits. 

On the death of the husband, his brother or the son of The 
his sister was bound to marry the widow. The failure to aes: 
fulfil this obligation sometimes led to bloody feuds. But if 
there was neither a brother nor a sister’s son alive, the widow 
might choose a husband from the other class or phratry to 
which her late husband belonged2 A man’s heir is his a man’s 
sister’s son, or, if there is none such, his younger brother.‘ heir his 

3 : Sister's son, 
A man and his wife’s mother shewed respect by not address- avoidance 

ing each other directly.” 

1 Relations des Jésuttes, 1642, pp. 
53, 85 597.3 id. 1644, pp. 66 sg. 
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858); 
Lafitau, Aleurs des saunages améri- 
quains (Paris, 1724), ii. 434. 

2H. J. Holmberg, “Uber die 
Vélker des russischen Amerika,” 
Acta Soctetatis Scientiarum Fennicae, 
iv. (1856) pp. 313, 315 sg.3 W. H. 
Dall, Alaska and its Resources, pp. 
415, 416; A. Krause, Die 7lrnkit- 
Indianer, pp. 220, 221. Father 
Veniaminoff, afterwards bishop of 
Kamchatka, ‘* alone of the Greek 
missionaries to Alaska has left behind 
him an undying record of devotion and 
self-sacrifice, and love, both to God 
and man, combined with the true 
missionary fire. To him also we owe 

Apparently the Tlingits thought °f wife's 

the first detailed account of the modern 
Aleutian character and mode of life” 
(W. H. Dall, Alaska and its Re- 
Sources, p. 385). 

3H. I. Holmberg, “Uber die 
Volker des russischen Amerika,” Acta 
Soctetatis Sctentiarum Fennicae, iv. 
(1856) pp. 316, 325; W. H. Dall, 
Alaska and tts Resources, p. 4163 
A. Krause, Die Thinkit-(udianer, p. 
22I. 

4H. J. Holmberg, “Uber die 
Volker des russischen Amerika,” Acta 
Soctetatts Sctentiarum Fenntcae, iv. 
(1856) p. 325; W. H. Dall, -4/aska 
and its Resources, p. 417; A. Krause, 
Die Tlinkit-Indianer, p. 122. 

5 J. R. Swanton, ‘‘ Social Condition, 
Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship 

The 
Haidas of 
the Queen 
Charlotte 
Islands. 

Scenery 
and climate 
of the 
Queen 
Charlotte 
Islands. 

278 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP, 

that this common rule of avoidance observed by a man and 
his wife’s mother was a great law of nature which was 
recognised also by the lower animals ; for when they were 
digging for clams, which withdraw rapidly into the sand, 
they used to say, “ Do not go down so fast or you will hit 
your mother-in-law in the face.” ? 

§ 3. Totemism among the Haidas 

The neighbours of the Tlingits on the south are the 
Haidas, who inhabit the Queen Charlotte Islands of British 
Columbia. These islands, so far as tradition allows us to 
judge, appear to be their original home; but to the north of 
them a branch of the Haidas, known as the Kaiganis, now 
occupies a portion of the coast of the Prince of Wales Archi- 
pelago in Alaska, from Clarence Strait westward, together 
with Forrester’s Island.2, The Queen Charlotte Islands form 
a chain nearly two hundred miles in length from north to 
south and are divided by wide channels both from the main- 
land on the east and from the islands! of Alaska on the north. 
A great part of the islands is rugged and mountainous, with* 
peaks where the snow lies all through the year. Dense 
forests chiefly of spruce cover the land even to the water’s 
edge. The timber is often of magnificent growth, the 
straightness and height of the tree trunks being remarkable. 
Next to the spruce (Adzes Menzteszi), the western cedar. 
(Thuja gigantea) and the western hemlock (Adzes 
Mertensiana) are the commonest trees. The luxuriance of 
the vegetation is favoured by the mildness and humidity of 
the climate; in winter the rains are very heavy, the sky 
persistently overcast with clouds, and gales frequent and 
violent. Snow sometimes falls, but seldom lies long except 
on the mountains. Hence in the moisture-laden atmosphere 
ferns and mosses grow abundantly, clothing the boles and 

of the Tlingit Indians,” 7wventy-Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of 

Annuai Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology (Washington, 

American Ethnology (Washington, 1908), p. 459. 

1908), p. 424. 2 George M. Dawson, Report on 
1 J. R. Swanton, ‘‘Social Condition, the Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878 

Beliefs, and Linguistic Relationship | (Montreal, 1880), p, 104 B (Geological 

of the Tlingit Indians,” Z7zventy-Sixth © Survey of Canada). 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 279 

branches of the trees in the forest with a mantle of vivid 
green. Great trunks, fallen and dead, become at once a 
garden of, moss, saplings, and shrubs. As the trees in 
sheltered spots almost dip their pendent boughs in the 
water, locomotion in any other way than by boat or canoe 
along the shore is nearly impossible. The eastern coast of 
the islands is indented with many winding inlets and land- 
locked coves. On some of these deep and narrow fjords, 
where the mountains rise steeply from the shore to the 
height of thousands of feet, their upper gorges and shady 
hollows filled with snowdrifts, their lower slopes veiled in the 
sombre gloom of the pines, the scenery is of desolate and 
almost oppressive grandeur.’ 

As the Haidas live almost exclusively on fish, the halibut 
and the salmon forming their staple diet, they pay little 

The 

Haidas live 

chiefly on 

attention to the interior of the country and turn their eyes fishand 

chiefly to the sea, choosing the sites of their villages with 

build their 

villages 

reference to the halibut banks and coast fisheries which beside 

engross most of their time. Hence the villages often stand 
on bleak wind-swept rocks or islands, though generally with 
a sandy or gravelly beach near them where the canoes can 
land even in stormy weather. The substantially built 
wooden houses are placed side by side facing seaward, a few 
feet above the high tide mark, and being unpainted soon 
assume a uniform grey colour or grow green and mossy in 
the damp climate. A cloud of blue smoke hovering over 
the village in calm weather reveals its presence from a 
distance ; and a nearer view discloses a forest of carved 
posts in front of the houses, the stages for drying fish, and 
the canoes drawn up on the beach and covered, when not in 
use, with mats and boughs to prevent them from warping 
and cracking in the sun.” The Haidas are bold sailors, 
navigating the wide and stormy seas which surround their 
islands in their great canoes, which are hewn out of logs 
of cedar. Some of these canoes can hold a hundred men 
with all their equipments for a long voyage. They are 
excellent sea boats, and in them the Indians undertake 

. ? G.M. Dawson, Report on the Queen 2G. M. Dawson, of. cit. pp- 44 B, 
Charlotte Islands, 1578 (Montreal, 109 B, 115 Bsg. 
1880), pp. 14 B-43 B. 

the sea, 

The 
Haidas are 
bold and 
skilful 
sailors. 

280 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

trading voyages of hundreds of miles to Victoria in 
Vancouver’s Island and thence to various towns in Puget 
Sound.’ 
Character Physically and mentally the Haidas are reputed the 
ee finest Indians of the North-West coast. Their complexion 
Their _—iis fairer and their features handsomer than those of the other 
bythe tribes, and the intelligent expression of their faces is not 
whites. belied by a closer acquaintance with them. Unfortunately 
intercourse with the whites has deeply demoralized this 
gifted race, and they are now wasted by vice and disease. 
Even thirty years ago their villages were falling into decay, 
some of them being completely abandoned, while in others 
many houses shut up and mouldering away in the damp 
weather, rotting totem-poles, and paths choked with a rank 
growth of weeds told the melancholy tale of a people blighted 
by contact with an alien race.? 
The The whole Haida stock is divided into two clans or classes, 
er aeq Which are named respectively the Raven (Qoala or Hoya) and 
intotwo the Eagle (Gzt2va or Got). These clans are strictly exogamous. 
cxogamous A Raven man must marry an Eagle woman, and an Eagle 
classes, the man Must marry a Raven woman. ¢scent is in the female 
Pee line; that is to say, the child belongs to its mother’s clan 
withde- and inherits the rank and property of its maternal uncle. 
a Thus if the mother is a Raven, the children are Ravens ; if 
line. she is an Eagle, they are Eagles. Soclose is the relationship 
between persons of the same clan that marriage within it is, 
or used to be, viewed by the Haidas almost as incest. On 
the other hand, the members of the other clan were often 
considered downright enemies. Even husbands and wives 
did not hesitate to betray each other to death in the interests 
of their own families. “ At times,’ says Mr. Swanton, 
“it almost appears as if each marriage were an alliance 
between opposite tribes; a man begetting offspring rather 
for his wife than for himself, and, being inclined to see 
his real descendants rather in his sister's children than in 
his own. They it was who succeeded to his position and 
1 James G. Swan, Zhe Haidah 2G. M. Dawson, Report on the 
Indians of Queen Charlotte’s Islands Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878, pp. 
(Washington, 1874), pp. 2 5g. (Smzth- 104B sg., 1178; A. Krause, Die 
sontan Contributions to Knowledge, Tlinkit-[ndianer, pp. 305 sg. 
No. 267). 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 281 

carried down his family line” The two clans or classes gach clan 
are each subdivided into an indefinite number of groups . es 
“y° . . Ivide 
or famjlies, which usually take their names from towns or into an 
camping-grounds and appear to be simply local groups. Each ee 
family or local group enjoys several prerogatives which it families 
guards jealously 2 such are the right to bear certain personal ae 
names and the right to use certain badges or crests, which and each 
are generally representations of animals, though trees, shells, nee 
and objects of daily life also occur amongst them. These its crests, 

crests are tattooed on the bodies of their owners, painted presi 
on their faces, woven on their clothing, and carved on tePresenta- 
their houses and utensils. Each family as a rule has animals. 
several crests, which are explained by traditions setting — 
forth the adventures of an ancestor of the family. 

Most of these traditions tell of his encounter with an 
animal or a supernatural being, which from that time 

on became the crest of his family. Not all the members 

of the family use all its crests. At first the youth seems to 
possess the most general crest of the clan only ; thus if he is 

of the Eagle clan, he will have the eagle crest ; if he is of 

the Raven clan, he will have the bear and the killer-whale 

crests. As he attains higher rank by repeated distributions 

of property among members of the other clan, he becomes 
entitled to the privilege of using other crests ; but the use 

of the total number of crests belonging to the family seems 

to be restricted to its chief. With regard to these Haida The crests 
crests Mr. J. R. Swanton, one of our chief authorities on the Sy pan 
tribe, observes that “they were originally obtained from some totemic. 
supernatural being or by purchase from another family. 
Although referred to by most writers as totems, they have, 
however, no proper totemic significance, their use being 
similar to that of the quarterings in heraldry, to mark the 

social position of the wearers.” Accordingly it would seem 

that these families or local groups cannot properly be 
described as totem clans; that term among the Haidas 
should be restricted to the two great exogamous divisions 

of the Raven and the Eagle.’ 

1 Fr, Boas, Factal Paintings of the tion, Memoir of the American Museum 
Indians of Northern British Columbia, of Natural History, 1898); J. R. 
p. 14 (Zhe Jesup North Pacific Expedi- Swanton, Contributions to the Eth- 

Dawson's 
account of 
the Haida 
social 
system. 

282 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP, 

Somewhat different from the above is the account of 
the Haida social system given by the late Dr. George M. 
Dawson, to whom we owe the first fairly full description 
of the Queen Charlotte Islands and their inhabitants. 
According to him “a single system of totems (Haida, 
kwalla) extends throughout the different tribes of the 
Haidas, Kaiganes, Tshimsians, and neighbouring peoples. 
The whole community is divided under the different 
totems, and the obligations attaching to totem are not 
confined by tribal or national limits. The totems found 
among these people are designated by the eagle, wolf, 
crow, black bear and fin-whale (or killer). The two last- 
named are united, so that but four clans are counted in all. 
The Haida names for these are, in order, hoot, koo-j1, kit-si- 
naka and sya-nu-yd. The members of the different totems 
are generally pretty equally distributed in each tribe. Those 
of the same totem are all counted as it were of one family, 
and the chief bearing of the system appears to be on 
marriage. No one may marry in his or her own totem, 
whether within or without their own ‘tribe or nation. A 
person of any particular totem may, however, marry one of 
any other indifferently. The children follow the totem of 
the mother, save in some very exceptional cases, when a 
child newly born may be given to the father’s sister to 
suckle. This is done to strengthen the totem of the father 
when its number has become reduced. The child is then 
spoken of as belonging to the aunt, but after it attains a 
certain age may be returned to the real mother to bring up.”? 

nology of the Haida (Leyden and New 
York, 1905), pp. 11, 62; zd. in 
Handbook of American Indians north 
of Mextco, i. 522. Compare Fr. Boas, 
in Fifth Report of the Committee on the 
North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 
26 sq. (Report of the British Associa- 
tion, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1889, 
separate reprint) ; za. in Twelfth Report 
of the Committee on the Tribes of North- 
Western Canada, pp. 648 sgq. (Report 
of the British Association, Bristol, 
1898). In these Reports Dr. Boas 
applies the term phratries to the two 
Haida divisions of the Raven and Eagle; 
but that term should be restricted to 

such exogamous tribal divisions as are 
themselves subdivided into minor exo- 
gamous groups, which seems not to be 
the case with the Raven and the Eagle 
divisions among the Haidas. Accord- 
ingly in his memoir, Facial Paintings 
of the Indians of Northern British 
Columbia (t.c.), Dr. Boas has rightly 
designated the two exogamous divisions 
of the Haidas as clans, not phratties. 

1 G.M. Dawson, Report on the Queen 
Charlotte Islands, 1878 (Montreal, 
1880), p. 134.8. Dr. Dawson’s account 
is Yeproduced by Mr. A. Krause 
(Dre Tlinkit-Indianer, p. 312). 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 283 

If the later accounts of the Haida system given by 
Messrs. Boas and Swanton are correct, as we may ‘assume 
them to be, it would seem that Dr. Dawson confused some 
of the families or local groups with the two exogamous 
clans. The animal crests claimed by the families might 
easily give rise to such a confusion. With regard to these Asa rule, 
crests we are told that while theoretically the crests used by 1° ors 
families of the Raven clan should be. different from those Raven and 
used by families of the Eagle clan, this distinction is not poesia 
maintained throughout in practice, since some crests, for from each 
example the dogfish and the skate, are claimed by families ee ae 
both of the Raven and of the Eagle clan. But as a general crests are 
rule the two sets of crests do actually differ from each other.) nae 
A family is not restricted to one crest. It may have, and Each 
often has, several crests or emblems which are supposed to ae 
commemorate events in the early history of the family. several 
For example, one family has for its crests the frog, beaver, “*"* 
raven, and eagle; another has the bear, moon, dogfish, 
-killer-whale, wolf, and devilfish; another has the killer- 
whale, owl, bear, and woodpecker; another has the bear, 
killer-whale, and moon; another has the halibut, eagle, 
beaver, and land-otter; another has the frog, beaver, 
starfish, and evening sky; another has the land-otter, 
killer-whale, woodpecker, and cirrus cloud ; another has the 
eagle, sculpin, and beaver ; another has the eagle, humming- 
bird, beaver, sculpin, and skate; another has the bear, 
killer-whale, hawk, rainbow, and stratus-cloud; another 
has the killer-whale, grizzly bear, and black bear; another 
has the eagle, raven, sculpin, and frog; another has the 
bear, moon, mountain-goat, killer-whale, storm-cloud, cirrus- 
cloud, and rock-slide ; another has the dogfish, eagle, frog, 
monster frog, and beaver. And so on.” 

According to Dr. Boas’s enquiries the commonest crests Somecrests 
or totems, as he also calls them, in the Raven clan are the povdeanaet 
killer-whale and the black bear; and the commonest crests thanothers. 

or totems in the Eagle clan are the eagle and beaver. Next 

1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to the Committee on the North-Western 
the Ethnology of the Haida, p. 107. Tribes of Canada, pp. 648 sqq. (Report 
of the British Association, Bristol, 

2 Fr. Boas, in Twelfth Report of 1898). 

284 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

to them in frequency, though at a long interval, come in 
the Raven clan the ¢samaos (a fabulous sea-monster) and 
the moon ; in the Eagle clan the sculpin, the frog, and the 
raven. In the Raven clan Dr. Boas found the woodpecker, 
tsélialas (killer-whale with raven wings), thunder-bird, hawk, 
wolf, and cirrus cloud, each respectively claimed as a crest 
by two familie$ ; and the dogfish, devilfish, ow], land-otter, 
grizzly bear, sea-lion, mountain-goat, gyztgalya, rainbow, 
stratus cloud, storm-cloud, and rock-slide each respectively 
claimed by one family only. In, the Eagle clan Dr. Boas 
found the dogfish claimed as a crest by two families, and 
the halibut, land-otter, starfish, humming-bird, skate (?), 
monster-frog watsat (a fabulous personage), wasg (a fabulous 
whale with five dorsal fins), sgango (a monster), and evening 

Table of sky, each respectively claimed by one family only. To 
the crests 

SF ihe put the result of Dr. Boas’s ehquiries in tabular form :— 
heel ae RAVEN CLAN (22 distinct families) 
Killer-whale crest in 21 families. Devilfish crest in 1 family. 
Black bear oe Yer Owl Si? HE egy 
Tsamaos 3 ee Land-otter ,, 1 ,, 
Moon are 4° 45) | Grizzly bear crest in 1 family. 
Woodpecker __,, De tne | Sea-lion a cers 
Tsilialas 59 a | Mountain-goat crest in 1 family. 
Thunder-bird ,, arr | Gyitgalya aa Re. 3s 
Hawk 3 2 -45 Rainbow - Toy 
Wolf 5 a Stratus cloud 35 ar 5 
Cirrus cloud 35 2) 55 Storm-cloud $5 45 
Dogfish 7 1 family, Rock slide spr TK. 3 
EAGLE CLAN (18 distinct families) 
Eagle crest in 17 families. Humming-bird crest in 1 family. 
Beaver ,, 13 5 Skate (?) ” I oy 
Sculpin ,, 9 a Monster-frog ‘5 Ie 35 
Frog - 5 3 Watsat (a fabulous personage) crest in 
Raven ,, 3 ms 1 family. 
Dogfish ,, 2 i Wasg crest in 1 family. 
Halibut ,, 1 family. Sgango ,, I 45 
Land-otter crest in 1 family. | Evening sky crest in 1 family. 
Starfish gy DE ogy 
aie Thus, while the two sets of crests mostly differ, the 

anomaly dogfish and the land-otter occur as crests both among the 
the raven 

isnota Ravens and the Eagles. It is remarkable that the raven 
crest of the should appear as a crest in the Eagle clan and not, where 

Raven clan, 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 

285 

we should expect to find it, in the Raven clan.’ This 
anomaly is a puzzle to the Indians themselves.” 

The results of more recent researches conducted among The 
the Haidas by Mr. J. R. Swanton agree to a considerable reo, 
extent with those of Dr. Boas. He finds that in the Raven probably 
clan the killer-whale and grizzly bear crests are the most a 
frequent, and that next to them come the rainbow and the rare 
‘the ¢samaos (a fabulous sea-monster); whilé in the Eagle Soule 
clan the eagle and beaver crests are the most frequent, and the new 
next to them come the sculpin and frog. The other crests os 
are considerably less common, and many of them occur only 
in a single family. From this Mr. Swanton infers with 
some probability that the crests most frequently used are 
the oldest, and that those which occur only once or twice 
must have been acquired in comparatively recent times.’ 
He tells us that the killer-whale is considered the oldest 
crest of the Raven clan, and the eagle the oldest crest of 
the Eagle clan. “The killer-whale,” he says further, “was 
owned by every Raven family without exception ; and the 
eagle, by almost every Eagle family. Young men are said 
to have worn these first before assuming the more valued 
ones ; but young men of high family, not yet entitled to 
wear the higher crests, might nevertheless have them carved 
upon their grave-posts, if they died in early years. The 
“town and family chiefs were always endeavouring to reserve 
certain crests for their own exclusive use, but the house 
chiefs were generally too powerful for this to go very 
far. The moon, however, seems to have been used 
exclusively by four or five of the highest Haida chiefs. : 
: . . Possession of a crest was jealously guarded; and _ if Possession 
any chief learned that one of his crests had been adopted Set wee 
by a chief of a family that was considered of lower rank, jealously 
he would put the latter to shame, and by giving away or &"ded. 

destroying more property than the other chief could muster, 
, 

1 Fr. Boas, in Zwel/th Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 648-654 (Report 
of the British Association, Bristol, 
1898). Compare zd. in Fifth Report 
of the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 26 sq. (Report 

of the British Association, Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne, 1889, separate reprint), 

2 J. R. Swanton, Cortrébutions to 
the Ethnology of the Haida, p. 107. 

3 J. R. Swanton, of. c¢f, pp. 107- 
117. 

Descent of 
the family 
as well as 
of the clan 
seems to 
be in the 
female line. 

Legends 
told by the 
Haidas to 
account for 
the origin 
of their 
crests. 

The killer- 
whale crest. 

‘The blue 
hawk crest, 

The sea- 
jion crest. 

286 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

force him to abandon it. Thus a chief of the family of 
Those-born-at-Skidegate once adopted the mountain-goat ; 
but when the chief of Skedans heard of it, he gave away 
a great many blankets, and compelled him to relinquish it.” * 

Descent in the family, as well as in the clan, appears 
to be in the female line, so that children take both their 
family name and their crest from their mother, not from 
their father. This is not indeed directly affirmed, so far 
as I have observed, by our authorities, but it seems to 
follow from some of their statements. Thus Mr. Swanton 
says that “if a man were very'fond of his children, he 
might give them the right to use some of his own crests ; 
but these must be surrendered as soon as the children 
married. Occasionally a crest of this kind was kept 
through life; and, according to tradition, one or two 
crests were given by the man who» first obtained them to 
his children, and thus to the jother clan.”? This statement 
implies that the acquisition of a crest by a child from his 
father is unusual and abnormal; from which we may infer 
that normally the crest is inherited by children from their 
mother. 

As specimens of the legends told by the Haidas to 
account for the origin of their crests we may cite the 
following. The killer-whale crest has been used by 
people of the Raven clan from the time when they came 
from the mythical marine being called Foam-Woman. 
One of her daughters wore a blanket with the figure of 
a killer-whale’s dorsal fin on it, and ever since then the 
women of the Raven family called People-of-Pebble-Town 
have worn similar blankets at potlatches? Again, the same 
Raven family is said to use the blue hawk crest because 
they saw the bird on a certain mountain where blue 
hawks live; the blue hawk and the thunder-bird are 
represented in carvings in almost exactly the same form, 
and both are employed as crests by the Raven family 
called People-of-Pebble-Town* Again, the same Raven 
family used wooden war-helmets carved in the shape of 

1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 3 J. R. Swanton, of. czt. p. 108. 
the Ethnology of the Haida, pp. 107 sq. 
2 J. R. Swanton, of. czt. p. 107. 4 }: R. Swanton, /.¢. 

xvu TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 287 

sea-lions, because a member of the clan is said to have 

found the first sea-lion and to have made a hat for 
himself out of the skin of its head Again, the Ravens The rain- 
adopted the rainbow as a crest, because the chief of all] bow crest. 
supernatural beings in the woods, called Supernatural-One- 
upon-whom-it-thunders, was a Raven power and used to 
appear as the rainbow when he was in full dress? Again, ‘rhe 

the cumulus and cirrus clouds were the full dress costume sar pie 
of the supernatural being called The-One-in-the-Sea, and as cloud 

he was a Raven, the Ravens adopted these clouds as their ‘es 
crests. Again, the Raven people use the flicker or the wooa- 
golden-winged woodpecker as a crest, because a man oi = 
the People-of-Pebble-Town, a Raven family, killed the first ~~ 
flicker, stuffed its skin, and put it on his hat.4. The moon, The moon, 
mountain-goat, and ¢samaos are crests imported by the mountain- 
Raven people from the Tsimshians. The ¢samaos was amas 
personification of driftwood or the “tide-walker”; it could ‘ests: 
assume several different shapes, such as that of a sea-lion 

and a black whale.® The eagle crest was used by the the eagle 
Eagle people when their families “first came out” from ‘rést 
their great mythical ancestress, who rejoices in the title 

of Property-making-a-Noise. The beaver crest of the'The beaver 
Eagle people was brought back from the Tsimshian country *** 

by the children of Property-making-a-Noise. The dogfish, The dog- 
another crest of the Eagle people, was first used by a man #5? crest. 
of the Food-giving-Town-People or, as they were sometimes 

called, Those-born-at-Skidegate-Creek, who are a Raven 
family. He found a dogfish on the beach and adopted 

it as a crest, but gave it to one of his children, who was 
necessarily an Eagle. That is how the dogfish came to 

be a crest of the Eagle people. At the same time we 

are told that Property-making-a-Noise, the ancestress 

of the Eagles, had a dogfish tattooed on ‘her back 

when she went to the Tsimshian country.® Again, a The raven 
man of the Gitins-of-Skidegate, an Eagle family, was ‘Tt 
unfortunately poisoned by eating clams while he lived in 

1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 4 J. R. Swanton, Jc. 
the Ethnology of the Haida, p. 108. 5 

2 J. R, Swanton, Ze. J. R. Swanton, /.c. 

3 J. R. Swanton, of. cz¢. p. 109. 6 J. R. Swanton, /.c. 

288 “TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

the Tsimshian country ; and to console his friends for this 
domestic bereavement they were given a raven hat. That 
is how the Eagle people come to have the raven for a 
Thesculpin crest. The sculpin crest was also received by the Eagle 
eats people at the same time; it was first carved on the front 
The star. Of a grave-post.. Again, a child playing on the beach 
fish crest. found the first starfish. He picked it up and dried it 
and played with it a long time. Indeed he liked it so 
much that he begged his friends to carve it on his grave- 
box. Since then his friends, who were Eagle people, have 
The used the starfish as a crest. Again, two Eagle families, 
nee called respectively Those-born-at-Skedans and Sea-Lion- 
Town-People, tie humming-birds to their hair as a crest, 
because the great mythical ancestress of the Eagle people, 
Djilaqons, likewise wore a humming-bird fastened to her 
The heron hair in a peculiar manner. Again, the Eagle people are 
oe said to have adopted the heron as a crest because once, 
when an Eagle man was returning empty-handed from the 
chase, a heron came out just at the stern of his canoe.’ 
The art The Haidas had a comparatively well-developed system 
ae of art, which they applied to the decoration of houses, canoes, 
paddles, horn-spoons, boxes, trays, dance-hats, masks, rattles, 
batons, and so forth ; and among the patterns employed for 
this purpose the figures of their totemic or crest animals 
were by far the commonest.? Indeed, so far did the 
artistic bent of the people carry them in this direction that 
in the opinion of Dr. Boas it even reacted on their social 
system and proved a most important factor in developing it.* 
The Formerly, every Haida had his crest tattooed on some 
Hailas part of his person, generally on the legs, arms, or breast, 

used to 
eee most commonly on the back of the hand and forearm. 
eed Apparently the Haidas never tattooed their faces. The 
on their ~~ patterns were carefully and symmetrically drawn by pricking 
bodies. : : : 

the skin and rubbing in charcoal, so that they stood out in 

a bluish tint on the copper-coloured skin. While every 

member of a household had one of the family crests 

1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to $ Fr. Boas, in Twelfth Report of the 
the Ethnology of the Haida, pp. 109 sg. | Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
2 J. R. Swanton, of. cet, p, 110, of Canada, p. 676 (Report of the British 

3 J. R. Swanton, of. cit. pp. 122 Association, Bristol, 1898). 
599-5 136 599., 143 599. . 

XVH TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 289 

tattooed on his body, the head or chief of the house used to 
have every one of them tattooed on his person in order to 
shew his relation to them all. Among the crests so tattooed 
which hdve been observed and recorded are the halibut, cod- 
fish, zvasko (a mythical monster), frog, humming-bird, crow, 
bear, moon, rainbow, dragon-fly, starfish, skate, thunder-bird, 
killer-whale, sculpin, and dogfish. Some of these creatures 
were represented with a fair attempt at realism.? 

While the Haidas appear not to have tattooed their The 
faces, on the other hand they painted their crests on them, aa 
sometimes with a close resemblance to nature, laying on the painted 
patterns in black, red, blue, and green colours mixed with ee 
grease. Thus a man might paint a very natural halibut in faces. 
red and black on his face, the head of the fish appearing on 
his brow and the tail on his cheek, and the rest of the fish 
occupying the intermediate portion of his countenance. 
Another would paint a killer-whale in black over his right 
eyebrow and a whale in red over his left eyebrow. A 
third would adorn the right side of his face with the likeness 
of a dog-salmon in red and black; while a fourth would 
decorate the front of his face with the figure of a devil-fish 
in red and black, the body with its goggle-eyes being 
plastered on his forehead, while the tentacles of the creature 
sprawled over his cheeks. Another would depict the sun 
as a disc with rays between his eyes, while another would 
display the crescent moon on his forehead or chin and lower 
jaws. Another would daub the upper part of his forehead 
with red to represent the red sky of evening ; while another 
would encircle the whole of his face with red patches or 
cover it with red spots to imitate cirrus clouds either seen on, 
the horizon across the sea or lit up by the warm rays of the 
rising or setting sun. In these last and in other cases the 
patterns are, however, so purely conventional that their 
meaning could not be understood without explanation.’ 

1G. M. Dawson, Refort on the Contributions to the Ethnology of the 
Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878, pp. Haida, pp. 141 sg., with Plates XX., 
108 B, 134B sg.3; J. G. Swan, Zhe XXI. 
Haidah Indians (Washington, 1874), 2 Franz Boas, / cial Paintings of 
PP. 3 sgg., with Plates 2, 4, 5,6, 7 the Indians of Northern British 
(Smithsonian Contributions to Know- Columbia, pp. 13 s9gg., with Plates 
ledge, No. 267); J. R. Swanton, I.-VI. (Zhe Jesup North Pacific 

VOL. III U 

The totem- 
poles or 
totem- 
posts of 
the Haidas. 

Two kinds 
of totem- 
poles, viz. 
the house- 
poles 

and the 
mortuary- 
poles. 

Of the 
house- 
poles some 
bore family 
crests and 
others 
illustrated 
myths. 

House- 
- poles bear- 
ing crests. 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP, 

290 

But the most elaborate and imposing representations of 
Haida crests are those which they carved and painted on the 
wooden pillars commonly known as totem-poles or totem- 
posts. Such monuments were set up by other Indian tribes 
of North-West America, but among none of them were the 
totem-poles so numerous, so large, and so elaborately carved 
as among the Haidas. These poles were from thirty to 
sixty feet high ; and as there were on an average at least two 
of them for each house, a Haida village seen from a distance 
used to present the appearance of a patch of burnt forest 
with bare, bristling tree-trunks. The cost of erecting such 
monuments was very considerable, sometimes, it is said, even 
amounting to several thousand dollars, so that only very 
wealthy people could afford to set them up. The totem- 
poles were of several kinds, amongst which we may 
distinguish two principal classes, the house-poles (even) and 
the mortuary-poles (ya). The house-poles are pillars from 
thirty to fifty or sixty feet high, and three feet wide at the 
base, tapering slightly upwards. They are hewn each out 
of a single cedar tree, and are hollowed out behind like a 
trough to make them light enough to be set up without 
much difficulty. One such pole is, or used to be, planted 
firmly in the earth at the front of every house and abutting 
against it, and an oval hole cut through the pole serves as 
the doorway. These poles are generally covered with 
grotesque figures, carved and painted, and closely grouped 
together from base to summit.’ “ Speaking generally,” says 
Mr. Swanton, “there were two varieties of house-poles: (1) 
those which merely bore crests, and (2) those which 
illustrated some story. In the former class, crests belonging 
to the family of the house-owner and, to that of his wife 
were usually placed together upon the pole, although 
occasionally all the crests were taken from one family ; but, 
as will be seen in what follows, there was no fixed rule for 
the order in which these should be arranged.”* Thus, for 

Expedition, Memoir of the American 
Museum of Natural History, 1898). 

1 J. G. Swan, The Haidah Indians 
of Queen Charlotte's Islands (Washing- 
ton, 1874), p. 3; G. M. Dawson, 
Report on the Queen Charlotte Islands, 

1878, pp. 115 B, I16B, 1488; A. 
Woldt, Capitain Jacobsen’s Reise an 
der Nordwestkiste Amerikas (Leipsic, 
1884), pp. 40 sg. 

2 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 
ife Ethnology of the Haida, p. 122. 

XVH . TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 291 

example, a pole which formerly stood in front of a house of 

an Eagle family called Those-born-at-Saki, in the town of 
Ninstints, exhibits an eagle at the top and a bear at the 
bottom, both of which were crests of the husband’s family ; 
while between them is carved the wolf, the crest of his wife, 

who was a Raven woman of the family called Xagi-Town- 
People. Again, a pole which stood at Skidegate shews a 
dogfish at the top and a raven immediately beneath it, 
while at the bottom is the killer-whale. Of these the dogfish 

and raven were the crests of the wife, who was of the Eagle 
clan ; while the killer-whale was the crest of her husband, 

who was of the Raven clan. Another pole which stood at 
Skidegate displays at the bottom the wife’s crest, a grizzly 

bear, and above it two crests of the husband, a raven and a 
wasgo, a fabulous monster, part wolf and part killer-whale, 

who hunts for black whales at night and brings them away 

on his back. In this case the wife was a Raven woman 

of the family of Those-born-at-Rose-Spit, and her husband 

was an Eagle man of the family of the Big-House-People. 
Another pole exhibits at the top a grizzly bear, the crest 

of the wife, who was a Raven woman of the family of 
Those-born-at-Rose-Spit ; and below the bear are carved 
successively a dogfish, a raven, and an cagle, all crests of 

the husband, who was an Eagle man of the family of the 
Rotten-House-People. At the top the pole ends in a tall The tar 
cylinder with circles cut round it, one above the other. on Sous 
This stands for a chief's cylindrical hat which was made in chief. 
segments ; and the more segments it had, the more honour- 

able was the hat. Another pole has a beaver and an eagle, 

the wife’s crests, at the top, and below them the moon and a 
grizzly bear, both crests of the husband, who was a Raven, 
while his wife was an Eagle. Another pole displays, from 
bottom to top, the grizzly bear, the moon, and two figures 
intended to represent mountain-goats, all of them crests of 

the husband, who was a Raven, chief of the Sand-Town- 
People. Surmounting all are two watchmen, as they are Figures of 
called, figures of human beings wearing the usual tall flat- ¥co™ 
topped hats. Some families had two, others had three of 
these watchmen. In Haida myths similar figures are 
mentioned on the house-poles of the supernatural beings ; 

Story- 
poles, that 
is, poles 
illustrating 
tribal 
myths and 
legends. 

Pole 
illustrating 
the legend 
of the 
great flood 
caused by 
Raven, 

292 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

and it is said that they always gave warning when an enemy 
approached or anything happened which the owner of the 
pole ought to know. They are not used as crests. Yet 
another pole exhibits at the bottom a killer-whale, and 
above it the moon, both crests of the husband, who was 
a Raven, and chief of the Pebble-Town-People ; above the 
moon appears the raven, the crest of his wife, who was an 
Eagle woman ; and surmounting all is a figure of the chief 
himself holding one of the much-prized copper plates under 
each arm. To put a portrait of the house-owner on his 
pole was not uncommon.’ 

These and similar house-poles are purely heraldic. 
Others are carved to illustrate the myths and legends of 
the tribe. These Mr. Swanton calls story-poles. They 
are clearly parallel to the monuments of ancient art, whether 
Egyptian, Babylonian, Assyrian, Greek, or Roman, which 
set forth the sacred traditions and religious beliefs of the 
people who erected them. For example, a pole, which 
stood at Kloo and belonged to an Eagle chief of the family 
of Those-born-at-Skedans, exhibits at the bottom a man 
squatting and wearing an immensely tall cylindrical hat which 
reaches from his head to the top of the pole. On either 
side of the hat is a series of three human beings, one above 
the other, clinging with their hand$ to the cylindrical hat, as 
if to support themselves by it. The pole illustrates a story 
that Raven caused a flood, whereupon a chief named Kenk, 
with great presence of mind, clapped his hat on his head, 
and as it grew longer and longer his people swarmed up it 
to escape from the rising tide of water.2 Again, a pole 
which belonged to a Raven chief of the Eagle- House-People 
is illustrated and thus described by: Mr. Swanton: “It 

LJ. R. Swanton, Contributions to feasts given by the wearer. It is now 

the Ethnology of the Haida, pp. 122- 
124, with Plates I. and II. As to the 
cylindrical hats worn by chiefs Prof. 
E. 3B. Tylor observes that “the 
original form of this head-dress may be 
the native basketry hat, which passes 
into a wooden helmet surmounted by 
a cylindrical turret, the number of 
divisions (séz/) indicating the wearer’s 
rank or dignity, and being said to 
represent the number of potlatches or 

only worn in ceremonial dances, but 
its representation is frequent in paint- 
ings and carvings” (Journal of the 
Anthropological [nstitule, xxviii. (1899) 
Pp. 134). 

2 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 
the Ethnology of the Haida, pp. 124 
sq., with Plate V. 23 Franz Boas, 
Indianische Sagen von der nord- 
pacifischen Kiisté Amerikas (Berlin, 

7895), p- 308. 

‘xvII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 293 

contains episodes from the Raven story. At the bottom 

is a figure of the beaver who owned the first house, salmon- 

lake, and salmon-trap, and who adopted Raven. The small 
human figure on the head of which this beaver has its front~ 

legs is Raven himself. Above is another figure of Raven pote 
playing with the crescent moon which surrounds the head eae 
of Butterfly, Raven’s companion. This refers to the theft how Raven 
of the moon by Raven. Butterfly is introduced only Se 
because he used to go about with Raven. The figure 
above this, with a frog in its mouth, is said to represent the 
grandfather of Raven at this time, the frog simply filling up 
space. Still higher Raven is seen in the act of .stealing 

the beaver’s salmon-lake. The lake is the cross-hatched 
surface curled round the two salmon. The frog on Raven’s 

hat is said to be merely for ornament; and the segmented 

part rising above it is, as usual, a chief's dance-hat. “On 

top of this dance-hat, finally, Raven appears again in the 

form of a bird holding the moon in his ‘bill, as he flew with 

it through the smoke-hole.”’ Again, a pole which stood 
before the house of a Raven chief near Masset illustrates 

the story of the man who married a bear, a story which, 

like the theft of the moon by Raven, has its parallel among 

the Tlingits ; for they tell how a woman, roaming the wood 

in search of berries, strayed into a bear’s den, and how she 

was obliged not only to marry the bear, but to be herself 
changed into a she-bear.2, On the Haida house-pole, which 
somewhat different version of the 

legend, see Franz Boas, Jrdianische 
Sagen von der nord-pacifischen Aiste 

1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 
the Mythology of the Haida, p. 125, 
with Plate III. 4. The Tlingits also 

tell how Raven (Yehl) contrived to 
steal the muon from a chief who kept 
it shut up in a box, and howon opening 
the box Raven allowed the moon to 
fly up into the sky, where it has since 
remained. In the same way he 
liberated the sun and stars, which the 
same chief had kept in two other 
boxes; for till then the world had 
been dark. Thus it was Raven who 
set the great lights in the sky to 
lighten the day and the night.. See H. 
J. Holmberg, ‘Uber die Volker des 
russischen Amerika,” feta Soctetatis 
Scientiarum Fennicae, iv. (1856) 
Pp» 336-339; and for a fuller and 

-(mertkas (Berlin, 1895), pp. 341-313. 
The myth contains a good example of 
the widespread story of the Virgin 
Birth. In order to obtain access to 
the chiefs house Raven turns himself 
into a blade of grass or a pine-cone, 
which is swallowed by the chief's 
daughter in a draught of water. 
Thereupon she becomes pregnant and 
gives birth to a child, who is no other 
than Raven himself. 

2H. J. Holmberg, “Uber die 
Volker des russischen Amerika,” Acta 
Soctetatis Sctentiarum Fennicae, iv. 
(1856) pp. 310 sg. A similar story, 
except as to the transformation of the 

294 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cua.’ 

Pole tells the tale of the man and his bear-wife, the principal 
heen figure is the Grizzly-Bear-Woman. She clasps in her hands 
how a man what appears to be a long tongue lolling out of her mouth ; 
murriec@ however, we are told that this object is not her tongue but 
a labret, such as all Haida women used to wear in their 
lower lips. On her head the Bear-Woman wears the usual 
conical dance-hat, divided into segments by circles and 
surmounted in this case by a bear’s cub, which thus sits on 
the top of the pole. In her arms the Bear-Woman clasps two 
more of her cubs, and a little lower down is a full-length 
figure of a bear representing her husband. At the bottom 
of the pole, above the oval opening which formed the 
doorway of the house, are carved a frog and a raven, which 
havef apparently no reference to the story of the Bear- 
Pole Woman.! Another Haida house-pole, which formerly 
ioe stood in the village of Masset, also illustrates the legend of 
howa man the man and the bear. The story ran that Toivats the 
Papel hunter went to the house of Hoorts the bear, when the bear 
wifeand was not at home. In his absence the hunter made love to 
iy ihe baat the bear’s wife. Coming home the bear found his wife in 
confusion and accused her. She denied the charge, but the 
bear was still suspicious, and when she went out to draw 
water and fetch wood, he tied a magic thread to her dress, 
and following this clue he found her with her gallant, whom he 
killed. On the Haida post the injured bear is represented in 
Pole the act of devouring the man who had injured him.2?, Another 
ea house-pole, whether Haida or Tsimshian is uncertain, 
of the man exhibits a scene which has sometimes been taken for Jonah 
in thefish’S in the fish’s belly. It certainly represents a man in the 

belly. 
ea belly of a killer-whale, but the legend which it illustrates 

woman into a bear, is told by of wood or bone and projected at 
the Tsimshians. See Franz Boas, right angles to the plane of the face. 
Indianische Sager von der unord- One of them has been found to 
pacifischen Kiiste Amerikas, pp. measure 3% inches in length by 28 
294 5g. inches in width. 
2 Ee, B. Tylor, ‘On the Totem- 
1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to post from the Haida Village of Masset,” 
the Ethnology of the Haida, p. 127, Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
with Plate V. 1. As to the labrets xxviii. (1899) pp. 133-135, with Plate 
which the Haida women used to wear XII. This fine totem-pole, which is 
in their lower lips, see G. M. Dawson, more than forty feet high, now stands 
Report on the Queen Charlotte Islands, in the grounds of Fox Warren, near 
1878, pp. 108 Bsg. They were made Weybridge. 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 

295 

appears to be of purely native origin.’ In the British pote 
Museum there is a totem-pole from the Haida village of pacha 
Kayang, near Masset, in Queen Charlotte Island. The how — 
carvings on the pole refer to a story which sets forth how ,@\°?5, 
Raven (Ye¢/), swimming in bird shape under water, was broken and 
caught on the line of some fishermen; how they tried to ea 
haul him into the boat, how he clung for dear life to the 
bottom with his claws, how they tugged and better tugged, 

till at last the line suddenly slacking they all collapsed in 

the bottom of the boat. When they pulled themselvés 
together and examined the hook, they found sticking on it 

a piece of Raven’s beak, which had snapped clean off in the 
desperate tussle. They did not know what to make of it, 

but took it ashore with them, and while they were confapbing 

over it in the hut, who should walk in but Raven himself, 
looking just like a man, but hiding his broken nose. He 
cajoled the assembled sages into letting him have the piece 

of his beak in his hand to look at, but no sooner had he got 

it than he clapped it on his broken nose ; the pieces joined 
together, and away he flew through the smoke-hole in the 

roof.” The story is of special interest for its references to 

the bird shape of Raven, who in the native mythology, 
despite his name, commonly appears as a man. 

Besides the tall house-pole which stood in front of the Inner 
house the greatest Haida chiefs had an inside pole, which ae 
stood in the middle of the rear part of the house, and the 
seat just in front of it was always reserved for persons of the 
highest rank. These inside poles were also carved with figures 
of the family crests, one above the other ; for example, on one 
we see, from bottom to top, a frog,a hawk, a raven with 
two frogs in its mouth, and a grizzly bear ; another represents 
an eagle above and a cormorant below; and so on? 

1 E. B. Tylor, **On two British 
Columbian House-posts with Totemic 
Carvings, in the Pitt-Rivers Museum, 
Oxford,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Institute, xxviii. (1899) pp. 136 59., 
with Plate XIII. The Pitt-Rivers 
Museum at Oxford possesses another 
fine Haida house-pole from the village 
of Masset. It is over forty feet high 
and exhibits two ‘‘ watchers” at the 
top, with figures of the raven, frog, 

crayfish, and killer-whale beneath 
them. See E. B. Tylor, ‘‘ Note on 
the Haida Totem-post,” A/a, ii. 
(1902) pp. I sg. with Plate A. 

2 T. A. Joyce, ‘A Totem Pole in 
the British Museum,” Journal of the 
Anthropological Institute, xxxiii, (1903) 
pp- 90 sg., with Plate XIX. 

3 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to the 
Mythology of the Haida, p. 128, with 
Plate V. 2. : 

Mortuary- 
poles are 
of two 
sorts, viz. 
those which 
support the 
remains of 
the dead 
and: those 
which 
merely com- 
memorate 
them. 

296 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

Like the house-poles, the mortuary ~ poles (ya/) may 
be divided into two classes, namely, grave-poles which 
contain or support the remains of the dead, and memorial- 
poles which are simply erected in honour of the departed, 
whether man or woman. To the Haidas, however, there is 
no essential distinction between the two. Both are called 
by them “ grave-father,” and both sorts were set up by the 
successor of a dead chief when he entered on office. The 
mortuary - poles, though sometimes as ponderous as the 
house-poles, were generally not so tall and not so elabor- 
ately decorated. They stood, as a rule, on the narrow strip 
of land between the houses and the beach, but in no 
determinate relation to the dwellings. The most elaborate 
form of these mortuary-poles was called “two grave-fathers,” 
and consisted of a long box with a carved front, capable of 
holding several bodies, and raised upon two posts instead 
of one. The carving on the box might represent the crest 
of the deceased.’ In other cases the grave-box was placed 
on the top of a single pole or let into the top of the pole 
itself. But whether any bodies were placed on the pole or 
not, it was sometimes carved in imitation of a true grave-pole, 
stout planks being nailed across it at the top to resemble the 
front of a grave-box. Both on the shaft and on the cross- 
piece might be carved the crests of the deceased. Other 
mortuary - poles are purely commemorative ; they neither 
support nor pretend to support the remains of the dead. 
As a rule they consisted of a shaft either plain or slightly 
decorated with a figure carved at the bottom and another 
at the top; these figures often represented the crests of the 
person in whose memory the monument was erected. For 
example, a memorial pole set up in honour of a Raven 
man exhibits a long flattened quadrangular shaft with a 
grizzly bear at the bottom and a raven perched’on the top. 
The shaft and the raven together stand for the mythical 
killer-whale called Raven-fin (7szalas). On the front of 
the fin were originally hung two of those copper plates, on 
which the Indians of this coast used to set an extravagant 

1G. M. Dawson, Refort on the butions to the Ethnology of the Haida, 
Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878, pp. p. 129. 
133 B, 148 B; J. R. Swanton, Covstri- | 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 297 

value. It was not uncommon thus to lay up a dead man’s 
coppers, as they were called, on his monument.’ Again, 
a memorial pole for a chief's wife,a Raven woman of the 
Sand-Town-People, consists of a plain cylindrical column 
with a figure of the mythical Cloud-Woman at the bottom 
and the long-billed figure of a flicker or golden-winged 
woodpecker perched on the top. Both the Cloud-Woman 
and the woodpecker were crests used by the woman’s 
family.” 

The possession of certain crests was not the only Family 
prerogative of a Haida family. Each family had in addition (iy. 
the use of certain names,—personal names, house-names, Haidas. 
canoe-names, even names of salmon-traps and spoons. A first- 
born son might be called by the name of the mother’s eldest 
brother, and the second-born by the name of the mother’s 
second brother, or by one of the additional names of the 
first. But a large proportion of Haida personal names Many 
were based on the belief in the transmigration of souls, Petsor™! 

names 

This belief was general among the Haidas: they thought omens the 
that.the soul of a dead ancestor was often reborn in the }203s #° 

person of one of his descendants, and whenever this was pe theory 
: of t. ~ 
supposed to have happened, the newborn child naturally puerta 

received the name of the ancestor or ancestress who had 2 person 
P cy hoe . ve bears the 
come to life again in him or her. The medicine-men or name of 
shamans professed to learn in a dream or a vision the name the dead 
. : ancestor, 
of the person who had just been reincarnated, and the often the 
infant was named accordingly. To this imaginary power of ees 
detecting the dead among the living the Haida medicine- father, of 
men owed a large part of the influence which they exercised ae j 
over the people. It was believed that a man was always to bea 
reborn into his own clan and generally into his own family. {0° ™ 
Thus a Raven man always came to life again as a Raven, 
never as an Eagle; and similarly, however often an Eagle 
man might die and be reborn, at each reincarnation he 
would still be an Eagle to the end of time. From this it 

follows that no man could be reborn in his own son, since 

1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 1878, p. 148 B. 
the Ethnology of the Haida, p. 130, 2 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 
with Plate V. 3; G. M. Dawson, the Ethnology of the Haida, p. 131, 
Report on the Queen Charlotte Islands, with Plate VIII. 1. 

298 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

in virtue of the laws of exogamy and female descent the 
son of a Raven man was never a Raven, but always an 
Eagle, and similarly the son of an Eagle man was never 
an Eagle, but always a Raven. But while a man 
could not be reborn in his son he might be reborn in his 
grandson, since the grandson always belonged to his 
paternal grandfather’s clan, though not to his father’s, For 
example, a Raven man had an Eagle son, and the Eagle 
son had a Raven son, so that on the Haida principles of 
descent and transmigration the Raven grandfather might be 
reborn in the person of his Raven grandson. This may 
explain why among the Haidas, whenever the name of the 
reborn ancestor was not revealed by the medicine-man, a 
newborn male child received the name of his paternal 
grandfather, provided that the grandfather belonged, as he 
often did, to the same family as his grandson. But if the 
grandfather was of a different family, his name could not 
ordinarily be employed; and in that case the grandson 
would have to receive a name from one of his great-uncles 
or from some other male member of the family. A girl 
also received her name from her paternal grandfather’s kin.’ 
The belief Perhaps the Haida custom and belief in this matter may 
plana throw light on the practice of naming sons after their 
similar paternal grandfathers which has prevailed elsewhere. or 
nomen- . 
clature of Example, among the ancient Greeks the custom was to 
the ancient name the first-born son after his paternal grandfather ; it 
Greeks. Z ° 9 ‘ : 
was rare to name him after his own father.” It is possible 
that this Greek practice points back to a theory of 
reincarnation combined with a system of exogamy and 
mother-kin, which ensured that a man should always belong 
to his grandfather’s clan but never to that of his father. 
To say nothing of Pythagoras’s doctrine of transmigration, 
there are some independent grounds for thinking that 
1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to Wyse in his learned commentary on 
the Ethnology of the Hatda, pp. 117 Isaeus, ii. 36 and iii. 30. See further 
5g.3 G. M. Dawson, Hefort on the WHermann- Bliimner, Lehrbuch der 
Queer Charlotte Islands, 1878, pp. griechtschen Privatalterthiimer, p. 
122 B, 131 B. 284; W. Smith’s Dictionary of Greek 
2 Demosthenes xxxix. 27, xliii, 74; and Roman Antiquities, Third Edition, 
Plato, Laches, p. 17943 Isaeus, ii. ii. 233; Daremberg et Saglio, Deetioz- 

36. The passagesof Demosthenes and zairve des Antiguités, grecques et 
Plato are quoted by my friend Mr. W. [{rvomaines, s.v. ‘Nomen,’ vii. 88 sg. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 299 

the ancient Greeks believed in the reincarnation of the 
dead. 

With regard to the social obligations which members of social 
the same totemic clan lay under to each other Dr. Dawson Obligations 

Incum- 

tells us that “an Indian on arriving at a strange village, bent on 

where he may apprehend hostility, would look for a house 
indicated by its carved post as belonging to his totem, and 
make for it. The master of the house coming out, may i 
he likes make a dance in honour of his visitor, but in any 
case protects him from all injury. In the same way, should 
an Indian be captured as a slave by some warlike expedition, 
and brought into the village of his captors, it behoves any 
one of his totem, either man or woman, to present them- 
selves to the captors, and singing a certain sacred song, 
offer to redeem the captive. Blankets and other property 
are given for this purpose. Should the slave be given up, 
the redeemer sends him back to his tribe, and the relatives 
pay the redeemer for what he has expended. Should the 
captors refuse to give up the slave for the property offered, 
it is considered rather disgraceful to them. This at least is 
the custom pursued in regard to captives included in the 
same totem system as themselves by the Tsimshians, and it 
is doubtless identical or very similar among the Haidas, 
though no special information on this subject was obtained 
from them.” ? 

' As the Haidas intermarry with neighbouring Indian 

tribes who have similar, though not identical, systems of 

members 
of the same 
totemic 

f clan in 

respect of 
each other. 

In 
marrying 
members of 

totemism and exogamy, it is necessary for the purpose of other tribes 

such intertribal marriages to determine the equivalence of 

the various totemic clans in the different tribes. On this 
subject we are told that “theoretically a man of the Raven 
clan was reckoned in that clan, wherever he might go; and 
the Ravens among whom he settled were his uncles, elder 
and younger brothers, sisters and nephews. This would be 
as true at Sitka or in the Chilkat country, or, for that 
matter, in Florida, as on the Queen Charlotte Islands ; but 

1 See F. B. Jevons, ‘*Greek Law and 2G. M. Dawson, Report on the 
Folk Lore,” Classical Review, ix.(1895) Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878, p. 
pp. 248 sg.; J. E. King, ‘‘Infant 134D. 

Burial,” 247d. xvii. (1903) pp. 83 s¢- 

the Haidas 
haveregard 
to the 
totems, 

300 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

it so happens that the crests of the Raven clan agree with 
those of the Bear and Wolf clans among the Tsimshian, 
while the crests of the Eagle clan agree with those of the 
Raven and Eagle clans among the latter people; and, since 
crests are considered much more important than the mere 
mame of the clan, each Haida clan considers the two 
Tsimshian clans bearing its crests its ‘friends’ ... The 
important point is, however, that a Haida marrying into 
another tribe always avoids a certain clan among them, the 
members of which, for one reason or another, he considers 
his ‘friends’”! Similarly, Dr. Boas tells us that “any 
Haida who has the raven among His emblems, when marrying 
a Tlingit, is considered a member of the Raven phratry, 
and wice versd, the emblems always deciding to which 
Equival: phratry an individual is to be reckoned.”* The following 
yee table exhibits the equivalence of the exogamous divisions 
clans in the (clans or phratries) and crésts among the Haidas, Tlingits, 
hibes, 2 Simshians, and Bella Bellas, so far as that equivalence has 
been determined by Mr. J. R. Swanton :—* 
Haida. Tlingit. Tsimshian. Bella Bella. 
Raven = Wolf (Eagle) = Wolf and Bear = Eagle and Killer-Whale 
Eagle = Raven = Raven and Eagle = Raven 
It is curious that the Ravens of the Haidas should be 
equated to the Eagles of the Tlingits and Bella Bellas, 
while conversely the Eagles of the Haidas are equated to 
the Ravens of the Tlingits, Tsimshians, and Bella Bellas. 
The reason of the anomaly is apparently unknown. 
Relations Though each of the two Haida clans, the Raven and 
ian, the Eagle, was subdivided into many families, yet all these 
clans and subdivisions were considered to have had a common origin, 
pbingaha and the distinction between the two clans is said to be 
absolute in every respect. The clans have no governmental 
functions: their significance is restricted to matters pertain- 
ing to marriage and descent. When a man died, the 
members of his wife’s clan, not of his own, conducted the 
funeral; and when his successor made a fotlatch, that is, a 

\ 
1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to Assoctation, |Newcastle-upon- Tyne, 
the Ethnology of the Haida, pp. 65 sg. 1889, separate reprint). 
2 Franz Boas, in /i/th Report of the 3 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 

Committee on the North-Western Tribes the Ethnology of the Haida, pp. 
of Canada, p. 27 (Report of the British 1 ¥2 59. ’ 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 301 

feast accompanied by a distribution of property, to set up 
the grave-post, he invited them to it. At other fotlatches 
he only gave property to members of his own clan. 
Families of the same clan were also more apt to go to war 
together than those of opposite clans. The fundamental 

Haida 

unit of Haida society was the family, and the family chief chiefs of 

was the highest functionary. Generally the chief of the 
family was also chief of the town, but the larger places were 
usually inhabited by several families belonging to both the 
clans. In such places the town chief ranked first socially 
among the family chiefs; he sat in the highest place, 
directly in front of the inside house-pole at feasts, and 
properly had his house in the middle of the town. His 
reputation was increased by the presence of other families, 
and his power in war generally rose correspondingly, 
especially if the families were related to his. Further, every 
family was subdivided into households, each of which was 
governed by its own chief. The house chief's power was 
almost absolute, being only limited by the other chiefs and 
the barriers raised by custom. He could call his nephews 
together to make war, and as he fitted out the expedition, 
nearly all the slaves and other booty acquired in the war 
went to him. His influence with the other house chiefs 
varied with the amount of his property ; and the power of 
family chiefs living in a town belonging to another family 
depended largely on the number and wealth of their people. 
Success in amassing property generally governed the selection 
of a new chief of the town, of the family, and of the house. 
The successor might be the own brother, own nephew, or a 
more distant relation of his predecessor. So far as any 
choice was exercised, it appears to have rested, in the case 
of a family or town chief, with the house chiefs, while the 
sentiments of a household probably had weight in deciding 
between claimants to the position of house chief. A chief's 
household was made up of the persons of his own immediate 
family who had no places for themselves, his nephews, his 
retainers or servants, and his slaves. A man’s sister’s sons 
were his right-hand men. They, or at least one of them, 
came to live with him in their youth, were trained by him, 
and spoke or acted for him in all social matters. The one 

families, 
towns, and 
households. 

Their 
mode of 
succession 
and 
election, 

302 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA 

CHAP. 

who was expected to succeed him often married his daughter. 
And on succeeding to the chieftainship a man often wedded 
one of the wives of his predecessor, the other wives, if there 
were others, returning to their families with liberty to marry 
again.’ 
Dawson on Dr. Dawson’s account of the rules of succession to a 
Pere Haida chieftainship agrees substantially with the foregoing, 
toa Haida though he doe’ not distinguish between the three grades of 
chieftainey. Chiefs—the town chief, the family chief, and the house chief. 
He says: “ The chieftaincy is hereditary, and on the death 
of a chief devolves upon his next eldest brother, or should 
he have no brother, on his nephew, or lacking both of these 
his sister or niece may in rare cases inherit the chieftaincy, 
though when this occurs it is probably only nominal. It is 
possible—as occasionally happens in the matter of succession 
to property—that a distant male relative may, in want of 
near kinsmen, be adopted by the mother of the deceased as 
a new son, and may inherit the chieftaincy. I have not, 
however, heard of cases of this kind. Should all these 
means of filling the succession fail, a new chief is then either 
elevated by the consensus of public jopinion, or the most 
opulent and ambitious native attains the position by making 
a potlatch, or giving away of property, greater than any of 
the rest can afford. Should one man distribute ten blankets, 
the next may dispose of twenty, the first tries to cap this by 
a second distribution, and so on till the means of all but one 
have been exhausted. This form may in reality become a 
species of election, for should there be a strong feeling in 
favour of any particular man, his friends may secretly re- 
inforce his means till he carries his point. In no case, 
however, does the chieftaincy pass from the royal clan to 
any of the lesser men of the tribe.” ? 
In these accounts of election to a chieftaincy it is 

1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 
the Ethnology of the Haida, pp. 66, 
68-70. ‘When he came to grow up, 
the boy ceased to stay with his mother. 
There he was thought to have too 
easy a time, and became an object of 
contempt. He was generally sent to 
live with the uncle to whose place he 
was to succeed. There he was put 

through a rather severe discipline, 
being kept at work out in the cold, 
etc.” (J. R. Swanton, of. czt. p. 50). 
This account applies to nephews (the 
sons of sisters) in general, not to the 
nephews of chiefs only. 

2G. M. Dawson, Report on the 
Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878, Pp. 
119 B, 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 303 

interesting to observe the importance of private property Import- 
in determining political power. Within certain limits the be 
richest man is elevated to the highest position in the social property 
group, whether that group is the household, the family, or othe 
the town; the rank of chief is put up to something like political 
auction. Democracy among the Haidas is, or rather was, ea 
developing into a plutocracy. Here as in other political these 
institutions of the Indians we seem to detect the germs pee 
of the corresponding institutions which their successors 
in North America have either already set up or to which 
for good or evil, they appear to be gravitating.’ With Power of 
the Red Man of the North-West the blanket, his unit ua eierey 
of currency, appears to be as omnipotent as the dollar with unit of 
his white brother: by blankets a man acquires the respect “"™"” 
and admiration of his fellows; by blankets he rises in **+ 
the social scale; by blankets he attains to the highest, 
position of power and influence in the community. And 
if in the old days in addition to blankets he possessed 
scalps which he had personally abstracted from the heads of 
a number of his fellow creatures, his claims to nobility were 
placed beyond a shadow of dispute; he stood on a pedestal 
of glory from which nothing but the loss of his blankets 
and scalps could possibly deject him. Things are changed 
nowadays, scalps and homicide have ceased to furnish a 
clear title of nobility, which is now based on blankets alone ; 
it is no longer necessary that a nobleman should be stronger 
and more bloodthirsty than his fellows, but it is absolutely 
essential that he should have more blankets. To the The 
acquisition of blankets, accordingly, the minds of the rising (4°°,0", 
generation are trained from the dawn of intelligence; and to 
the acquisition of blankets the mature energies of the adult 
are directed with a single-minded devotion worthy of a better 
cause. Nor is the rivalry in this great race for blankets con- 
fined to individuals only ; it is shared by whole clans, which 
are perpetually pitted against each other in their endeavour 
to surpass their rivals in the degree of their nobility, to crush 
or, to use their own expression, to flatten them under the 
weight of blankets. “ Formerly,” we are told, “feats of 
bravery counted as well as distributions of property, but 

1 See above, p. 156. 

304 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA 

CHAP. 

nowadays, as the Indians say, ‘rivals fight with property 

a1 

only. 

1 Lest I should be thought to ex- 
aggerate the plutocratic tendency of 
society among these Indians, I will 
quote some of my authorities. Speak- 
ing of the Indians of British Columbia 
and Vancouver Island more than forty 
years ago a writer tells us that “the 
natives judge of rank by two tests in 
particular—the number of scalps and 
slaves taken in battle, and the amount 
of property accumulated. The latter 
symbol of power is eagerly coveted by 
them; and as blankets have come 
generally to be the chief representation 
of wealth, these are accumulated against 
the recurrence of the feasts of the tribe, 
when an opportunity is afforded of dis- 
playing the extent of individual re- 
sources” (Matthew Mache, Vancouver 
Island and British Columbia, Loncop, 
1865, p. 429). Speaking of the same 
Indians in later times Dr. Franz Boas, 
one of the best living authorities on the 
subject, says: ‘‘ Before proceeding any 
further it will be necessary to describe 
the method of acquiring rank. This is 
done by means of the fotlatch, or the 
distribution of property. This custom 
has been described often, but it has 
been thoroughly misunderstood by most 
observers. The underlying principle 
is that of the interest-bearing invest- 
ment of property. . . . The unit of 
value is the single blanket, now-a-daysa 
cheap white woolen blanket, which is 
valued at 50cents. The double blanket 
is valued at three single blankets. 
These blankets form the means of 
exchange of the Indians, and every- 
thing is paid for in blankets or in 
objects the value of which is measured 
by blankets. . . . Possession of wealth 
is considered honorable, and it is the 
endeavour of each Indian to acquire a 
fortune. But it is not as much the 
possession of wealth as the ability to 
give great festivals which makes wealth 
a desirable object to the Indian. As 
the boy acquires his second name and 
man’s estate by means of a distribution 
of property, which in course of time 
will revert to him with interest, the 
man’s name acquires greater weight in 

‘rival. 

the councils of, the tribe and greater 
renown among the whoie people, as he 
is able to distribute more and more 
property at each subsequent festival. 
Therefore boys and men are vying with 
each other in the arrangement of great 
distributions of property. Boys of 
different clans are pitted against each 
other by their elders, and each is 
exhorted to do his utmost to outdo 
his rival. And as the boys strive 
against each other, so do the chiefs 
and the whole clans, and the one 
object of the Indian is to outdo his 
Formerly feats of bravery 
counted as well as distributions of 
property, but nowadays, as the Indians 
say, ‘rivals fight with property only.’ 
The clans are thus perpetually pitted 
against each other according to their 
rank. . . . I referred several times to 
the distribution of blankets, The 
recipient in such a distribution is not at 
liberty to-refuse the gift, although 
according to what I have said it is 
nothing but an interest-bearing loan 
that must be refunded at some future 
time with 100 per cent interest. This 
festival is called pasa, literally, flatten- 
ing sbmething (for instance, a’basket). 
This means that by the amount of 
property given the name of the rival is 
flattened.” Thus the appearance of 
generosity displayed by the lavish dis- 
tribution of property on these occasions 
is deceptive: the transaction, if Dr. 
Boas is right, springs from the most 
sordid motives, it is nothing but the 
lending of money, or the equivalent of 
money, on the most usurious and ex- 
orbitant interest. See Franz Boas, 
‘The Social Organization and the 
Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl 
Indians,” Report of the United States 
National Museum for 1895 (Washing- 
ton, 1897), pp. 341-343. Although Dr. 
Boas is here dealing with the Kwakiutl 
in particular, his remarks appear to be 
applicable generally to the coast tribes 
of British Columbia. In one respect 
these savages are, from the purely 
economic point of view, even more 
a than ourselves; for with us 

xvii TOTEMISM AMONG THE HAIDAS 305 

The succession to property, like the succession to Succession 
chieftainship, runs among the Haidas in the female line. acre 
“The brother of the deceased inherits his property, or should Haidas 
there be ho brother, a nephew, or the sister, or, failing all Sire. 
these, the mother. Occasionally some distant male relative 
may be adopted as a new son by the mother, and be made 
heir to the property. The wife may in some cases get a 
small share. As soon as the body has been enclosed in the 
coffin-box, and not before, the brother or other heir take 
possession. When it can be amicably arranged, he als@ The 
inherits the wife of the dead man, but should he be already vi. 
married, the nephew or other relative on whom the succession 
would next devolve is supposed to marry the relict. Should 
there be no relative to marry her, she may be married again 
to any other man.”! 

A chief might marry as many women as he chose ; three Polygamy. 
or four were not uncommon, and there is a tradition of a 
chief who had ten; but polygamy does not seem to have 
been very frequent.2, The common rule of avoidance between Mutual 
a man and his wife’s parents was observed also by the ae 
Haidas. A man was bashful before his father-in-law and and his 
mother-in-law, and they were bashful before him; that is, ene 
they never addressed each other directly, if they could 
avoid it? 

_ The Haidas, like so many other Indian tribes of North The classi- 
America, possess the classificatory system of relationship. Socal 
In the generation above his own a man calls all the men of relation- 
his father’s clan “fathers,” but all the men of his mother’s ed the 
clan he calls “uncles”; and he calls all the women of his Haidas. 
mother’s clan “mothers.” In his own generation he calls 
all the men of his own clan who are older than himself “ elder 
brothers ” ; and all the men of his own clan who are younger 
than himself he calls “ younger brothers”; all the women of 

his own generation and clan he calls his “sisters,” but all 

no man is as yet obliged by law to Charlotte Islands, 1878, p. 126 B. 

swell the bloated fortune of a usurer 1G. M. Dawson, of. cif. pp. 

by accepting his loan at ruinous interest 133 B sg. z 

whenever he chooses to offer it. On 3G, MiDawsont. goer. ig0 Bs 
. M, » op. ttt. p. : 

blankets as the means of paving, or ate 
Lagan J. R. Swanton Contributions to the 

rather carpeting, the way to political : 
power among the Haidas, see also Ethnology of the Haida, p. 50. 

G. M. Dawson, Report on the Queen 3 J. R. Swanton, of. cit. p. 51. 
VOL. IIE x 

The Tsim- 
shians. 

Tsimshian 
fisheries. 

306 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

the women of his own generation of the other clan before 
marriage he calls “cousins.” In the generation below his 
own a man calls all the men and women of the other clan 
“children,” and the women he cails also “daughters.” A 
woman uses corresponding terms in speaking of members 
of her own and of the other clan. All the men of her 
father’s generation and clan are her “fathers”; all the 
women of her mother’s generation and clan are her 
“mothers”; all the women of her own generation and clan 
who are older than herself are her “elder sisters,” and all 
the women of her own generation and clan who are younger 
than herself are her “ younger sisters”; all the men of her 
own generation and clan are her “ brothers” ; and all the men 
and women of the generation below her own and of her own 
clan are her “ children.” ? 

§ 4. Totemism among the Tsimshians 

The Tsimshians or Chimmesyans are a small stock of 
Indians speaking a language of their own, who inhabit the 
coast of the mainland of British Columbia from’ the Nass 
River on the north to Millbank Sound on the south. The 
valley of the Skeena River is included in their territory. In 
their social system, habits, and art they are closely allied to 
their neighbours on the north and west, the Tlingits and the 
Haidas, with whom they live on terms of friendly intercourse. 
Like the other coast tribes they subsist mainly on the 
produce of the sea and the rivers. The annual runs of 
salmon on the Skeena River and of oolachen or candle-fish 
on the Nass River furnish them with an abundance of 
provisions at certain seasons. Oolachen are a great source 
of revenue to the Niska, the subdivision of the Tsimshians 
who inhabit the valley of the Nass River; for the oil of this 
fish is in great demand all along the coast and is indispens- 
able for the great winter fotlatches. Bears, mountain goats, 
and other wild animals are hunted, especially by the tribes of 
the interior. The horns of mountain goats are carved into 
handles for spoons used at feasts and potlatches, and are sold 
to other tribes for the same purpose. Although they are 

1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida, pp. 62 599. 

XVIL TOTEMISM AMONG THE TSIMSHIANS 

307 

good carvers and builders of canoes, the Tsimshians are 

surpassed in these arts by the Haidas, from whom they still 

purchase canoes. Their houses are large square structures, Houses of 

solidly built of heavy cedar beams and planks and capable oes 

of accommodating from twenty to thirty people. Each 

house is, or was, presided over by a house chief, while every 

family and every town had a superior chief; under him were 

the members of his household; his more distant clan relations, 

and the servants and slaves. The Tsimshians or Chim- Three 

mesyans fall into three main divisions, namely, the Giisions 

Tsimshians of the lower Skeena River, the Gitksans of ofthe 

‘Kitksans of the upper Skeena River, and the Niskas of the 7™shans- 

Nass River. The dialects of these three divisions differ 

somewhat, but their customs and institutions are practically 

identical ; at least this is true of the Tsimshians of the lower 

Skeena and the Niskas of the Nass. Accordingly the 

following account may be taken to apply to both these 

divisions and probably to the whole of the Tsimshian 

stock. : 
The Tsimshians are divided into four exogamous clans, Exogamous 

the Raven (Kanhada), the Eagle (Lagskiyek), the Wolf apne 

(Lagkyebo), and the Bear (Gytspawaduweda), Descent is shians. _ 

reckoned in the female line ; that is, children belong to the 

clan of their mother, not to the clan of their father. If he 

is a Raven and she is an Eagle, the children are Eagles ; if 

he is a Wolf and she is a Bear, the children are Bears, 

And so on. Of these clans, the Bear is the most numerous, 

and it is also considered the noblest, because it derives its 

origin from Heaven, which, as we shall see, plays a great 

part in Tsimshian religion. The clans reside together in 

the villages, though members of all four clans are not 

necessarily found in every village. But in each village the 

houses of members of the same clan are grouped together. 

1 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, 1.270 sg. ; A. Krause, 
Die Tlinkit-Indianer, pp. 317-320; 
Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of. the 
Commzttee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 27-29 (Report of the 
British Association, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint); zd. in 
Tenth Report of the Committee on the 

North - Western Tribes of Canada, 
pp. 48 sgg. (Report of the British 
Association, Ipswich, 1895, separate 
reprint) ; zd. in Eleventh Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 11-13 (Report of the 
British Association, Liverpool, 1896, 
separate reprint). 

The 
personal 
names 

of each 
Tsimshian 
clan have 
reference 
not to the 
person’s 
own totem 
(which 

he takes 
from his 
mother), 
but to his 
father's 
totem. 

308 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP, 

Each clan has its; own crests or emblems, of which the 
following is a partial list :— 

TSIMSHIAN CLANS AND CRESTS 

Clan. Crests. 
| 
Raven . : . | Raven, codfish, starfish. 
Eagle . é . | Eagle, halibut, beaver, whale. 
Wolf. . . | Wolf, crane, grizzly bear. 
Bear . : . | Killer-whale (De/phinus orca), sun, moon, stars, 

rainbow, grouse, ¢semaks (a sea-monster). 

Thus every clan, except the Bear, has among its crests 
the animal after which it is named. 

Each clan has also its own proper names, which are 
different for chiefs and for middle-class people. For the 
Tsimshians, like the other Indian tribes of North-West 
America, are divided into sharply-marked social ranks or 
classes, namely, common people, middle-class people, and 
chiefs. Common people.are those who have not yet been 
initiated into a secret society; by being so initiated they 
become middle-class people or nobles, as the class is some- 
times called ; but they can never become chiefs, who form a 
distinct class. Curiously enough, though children take their 
clan from their mother, their clan names refer to their father’s 
crest or totem, not to their mother’s. Thus the son of a 
Raven man and an Eagle woman may be called (Raven)- 
having-no-nest ; the daughter of a Raven man and a Bear 
woman may be called (Raven)-flying-in-front-of-the-house- 
early-in-the-morning ; indeed the eldest daughter of such a 
marriage always bears this sonorous name, though in common 
life it is abridged from Seopgyibayuk into Bayuk, Again, 
the daughter of an Eagle man and a Raven woman may be 
called (Eagle)-sitting-on-the-ice or On-a-whale, the reference 
in either case being to the father’s crest, since the whale as 
well as the eagle is a crest of the Eagle clan. The daughter 
of an Eagle man and a Wolf woman may be called Eagle- 
having-one-colour-of-wings. The daughter of a Bear man 
and an Eagle woman may be called Great-noise (of killer- 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE TSIMSHIANS 309 

whale) or Great-fin (of killer-whale), the reference in both 
cases being to the killer-whale, which is a crest of the father’s 
Bear clan.| Why with maternal descent of the clan the perhaps 
personal names should refer to the’ paternal crests is not aa 
plain ; perhaps the custom of naming children after their transition 
father’s crest marks an attempt to shift descent from the pies oon 
maternal to the paternal line, or at least to strengthen the to paternal 
ties between a father and his children. eres 
The following account of the system of crests or totems, Mayne's 
given by Commander R. C. Mayne, in his book on British fe crest 
Columbia and Vancouver Island, while it is couched in br totems 

general terms, perhaps applies specially to the Tsimshians road pame se 
for it incorporates the evidence of Mr. William Duncan, of British — 
the Church Missionary Society, who laboured successfully as C'™™>!2- 
a missionary among the Tsimshians at Fort Simpson from 

the year 1857 onwards. The information conveyed in this 
account is particularly valuable, because it refers to a time 

when the Indians of British Columbia were still comparatively 

little affected by white influence, and when, moreover, 

the importance of totemism in the early history of society 

was not yet recognised by civilised men, so that their 
observations on the subject were unbiassed by theories and 
prepossessions. Commander Mayne’s account runs thus :—? 

“T have previously had occasion to refer to the fashion The crests 
among the Indians of carving the faces of animals upon the ae 
ends of the large beams which support the roofs of their 
permanent lodges. In addition, it is very usual to find 
representations of the same animals painted over the front 
of the lodge. These crests, which are commonly adopted 
by all the tribes, consist of the whale, porpoise, eagle, raven, 
wolf, and frog, etc. In connexion with them are some 
curious and interesting traits of the domestic and social life 

1 Fr. Boas, in Fz/th Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 27 sg. (Report of the 
British Assoctation, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint) ; zd. in 
Tenth Report of the Commtttee on the 
North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 
48-50 (Report of the British Association, 
Ipswich, 1895, separate reprint) ; Hand- 
book of American Indians north of 
Mexico, i. 271. 

2 Commander R. C. Mayne, Four 
Years in British Columbia and Van- 
couver Island (London, 1862), pp. 257 
sg. As to Mr. William Duncan’s 
work among the Tsimshians at Port 
Simpson, see 767d. pp. 305 599. 
Commander Mayne incorporates in his 
book much valuable information fur- 
nished to him by Mr, Duncan. See 
particularly 747d. pp. 249 sg., 254 5¢., 
263 sqg., 284 399. 

Persons of 
the same 
crest may 
not marry 
each other, 

The 
Indians 
will not kilt 
their crest 
animals. 

Presents 
must be 
made to 

a person 
whenever 
he exhibits 
his crest. 

310 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

of the Indians. The relationship between persons of the 
same crest is considered to be nearer than that of the same 
tribe ; members of the same tribe may, and do, marry—but 
those of the same crest are not, I believe, under any circum- 
stances allowed to do so. A Whale, therefore, may not 
marry a Whale, nor a Frog a Frog. The child again always 
takes the crest of the mother ; so that if the mother be a 
Wolf, all her children will be Wolves. As a rule also, 
descent is traced from the mother, not from the father. 

“ At their feasts they never invite any of the same crest 
as themselves: feasts are given generally for the cementing 
of friendship or allaying of strife, and it is supposed that 
people of the same crest cannot quarrel; but I fear this 
supposition is not always supported by fact. Mr. Duncan, 
who has considerable knowledge of their social habits, says 
that the Indian will never kill the animal which he has 
adopted for his crest, or which belongs to him as his birth- 
right. If he sees another do it he will hide his face in 
shame, and afterwards demand compensation for the act. 
The offence is not killing the animal, but doing so before 
one whose crest it is. They display these crests in other 
ways besides those I have mentioned, viz. by carving or 
painting them on their paddles or canoes, by the arrangement 
of the buttons on their blankets, or by large figures in front 
of their houses or their tombs. They have another whimsical 
custom in connexion with these insignia: whenever or 
wherever an Indian chooses to exhibit his crest, all indivi- 
duals bearing the same family-figure are bound to do honour 
to it by casting property before it, in quantities proportionate 
to the rank and wealth of the giver. A mischievous or 
poor Indian, therefore, desiring to profit by this social custom, 
paints his crest upon his forehead, and looks out for an 
Opportunity of meeting a wealthy person of the same family- 
crest as himself. Upon his approach he advances to meet 
him, and when near enough displays his crest to the 
unsuspecting victim ; and, however disgusted the latter may 

- be, he has no choice but to make the customary offering of 

property of some sort or other.” 
In this account of the Indian crests we find almost all 
the characteristic features of typical totemism, namely, clans 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TSIMSHIANS 3Ir 

taking their names from animals, using the likenesses of the This is 
animals as their badges, refusing to kill the animals after ee, 
which they are named, or to marry women who have the yet the ‘ 
same animal name and badge as themselves, and, finally, jreivP° 
transmitting the name, the badge, and the attendant prohi- it does not 
bitions in the female line from the mother, not from the CmPioy the 
father, to the children. Yet the writer does not use the totem and 
words totem and totemism, probably because writing in eepyen: 
1862 he had not heard of them. This example should 

serve as a warning against hastily inferring the absence of 

the thing from the absence of the word. Certainly the 

Indians with whom we are dealing do not use the word 

totem, but they have the institution in a form identical with 

that in which it occurs among the most typically totemic 

tribes of North America. 

The statement made on Mr. Duncan’s authority that the The 
Indians will never kill the animals which serve as their crests rie 
is particularly important in its bearing on the question of the totemic 
relation in which a man stands to his totem animal. So far ™*'s 
as I remember,no other writer on these North-Western Indians not to be 

has mentioned their reluctance to kill their totemic animals. one 
In the course of this work I have repeatedly called attention writers. 
to the paucity of evidence on this important side of totemism 
in the writings of American ethnologists. Unfortunately it 
is not quite clear whether in the passage quoted Mr. 
Duncan refers to the clan totem or to the individual totem, 
that is, to the manztoo; but apparently Commander Mayne 
understood him to refer to what we should now call the clan 
totem, for throughout the rest of the passage he speaks of 
the crest as if it were the badge of a family, and of an 
exogamous family, in other words, as if it were a clan totem. 
If this interpretation of Mr. Duncan’s statement is correct, 
it would seem to follow that the respect for the clan totem 
which he describes has either disappeared since his time or, 
what is perhaps more probable, has been overlooked or 
deemed unworthy of mention by later writers. 

“In all festivals,” says Dr. Boas, speaking of the Niskas, Artificial 
“the totems of the clan play an important part. Carvings Foes 
representing the totem are worn as masks or head-dresses joa 

BS ouses, 
1 See above, vol. ii. p. 151, note!. poles, etc, 

Dances 
dramatic- 
ally repre- 
senting the 
myths. 

Dance 
of the 
thunder- 
bird. 

Dance of 
the owl. 

312 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

they are painted or carved on houses and utensils, and on 
memorial columns and totem poles. In all initiations an 
artificial totem animal brings back the novice.”’ Some of 
the dances are dramatic representations of myths. In one 
ceremony, for example, the mythical thunder-bird is per- 
sonated by a man dressed in eagle feathers and wearing 
the mask of the thunder-bird, while mock lightning flashes, 
mock thunder rolls, and the spectators are drenched with 
real water thrown on them from the roof. This drama 
is accompanied by a chorus of women who sing the myth 
which is being acted by the performers.? Again, the Bear 
clan possesses a mask representing an owl surrounded by 
many small human heads. This mask is worn at potlatches 
to commemorate the sad story of a woman who was carried 
off by an owl. He took her away to the top of a tree and 
there she was heard by her people to weep. They tried to 
save her, but could not climb the tree. After atime she 
dried her tears and married the owl. They had a son. 
When he grew up, the mother told the father owl that she 
wished to send her son home to her own people. Then his 
father composed a song for him. His' mother told him to 
carve a head-dress in the shape of an owl, which he was to 
wear when he danced and to sing the song composed for him 
by his father the owl. She bade ‘her son good-bye and 
said that her husband was about to carry her away to a 
land far off. But the owl first brought her and her son to 
the house of the old chief her father. When the chief's 
wife saw the unknown boy, she was afraid; but her 
daughter spoke to her and said that the boy was her 
grandson. So the old woman took the boy into her house, 
while the boy’s mother and the owl disappeared. When 
the boy was grown up, his mother’s brother gave a potlatch 
in his honour ; and before the blankets were distributed, the 
boy danced, wearing the head-dress of the owl and singing 
the song which his father the owl had composed for him? 

1 Franz Boas, in Zenth Report of see below, pp. 538 sg. 
the Committee on the North-Western 2 Franz Boas, of. cit. p. 52. 
Tribes of Canada, p. 50 (Report of 3 Franz Boas, of. ctt. p. 51 (Report 
the British Association, Ipswich, 1895, of the British Association, Ipswich, 
separate reprint). Astotheceremonies 1895, separate reprint); za. ‘‘The 
of initiation into the secret societies Socjal Organization and the Secret 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TSIMSHIANS 313 

The Bear clan of the Tsimshians also tell the following Legend of 

tale to explain why they use the crest of the bear. Once ae ting 
upon a time an Indian went out to hunt the mountain-goat. 5 ere 
Far away in the mountains he met a black bear, who took crest. 
him to his home, and taught him how to catch salmon and 
build canoes. For two whole years the man staid with 
the bear; then he returned to his own village. But when 
he came there, all the people were afraid of him because he 
looked just like a bear. However, one man bolder than 
the rest caught him and brought him into the house. At 
first the bear-like man could not speak nor eat anything 
but raw food. But they rubbed him with magic herbs, and 
gradually he was retransformed into the shape of a man. 
After that, whenever he was in want, he called his friend 
the bear, who came to his help. In winter, when the rivers 
were frozen and nobody else could fish, he alone caught 
fresh salmon. He built a house and painted the likeness of 
a bear on the front of it. His sister, too, wove the image 
of a bear on a blanket to be used in the dance. Therefore 
the descendants of the bear-man’s sister use the bear for 
their crest to this day.’ : 

Again, the Whale clan among the Tsimshians tell the Legend of 
following story to explain why they use the whale crest, it Whale 
Once upon a time a man went out fishing. For three days explain 
he fished and caught nothing. Then he cast anchor at Peo a 
place where a steep hill descended into the water. It so 
happened that his anchor fell on the house of the whale, 
who drew the man and his boat to the bottom of the sea. 

For two whole years the man staid with the whale at the 
bottom of the sea, and the two years seemed to him like 
two days. The whale taught him the whale dance and how 
to ornament his house with the pattern of a whale. When 
the two years were up, the man rose to the top of the water 
and returned home, all covered with seaweed. There he 

Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,” 1889, separate reprint); ¢@., Jdian- 
Report of the United States National sche Sagen von der nord-pacifischen 
Museum for 1895 (Washington, 1897), Kéiste Amerikas (Berlin, 1895), p. 
PP. 324 59. 293; id. ‘The Social Organization’ 
1 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of the and the Secret Societies of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
of Canada, p. 24 (Keport of the British United States National Museum for 
Association, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 7895 (Washington, 1897), p. 323- 

314 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

built a house and painted a whale on the front of it. Also 
he used the mask and the blanket of the whale when he 
danced. So the descendants of his sisters have used the 
whale crest ever since.’ 
Legend of Again, members of the Raven clan among the Tsimshians 
ices tell the following story to explain why they carve sea- 
explain monsters as their crests on their heraldic columns or totem- 
Sand poles. There was a great chief who, like the man of the 
crest. Whale clan, had been taken to the bottom of the sea. Once 
upon a time he invited the chiefs of the whole earth to a 
great feast which was to be held at Nass River. All the 
monsters of the coast came, using killer-whales (Delphinus 
orca) for their boats. So numerous were they that the 
river swarmed with them. They landed and entered the 
chief's house, each clad in his peculiar dress, and whenever 
one of them opened the door, water flowed in after him. 
Some of these monsters wete very dangerous and used to 
kill everybody who passed by their houses. They all! sat 
down in order in the chief's house, the most dangerous 
taking their seats at the rear and the less dangerous round 
the platform nearer the door ; and they all kindly promised 
not to kill people any more, and when they returned home 
they were as good as their word, for they removed their 
houses from the track of canoes plying between the villages. 
So the chief imitated the. dresses of the sea-monsters who 
had been his guests; and he wore these dresses himself, and 
his descendants carve the sea-monsters on their columns 
down to this day.” 

The These Tsimshian legends of the acquisition of crests 
Sala, are typical of the stories told by all the northern Indians 
Bohan —the Tlingits, the Haidas, and the Tsimshians—to explain 
ndians 

explain the the origin of their crests. Such stories normally relate how 

Srigin of an ancestor of the clan fell in with a beast or fish or bird, 
Giang by who became his helper and whose likeness accordingly the 

stories of man’s descendants in the female line have ever since used as 
the en- Pee: eas se 
counter their crest. But it is to be observed that they never, or 

oftheir hardly ever, claim to be descended from the animal, fish, 

1 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of British Assoctation, Newcastle-upon- 
the Committee on the North-Western Tyne, 1889, separate reprint). 
Tribes of Canada, p. 24 (Refort of the (2 Franz Boas, Zc. 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE TSIMSHIANS 

315 

or bird in question: according to tradition the creature ancestor 
which they use as their crest was the friend and protector, ey 
not the progenitor, of their ancestor. Thus these legends the totemic 
of the acquisition of clan crests or totems remind us Bede as 
strongly of the mode in which the eastern Indians of trace their 
North America acquired their *manitoos or individual foo 
totems, as I have called them.! The resemblance between animal. 
the myths of the North-Western Indians and the practice Seraue 
of the eastern Indians of North America has been justly i Bap 
pointed out and emphasised by Dr. Boas. “ There are a gequired 
great many cases,” he observes, “among the northern tribes ooh 
in which the crest was acquired by an ancestor of the of acquisi- 
family in the same way as Indians of the plains acquire ee 
a manttou. It is told how a man went out into the guardian- 
wilderness, and in the course of events met a supernatural ae fe 
being or animal, which henceforth became his protector, eastern 
The difference between the north-west coast traditions and 42s. 
those of the plains consists in the fact that the animal 

once acquired was transmitted by the ancestor to his 
sister’s children. There is hardly a case of traditions in 

which the family claims direct descent from the crest 
animal.”* On the ground of this resemblance Dr. Boas 
inclines to believe that the clan totems of the North- 
Western tribes originated in the same way as the 
individual or personal totems (sanitoos) of the eastern 
tribes; in other words, that they were all originally the 
guardians or patrons of individuals, who transmitted them 

to their descendants in the female line.* We shall return 

to this question later on. 

Among the Tsimshian and other Indian tribes of the Great 
northern coast of British Columbia great importance is ‘mPoftance 
attached to the possession of the clan legends, of which to the — 

possession 

of the clan 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 49 5gg., and the North-Western Tribes of Canada, legends. 

below, pp. 372 s¢9. 

2 Franz Boas, in Annual Archao- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 241. 
Compare zd. in Fifth Report of the Com- 
mittee on the North-Western Tribes of 
Canada, pp. 23, 24 sg. (Report of the 
British Association, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint) ; zd. in 
Twelfth Report of the Committee on 

pp. 674 sg. (Report of the British 
Association, Bristol, 1898); zd. ‘The 
Social Organization and the Secret 
Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,” 
Report of the United States National 
Museum for 1895 (Washington, 1897), 
PP. 323 59-5 336-338, 393. 

3 See the references in the preceding 
note. 

316 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

a few specimens have just been given. Indeed the 
legend is deemed one of the most valuable properties and 
highest prerogatives of each clan or family; it is carefully 
guarded in the same way as material property, and if 
any person attempts to tell a tradition which does not 
belong to his clan, he commits one of the gravest offences 
against the rights of property which are recognised in the 
Indian code of morality. 
Tsimshian Among the Tsimshians a burial is attended by members 
onda of the clan of the father of the deceased, who are paid for 
their services. They double the body up, place it in aé 
box, and burn it on a pyre; with the body they also- 
burn food and clothing for the use of the deceased. Men 
and women sit round the blazing pyre and sing all the 
cradle songs of the’ clan which are contained in their 
legends. The remains are then deposited in a small box 
and placed on a tree.” 
Reported Apart from their totemism the Tsimshians are reported 
worship Of +4 practise a pure worship of heaven. In their opinion 
among the Heaven is the great deity, but he has a number of sub- 
Tsimshians: ordinates or mediators called megnog. While any natural 
object can be a megnog, the most important are the sun 
and moon, spirits appearing in the form of lightning-flashes, 
and animals. Veguzog means anything mysterious. It is 
the supernatural will of the deity and also the whistle 
which is used in the dances and is kept a profound secret. 
Heaven rules the destinies of mankind ; Heaven taught men 
to distinguish between good and bad, and gave them their 
religious laws and institutions. Heaven is worshipped by 
offerings and prayers; the smoke rising from fires is 
especially agreeable to him. Murderers, adulterers, and 
those who behave foolishly, talking to no purpose and 
making a noise at night, are particularly hateful to him. 
He loves .those who take pity upon the poor, who do not 
try to become rich by selling at high prices what others 
want. Men make themselves agreeable to the deity by 
1 Franz Boas, The Mythology of the 2 Franz Boas, in Tenth Report of 
Bella Coola Indians, p. 123 (The Jesup the Committee on the North-Western 
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of Tribes.of Canada, p. 52 (Report of the 

the American Museum of Natural British Association, Ipswich, 1895, 
History, 1898). separate reprint). 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE TSIMSHIANS 317 

cleanliness. Therefore they must bathe and wash their 
whole bodies before praying. For the same reason they 
take an emetic when they wish to please the deity well. 
They fast and abstain from their wives if they desire their 
prayers to be successful, and they offer by fire whatever 
they deem valuable, such as eagle-down, red paint, red 
cedar-bark, lines made of elk-skin, and so forth. How- 
ever, they think that they can compel the deity to grant 
their wishes by observing a rigid fast. For seven days 
they must abstain from food and from seeing their wives. 
During these days they have to lie in bed motionless. At 
the expiry of the time they may rise, wash themselves, 
comb the right side of their head, and paint the right 
side of their face.’ 

This curious worship of Heaven deserves to be further 
investigated. It may have been Coloured by the influence 
of the missionaries who laboured for years among these 
Indians. Mr. William Duncan, of the Church Missionary 
Society, took up residence among the Tsimshians at Fort 
Simpson in 1857 and established a school which was 
attended by many pupils both old and young. In November 
1859 he reported that “there is amongst the Indians a 
great stir of opinion against their heathenish winter-customs, 
and four of the tribes out of nine have, indeed, cut them off. 
Those tribes which still adhere to them are carrying them on 
exceedingly feebly ”; and about a year later in an examina- 
tion held at Victoria pupils drawn from the Tsimshians, 
Haidas, and Songhies displayed some knowledge of Bible 
history.2, From them the knowledge might easily spread to 
their heathen brethren and so modify their ancient customs 
_and beliefs. 

§ 5. Lotemism among the Kwakiutl 

This 
worship 

of Heaven 
may be 
coloured by 
missionary 
influence. 

To the south of the Tsimshians, from Gardner Channel The 

to Cape Mudge, the coast of British Columbia, with the 

1 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of the 2 Commander R. C, Mayne, Four 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes Years in British Columbia and Van- 
of Canada, pp. 49 sq. (Report of the couver’s Island, pp. 305 599., especially 
British Association, Newcastle-upon- pp. 319, 345 59. 

Tyne, 1889, separate reprint). 

Kwakiutl. 

Three 
dialects ‘ 

the Haisla, 

and 
Kwakiutl 

propey, 

Totemic 

clans of the 

Haisla- 

Totemic 

clans of the 

Heiltsuk- 

Among the clans.” 

Northern 
Kwakiutl 

318 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA 

CHAP. 

exception of the region about Dean Inlet, is ‘occupied by 
the Kwakiutl, an Indian stock who speak a language differ- 
ing from that both of their northern and of their southern 

neighbours. 

The Kwakiutl language itself falls into three 

dialects: the Haisla (Xaisla), the Heiltsuk, and the.Kwakiutl 
Heiltsuk, proper, to mention them in their order from north to south. 

The Haisla (Xaisla) dialect 

is spoken on Gardner and 

Douglas Channels; the Heiltsuk, from Gardner Channel to 
Rivers Inlet ; and the Kwakiutl proper, from Rivers Inlet to 
Cape Mudge, including the north-eastern portion of Vancouver 

Island.! 

In these three linguistic and geographical divisions 

of the Kwakiutl stock the types of social organisation all differ 

more or less from each other. 
from north to south. 

We will take them in order 

The most northerly members of the stock, who speak 
the Haisla (Xaisla) dialecf, are divided into six totemic and 
Kwakiutl. exogamous clans, which take their names and their crests 
from their totemic animals and are called respectively the 

Beaver, Eagle, 
(Delphinus orca) clans. 

Wolf, Salmon, 
To the south of them the members 

Raven, and Killer+whale 

of the stock, who speak the Heiltsuk dialect, are divided into 
Kwakiutl three totemic and exogamous clans, which also take their 
names and their crests from their totemic animals and are 
called respectively the Raven, the Eagle, and the Killer-whale 

Together, the tribes speaking the Haisla and tne 

Heiltsuk dialects form the northern group of the Kwakiutl. 
(Haislaand Among them descent on the 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘ The Social Organ- 
ization and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Museum for 1895 
(Washington, 1897), p. 320 ; Handbook 
of American Indians north of Mexico, 
i. 744 5g. Compare F. Boas, in Fifth 
Report of the Committee on the North- 
Western Tribes of Canada, p. 31 
(Report of the British Assoctation, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1889, separate 
reprint) ; z@. in Svxth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 52 sgg. (Report of 
the British Association, Leeds, 1890, 
separate reprint), with the map facing 
the title-page. 

2 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of the 

whole is in the female line, 

Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 29, 31 sg. (Report of 
the British <Association, Newcastle - 
upon-Tyne, 1889, separate reprint) ; 
td. in Sixth Report of the Committee on 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
p- 52 (Report of the British Associa- 
tion, Leeds, 1890, separate reprint) ; 
td. in Twelfth Report of the Committee 
on the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
pp. 674-676 (Heport of the British 
Association, Bristol, 1898) ; zd. “* The 
Social Organization and the Secret 
Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,” 
Report of the United States National 
Museum for 1895 (Washington, 1897), 
pp. 322 sg., 328. 

XVIH TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 319 

that is, children belong to the clan of their mother, not to Heiltsuk) 
that of their father. But this rule, though it is general, is pases 
not absolute; for in certain cases the parents are free to inthe — 
assign their children to the father’s clan instead of to the SMSEUNG 
mother’s! Thus the type of social organisation which 
prevails among the Northern Kwakiutl, who speak the 
Haisla and Heiltsuk dialects, closely resembles that of their 
neighbours to the north—the Tsimshians, the Haidas, and 

the Tlingits. All these peoples are subdivided into totemic 

and exogamous clans with descent in the female line. And 

the rule of exogamy is not limited to a single people, it 
extends to them all; a Heiltsuk man of the Eagle clan, 

for example, cannot marry a Tlingit woman of the Eagle 
phratry ; for those exogamous divisions which possess the 

same crest or totem are regarded as equivalent to each other, 
whether they are found among the Heiltsuks, the Tsimshians, 

the Haidas, or the Tlingits. 

But while the social organisation of the Northern Among the 
Kwakiutl, who speak the Haisla and Heiltsuk dialects, Oye" 
agrees closely with that of their northern neighbours of alien (the _ 
stocks, it differs decidedly from that of their southern ee 
brethren of the same stock, the Kwakiutl proper, who have there are 

‘ no totems, 
paternal instead of maternal descent and among whom anddescent 
totemic clans of the ordinary type appear to be absent. To an ie 

ie. 

account for this remarkable difference between two branches ne nea s 
of the same linguistic stock, Dr. Boas supposes that the view 
Northern Kwakiutl have borrowed both the rule of maternal Noes 
descent and the division into 

totemic clans from their still Kwakiut 
more northerly neighbours of alien stocks; in other words, "° 

1 Franz Boas, Zhe Mythology of 
the Bella Coola Indians (The Jesup 
North Pacific Expedition), p. 121 3 td. 
“The (Tribes of the North Pacific 
Coast,” Annual Archaolog?-al Report, 
7905 (Toronto), p. 239. So predomi- 
nant is the custom of female descent 
among the Northern Kwakiutls that 
Dr. Boas formerly believed it to be 
invariable. The researches of Dr. 
Livingston Farrand, he tells us, re- 
vealed the exceptions to the rule. 

2 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of the 

Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 32 (Report of the British 
lssoctation, Newcastle - upon - Tyne, 
1889, separate reprint): ‘* One of the 
main facts is that the phratries, viz. 
gentes of the Tlingit, Haida, Tsimshian, 
and Heiltsuk, are exogamous, not only 
among each tribe, but throughout the 
whole region. A member of the eagle 
gens of the Heiltsuk, for instance, 
cannot marry a member of the eagle 
phratry of the Tlingit. Those gentes 
are considered identical which have the 
same crest.” 

320 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

borrowed that totemism and mother-kin have spread southward among 

totemism a people who previously had father-kin and no totemic 
descent system.' Whatever may be thought of the hypothesis that 
from their totemism has been borrowed ‘by one people from another, 
neigh- the theory that a people who once possessed paternal 

a descent afterwards exchanged it for maternal descent would 

require very strong evidence in its support to make it 
probable, since both intrinsic probability and analogy are 
strongly against it. For it seems very unlikely that men 
who had once been accustomed to transmit their rights and 
privileges to their own children, should afterwards disinherit 
them and transmit these rights and privileges to their sisters’ 
children instead ; and in point of fact, while there are a good 
many symptoms of a transition from maternal to paternal 

1 Lest I should have misinterpreted Association, Bristol, 1898): ‘* The 

Dr. Boas’s opinion on this subject I will 
transcribe his own words. See Franz 
Boas, in Fifth Report of the Committee 
on the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
p. 29 (Report of the British Association, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1889, separate 
reprint): ‘The most southern tribe 
which belongs to this group [the 
Heiltsuk] are the Awikyenoq of Rivers 
Inlet. Further south, and among the 
Bilqula [Bella Coola], patriarchate pre- 
vails, The social organisation of these 
tribes differs fundamentally from that 
of the northern group. We do not find 
a Single clan that has, properly speak- 
ing, an animal for its totem; neither 
do the clans take their names from 
their crest, nor are there phratries ” ; 
td. in Sixth Report of the Committee on 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
p-. 52 (Report of the British Assoctation, 
Leeds, 1890, separate reprint) : ‘* The 
Kwakiutl language is spoken in two 
main dialects, the Heiltsuk, from 
Gardner Channel to Rivers Inlet, and 
the Kwakiutl proper. . . . The tribes 
speaking the Heiltsuk and Gyimano-itq 
dialects are in the maternal stage, and 
are divided into gentes having animal 
totems ; while the southern group are 
in the paternal stage, and are divided 
into gentes which have no animal- 
crest”; t@., Twelfth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 676 (Report of the British 

northern tribes have clearly defined 
totems, which are inherited in the 
maternal line, and which have animal 
names and crests. . . . The northern 
tribes of Kwakiutl lineage show 
clearly that their ideas have ‘been 
influenced by the animal totem of the 
northern tribes, They have adopted 
to a great extent the maternal descent 
and the division into animal totems of 
the northern tribes. The social organ- 
isation of the Heiltsuk, one of the 
most horthern tribes of Kwakiutl 
lineage, is similar to that of the 
Tsimshian, while their southern neigh- 
bours, the inhabitants of Rivers Inlet, 
who speak the same dialect, retain the 
more complex organisation of the 
Kwakiutl [proper]; but they have 
mainly maternal descent” ; 7d. “‘ The 
Social Organization and the Secret 
Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,” 
Report of the United States National 
Museum for 1895 (Washington, 1897), 
Pp. 323: ‘Animal totems in the 
proper sense of this term are confined 
to these five groups or tribes [the 
Tlingits, Haidas, Tsimshians, Haislas, 
and Heiltsuks]. They are not found 
among the Kwakiutl, although they 
belong to the same linguistic stock to 
which the Xaisla and Heiltsuq belong. 
The clans of the northerntribes bear 
the names of their respective totems 
and are exogamous.” 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 321 

descent in other parts of the world,’ there is, so far as I 
know, none whatever of a transition in the reverse direction 
from paternal descent to maternal. 

The social organisation of the Southern Kwakiutl differs The social 
widely from that of their northern congeners, and is both (2 °Grthe 
complex and peculiar. Our principal, almost our only Southern 
authority on the subject is Dr. Franz Boas, and even he Uplcaied 
confesses that the subject is very difficult to understand.? and 
Others may therefore be excused if they find it even less oon 
intelligible. Apparently the Kwakiutl proper are divided 
into a large number of kindred groups which Dr. Boas 
variously denominates as groups, clans, gentes, and families, 
but which for the sake of uniformity I shall call clans. 

These clans are not at the present day local groups, for 
a considerable number of them are represented in each 

village.® But in Dr. Boas’s opinion each of these clans Their clans 
cs * ° seem to 
was originally a local group or village community. He re 

says: “The traditions of the clans show clearly what originally 

we must consider the original unit of society among the er 
Kwakiutl. Each clan derives its origin from a mythical commuri- 
ties. 

ancestor, who built his house at a certain place and whose 
descendants lived at that place. In a great many cases 
these places prove to be old village sites. In some, large 
accumulations of shells are found, which show that they 
have been inhabited through long periods. We conclude, 
therefore, that the clan was originally a village community, 
which, owing to changes in number or for purposes of 
defense, left their old home and joined some other com- 
munity, retaining, however, to a certain extent its independ- 
ence.”* The clans are in general exogamous, but the custom In general 
is not definitely settled, and some clans prefer to marry {De as 
within their own limits. On the whole, however, marriages gamous. 

outside of the clan are more frequent, because men are 

Here 

1 See, for examples, above, vol. ii. pp. 
15, 17, 195-197, 365, 409; vol. ili. 
pp. 72 59., 80, 132, 136, 174 5g., 308 sg. 

2 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 56 (Report of the British 
Association, Leeds, 1890, separate 
reprint). 

3 F. Boas, in Annual Archeological 

VOL. Ill 

Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 240. 
Dr. Boas speaks of the kindred groups 
as families. 

4 F. Boas, ‘*The Social Organiza- 
tion and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Museum for 
1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 333 
Sq. 

Y 

"322 

Each 
Kwakiutl 
clan has 
one or 
more crests 
and a 
legend ex- 
planatory 
of the crest. 
These 
Jegends 
are of two 
kinds. 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA 

CHAP. 

anxious in this way to acquire the privilege of using new 
and important crests.1_ For every Kwakiutl clan possesses 
a crest or crests consisting of representations of beasts, birds, 
fabulous monsters, the sun, moon, and so forth. These 
crests are carved or painted on their houses, heraldic 
columns or totem-poles, masks, and dancing paraphernalia. 
Among the beasts and birds which the Kwakiutl use as 
crests are the bear, wolf, beaver, sea-lion, killer-whale, raven, 
eagle, and crane; among the fabulous monsters are the 
thunder-bird, a double-headed snake called szszu/, a wild 
woman with long breasts named Tsonoqoa, who lives in 
the woods and steals children to devour them, and the 
spirit of the sea called Iomoqoa, who protects seals and 
kills hunters. A clan may have several crests; for 
example, there is one that has for its crests the thunder- 
bird, crane, grizzly bear, raven, and sun. Each clan has 
its legend to explain how it came to possess a particular 
crest. Roughly speaking, these legends are of two kinds. 
In many of them an ancestor of the clan is said to have 
met with an animal or a supernatural being, who became 
his protector and whom accordingly he and his descendants 
adopted as their crest; in others the ancestor is said to 
have appeared on earth from above or below or from under 
the sea wearing the dress, skin, or' mask of an animal or 
a supernatural being, which he afterwards put off? I 

} Franz Boas, in Amnual Archao- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 240: 
‘* According to the group system of the 
northern tribes, each family of the 
village community must be necessarily 
exogamic, The custom among the 
Kwakiutl is not definitely settled, some 
of the families preferring marriages 
outside the group, while others prefer 
marriages in the group. On the whole, 
marriages outside of the group are more 
frequent on account of the eagerness of 
individuals to secure the privilege of 
using new and important crests.” 
Here Dr. Boas seems to use the 
terms group and family as equivalent. 
This is, so far as I know, Dr. Boas’s 
latest statement on the subject. At 
first he expressed himself with some 
hesitation, but believed that marriage 

within the clan (gens) was absolutely 
prohibited. See Fifth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 32 (Report of the 
British Assoctation, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint). After- 
wards he affirmed without qualification 
that the Kwakiutl clans are exogamous. 
See Franz Boas, in ‘* The Social Or- 
ganization and the Secret Societies of 
the Kwakiutl Indians,” efort of the 
United States National Museum for 
1895 (Washington, 1897), p. 3343 7@., 
The Mythology of the Bella Coola 
Indians, p. 122 (The Jesup North 
Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the 
American Museum of Natural History, 
November 1898). 

2 Franz Boas, in F2fth Report of the 
Ci opinistiee on the North-Western Tribes 

XVI TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWARKIUTL 

. 

will illustrate both these classes of legends, beginning with 
the former. 

For example, it is said that the ancestor of the Examples 
Omanitsenox clan fell in with a number of killer-whales, 90°?" 
which had assumed the shape of men and were mending legends. 
their nets. The chief of these Killer-whale men gave’ the Cac of 
ancestor the quartz-pointed whaling harpoon, his names, ya.” 
and the right to paint. the killer-whale as his crest on crest. 
the front of his house. Again, the first ancestor of the Origin of 
Kuexa clan is said to have been out hunting bears and — 
to have met with a fabulous bird supposed to resemble a 
crane. The bird pecked at him and tried to kill him, but 
he dodged behind a cedar-tree and escaped. When he 
came home, he carved an image of the crane out of yellow 
cedar and set it up on the top of a pole outside of his 
house, and it became the crest of his clan, These legends, 
as Dr. Boas has pointed out, present a close analogy to 
the mode in which among the eastern Indians of America 
a man acquires his individual totem, guardian spirit, or 
manitoo Again, the Kwatsenok clan tell how a_super- osigin of 
natural being came down from heaven in the shape of ee 
a bird with a neck-ring of red cedar-bark, how he built cedar-bar, 
a house, cured one of the Kwatsenok clan of madness, 
and gave him the neck-ring. Since then members of the 
clan have danced a certain dance wearing neck-rings of 
red cedar-bark.? Again, the Gapenox clan tell of an origin of 
ancestor of theirs called Counsellor-of-the-World, who ee 
lived with his people at Grassy Place. 

323 

The world was mask. 
then dark, for the sun never rose, being kept shut up in 
a box by Day-Receptacle-Woman, who lived at Cut-Beach. 
So Counsellor-of-the-World walked to see the village at 
Cut-Beach. There he discovered Day-Receptacle-Woman 

pf Canada, pp. 29-32 (Heport of the 
British Association, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint); Franz 
Boas, “ The Social Organization and 
the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl 
Indians,” Report of the United States 
National Museum for 1895 (Washing- 
ton, 1897), pp. 335 599, 371 sgq.; id. 
‘©The Tribes of the North Pacific 
Coast,” Annual Archeological Report, 
1905 (Toronto), pp. 239-242. 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘The Social Organiza- 
tion and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Aluseum for 
1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 336 sg. 

2 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, p. 29 (Report of 
the British Association, Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne, 1889, separate reprint), 

Examples 
of the 
second 
kind of 
legends. 

Descent 
of the 
Neentsa 
clan from 
an eagle. 

ZTOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA 

324 CHAP. 

sitting in her house eating salmon. At once he turned 
himself into a baby and entered her womb. So she con- 
ceived and in four days she gave birth to a boy, who was 
no other than Counsellor-of-the-World himself. Then 
Counsellor-of-the-World cried for the box in which the 
sun was shut up; and at last to stop him from crying 
his mother gave it to him. He put it in a canoe ahd 
paddled away with it. Then he opened the box, let out 
the sun, and took off the double-headed serpent-mask of 
the sun. So it grew light in the world. The Sun spoke 
and said, “O friend! don’t keep me, let me go to the upper 
world, and let me take care of our world, and it will become 
day. Now you have my double-headed serpent-mask.” 
Also the Sun said, “O friend! just take care that you don’t 
do any harm to my double-headed serpent-mask. Show 
the daybreak mask in the winter dance.” Thus said the 
Sun. Then Counsellor-of-the-World bade him good-bye, 
and the Sun went up into the sky. That is why the 
Gapenox clan have the daybreak mask and red cedar-bark. 
They were all inside the box with the Sun. 

In the other class of legends which the Kwakiutl tell 
to explain the origin of their crests, it is said that the 
ancestor of the clan came down from heaven, or up from 
the under-world, or ont of the sea, wearing the dress, skin, 
or mask of an animal or supernatural being, that he 
afterwards doffed the dress, mask, skin, or other disguise 
and appearing as a man became the progenitor of the 
clan, who henceforth adopted the animal or thing as 
their crest. For example, the Neentsa clan tell how two 
eagles and their eaglet descended from heaven at Cape 
Scott, where they took off their eagle-skins and became 
men. The eaglet, or rather the young man, was after- 
wards drowned at sea, but he awoke to new life, flew up 
to heaven in the shape of an eagle, and then flew down 
again, still in the form of an eagle, to his sorrowful parents, 
who had given him. up for dead. In his talons he bore 

1 Franz Boas and George Hunt, 
Kwakiutl Texts, ii. 393-397 (7esup 
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of 
the American Museum of Natural 
History, December 1902). This story 

of the stealing of the Sun by a cunning 
hero is widespread among the Indians 
of North-West America. The Tlingits, 
for example, tell it of Yehl the 
Rayen. See above, p. 293, note 1, 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 325 

a box in which were many whistles to imitate the eagle’s 
scream. Also he wore a double mask and a neck-ring 
of red cedar-bark, and he became the ancestor of the 
Neentsa clan.' Again, the Sisintle clan, who have the Descent of 
sun for their crest, tell how the sun (sendlae) came down ‘he Ssintle 
from heaven in the shape of a bird, took the likeness of a the sun in 
man, and wandering about the ecarth came at last to Parr 
place called “the Plain at the mouth of the river, where 
the clover-root is found,” in the land of the Kwakiutl. 
In every tribe which he visited he married a wife, and 
their descendants are the clan Sisintle. But he resolved 
to settle among the Kwakiutl in the plain where the root 
of the clover grows. There he took a Kwakiutl woman 
to wife, and she conceived and bore him a son. And 
you may see their house there to this day. On each 
side of the door is painted a great image of the sun, 
and the posts are carved in the likeness of men each 
carrying a sun; and the crossbars which rest upon the 
posts are also carved like men, but the beams are sea- 
lions. And in winter, when people dance, the Sisintle 
clan wear the mask of the sun, and also the mask of a 
dog called the Sun-Shining-Red-through-the-Clouds ; for 
that dog came down from heaven with the sun. And 
the heraldic column, or what people commonly call the 
totem pole, of the clan represents a series of copper 
plates with a man above them, and above that again is 
a mask of the sun with beams radiating from it.? Again, Descent of 
the Gexsem clan relate the following legend to explain ee 
their use of a certain mask, which represents the son the Spirit 
of Qomogoa, the Spirit of the Sea. They say that the ° "Se 
Raven, the ancestor of the clan, had a sister, the Crow, 
and a daughter named Hataqa. One day the Crow and 
Hataqa went down to the beach to gather sea-urchins. 
When they had filled their baskets, the Crow tempted 
Hataga to eat of the sea-urchins, so she took of them 
and ate. But the Crow told the girl’s father the Raven, 

1 Franz Boas, in F7fth Report of the 2 Franz Boas, of. cit, pp. 29 sg. 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes (Report of the British <tssoctation, 
of Canada, p. 29 (Report of the British |Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1889, separate 

Association, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, __ reprint). 
1889, separate reprint). 

Descent 
of the 
Gigilqam 
clan 
from the 
thunder- 
bird. 

Descent of 
a clan from 
its crest 
animal 
resembles 
the descent 
of a clan 
from its 
totem ; in 
fact the 
crest 
animals 
seem to be 
totems, 

326 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 
« 

and he was very angry, and sailed away with all his 
people in canoes, leaving his daughter alone in the 
deserted village. Only a dog and a bitch remained behind 
with the maiden, and they helped her. So she made four 
fish-baskets and at low water she placed them on the 
beach. At the next tide she found the baskets full of 
fish, and in ome of the baskets was a man. He was the 
son of the Spirit of the Sea, and he carried a box which 
was small but very heavy, for it contained a whale. He 
built a large house and married the girl, and he invited 
all the tribes to a feast and gave them whale flesh to eat. 
So his descendants still use the mask which represents 
their ancestor, the son of the Spirit of the Sea. And 
when they shew the mask they sing this song :-— 

It is a tale which came down to us from the beginning of the world. 

You cone bringing the house of the Spirit of the Sea, you “ Growing 
Wealth coming ashore,” “Covered with wealth,” “ Mountain of 

Property,” 
“ Really great Mountain.” It is a tale which came down to us from 
the beginning of the world) 

In some of the foregoing legends a clan traces its 
descent from an ancestor who first appeared in the form 
of a bird. Similarly the Gigilqam clan has a tradition 
that they are descended from the mythical thunder-bird a 
and the beak of the bird was carved and fastened as a 
crest to the front of their house, which was also excellently 
painted till the misplaced zeal of a missionary obliterated 
the gay heathen blazon under a coat of whitewash.? In 
these cases the descent of a clan from its crest animal 
resembles the descent of a clan from its totem animal, 
of which we have met with many examples in the course 
of this work; and on that and other grounds we might 
naturally conclude that the animals, supernatural beings, 
and other objects from which the Kwakiutl clans take 
their crests are simply their totems. Dr. Boas himself 
has taken this view in his general summary of the social 
system of the Indian tribes of this region; for he tells 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘ The Social Organiza- United States National Museum for 

tion and the Secret Societies of the 1895 (Washington, 1897), Pp. 374+ 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Refort of the ! 2 Franz Boas, op. cite pp» 375 59. 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 327 

us that “the Kwakiutl are divided into a number of 
clans, most of which have animals for their totems. Most 
of these totems are explained in the same manner as those 
of the northern tribes, while others are considered direct 
descendants of the totem animal.”! Yet elsewhere Dr. 
Boas repeatedly denies that the Kwakiutl clans have 
animal totems.2 But as the passage just quoted in 
which he affirms Kwakiutl totemism is later than those 
in which he.denies it, we may suppose that it represents 
his more mature opinion, and I shall follow him in that 
opinion with the less hesitation because it seems to me 
difficult to distinguish the crest system of they Kwakiutl 
clans from totemism proper. 

However, the Kwakiutl system has certainly some peculiar Features 
features which sharply discriminate it, as Dr. Boas has pinion 
rightly pointed out, from the more normal totemism of their Kwakiut! 
northern congeners the Haislas and the Heiltsuks. In the pm's™ 
first place, while among the Haislas and the Heiltsuks the ordinary 
clans are limited in number to six and three respectively, ‘7 "” 
among the Kwakiutl proper the number of the clans is 
much greater and indeed apparently unlimited.? Second, 
while the clans of the Haislas and Heiltsuks are named after 
totems, the clans of the Kwakiutl are not so named,’ but are 
called either by the collective form of an ancestor’s name, or 
by the name of the district which they inhabit, or again by 
titles of honour, such as “ The Rich Ones” or “ The Great 
Ones.”*® Thirdly, while the clans of the Haislas and 
Heiltsuks descend in the female line, the children belonging 
to the clan of their mother, among the Kwakiutl the clans 
apparently descend in the male line, children belonging to 
the clan of their father. 

1 Franz Boas, in 7welfth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, p. 674 (Report of 
the British Association, Bristol, 1898). 
From the sequel it is clear that Dr. 
Boas is here speaking of the Kwakiutl 
proper, not of the northern members 
of the Kwakiutl stock, the Haislas and 
the Heiltsuks, who have totemism of 
the ordinary pattern. 

2 See the passages quoted above, 
p. 320, note!, 

3 Franz Boas, in Annual Archao- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 240, 

4 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 29 (Report of the 
British Association, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint). 

5 Franz Boas, ‘The Social Organiza- 
tion and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
Onited States National Museum for 
+595 (Washington, 1897), pp. 332 59. 

On the 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cur, 

328 

Yet the question of descent in the Kwakiutl clans seems 

question of to be open to some doubt ; at least it is difficult to elicit a 

the descent 
of the 
Kwakiutl 
clans Dr. 
Boas’s 
statements 
appear to 
be con- 
flicting. 

clear and consistent account of it from Dr. Boas’s statements 
on the subject. At one time he tells us that among the 
Kwakiutl “the child does not belong by. birth to the gens of 
his father or mother, but may be made a member of any 
gens to which his father, mother, grandparents, or great-grand- 
parents belonged.” ? At another time he says that among the 
Kwakiutl proper “a child belongs by blood to both his father's 
and his mother’s family” 5* and, again, that “the Kwakiutl 
considers himself as belonging half to his mother’s, half to 
his father’s gens.” * If in these passages “ gens” and “family” 
are used, as they seem to be, as equivalents of each other and 
of “clan,” the term which in other passages Dr. Boas applies 
to the kinship divisions of the Kwakiutl, then the first of the 

- statements which I have quoted appears to contradict the 

Apparently 
children 
belong to 
their 
father’s 
clan, but 
can be 
nominated 
into the 

other two. Yet in other passages, again, Dr. Boas speaks as 
if descent of the Kwakiutl clans was definitely in the paternal 
line. Thus he observes that “among the Kwakiutl the clans 
are also exogamic, and certain privileges are inherited in the 
paternal line, while a much larger number are obtained by 
marriage” ;* and again, after remarking that the social 
organisation of the Kwakiutl appears to be in a transitional 
stage between maternal and paternal institutions, he affirms 
simply that among the Kwakiutl “descent is in the paternal 
line.” ° 

It is to be hoped that in the monograph on the Kwakiutl 
which may be expected from Dr. Boas he will clear up the 
obscurity which appears to hang over the simple question, 
whether among this people children at birth are reckoned 
to their father’s clan or not. So far as I can interpret Dr. 
Boas’s various statements on the subject, I am inclined to 

1 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of the 

1889, separate reprint). 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 

4 Franz Boas, ‘* The Social Organ- 

of Canada, p. 57 (Report of the British 
Association, Leeds, 1890, separate 
reprint). 

2 Franz Boas, in Annual Archeo- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 239. 

3 Franz Boas, in F2z/th Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 32 (Report of the British 
«lssoctation, Newcastle - upon - Tyne, 

ization and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Museum for 
1895 (Washington, 1897), p. 334. 

5 Franz Boas, 7he Alythology of the 
Bella Coola Indians, pp. 121 sg. ( The 
JSesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir 
of the American Museum of Natural 
Higory, November 1898). 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 329 

infer that a child belongs by birth to his father’s clan, but clanoftheir 
can afterwards be enrolled in any clan to which his father, ie 
mother, grandparents, or great-grandparents belonged, and parents 
that this enrolment is effected by giving the child one of the (S"" 
names belonging to the particular clan which it is desired parents. 
that he should join; for each clan has a certain limited 
number of names, and by receiving the name of one of the 

clans to which his ancestors belonged a man becomes thereby 

a member of that particular clan. But by joining another 

clan a man apparently does not cease to belong to his 
original clan ; chiefs are sometimes members of many clans ; 

for example, we hear of a Kwakiut! chief who was a member 

of six. In fact a child is generally made a member of 
another clan as a sort of life-insurance ; for by assuming the 

name and thereby joining the clan of a dead relative he 
inherits any debts due to the deceased and may thus be 
provided for in case his father should die, though at the 
same time he becomes responsible for any debts which his 
kinsman had left unpaid at his death. Ifa person does not 

take the name of a deceased relation, whether father, érand- 
father, or what not, he neither inherits his property nor 
becomes responsible for his debts.) 

But while the question of the descent of the Kwakiutl clans ‘The crests 
remains to some extent uncertain, it seems clear that the clan iat 
crests descend through women, every man receiving at marriage clans seem 
his father-in-law’s crest as a dowry with his wife and holding eerie 

it in trust for his future son-in-law. To quote Dr. Boas: through 
. . . women ; 
“The marriage ceremonies of the Kwakiutl seem to show thatis, 

that originally matriarchate prevailed also among them, @ man 
‘. ws recelves 
The husband always assumes, a short time after marriage, his crest 

his father-in-law’s name and crest, and thus becomes ae 
. . * - V1 
member of his wife’s clan. From him this crest descends marriage. 

upon his children ; the daughters retain it, but his sons, on 
marrying, lose it, adopting that of their wives. Thus the 

! Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of the one name at a time. The bearers of 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes these names form the nobility of the 
of Canada, p. 57 (Report of the British tribe” (Twelfth Report of the Com- 
wlssociation, Leeds, 1890, separate re- -mtttee on the North-Western Tribes of 
print). Elsewhere Dr. Boas says that Canada, p. 675, in Report of the British 
‘each clan hasacertain limited number —_--/ ssoctation, Bristol, 1898). 

of names. Each individual has only 
STVBRADN 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH- WEST AMERICA 

CHAP. 

33° 

‘descent of the crest is practically in the female line, every un- 
married man having his mother’s crest ; but still we cannot call 
this matriarchate proper, as the father is the head of the 
family, as he gives up his own crest for that of his wife. 
This law is carried so far that a chief who has no daughters 
marries one of his sons to another chief's son, the latter thus 
acquirjng his ¢rest. By this means the extinction of gentes 
is prevented. It seems, however, that the father’s. gens is 
not entirely given up, for the natives frequently use carvings of 
both gentes promiscuously, but certain parts of the father’s 
gens, to which I shall refer presently, are excluded from this 
use. The following instance, which came under my personal 
observation, will show the customs of the Kwakiutl regarding 
this point. Komenakula, chief of the gens Gyigyilkam, of 
the tribe Ttlatlasikoala, has the heraldic column of that gens, 
and the double-headed snake for his crest. In dances he 
uses the latter, but chiefly tHe attributes of the raven gens. 
His mother belonged to the gens Nunemasekalis, of the 
Tlauitsis ; hence he wears the mask of that gens. He had 
an only daughter who, with her husband, lived with him. 
She died and her husband is the present owner of the 
heraldic column of the gens. The son of this daughter, at 
present a boy seven years of age, is the future chief of the 
gens.”' Again, Dr. Boas writes as follows: “ Among the 
Kwakiutl we find a mixture of paternal and maternal 
institutions, but the son is not allowed to use his father’s 
totem; he acquires the right to his totem by marriage, 
receiving at that time the totem of his wife’s father. When, 
later on, his daughter marries, the right to the totem descends 
upon her husband. In this manner the totem descends in 
the maternal line, although indirectly. Each clan has a 
certain limited number of names. Each individual has only 
one name at atime. The bearers of these names form the 
nobility of the tribe. When a man receives the totem of his 

father-in-law, he at the same 

! Franz Boas, in /7/th Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 33 (Report of the British 
Association, Newcastle - upon - Tyne, 
1889, separate reprint), The example 
by which Dr. Boas seeks to elucidate the 

time receives his name, while 

descent of the crests is not as clear as 
might be desired. Is the Gyigyilkam 
clan the clan of Komenakula’s father ? 
What is Komenakula’s relation to the 
Raven clan? What is the crest of his 
wjother’s clan ? 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 

33! 

the father-in-law gives up the name, and takes what is called 
‘an old man’s name,’ which does not belong to the names con- 
stituting the nobility of the tribe.”’ Again, we read: “ One of 
the essential property rights of each individual is his clan- 
legend and the use of his crest. According to the Kwakiutl 
custom, the property right in these objects is held by the 
men of the tribe. It is, however, not transmitted as a per- 
manent inheritance to the sons, but it is always acquired in 
marriage. Thus, if a certain man has a right to use the 
raven as his crest, he will give this crest to his son-in-law 
about the time when a child is born to the young man. Ih 
this way, the son-in-law practically holds the crest in trust 
for his wife’s daughter, because when he in turn is to give up 
the use of the crest he must deliver it to his daughter’s 
husband, who again holds it in trust for his future daughter. 
It is clear that in this manner a purely maternal descent is 
secured.”? However, it would appear that among the 
Kwakiutl a man inherits a crest or crests also from his 
father ; for Dr. Boas tells us that among them “ the lowest 
carving on a totem pole is that which the owner inherited 
from his father. The higher ones are those which he 
obtained by marriage.” ® 

Thus, as Dr. Boas says, the social organisation of the The _ 
Kwakiutl seems to be in a transitional stage between maternal pert 
and paternal institutions ;* 

for while the clans perhaps be ina 
1 Franz Boas, in Twelfth Report of 

the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 674 sg. (Report 
of the British Association, Bristol, 
1898), 

2 Franz Boas, in .frnual Archeo- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), pp. 239 
sg. Compare id., The Mythology of the 
Bella Coola Judians, pp. 121 sg. (The 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir 
of the American Museum of Natural 
History, November 1898): ‘* The 
Kwakiutl have a peculiar organization, 
which may be considered a transitional 
stage between maternal and paternal 
institutions. Descent is in the paternal 
line; but a man, at the time of his 
marriage, receives his father-in-law’s 
crest as a dowry, which he holds in 
trust for his son [-in-law ?], so that 
actually each individual inherits the 

crest of his maternal grandfather. The 
clans are exogamic.” It is not clear 
how on Dr, Boas’s shewing ‘‘each 
individual inherits the crest of his 
maternal grandfather.” If I under- 
stand Dr. Boas aright, every man 
receives at marriage the crest of his 
wife’s father, who in turn received it 
from his wife’s father, and so on ad 
infinitum, Thus a man receives the 
crest of his wife’s father, of his wife's 
maternal grandfather, etc., not of his 
own father, of his own maternal grand- 
father, etc. 

3 Franz Boas, in Eleventh Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, p. 9 (Report of the 
British Association, Liverpool, 1896, 
separate reprint). 

* See the passage cited in note 2. 

332 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

transitional descend in the male line, the crests appear to descend 
ee regularly, if not invariably, through women, each man 
motne an acquiring his crest at marriage through his wife. The 
kin. Dr, Question then naturally arises, Are the Kwakiutl passing 
Boas isof from maternal institutions to paternal institutions, from 
atthe mother-kin to father-kin, or in the reverse direction? Is the 
original = female descent of the crests a relic of mother-kin ? or is it on 
system was we . 
father-kin, the contrary an innovation superposed on an old system of 
aie * father-kin? In one passage Dr. Boas seems to incline to the 
modified former member of this alternative, that is, to the view that 
i hve of the Kwakiutl are passing or have passed from mother-kin 
maternal of (as he calls it) matriarchate to father-kin or patriarchate ; 
institutions: for he says that “the marriage ceremonies of the Kwakiutl 
seem to show that originally matriarchate prevailed also 
among them.”* Yet he afterwards adopted with great decision 
the contrary view, namely, that the original system of the 
Kwakiutl was father-kin or patriarchate, which was at a later 
time modified by the adoption of maternal institutions. 
“In the north,” he says, “a woman’s rank and privileges 
always descend upon her children. Practically the same 
result has been brought about among the Kwakiutl, but 
in a manner which suggests that a people with paternal 
institutions has adapted its social laws to these customs. 
Here the woman brings as her dower her father’s position 
and privileges to her husband, who, however, is not allowed 
to use them himself, but acquires them for the use of his 
son. As the woman’s father, on his part, has acquired 
his privileges in the same manner through his mother, a 
purely female law of descent is secured, although through 
the medium of the husband. It seems to my mind that 
this exceedingly intricate law . . . can not be explained in 
any other way than as an adaptation of maternal laws by a 
tribe which was on a paternal stage. I can not imagine 
that it is a transition of a maternal society to a paternal 
society, because there are no relics of the former stage 
beyond those which we find everywhere, and which do not 

prove that the transition has been recent at al]. There is 

1 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of the Association, | Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 1889, separate reprint), 
of Canada, p. 33 (Report of the British 

4 

XVII 

TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 333 

no trace left of an inheritance from the wife’s brothers; the 
young couple do not live with the wife’s parents. But the 
most important argument is that the customs can not have 
been prevalent in the village communities from which the 
present tribal system originated, as in these the tribe is 
always designated as the direct descendants of the mythical 
ancestor. If the village communities had been on the 
maternal stage, the tribes would have been designated as 
the descendants of the ancestor’s sisters, as is always the 
case in the legends of the northern tribes.” ! 

While the mature opinion of Dr. Boas on the people tb Butit 
whom he has paid so much attention deserves to be received et ee 
with respect, I have indicated above? some of the reasons that the t 
which lead me, not without hesitation, to incline to the ee 
other view, formerly favoured by Dr. Boas himself, namely, from é 
that the Kwakiutl are in a stage of transition from mother- aes 
kin to father-kin. But it is to be hoped that further kin. 
researches of Dr. Boas, to whom we already owe so much 
valuable information on the Indians of North-West America, 
will clear up this and other obscurities which still remain in 
the social system of the Kwakiutl. 

A very peculiar feature of the Kwakiutl clans is that in tq winter 
winter their organisation is practically dissolved and replaced Bed social 
by a grouping of the people into two great classes, the dian OLR 
initiated and the uninitiated, each of which again is sub- nae 
divided into lesser groups, the initiated being subdivided dissotvea 
according to the particular secret society to which each nice tops 
person belongs, while the uninitiated are subdivided grouping 
according to their age and prospective position among hes 

people 
the initiated. The secret societies play a great part in the into two 

1 Franz Boas, ‘* The Social Organiza- 
tion and the Secret Societies of the 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the United 
States National Museum for 1895 
(Washington, 1897), pp. 334 5g. Some 
points in this passage create difficulties. 
Iam at a loss to understand the state- 
ment that ‘‘ the woman’s father, on his 
part, has acquired his privileges in the 
same manner through his mother”; 
for in the preceding sentence we had 
been told that a husband acquires his 
privileges not through his mother nor 

yet from his father, but through his 
wife ; and with this latter account of 
the acquisition of a crest Dr. Boas’s 
other statements (above, pp. 329-331) 
seem to agree. Again, when Dr. Boas 
says that ‘‘the young couple do not 
live with the wife’s parents,” he seems 
to have forgotten the case, which fell 
under his own observation, of a young 
couple who lived with the wife’s father 
(above, p. 330). But perhaps that 
case was exceptional. 
2 Above, pp. 319-321. 

334 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

classes, the SOCial life, not only of the Kwakiutl, but of the other Indian 
ese tribes of North-West America. While they are intimately 
uninitiated, related to the totemic system of the tribes, they are yet 
the init distinct from it. Accordingly the fuller consideration of 
prising all them is reserved for a separate chapter. Here a brief 
who are notice of them must suffice, Members of a secret society 
of a secret are believed to be initiated by a patron-spirit, who presides 
society over that ‘particular society, protects its members, and 
invests them with certain supernatural or magical powers 
which vary with the society. The right to be initiated into 
any particular society is hereditary in certain clans* and is 
acquired by a man at marriage in the same way as he 
acquires his crests through his wife. As the number of 
presiding spirits is not large, many clans have the same 
spirit or supernatural being for their patron. Amongst the 
Kwakiutl and the other Indian tribes of this region the 
most important patrons are|the Cannibal Spirit, the Ghost, 
the Grizzly Bear, and the Fool Spirit; and corresponding 
to them the most important secret societies are the 
Cannibals, the Ghosts, the Bears, and the Fools. Of these 
the Cannibals rank highest, and next'to them the Ghosts. 
The spirits appear to their devotees only in winter, and 
accordingly it is only in winter that the secret societies 
meet for the performance of their dances and ceremonies. 
Hence the winter season, when the clans are in abeyance 
and the secret societies are in force, is known among the 
Indians as “ The Secrets” (¢se¢tsaeka), a name which they 
also apply to the ceremonies themselves. The summer 
season, on the other hand, when the secret societies are in 
abeyance and the clan organisation is in force, is called by 
another name (daxus), which may be translated “ profane,” 
Traditional and which is also applied to all uninitiated persons. Accord- 
ongin Ol ing to tradition, the secret societies originated in the same 

societies. way as many of the clans ; an ancestor met the patron spirit 
The novice a ee ee P oe 
is thought Of one of the societies and was initiated by him. Similarly 

ana of at initiation the novice is still supposed to be carried off 
by the and possessed by the patron spirit of the society to which 
eae: he belongs ; and the object of the whole winter ceremonial 
the society, is to bring back the youth and to exorcise the spirit which 

and be possesses him, in order that, healed of his holy madness, he 

XVH TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 335 

may be restored to the society of his relations and friends, must be 
It is with this kindly intention that the members of the oe 
secret societies perform their various dances, in which they masked 
personate their patron spirit, wearing his mask and orna- ce 
ments and uttering his peculiar cries. The dance is, in sent the 
fact, a dramatic performance of the myth which tells of the?" 
acquisition of the patron spirit. Each society, like each 

clan, has a limited number of personal names’ which are 
bestowed on the members; for the novice is supposed at 
initiation to receive a new name from the patron spirit of 

the socfety. But these secret or sacred names are only 

used in winter when the spirits are believed to dwell among 

the Indians; in summer they are dropped and replaced 

by the personal names of the clans.’ 

Like other Indian tribes of North-West America the Belief 
Kwakiutl believe in the reincarnation of the dead; they aa 
think that the soul of a deceased person returns to life in in the re- 
the first child born after his death. This belief is illustrated erihe dead: 
by the following tale, the events of which are supposed to 
have happened not long ago. There were two chiefs called 
Ankoalagyilis and Tsekete. Ankoalagyilis was a twin and 
boasted that the deity took special care of him, and that he 
would go to heaven when he died. But he also laid up 
treasure on earth, for he collected blankets for years and 
hid them under stones in the wood. His wife helped him 
to do so. But one day his rival Tsekete followed the two 
into the forest, stabbed them to death, and threw the bodies, 
weighted with stones, into the sea. Nobody knew what 
had become of the chief and his wife. But the dead man 
had left a son, who in due time married a wife, and she 
bore him a male child. That child was no other than his 
murdered grandfather come to life again. When the boy 

1 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 34, 52 sqg. 
(Keport of the British Assoctation, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1889, separate 
yeprint); 2. in Sixth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 62 sqg. (Report of the 
British Assoctation, Leeds, 1890, 
separate reprint); #/. in Twelfth 
Report of the Committee on the North- 

Western Tribes of Canada, p. 675 
(Report of the British Association 
(Bristol, 1898)); id ‘The Social 
Organization and the Secret Societies 
of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Museum for 
1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 393- 
396, 418-424, 431; td. in Annual 
Archeological Report, 1905 (Toronto), 
Pp: 243-247. 

336 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

was a few years old, he said to his father, “I was once your 
father and I have returned from heaven.” At first his 
father did not believe him, but the boy said, “You know 
that your father buried his property and that nobody can 
tell where it is. I will shew it to you.” With that he led 
his father straight to the spot and shewed him the property, 
two canoe-loads of blankets. Then the people knew that 
the murdered 'chief had returned to life in the person of 
his grandchild. In time the boy became chief himself, 
but he magnanimously refrained from murdering his 
murderer.’ 
The souls However, the souls of the dead are not always born 
ornunters again in human form. Sometimes they must be reincarnated 
animals are in animals before they come to life again as men. This, in 
Seance the opinion of the Kwakiutl, is the fate of hunters. The 
ow ot souls of dead men who hunted sea-beasts are turned into 
sea-beasts killer-whales ; and the soulsiof men who hunted land-beasts 
apie are turned into wolves. Only when a killer-whale or a 
whales. wolf dies, can their souls return and be born again in 
human bodies. Hunters ornament the bow seat in their 
canoes and cut a hole in it; this becomes their dorsal fin 
when they turn into killer-whales after death. The 
Kwakiutl believe that after the death of a hunter the 
killer-whale into which he has been transformed will come 
to the village and shew itself. When many killer-whales 
approach a village, it is supposed that they come to fetch a 
soul. But it is not only hunters whose souls transmigrate 
into the bodies of killer-whales. Once when a killer-whale 
was killed, the fin shewed a scar as if it had been burnt; 
and it had happened not long before that a girl had died 
who had burnt her hand. So the Kwakiutl concluded that 
her soul had transmigrated ‘into this killer-whale. The 
belief that the souls of hunters of land animals are reborn in 
wolves may perhaps account for the treatment of a dead 
wolf by the Kwakiutl When a wolf has been killed, its 
heart is taken out, and all who helped to kill it must eat 
four morsels of the heart. Then they wail over the carcase, 

1 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of British Association, Leeds, 1890, 
the Committee on the North-Western separate reprint). 
Tribes of Canada, p. 59 (Report of the 

XVII . TOTEMISM AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 337 

saying, “Woe! our great friend.” After that they cover 
the carcase with a blanket and bury it. 

Like other totemic peoples the, Kwakiutl tell a tale like Kwakiun 
that of Cupid and Psyche about a fairy wife, who lived ra aa 
happily with her husband for a time and then left him Cupid ana 
lamenting. To understand the story you must know that ,2t 
in the opinion of the Kwakiutl twins are nothing but married a 

salmon who have assumed human shape and in that guise nr ae 
can bring plenty of their finny brothers and sisters to the ost her. 
fisherman’s net. Well, once upon a time there was a chiek 
called Chief-of-the-Ancients. There was no river where 
he lived and therefore necessarily there were no salmon. 
That troubled the chief, so one day he said to his younger 
brothers, “I wish to look for one who is a twin and to make 
her my wife, that through her the salmon may come.” His 
aunt the Star-Woman bade him go to the graves and search 
among them for a twin. So he went to the graves and 
cried out, “Is there a twin here, O graves?” But the 
graves said, “There is none here.” Thus he did to many 
graves. But at last one of the graves answered, “I am a 
twin.” Then Chief-of-the-Ancients went to it, and gathered 
the bones, and sprinkled them with the water of life, and the 
twin woman at once came to life. She was very pretty, and 
said, “ O Chief-of-the-Ancients, why do you come and make 
me live?” He said, “I wish to have you for my wife.” 
She said, “ Beware, Chief-of-the-Ancients! Do me no 
harm.” He took her home and she became his wife, and 
she made plenty of salmon, for she had only to put her 
finger in her mouth and dip it in water, and lo! there was 
a salmon jumping in the water. And when she went into a 
river the salmon came leaping at her feet. So the chief’s 
salmon-traps were full of salmon, and his heart was lifted 
up and he grew proud, because he had much food. He 
spoke angrily to his younger brothers and to his wife ; and 
when the backbone of the salmon caught in the hair of his 
head, he scolded it and threw it into a corner of the house, 
and said, “ You come from the ghosts, and you catch me!” 

1 Franz Boas, in Eleventh Report of British Association, Liverpool, 1896, 
the Committee on the North-Western separate reprint). 
Tribes of Canada, p. 9 (Report of the 

VOL, Il Zz 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

338 

That made his wife Salmon-Maker very sad. She arose 
and weeping said to the dried salmon in the house, “ Come, 
my tribe, let us go back.” Thus she spoke to the dried 
salmon. And they followed her, for they were her tribe, 
and they all went away into the water. Chief-of-the- 
Ancients tried to stop her, putting his arm round his wife’s 
body ; but her body was like smoke and his arms went 
through her. She never came back, and Chief-of-the- 
Ancients and his brothers became poor again.’ 

§ 6. Totemism among the Salish 

The social When we have passed from the northern to the southern 
Se, of ne tribes of British Columbia, we find that with the language 
Salish the social organisation has changed; for whereas the 
ae northern tribes, the Haidas and the Tsimshians, with their 
of British neighbours the Tlingits of Alaska, are organised in totemic 
Columbia . 

differs from 20d exogamous clans with maternal descent, among the 

that of the southern tribes, who belong to the great Salish stock, 

northern . . . 

tribes; for exogamy and totemism in the strict sense are absent, or 
The 

one the nearly so, and descent is reckoned in the paternal line. 
ALS. . . ° ° . . . . . . 
totemism Social organisation of the Salish tribes in the interior is very 

eae loose ; there is no recognised tribal unit, no division into 
nearly | €XoOgamous clans, and no hereditary nobility. The people 
absentand are broken up into village communities occupying each its 
descent is : a. . > . 
in the own permanent village in the river valleys, where they reside 
paternal . : : 

Tne. But GUring the fishing season. But the population even of the 

among the villages is shifting ; during the hunting and root-gathering 
<oast' seasons the Indians live dispersed in tents among the 

Salish 
there isan mountains.” Only among some tribes which dwell on or 

1 Franz Boas and George Hunt, 
Kwakiutl Texts, ii. pp. 322-330 (The 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir 
of the American Museum of Natural 
History). 

2 Franz Boas, in 77th Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 

of the Bella Coola Indians, p. 122 (The 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir 
of the American Museum of Natural 
History, November, 1898); zd. ‘* The 
Salish Tribes of the Interior of British 
Columbia,” Anzual Archeological Re- 
port, 1905 (Toronto), pp. 219-221, 

of Canada, pp. 23,29 (Keport of the 
British Association, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint); zd. in 
Twelfth Report of the Committee on the 
North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 
675,676 (Report of the British Assocta- 
tion, Bristol, 1898) ; 2@., The Afythology 

240; C. Hill-Tout, Zhe Far West, the 
Home of the Salish and Déné, p. 158; 
zd, ‘“Some Features of the Language 
and Culture of the Salish,” American 
Anthropologist, New Series, vii. (1905) 
pp- 680 sg. 

TOTEMISM AMONG THE SALISH 

near the coast do we find a certain approximation to the approxima- 
clans and crests of the northern tribes ; and it appears to be aes ne 
the opinion of Dr. Boas, one of our best authorities on the of the 

Indian tribes of North-West America, that this approxima- Rother 
tion has come about, not by independent evolution, but 
through diffusion, the Salish Indians borrowing the crests or 
totems with their appropriate legends from their neighbours.’ 
But while totemism in the usual sense of the term, that is, 
the organisation of the whole community into totemic and 
exogamous cians, seems to be lacking among the Salish 
tribes of the interior, on the other hand individual or personal 
totems are reported to be universally prevalent among them? 
To this subject we shall return in the next chapter. But in The Salish 
speaking of these Indians it is well to bear in mind the jrbesofthe 
statement of Dr. Boas, made many years ago, that “ the for the 
ancient customs of the Salish tribes of the interior of the Gyih os, 
Province of British Columbia have almost entirely dis- 
appeared, as the natives have been christianised by the 
endeavours of Catholic missionaries. Only a very few still 
adhere to their former customs and usages; for instance, a 
group of families living in Nicola Valley and another on 
North Thompson River.” ® 

Two tribes of the Salish stock which possess a social The Bella 
system approximating in some degree to the totemic system poe 
of the northern tribes are the Bella Coolas (Bilqulas) and northerly 
the Lillooets. Of these the Bella Coolas are the most ogee 
northern tribe of the Salish stock. They live isolated from stock, 
their congeners, being wedged in between alien tribes, to elegans 

wit, the Haislas on the north, the Chilcotins on the east, ™arriage 

XVII 339 

1 Franz Boas, in Twelfth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, p. 676 (Report of the 
British Association, Bristol, 1898) ; 
id., The Mythology of the Bella Coola 
Indians, pp. 122 sqg.3 td. in Annual 
Archaeological Report, 1905 (Toronto), 
pp. 225, 240. The view of Dr. Boas 
is shared also by Mr. James Teit, who 
has given us valuable monographs on 
the Thompson and Lillooet Indians. 
See J. Teit, Zhe Lillooet Indians 
(Leyden and New York, 1906), p. 254 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
Memoir of the American Museum of 

Natural History). 

2 C, Hill-Tout, ‘Some Features of 
the Language and Culture of the 
Salish,” American Anthropologist, New 
Series, vii. (1905) p. 682: ‘‘ In the 
tribes of the interior, where group 
totems, so far as we have been able to 
discover, are wholly unknown, every 
individual of both sexes is said to 
possess his or her personal totem,” 

3 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 80 (Report of the British 
Association, Weeds, 1890, separate 
reprint). 

outside of 
the village 
community 
is for- 
bidden. 

340 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

and the Kwakiutl on the south. Considered grammatically, 
their language is more closely related to the dialects of the 
Coast Salish than to those of the tribes of the interior, A 
number of terms referring to the sea and to sea-animals are 
the same in the Bella Coola tongue and in the dialects of 
the Gulf of Georgia ; hence we may safely assume that the 
Bella Coolas have been differentiated from this group. 
They inhabit the coasts of Bentinck Arm and Dean Inlet 
and extend far up the Bella Coola River.’ The tribe is . 
divided, like the Salish Indians generally, into village com- 
munities, and each village has its own crest and its own 
tradition ; but the village community is not exogamous. 
On the contrary, whereas the southern Coast Salish tribes 
exhibit a tendency to exogamy, the Bella Coolas have 
developed a system of endogamy; marriage outside of the 
village community is forbidden. In this respect the Bella 
Coolas stand alone among Ithe Indian tribes of the North 
Pacific coast. The motive which has led them to adopt this 
unusual rule of marriage, if Dr. Boas is right, is a jealous 
desire to prevent the crest and the tradition of the village, 
both of which are highly prized, from being communicated 
by intermarriage to the people of other villages. “The 
inhabitants of each Bella Coola village,” he tells us, “ are not 
subdivided into clans, gentes, or septs; but each village 
community forms a unit, and possesses the same tradition. 
In order to keep the tradition in the tribe, the law requires 
that no person shall marry outside of his own village 
community. Thus the clan tradition is kept the exclusive 
property of the village community by means of endogamy. 
I have made very careful inquiries in regard to this point, and 
all the old men make substantially the same statement. Even 
marriages among near relatives are permitted ; and although 
marriages of people who are distantly related, or not related 
at all, are preferred, it even happens that cousins marry, or 
that an uncle marries his niece, in order to keep the clan 
tradition from being acquired by another village community. 
It seems, however, that, owing to the influence of the Coast 

1 Franz Boas, in Seventh Report of British Association, Cardiff, 1891, 
the Committee on the North-Western separate reprint). 
Tribes of Canada, p. 2 (Report of the 

Xvi TOTEMISM AMONG THE SALISH 341 

tribes, the endogamic system has begun to give way to an 
exogamic system. Powerful and wealthy chiefs marry 
outside of their own village community, in order to secure 
an additional clan legend through marriage. This new 
system agrees with the one prevalent among the Kwakiutl 
tribes.” * 

Among the Bella Coolas the crests are painted on the The family 
house-fronts and on the dancing implements. Thus the f°3or 
Tokoais family have a killer-whale (Delphinus orca) painted Coolas. 
on the house-front. Tradition runs that their ancestor, 
hunting in the mountains, found a house on which a killeré 
whale was painted. The chief who lived in the house 
presented him with his crest for himself and his descendants. 

The crest consists of the killer-whale, eagle, swan, and heron. 
Again, the Spatsatlt family have breaking waves painted on 
their house-front, and in dances they use the mask of a large 

kind of whale, of the crow, and of the black bear. Another 
family uses the mask of The Sleeper and the eagle. Another 
family paints the moon on the front of the house. Another 

uses the raven, robin, eagle, whale, the flood-tide, and the 
bird ¢ehtlala; and they paint the sun, moon, and stars on 

their house-front. 

Another paints a mountain surmounted 

by a mackerel sky on their house, and waves are included 

in their crest.” 

1 Franz Boas, The Mythology of the 
Bella Coola Indians, p. 116 (Lhe Jesup 
North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the 
american Museum of Natural History, 
November 1898); compare zb7d. pp. 
121, 122,124 59. Elsewhere (4aual 
wlrcheological Report, 1905 (Toronto), 
p- 240) Dr. Boas has stated the rule, 
or rather the exception, somewhat 
differently. He says: ‘‘The Bella 
Coola of the central part of British 
Columbia, who are neighbours of the 
northern Kwakiutl tribes, and under 
whose influence their culture has de- 
veloped, have also adopted the crest 
system. The village community is here 
also the social unit, and each village has 
its own crest. Here, however, the 
jealousy with which the property rights 
in the crest are guarded is so great that 
at least among chiefs’ families exogamy 
is strictly forbidden.” According to 

Other people wear eagle masks and eagle 

this later statement it is the chiefs who 
adhere most strictly to the rule of 
endogamy ; according to Dr. Boas’s 
earlier statement, quoted in the text, it 
is precisely the chiefs who break that 
rule most frequently. As the two 
statements seem to be irreconcilable, we 
may perhaps assume that the later state- 
ment corrects the earlier, and that both 
of them correct Dr. Boas’s still earlier 
statement that each of the Bella Coola 
tribes ‘is subdivided into gentes, 
which appear to bearranged in exogamic 
groups” (Seventh Report of the Com- 
mittee on the North-Western Tribes of 
Canada, p. 3, Report of the British 
elssoctation, Cardiff, 1891, separate 
reprint). 

2 Franz Boas, in Seventh Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 5 sg. (Report of 
the British Association, Cardiff, 1891, 

342 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

blankets because their ancestor is said to have been sent 
down by the Sun wearing an eagle dress! When a person 
dies, his masks are burnt, and his crest is carved on a 
memorial column, which also shews how many canoes, 
copper-plates, head-dresses, and slaves he had given away at 
potlatches in his life; representations of these objects are 
carved or painted on the column. In former times slaves 
were killed at the burial of a chief, and the number slain 
was recorded by as many human figures carved on his 
monument.” 

The The Lillooets are an Indian tribe of the Salish stock 

Sco’ 2 who inhabit the south-western interior of British Columbia. 

of the Their territory, about a hundred miles square, lies entirely 
Beak within the Coast Range, and is divided in two by the water- 
Columbia. 

shed which runs between Mosquito or Pole River and 
Anderson River. On the whole the country is more rugged 
and mountainous than that of any other tribe in the interior 
of British Columbia. From the watershed west and south 
the climate grows wetter, till in the neighbourhood of 
Harrison Lake the annual rainfall is very heavy (150 
centimetres). Corresponding to the geographical division of 
the country is the division of the aboriginal inhabitants. 
Those who live to the south of the watershed are the Lower 
Lillooets ; those who live to the north and east of it are the 
Upper Lillooets. But the Lillooets, though they all speak 
the same language, appear to have no one name to include 
them all ; the Lower Lillooets they call the Liluet, and the 
Upper Lillooets they call the Slalemux.’ 

separate reprint). In this passage Dr. 
Boas speaks of the crest-bearing groups 
as gentes, not as villages, In the text 
I have called them families. Dr. Boas 
adds (zé¢d. p. 6): ‘* The children 
belong to the gens of either father or 
mother, the decision being left to the 
choice of the parents,”’ 

1 Franz Boas, The Mythology of the 
Bella Coola Indians, pp. 65-67 (The 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir 
of the American Museum of Natural 
fistory). 

2 Franz Boas, in Seventh Report of 

the Committee on the North - Western 
Tribes of Canada, p. 13 (Report of the 
British Association, Cardiff, 1891, 
separate reprint). 

3 James Teit, The Lillooet Indians 
(Leyden and New York, 1906), 
Pp. 195 sg. (The Jesup North Pacific 
Expedition, Memoir of the American 
Museum of Natural History). Mr. C. 
Hill- Tout calls the whole tribe the 
Stlatlumh (‘* Report on the Ethnology . 
of the Stlatlumh of British Columbia,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Instztute, 

XXXV, (1905) pp, 126 s¢gq.). 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE SALISH 343 

The Lillooets, who are all now nominally Catholics, were The clans 
formerly divided into clans. It would seem that originally nese 
all the people of one village were supposed to be descendants 
of a comnmon ancestor, for they had a single tradition of 
their origin. Perhaps then at one time each village com- 
munity consisted of a single clan. The following is a list 
of all the clans of which Mr. James Teit, our principal 
authority on the tribe, obtained information, together with a 
list of the places at which they are supposed to have 
originated :— 

Place. Clan. 
{ Wolf. 
Pemberton Meadows . . . . Hatlolaux (beings half human, 
| half fish). 
Owl Creek on Pole River . . Owl. 
Upper Lillooet River . : . Sainux (beings half human, half 
fish). 
Lower end of Seaton Lake at 
Sqemgain é : : . xanaukst. 
Lower end of Slakal_ . F lupst. 
Sel (Reservation near town of 
Lillooet) . . ; ‘ . Frog. 
Bridge River. ‘ : . Bear (?). 
Fountain. : . . . Coyote. 

Membership of the clan descended both in the male and Descent of 
the female line. A man could not become a member of his '* “!@. 
wife’s: clan nor she of his; but children could claim member- 
ship of the clan of both their father and mother, for by 
blood they were members of both clans. There were no 
restrictions on intermarriage between the clans. This perhaps 
means that there were no barriers to marriage within as well 
as without the clan, in other words, that the clans were not 
exogamous." 

The clans used masks which represented the ancestor or Dancing 
had reference to some important incident in his life. Thus ae si 
the Sainux clan danced with a mask representing a monster, of the 
half man, half fish, and wore cedar-bark dresses. The Wolf er 
clan wore a mask made like the face and head of a wolf, and in 
their dances were clad in wolf-skins. The Owl clan wore a 
mask representing that bird, and used owl-feathers attached 

1 James Teit, Zhe Lillooet Indians, nominally Catholics is mentioned by 
p. 252. That the Lillooets are all Mr. Teit elsewhere (of. c¢¢. p, 278). 

344 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

to their clothes, and a head-dress of owl-feathers. The 
Hailolaux clan used a mask somewhat like the face of a 
grizzly bear: they painted their hair red, and wore the skins 
of grizzly, brown, and cinnamon bears when they danced. 
The people of the lower end of Seaton Lake personated 
their ancestor when they danced, and wore masks representing 
the satuen, a variety of crane. They used bone whistles at 
dances, and mimicked the cries of the pelican, crane, and 
swan. The people of Sel employed masks representing the 
frog. The people of Fountain-wore coyote skins and masks 
representing the coyote. The Bear clan of Bridge River used 
bear masks and black-bear skins. All these masks were 
the property of the clan and could be shown by any man or. 
woman of the clan when he or she was giving a potlatch, 
but not otherwise.’ They were used at the clan festivals ; 

.and the dancers also wore necklaces consisting of the skin 

The masks 
were not 
worn by 
their 
owners, but 
by persons 
hired 
for the 
purpose. 

and claws or feathers of the\animal or bird they personated. 
Feather head-dresses were worn by the clans who personified 
birds. Those clans who did not dress in animal skins, garbed 
themselves in cloaks, kilts, necklaces, and sometimes head- 
bands of cedar-bark, white, red, or red and white. All dancers 
put bird’s down on their heads.” A person who gave a potlatch 
and shewed his mask at it never wore it himself: he hired 
another man, generally an old maz, to wear it, to sing the 
clan songs, and to dance or act and relate the clan legend. 

. The man hired to wear a mask was liberally paid, because it 

was thought that masks brought ill luck, particularly an 
early death? Hence when they had been used once they 
were hung up on a tree or thrown away, and similar new 
ones were made to replace them. It was because they 
represented the ancestors and were therefore associated with 
the dead that masks were deemed unlucky. For the same 
reason they were always painted partly white, that being the 
colour of the dead or of the ghosts. Some people thought 
that the wearer of a mask would die within the year.’ 

The Lower Lillooets carved or painted the clan totem 
on various parts of the house and also on grave-posts, and 

1 James Teit, Zhe Lillooet Indians, 3 James Teit, of. czt. p. 258. 

PP. 253 59. 
2 James Teit, of, cit. p. 257. 4 James Teit, of. cit. p. 290. 

XVII TOTEMISM AMONG THE SALISH 345 

sometimes regular totem-poles were erected near the grave~ Clancrests 
box.' These Indians also set up totem-poles in front of farved on 
their houses, after the manner of the Coast tribes. But the grave.’ 
poles wete' much shorter and not so well carved or painted. oe 
The figures differed according to the clan totem. The body poles. 
was always represented as human ; and the face resembled 

the mask used by the clan—generally it was the face of an 
animal.” 

“The clan totems were to a certain extent considered The clan 
as guardian spirits of the clan. Some people claim that ia aaa 
animals represented by clan masks were the guardian spirit$ guardian 
of the ancestor of the clan, and that such animals (or ake 
‘“mysteries’) continue to be the guardians and advisers of 
his descendants. Clans were supposed to take after the 
qualities of their totem.” ® 

The Lillooets observed the custom of the levirate. ‘rhe 
After her period of mourning was over, the widow married bev" 
the brother or other nearest male kinsman of her deceased 
husband. But if she was old and her sons full-grown, she 

often did not marry, but continued to live with them.’ 

§ 7. Totemism among the Tinnehs (Dénés) 

Having now surveyed the totemic systems of the Indian The 
tribes which inhabit the coasts of Southern Alaska and yar aael 
British Columbia, we turn to the Tinnehs or Dénés, the Athapascan 
widely spread Indian nation who inhabit for the most part pation of 
the interior of Alaska and a great extent of the Canadian West 
territory which stretches from there to the Arctic Ocean on 47°" 
the north, towards Hudson’s Bay on the east, and to the 
Lillooet mountains on the south. They belong, as we have 
seen, to the great linguistic family now commonly called 
Athapascan, of which the most southerly members are the 
Apaches and Navahoes of Arizona and New Mexico. 
Among the tribes into which the Canadian Tinnehs are Principal 
divided the following are the principal :— Tinreh 

: tribes. 
1, The Loucheux, often called the Kutchins, whose country 

1 James Teit, Zhe Lillooet Tndians, 3 James Teit, of. cet. p. 283. 
pp. 272, 300. 4 James Teit, of. cz¢. pp. 255 sg. 
2 James Teit, of. cit. p. 217. 5 See above, pp. 241 sg., 252. 

The 
Loucheux 
or Kutchin, 

The Moun- 
taineers. 

The 
Hares. 

The : 
Dog-ribs. 

The 
Slaves. 

The 
Yellow 
Knives or 
Copper 
Indians. 

The 
Cariboo- 
eaters. 

The 
Chippe- 
wayans. 

The 
Nahanais. 

‘The 
Beavers. 

346 _ TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

extends north to south from the fishing-grounds of the 
Eskimo to 67° of North Latitude, while it stretches from 
the Anderson River on the east through the lower valley 
of the Mackenzie River and the vast forests of Alaska almost 
to the Pacific on the west. They number about 5500 souls. 

2. The Mountaineers or Eiagotznne, a small tribe who 
roam the valleys of the Rocky Mountains. 

3. The Hares, a timid tribe, who hunt along the 
Anderson and Macfarlane Rivers from the northern shores 
of the Great Bear Lake. 

4. The Dog-ribs, who hunt between the Great Slave 
Lake and Great Bear Lake, east of the Mackenzie River 
as far as the Coppermine River. 

5. The Slaves, whose country stretches from the 
western shores of Great Slave Lake along the banks of the 
Mackenzie River as far as the outlet of Great Bear Lake. 

6. The Yellow Knives ot Copper Indians, whose original 
home appears to have been the valley of the Coppermine’ 
River. Alone of all the Tinnehs they formerly boasted 
of the possession of copper tools wrought out of pieces of 
that metal which they found scattered on the slopes of a 
particular mountain. They now roam chiefly over the barren 
steppes to the north-east of Great Slave Lake. 

7. The Cariboo-eaters, an important tribe, whose 
territory comprises the waste lands east of Lakes Cariboo, 
Wollaston, and Athabaska. 

8. The Chippewayans. They are divided into (a) the 
Athabaskans, who hunt around Lake Athabaska as well as 
along the Slave River, and (4) the Chippewayans proper, 
who dwell on the shores of Lakes Isle-a-la-Crosse, Cold and 
Heart. They number about 4000 souls. 

g. The Nahanais, who, like the Loucheux, are distri- 
buted on both sides of the Rocky Mountains, though their 
principal seat is west of that range. They number about 
a thousand, and inhabit the valley of the Stickine River and 
its tributaries in northern British Columbia. 

10. The Beavers, who inhabit the vast plains along 
the Peace River immediately to thé east of the Rocky 
Mountains, 

11. The Sekanais, whose principal trading-posts are 

xvi. TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 347 

Forts McLeod and Grahame. Their original home was to The 
the east of the Rocky Mountains; but they, together with Sekanais, 
the following tribes, now belong to the western division of 

the Tinrehs. 

12. The Babines, numbering about 530 souls, who dwell the 
immediately to the west of the Sekanais on Babine Lake Babines. 
and along the Bulkley valley down to French and Morice 
Lakes. 

13. The Carriers, who live to the south of the Babines. ‘rhe 
Their villages lie between Tremblay Lake in the north and C™T er. 
Alexandria. In 1889 they numbered 1600 souls, but in 
1905 these numbers were reduced to 970. 

14. The Chilcotins, who live immediately south of the The _ 
Carriers on both sides of the Chilcotin River. They are “hilcotns. 
the most southern members of all the Canadian Tinnehs. 

They number about 450 souls. 

15. The Tsetsauts on Portland Inlet, an arm of the The 
sea which forms the northern boundary of British Columbia Sts" 
on the Pacific. 

These tribes fall into two groups, an eastern and a The 
western. The Western Tinnehs or Dénés are the Sekanais, ae 
Babines, Carriers, Chilcotins, and Tsetsauts! While the and the 
Eastern Tinnehs are inveterate nomads, constantly moving ca 
after the game on which they chiefly subsist, the Western 
Tinnehs are semi-sedentary, living in permanent villages 
part of the year but quitting them periodically to hunt the 
fur-bearing animals. The staple food of these Western 
Tinnehs is the salmon, which they catch in such quantities 
that once dried it takes the place of daily bread and 
enables them to stay longer at home in the village? 

Our information as to the social condition of most of the 
Tinneh tribes is very meagre; but we are informed that 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘*The 

iv. (1892-93) pp. 11-17; E. Petitot, 
Canadian Dénés,” Annual Archeo- 

Monographie des Dene Dindjjé (Paris, 
For a list of the 

logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), pp. 
189 sg. Compare 7d, ‘The Western 
Dénés, their Manners and Customs,” 
Proceedings of the Canadian Institute, 
Toronto, Third Series, vol. vii. Fasci- 
culus 1 (Toronto, 1889) pp. 109-144 ; 
id, ‘*Notes, Archzological, Industrial 
and Sociological, onthe Western Dénés,” 
Transactions of the Canadian Institute, 

1876), pp. 26-28. 
Tinneh tribes of Alaska, see W. H. 
Dall, ‘‘ Tribes of the Extreme North- 
west,” in Contributions to North 
American Ethnology, i. (Washington, 
1877) pp. 24-36. 

2 Father A. G. Morice, ‘ The 
Canadian Dénés,” in Annual Archeo- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 200. 

348 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

The most of the Western Tinnehs are divided into totemic and 
ieee exogamous clans with descent in the female line. The 

aredivided rule of exogamy among the clans is or was strictly observed ; 
and ce we are informed that “no youth would ever dream of seeking 

gamous_ the hand of a girl who was a perfect stranger to him if told 
dans with that she belonged to the same clan as himself”! Our 
ecenal principal authority on the subject is the Catholic missionary 
; Father A. G. Morice, who has laboured among the Carrier 
Indians for many years and has given us some valuable 
accounts of their old customs and beliefs. He tells us that 

the Western Tinnehs (Dénés) are divided into clans or 

gentes. “These to the number of five, form a kind of very 

strict relationship, to which, to the present time, they have 

held very tenaciously. Each of these clans has one or 

several particular heraldic emblems or totems, the toad, 

grouse, crow, beaver, salmon, etc.; the image of which 
formerly received special consideration. This organisation 
outsteps the village limits, and members of the same clan 

are to be found in localities very wide apart. But however 

remote their respective places, they still claim mutual 
kinship. Now, from time immemorial, a fundamental law in 

their social constitution has been for individuals of the same 

clan never to intermarry. So it is that endogamy is looked 

upon with horror among them. Indeed, I think I am 
warranted in affirming that marriage with a consanguine, 

unless a very close one, was preferred to matrimonial union 

with a co-clansman. As it is, agnation and consanguinity 

in the direct or collateral line on the paternal side were 
considered powerful barriers to sexual relations, males and 
females descended from the same stock being always 

Marriage regarded as brothers and sisters. . .. Such was not the 
of cousins. case, however, with consanguinity in collateral lines by the 
mother’s side, cousins of that class, even as near as the first 

degree, being by a time-honored custom, almost bound to 
Mother-kin intermarry. And here it is as well to state at once that, in 
ear common with nearly all the primitive people, mother-right is 
titles and the supreme law regulating succession among nearly all the 
Property: Western Dénés, and I may add that here? it admits of no 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘The Jogical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 201. 
Canadian Dénés,” cfunual Archeo- 2 At Stuart’s Lake. 

xv TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 

349 

exception whatever. On the other hand, another ordinance 
of their social code forbids titles as well as landed property 
to pass by heredity into a different clan. Therefore children 
of a notable among them belonging to their mother’s clan, 
could never inherit from their father. But if the latter had 
nephews by a sister, one of them was de jure his successor, 
this nephew belonging through his mother to his uncle’s 
clan. Now, by way of compensation, and to permit the 
notable’s children who could not otherwise inherit from him, 
to enjoy at least, as much as was lawful of their father’ 
succession, one of his daughters would be united in marriage 
with her inheriting maternal first cousin. As for affinity 
consequent upon either [awful or unlawful sexual relations, it 
was simply ignored. Nay, I should say that it was rather 
considered a powerful incentive to marriage, except when 
the regulations of the clan organization interfered so as to 
make the two relatives fellow clansmen. Thus it was, that 
in the case of a deceased brother’s wife, the Dénés treated her 
conformably with the directions of the Jewish law, and the 
nephew considered himself in duty bound to espouse her.” 
The statement just quoted as to the marriage of first Cousin- 

cousins is somewhat ambiguous. Elsewhere Father Morice ™'™ages. 
writes that “the kinship resulting from fellow-clanship was 
reputed to be so strict that it precluded the possibility of 
co-clansmen intermarrying, while, on the cther hand, marriage 
between even first cousins, if on the mother’s side, was quite 
common, and, in some cases, almost obligatory”; and 
again: “ First cousins married each other without any scruple 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘‘ The 
Western Dénés, their Manners and 
Customs,” Proceedings of th: Canadian 
Institute, Toronto, Third Series, vol. 
vii. Fasciculus 1 (Toronto, 1889), pp. 
118-120, Compare 7a@., <%« pays de 
fours noir, chez les sauvages de la 
Colombie Britannigque (Paris and Lyons, 
1897), pp. 67 sg. In the latter 
passage it is said that it was the 
brother, not the nephew, of the 
deceased husband who was bound to 
marry the widow ; and this is probably 
the correct statement. Elsewhere also 
Father Morice observes that ‘‘ by an 
immemorial custom, the widow of a 

Carrier was also inevitably transferred 
as wife to the deceased’s surviving 
brother” (Father A. G. Morice, ** Are 
the Carrier Sociology and Mythology 
indigenous or exotic ?” Proceedings and 
Transactions of the Royal Soctety of 
Canada for the year 1892, x. (Ottawa, 
1893), Transactions, Section ii. *p. 
112. 

2 Father A. G. Morice, ‘* Are the 
Carrier Sociology and Mythology 
indigenous or exotic?” Proceedings 
and Transactions of the Royal Soctety of 
Canada for the year 1892, x. (Ottawa, 
1893), Transactions, Section ii. p. 
112. 

Ambiguity 
of the 
expressions 
‘* cousins 
on the 
father’s 
side” and 
‘* cousins 
on the 
mother’s 
side.”’ 

350 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

if related only through the father’s side.”’ The last state- 
ment is apparently, though perhaps not really, contradictory 
of the other two. 

As I have already pointed out,’ the expressions “ cousins 
on the father’s side” and “cousins on the mother’s side” 
are ambiguous, and each of them may cover relationships 
which to the savage mind are entirely different, though the 
civilised mind confuses them. For the expression “ cousins 
on the father’s side” includes not only cousins who are the 
children of two brothers ; it may include also cousins who 
are the children of a brother and a sister respectively, since 
to the children of the brother the children of the sister are 
“cousins on the father’s side.” Similarly the expression 
“cousins on the mother’s side” includes not only cousins 
who are the children of two sisters; it may include also 
cousins who are the children of-a sister and a brother re- 
spectively, since to the childreh of the sister the children of 
the brother are “cousins on the mother’s side.” If we 
would keep our ideas clear, therefore, the expressions 
“cousins on the father’s side” and “ cousins on the mother’s 
side” should be strictly avoided. In'the passages just 
quoted which seem to contradict each other Father Morice 
was probably thinking of cousins who are the children of a 
brother and a sister respectively ; but whereas in the one 
passage (“first cousins, if on the mother’s side”) he was 
thinking of this relationship from the side of the sister’s 
child, in the other passage (“if related only through the 
father’s side”) he was thinking of this relationship from the 
side of the brother’s child. At least this interpretation 
reconciles the two seemingly contradictory statements with 
each other and with the common usage of savage tribes. 
We may conjecture, therefore, that among the Tinnehs, 
as among many other peoples, first cousins are allowed or 
even expected to marry each other when they are the 
children of a brother and a sister respectively, but that they 
are forbidden to marry each other when they are children 
of two brothers or of two sisters respectively. . 

Among the Carriers the number of totemic clans was 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘*The Jogical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 201. 
Canadian Dénés,” Annual Archeo- 2 Vol. ii. p. 383 note? 

xvi) ZOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 

35! 
four, not five as among other of the Western Tinnehs. Clans and 
Their names and totems were as follows :—" coir 

of the 
Carriers. 

TOTEMIC CLANS OF THE CARRIERS 

Clans. Totems. 
Ltsemes-yu The Grouse 
Tsa-yu The Beaver 
Yesil-yu The Toad 
Temten-yu The Grizzly Bear 

oe — as 

Of these native names of the clans 7sa-yu means “ beaver 
medicine”; the others are untranslatable and in the 
opinion of Father .Morice “are probably imported from 
among the heterogeneous tribes from which the whole 
system is undoubtedly derived.” The Grouse clan is by far 
the most powerful among the Carriers ; and the Toad and 
Grizzly Bear clans are thought to have a sort of affinity 
which entitles the members of each to consideration and 
protection at the hands of the other? “Incase of extended Social 
travelling—which, however, was of rare occurrence—the foations ol. 
totem served also as an emblem guaranteeing to the bearer a totemic 
a brotherly reception and constant protection by any a 
member of the same clan he might fall in with.”* These 
‘bonds of kinship between members of the same clan reached 
even beyond the limits of the tribe; for we are told that 
“a Babine from the far north-west, if chance brought him in 
contact with a clansfellow from, say Alexandria, 500 miles 
to the south, was sure of protection, hospitality and every 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘* Notes, 
Archeological, Industrial and Socio- 
logical, on the Western Dénés,” Zrans- 
actions of the Canadian Institute, iv. 
(1892-93) p. 203. In writing the 
native names of the clans Father Morice 
has turned some of the letters upside 
down, a practice which has also com- 
mended itself to many other American 
ethnologists for the sake, no doubt, of 
conveying the exact shade of pro- 
nunciation more exactly. As the 
advantages of this peculiar orthography 
appear to me scarcely to outweigh its 

inconveniences, I have taken the 
liberty here and elsewhere of restoring 
the letters to the position which 
they usually occupy in books printed 
in Europe. 

2 Father A. G. Morice, of. cé¢. p. 
204. 

3 Father A. G. Morice, ‘* Are the 
Carrier Sociology and Mythology 
indigenous or exotic?” Proceedings and 
Transactions of the Royal Society of 
Canada for the year 1592, x. (Ottawa, 
1893), p. 112. 

Respect 

shewn for 
the totems 
and crests. 

352 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

mark of attachment, though Carrier and Babine might not 
before as much as have known of each other.” ?! 

With regard to the nature and meaning of the clan 
totems among the Western Tinnehs we have little informa- 
tion. Father Morice tells us that they “were sets of animals 
or other beings, which were supposed to have had in pristine 
times something to do with the establishment of those 
artificial divisions. They were regarded with a peculiar 
respect almost amounting to veneration, and, on festival 
occasions, they personified the whole clan and its members, 
whose symbol or crest they became.”? At such festivals an 
effigy of the totem of the clan who acted as hosts was carved 

’ and exposed at the door of the house ; and every person who 

did not belong to the clan was expected at entering to make 
a present to the totem and hence to the givers of the feast ; 
but there was a tacit understanding that he would receive in 
return at some future time a present of at least equal value. 
Even to name publicly the totem of another clan was an act 
which had to be atoned for with the gift of a blanket, a 
piece of dressed skin, or any article of wearing apparel ; else 
it would be thought that the crest was slighted and the 
whole cian thereby dishonoured. Specimens of such carved 
images of their clan totems no longer exist among these 
Indians? who are now “considerate, virtuous, and, law- 

‘abiding Christians.” * 

Totemic 
images 
placed 

on the 
mortuary 
column or 
on the 
grave, 

Besides the carved effigies of their clan totems which the 
Carriers displayed at festivals for the purpose of attracting 
contributions, it was also customary to place images of the 
same sort on the mortuary column or on the grave. Only 
two specimens of such sepulchral monuments survived in the 
year 1893; both of them represented a beaver carved in the 
round and perched, one on the top of a pole, the other 6n 
the top of a grave. In both cases the deceased was a 
member of the Beaver clan. The rest of these memorials of 

1 Father A. G. Morice, Annual 
Archeological Report, 1905 (Toronto), 
p- 201. 

2 Father A. G. Morice, ‘The 
Canadian Dénés,” Annual Archeo- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 203. 

3 Father A. G. Morice, ‘Notes, 

Archeological, Industrial and Socio- | 
logical, on the Western Dénés,” 7rams- 
actions of the Canadian Institute, iv. 
(1892-93) pp. 119, 204. 

4 Father A. G. Morice, ‘ The 
Canadian Dénés,” Annual Archeo- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), p. 197. 

xv TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 353 

the past have long disappeared, probably destroyed by the 
zeal of the missionaries or their converts. But carved 
monuments seem never to have been common among the 
Carriers ; they are not an artistic people like the Haidas." 

The practice of tattooing used to be very prevalent Totemic 
_ among the Western Tinnehs ; and the figures tattooed on (ater 
the breast “had generally a totemic significance”; the 
marks tattooed on the forearms “referred as a rule to a 
personal totemic animal revealed in dream, and the bearing 
of whose symbol was supposed to create a_ reciprocal 
sympathy and asort of kinship between the totem and the 
‘tattooed individual.” The personal as distinct from the 
clan totems of the Tinnehs will be considered in the next 
chapter. 

The headmen or representatives of the totemic clans Headmen 
were called ¢eneza, “the men,” by the Carriers and Babines, faa 
but ¢éné-thie, “great men,” by the Nahanais. They formed clans. 
a privileged class of hereditary nobles, and the hunting 
grounds were parcelled out as their lawful patrimony, over 
which no one else had any right. They enjoyed great 
consideration in the tribe, were respectfully listened to and 
obeyed so far as obedience consisted with a state of society 
little above savagery, and on ceremonial occasions they 
wore a special costume and occupied seats of honour as 
. remote as possible from the door. The whole institution, we 
are informed, had more points of resemblance to the landed 
nobility of the Old World than to the class of tribal 
chiefs; indeed chiefs in the strict sense did not exist 
among the Tinnehs before the adyent of the whites. Even 
the children of such noblemen enjoyed some consideration 
and were dubbed oezkheza, “ true children.” Yet belonging 
as they did to their mother’s clan they could not succeed 
to the rank and property of their father. As the lands 
belonged to the clan they passed at the death of the 
headman (¢exeza) not to his own son but to the son of his 
sister or, failing that, to the dead man’s brother; and if 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘‘ Notes, (1892-93) pp. 199-201. 
Archeological, Industrial and Socio- 
logical, on the Western Dénés,” Z7ans- 2 Father A. G. Morice, of. cif. p. 
actions of the Canadian Institute, iv, 182. 

VOL. III . 2A 

354 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

there were neither brothers nor sisters’ sons, the lands and 
title might pass to a sister or to a sister’s daughter. Hence 
female chiefs were occasionally found among the Western 
Tinnehs or Dénés.' 

Marriage Among the Carriers a young man used to serve the 

customs. father of his betrothed wife for one or two years. During 
this time he contributed the products of the chase and his 
other earnings to his future father-in-law and the other rela- 
tions of his betrothed, receiving her hand at the end of his 
period of service.2 Polygamy was common; the higher a 
man’s rank, the more numerous were his wives; we hear of a 

Practice of chief who had as many as six at one time Among the 

ae Northern Tinnehs men made no scruple of having two or 

sistersto three sisters for wives at one time.* We have seen that this 

ee practice of marrying several sisters at the same ‘time or 
successively was very common among the North American 
Indians.’ 

Totemic The social organisation of the community in totemic 

nar clans is not found among all the Western Tinnehs; for 

among the example, it is entirely lacking among the Sekanais, being 

Sekanals. replaced, we are told, by a sort of anarchy. That tribe 
has neither clans nor hereditary nobility with their hunting 
domains; the fathers of families, are the natural chiefs of 
the group, but their authority is more nominal than real.° 

os On the other hand the large tribe of the Loucheux 

among the Of Kutchins, as they are variously named, is or rather 

Loucheux used to be divided into three exogamous clans or castes, 
or Kut- 

chins. as they are called by the writers who have recorded them. 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘*The vii. Fasciculus 1 (Toronto, 1889), p. 
Western Dénés, their Manners and 123; 7a@., Aw Pays de [ours noir, p. 
Customs,” Proceedings of the Canadian 122; id. ‘“‘The Canadian Dénés,” 
Institute, Toronto, Third Series, vol. Annual Report of the Archaeological 
vii. Fasciculus 1 (Toronto, 1889), p. /wstztute, 1905 (Toronto), p. 219. 
125; td. ‘The Canadian Dénés,” 4 S. Hearne, Journey from Prince of 
Annual Archaeological Report, 1905 Wales’s Fort in Hudson’s Bay to the 
(Toronto), p, 202. Northern Ocean(London, 1795), p. 139- 

2 Father A. G. Morice, 4a Pays de 5 See above, pp. 65, 85, 108, 127, 
Pours noir, chez les sauvages de la 136, 148, 154, 246. 

Colombie Britannique, p. 121. 6 A, G. Morice, 4u Pays de [ours 

3 Father A. G. Morice, ‘“‘The wor, chez les sauvages de la Colombie 
Western Dénés,” Proceedings of the Britannigque (Paris and Lyons, 1897); 
Canadian Institute, Third Series, vol. pp. 117 5g. 

xvi) TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 

355 

According to Mr. William L. Hardisty, of the Hudson 
Bay Company, the names of the three clans were Chztsah, 
Tain-gees-ah-tsah, and Nat-singh ; according to Mr. Strachan 
Jones, formerly commander at Fort Yukon, the names 
were TZchit-che-ah, Tenge-rat-sey, and Nat-sah-¢;' according 
to Mr. W. W. Kirby the names were Chzt-sa, Tanges-at-sa, and 
Nate-sa.2_ Allowing for local differences of pronunciation and 
for variations of spelling the three lists seem to be identical. 
Mr. Hardisty’s account of the clans or castes runs as follows ; 
“With reference to the story about caste it is difficult i 
arrive at a correct solution of the matter. The fact, 

believe, is that they do not know themselves, for they give 
various accounts of the origin of the three great divisions 
of mankind. Some say it was so from the beginning ; 
others that it originated when all fowls, animals, and fish 
were people—the fish were Chztsah, the birds Tain-gees-ah- 
tsah, and the animals Nat-singh; some that it refers to 
the country occupied by the three great nations who are 
supposed to have composed the whole family of man; 
while the other, and, I think, most correct opinion, is that 
it refers to ‘color, for the words are applicable. Chétsah 
refers to anything of a pale color—fair people; Naz-szngh, 
from ah-zingh, black, dark—that is, dark people; Zazn-gees- 
ah-tsah, neither fair nor dark, between the two, from 
tain-gees, the half, middle, and ah-tsah, brightish, from ¢sa, 
the sun, bright, glittering, shining, etc. Another thing, the 
country of the Na-tsik-koo-chin is called Nah-tsingh to 
this day, and it is the identical country which the Nat- 
singh occupied. The Na-tsik-koo-chin inhabit the high 
ridge of land between the Youcon and the Arctic sea, 
They live entirely on the flesh of the reindeer, and are 
very dark-skinned compared with the Chit-sangh, who 
live a good deal on fish. All the elderly men fish the 
salmon and salmon trout during the summer, while the 

{ «Notes on the Tinneh or Chepe- 
wyan Indians of British and Russian 
America,” communicated by George 
Gibbs, Annual Report of the Board 
of Regents of the Smithsonian Institu- 
tion for 1866 (Washington, 1867), pp. 
315, 326; W. H. Dall, Alaska and its 
Resources, pp. 196 sg. 3 za. * Tribes 

of the Extreme North-west,” in Cosért- 
buttons to North Anerican Ethnology, 
i, (Washington, 1877) p. 30. 

2 W. W. Kirby, ‘A Journey to the 
Youcon, Russian America,” Annual 
Report of the Board of Regents of 
the Smithsonian Institution for 1864 
(Washington, 1865), p. 418. 

Hardisty’s 
account of 
the three 
castes or 
clans of the 
Loucheux. 

Rule of 
exogamy. 

Maternal 
descent of 
the caste 
or clan. 

In war the 
obligations 
of the clan 
overrode 
that of 
blood. 

356 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

young men hunt the moose, and have regular white-fish 
fisheries every autumn besides. Some of the Chit-sangh 
are very fair, indeed, in some instances approaching to 
white. The Tain-gees-ah-tsa live on salmon trout and 
moose meat, and, taken as a whole, are neither so fair 
as the Chit-sangh nor so dark as the Nah-tsingh. They 
are half-and-half between the two. A Chit-sangh cannot, 
by their rules, marry a Chit-sangh, although the rule is 
set at naught occasionally ; but when it does take place 
the persons are ridiculed and laughed at. The man is 
said to have married his sister, even though she may be 
from another tribe and there be not the slightest connec- 
tion by blood between them. The same way with the other 
two divisions. The children are of the same color as 
their mother. They receive caste from their mother; if 
a male Chit-sangh marry a Nah-tsingh woman the children 
are Nah-tsingh, and if a male Nah-tsingh marry a Chit- 
sangh woman the children are Chit-sangh, so that the 
divisions are always changing. As the fathers die out, 
the country inhabited by the Chit-sangh becomes occupied 
by the Nah-tsingh, and so on vace versa. They are 
continually changing countries, as it were. Latterly, how- 
ever, these rules are not so strictly observed or enforced as. 
formerly, so that there is getting! to be a complete amal- 
gamation of the three great divisions, such a mixture 
that the difference of color is scarcely perceptible, and,. 
no doubt, will soon disappear altogether, except what is. 
produced by natural causes. The people who live on the 
flesh of the reindeer are always darker than those who. 
live on fish, or on part fish and part flesh, One good 
thing proceeded from the above arrangement—it prevented 
war between two tribes who were naturally hostile. The 
ties or obligations of color or caste were stronger than 
those of blood or nationality. In war it was not tribe- 
against tribe, but division against division, and as the 
children were never of the same caste as the father, the 
children would, of course, be against the father and the 
father against the children, part of one tribe against part 
of another, and part against itself, so that, as may be 
supposed, there would have been a pretty general con-- 

xvii) TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 357 

fusion. This, however, was not likely to occur very often, 
as the worst of parents would have naturally preferred 
peace to war with his own children.” ? 

From! the foregoing account it would seem that the three 

exogamous clans of the Loucheux or Kutchins formerly 
occupied separate districts, and that they differed in com- 
plexion as well as in their modes of life. It is not easy to 
understand how exogamous and intermarrying clans can in 
the long run differ in any marked degree physically from 
each other, since constant and compulsory intermarriag¢ 
might be expected to produce a uniform type among all the 
clans which thus mix their blood. We may surmise, there- 
fore, that the statement as to a physical distinction between 
the clans, and perhaps also as to separate territories occupied 
by them, is erroneous. This surmise is partially confirmed Petitor's 
by the account which the experienced French missionary, nag 
Father E. Petitot, gives of the social organisation of the castes or 
Loucheux. He says: “What distinguishes the Dindji¢ eee 
{Loucheux] from their neighbours is the division of their 
nation into three camps or fractions, independent of the 
local division in tribes. These camps take the names of 
‘Men of the Right’ (Etchian-Kpét); ‘Men of the Left’ 
(Nattsein-Kpét); and ‘Men of the Middle’ (Zpendyjz- 
adhoettset-Kpét). The young people of one camp are bound 
to choose a wife in the opposite camp. But the men of the 
middle have the choice between the one and the other camp. 
The children belong to the camp of their mother. The 
Etchian are reputed white, the Mattsezn black, and the 
Tpendjidhoettset brown, indications of the mixture of two 
races and of half-breeds.” ? 

The names of what Father Petitot calls the three camps The _ 
or fractions of the Loucheux are clearly only divergent forms “Pvraten 
of the names given by our other authorities Messrs. Hardisty, three clans 

° : in different 
Jones, and Kirby; and the separation of these exogamous camps 

1 « Notes on the Tinneh or Chepe- 
wyan Indians of British and Russian 
America,” contributed by George 
Gibbs, in Annual Report of the Board 
of Regents of the Smithsonian Institu- 
tion for 1866(Washington, 1867), p. 315. 
Mr. Hardisty’s account is reproduced 
with some small verbal changes and 

omissions in W. H. Dall’s Alaska and 
zts Resources, pp. 196 sg. 

2 Emile Petitot, 7radztions indiennes 
du Canada Nord-Ouest (Paris, 1886), 
pp- 14 sg. In spelling Indian names 
M. Petitot uses the Greek p to express 
a sound like the guttural 7 in Arabic. 

358 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

resembles divisions of the tribe in different camps, but not in different 
neeeaieg districts, reminds us of the similar separation of the 
custom. €xOgamous classes in the camps of the Central Australian 
aborigines.’ It is probable that, when the rule of exogamy 
was first introduced, the intermarrying classes into which 
the community dissolved itself were locally segregated from 
each other in order to avoid confusion and mistakes. 
Indeed withdut some such segregation it ‘is difficult to 
imagine how the new rule could have been either under- 
stood or obeyed. 2 
Chiefs The Loucheux generally live in large parties, each band 
eee. ~, headed by a chief and one or more medicine-men. Though 
the medicine-men exercise no secular power as chiefs, they 
acquire through their magical practices an authority to 
Polygamy which even the chiefs themselves are subject. All the 
oe chiefs, medicine-men, and those who possess rank acquired 
by property have two, thrde, or more wives, so that but few 
of the young men can marry, unless they content themselves 
with an old cast-off widow, who, from ill health and the 
effects of bad treatment, is no longer able to do heavy work. 
Hence those who have wives are invariably jealous and treat 
their women most brutally. This is one of the principal 
causes of the great falling off in numbers of the Loucheux 
Female tribe. Other causes of the decrease of the population are 
infanticide. female infanticide, premature births, and very frequent 
miscarriages from excessive fatigue. The only reason 
alleged by the women for killing their infant daughters is 
Women a desire to spare them the miseries of life. The women 
eos than are fewer than the men, which coupled with the practice of 
polygamy among the chiefs and. nobles must seriously 
diminish the number of married men. It is the mother 
who disposes of her daughters in marriage; fathers and 
Hard work brothers have no voice in the matter. Yet the women, we 
teeter are told, are literally beasts of burden to their lords and 
bythemen. masters, All the heavy work is done by them. When an 
animal is killed, they carry the meat and skin on their backs 
to the camp, after which they dress the skin, cut up the meat 
and dry it. They hew the wood and draw the water. All 
the household duties devolve on them: they tend the fires, 
1 See above, me i, p. 248. 

xvi) TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 359 

ook the food, make and mend their husband’s and children’s 
clothes, lace the snow shoes, and so forth. In migrating 
from place to place, if it be winter, the woman hauls the 
whole of' the baggage, provisions, lodge poles, cooking 
utensils, and perhaps a couple of children on the top of all, 
while the husband strolls ahead with his gun, horn, shot- 
pouch, and empty game bag. If it be summer, the man 
paddles a light canoe, while the woman propels with strain- 
ing nerves a large clumsy canoe laden with the baggage.’ 
Yet these savages have mother-kin, that is, the syste 
which traces descent through women. So little does 
mother-kin or mother-right, as it is often called, carry with 
it the social superiority of women to men. 

Another Indian tribe of the Tinneh stock who were The 

divided into exogamous clans with descent in the female ane 

line were the Tsetsauts, who lived on Portland Inlet in the tbe es. 
ortlan 

observers seem to agree in describing Inlet. 
the Tinnehs as unusually gentle, un- 
warlike, and even timid to a ridiculous 

1 «* Notes on the Tinneh or Chepe- 
wyan Indians of British and Russian 
America,” Annual Report of the Board 

of Regents of the Smithsonian Insti- 
tution for 1866 (Washington, 1867), 
p- 312. Compare W. W. Kirby, 
“© A Journey to the Youcon, Russian 
America,” Annual Report of the Board 
of Regents of the Smithsonian Institu- 
tion for 186g (Washington, 1865), 
p. 418: ‘© The women are much fewer 
in number and live a much shorter time 
than the men. The latter arises from 
their early marriages, harsh treatment 
they receive, and laborious work they 
have daily to perform, while the former 
is caused, I fear, by the cruel acts of 
infanticide which to female children 
have been so sadly prevalent among 
them.” Yet with regard to these 
same Loucheux Indians Father Petitot 
tells us that ‘* they are gentle, humane, 
hospitable, intelligent, frank, and 
good-humoured. They are kind to 
their women, whose advice they often 
take to the extent of making them 
their chiefs” (E. Petitot, Zraddtions 
tndiennes du Canada Nord-Ouest, 
p- 14). So difficult is it to extract a 
consistent account of the moral char- 
acter of savages from the reports of 
different writers. However, most 

degree, though some of the tribes, 
such as the Chepewyans, Beavers, and 
Yellow Knives, are less so than others. 
They never made war on the whites 
and have been described as ‘‘ the most 
peaceable tribe of Indians known in 
North America.” See Samuel Hearne, 
Journey from Prince of Wales’s Fort 
in Hudson’s Bay to the Northern Ocean 
(London, 1795), p. 310; Alexander 
Mackenzie, Voyages from Montreal 
through the Continent of North America 
(London, £801), pp. cxix,, cxxiv. 5 
‘‘Notes on the Tinneh or Chepewyan 
Indians of British and Russian 
America,” Annual Report of the 
Bureau of Regents of the Smithsonian 
Institution for 1866(Washington, 1867), 
Pp. 397, 308, 309 sg. ; E. Petitot, AZono- 
graphie des Déne-Dinadji¢ (Paris, 1876), 
PP. 30, 323 2d., Traditions indiennes 
du Canada Nord-Ouest, p. 143 A. 
G. Morice, ‘‘ Notes, Archeological, 
Industrial and Sociological, on the 
Western Dénés,” Transactions of the 
Canadian Institute, iv. (1892-93) pp. 
18 sg., 20; 7. ‘The Canadian 
Dénés,” Annual Archeological Report, 
1905 (Toronto,), pp. 193 59. 

Their 
migratory 
life. 

360 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP, 

extreme north of British Columbia, where it borders on 
Alaska. When Dr. Boas visited the tribe in 1894, it was 
reduced in numbers to about twelve members, of whom 
only two could speak their language correctly. By this 
time the tribe may perhaps be extinct. Some seventy or 
eighty years ago the Tsetsauts numbered about five hundred 
souls, but were for the most part exterminated by their 
enemies the Tlingits. They have no fixed villages, but 
make a camp wherever they intend to hunt. Their 
temporary houses are made of bark with a slanting roof, 
which is propped against the trunk of a great tree. When 
two families desire to inhabit one house, two of these bark 

. structures are joined together, so that the two roofs slope 

The 
Tsetsauts 
divided 
into two 
exogamous 
clans with 
descent in 
the female 
line. 

up and meet each other in the middle, one of them over- 
lapping the other a little to keep out the rain and snow. 
For the same reason also they set up the house under the 
shelter of the butt of a tall tree in the forest. When the 
tribe moves to another place, these houses are taken to 
pieces and the props tied together and fastened to a tree. 
On their return to the same spot, the bundles are untied, 
the props taken out, and the house set up again. In 
winter, when the doors of the houses are blocked with the 
deep snow, the exit is through the roof. It is possible that 
this winter house may be the primitive type out of which 
the subterranean lodge of the interior of British Columbia 
has developed. The staple food of the Tsetsauts is 
porcupine, marmot, mountain-goat, and bear. The skins of 
these animals furnish them with clothing. In summer they 
go down the rivers of Portland Inlet to catch salmon, which 
they dry for winter use. They made fire by means of a 
fire-drill worked with a bow. Their arrows were headed 
with flints." The tribe was divided into two exogamous 
clans, the Eagle and the Wolf, with descent in the female 
line. Hence if an Eagle man married a Wolf woman, the 
children were Wolves; if a Wolf man married an Eagle 
woman, the children were Eagles. Each clan had its own 
personal names for its members. Children inherited not 

1 Franz Boas, in Tenth Report of 41 sg. (Report of the British Associa- 
the Committee on the North-Western tion, Ipswich, 1895, separate reprint). 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 34; 39, 40 59., 

xvii. = TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 361 

from their father but from their mother’s brother. The parents 
parents of a child changed their names and were called seule 
after their child “Father of So-and-So,” “Mother of So- children.” 
and-Sd.”__ This widespread custom? in so far as it is 
observed by the Tsetsauts, is explained by Dr. Boas as 
follows: “ There are a limited number of names only in the 
tribe, probably names belonging. to the nobility. When a 
child reaches a certain age, his father, uncle, mother, or 
aunt may give it his or her name; and since by this act the 
former owner has relinquished his place, he also loses the 
name belonging to the place, and consequently adopts that 
of the father, mother, or aunt of the owner of the place, 
thus indicating that he owned the place formerly.”? On 
this explanation it is to be remarked that if a father gives 
his own name to his son, that name cannot be a clan name, 
since father and son always belong to separate clans, and 
each clan has names appropriated to its members. The 
custom of naming parents after their children is practised 
by other tribes of the Tinneh stock. 

The Tsetsauts observe the custom of the levirate : when The 
a man dies leaving a widow, his brother marries her. How- vite. 
ever, he may not marry her before the lapse of a certain 
time, for they think that the ghost of the dead husband 
haunts his widow and would do a mischief to the man who 
should usurp his rights too soon. During the period of her 
mourning the widow is supported by her late husband’s 
brother, her future spouse.* 

The Tsetsauts further observe the custom which obliges Avoidance 
a man and his mother-in-law to avoid each other. It is said ne he 
that this custom is found among ali the northern tribes of wife's 
the Tinneh stock. Among the Tsetsauts persons who stand ™*"* 
in this relationship are ashamed to talk to or even to see 
each other. The mother-in-law leaves the house before her 
son-in-law enters it, or, if that cannot be done, she hides her 

1 For more examples of it in other 3 E. Petitot, Afonographie des Déne- 
parts of the world see 7%e Golden Dinajré (Paris, 1876), p. 61. 

Bough, Second Edition, i. 412 5g. 

2 Franz Boas, in Zenth Report of 4 Franz Boas, in Zenth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 44 5g. (Report Tribes of Canada, p. 45 (Report of the 
of the British <Association, Ipswich, British Association, Ipswich, 1895, 
1895, separate reprint). separate reprint). 

362 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP, 

Avoidance face or turns the other way while he is near her. Dr. 
pbett Boas’s Indian informant further stated that an adult man 
and sisters. must not look at his adult sister. “This custom, he 
explained, is based on a tradition according to which a 
man married his sister. Their brothers were ashamed, 
tied them together, and deserted them; but the man 
broke the ropes. They had a child, and eventually he 
killed a ram, a'ewe, and a kid of the mountain-goat, put on 
their skins, and they assumed. the shape of goats. He had 
acquired the power of killing everything by a glance of his 
eyes. One day his tribe came up the river for the purpose 
of hunting and he killed them. Then he travelled all over 
the world, leaving signs of his presence everywhere, such as 
remarkable rocks, The woman and her child went to the 
head waters of the Nass River, where they still continue to 

live on a lake.”? 
So far as this tradition| bases the avoidance of brother 
and sister on a desire to remove from them the temptation 
Avoidance to incest it is probably correct. We have seen that the 
of prothe's mutual avoidance of brothers and sisters is practised by 
elsewhere. the Navaho and Arapaho Indians of North America as 
well as by people in other parts of the world. In every 
case the intention of the custom is probably to prevent 

Marriage incest.2 Amongst the Tinnehs such precautions would seem 
as to be necessary ; for with regard to the eastern tribes of this 

sisters, and nation we are informed that “the divine and customary barriers 
daughters. between blood relations are not well observed, for, although 
it is not considered correct by general opinion, instances of 
men united to their mothers, their sisters, or their daughters, 
though not common, are far from rare. I have heard among 
them of two sons keeping their mother as a common wife, 
of another wedded to his daughter, and of several married 
to their sisters, while in cases of polygamy having two sisters 

to wife is very usual.”® 

1 Franz Boas, in Tenth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, p. 44 (Report of the 
British Association, Ipswich, 1895, 
separate reprint). 

2 See above, p. 245; and vol. i. 
P- 542; vol. ii. pp. 77 5¢g., 124, 131, 

And speaking of the Southern 

147, 188 59., 343, 344 

3 « Notes on the Tinneh or Chepe- 
wyan Indians of British and Russian 
America,” communicated by George 
Gibbs, Annual Report of the Board of 
Regents of the Smithsonian Institution 
(Washington, 1867), p. 310, The 

xvi) =TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 363 

Indians of the Tinneh stock, whom in this respect he con- 
trasts disadvantageously with the Northern Indians, the old 
traveller Samuel Hearne observes: “Most of the Southern 
Indians, as well as the Athapuscow [Athapascan] and 
Neheaway [Nahanai] tribes, are entirely without scruple in 
this respect. It is notoriously known, that many of them 
cohabit occasionally with their own mothers, and frequently 
espouse their sisters and daughters. I have known several 
of them who, after having lived in that state with their 
daughters, have given them to their sons, and all parties 
been perfectly reconciled to it. In fact, notwithstanding the 
severity of the climate, the licentiousness of the inhabitants 
cannot be exceeded by any of the Eastern nations, whose 
luxurious manner of life, and genial climate, seem more 
adapted to excite extraordinary passions, than the severe 
cold of the frigid zone. It is true that few of those who 
live under the immediate protection of the English ever take 
either their sisters or daughters for wives, which is probably 
owing to the fear of incurring their displeasure ; but it is well 
known that acts of incest too often take place among them, 
though perhaps not so frequently as among the foreign 
Indians.” ? . 
The last Indian tribe of the Tinneh stock and indeed of The 

North America whose totemic system we shall notice are the £e4y*5 or 

Kenais, a 
Kenayes or Kenais, who inhabit the Kenai Peninsula and Tinneh 

the neighbourhood of Cook’s Inlet in Alaska, where they ieee 
border on the Eskimo. They call themselves Tnaina or : 
Tnai, that is, “men,” this name being probably a mere 
dialectical variation of Tinneh or Déné. In temperament 

more taciturn and in manners more dignified than their 
cheerful lively neighbours the Eskimo, these Indians are 

expert fishers and ardent hunters. In summer they catch Theirmode 
the various kinds of salmon which swarm in their seas and ° lif 
streams ; and in the early days of August, when the fishing 

season is over, they betake themselves to the mountains, 

authority quoted in the text is Mr. Prince of Wales's Fortin Hudson’s Bay 
Bernard R. Ross, of the Hudson’s Bay ¢o the Northern Ocean (London, 1795), 
Company. p. 130. 

1 Samuel Hearne, Journey from 

The 
country of 
the Kenais, 

Exogamous 
divisions of 
the Kenais, 

TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

364 

where they make long and toilsome journeys over the high 
passes in pursuit of reindeer and mountain-goats, returning 
lean, worn, and exhausted by privations and fatigue to hunt 
the beaver until, with the setting in of the first hard frosts, 
they give themselves up to their winter rest and recreations. 
In the neighbourhood of the sea their country is an ascending 
plain dotted with lakes but bare of trees except in the deep 
ravines, which are clothed with a stunted growth of creeping 
willows and alder bush. Further inland, as the land rises, you 
come to a belt of forest and beyond that to the great alpine 
chain of mountains which runs parallel to the sea, glittering in 
the distance with its glaciers and eternal snows. Herds of rein- 
deer browse all over this region, retreating with the approach 
of summer to the inaccessible heights of the mountains, where 
they may often be seen by the traveller as a moving line of 
black dots winding over thei snow-fields far above.’ 

The Kenais are divided into two exogamous clans or 
perhaps phratries. According to their traditions the Raven 
created two women out of different stuffs; one of them 
became the: ancestress of the one clan, and the other of the 
other, Of the two clans one is divided into six and the 
other into five septs, which are named as follows :— 

1. Kachgija, so called from the croaking of ravens. 
[> Kali, ss », the catching of fish. 
Clan 1 3. Tlachtana, ,, 3 +a grass-mat. 
° \4. Montochtana, ,, », the inner corner of a hut. 
iF Tschichgi, ” », a colour. 
6. Nuchschi, those who have fallen from heaven. 

1. Tultschina, so called from the inclination to bathe in cold 
water in late autumn. 

Kutluchtna, women fond of stringing glass-beads. 

Schischlachtana, deceivers like the Raven, who at the 
creation of the earth and mankind always played tricks 
on the latter. 

4. Nutschichgt, named after a mountain near Lake Skilach, 

5. Zaltana 

x 

Clan II, 

” ” ” ”» 

1 Admiral v. Wrangell, ‘‘ Einige 
Bemerkungen iiber die Wilden an der 
Nordwest-Kiiste von Amerika,” in 
K. C. v. Baer und Gr. v. Helmersen’s 
Beitrage eur Kenntniss des russischen 
Reiches, i, (St. Petersburg, 1839) pp. 
103, 112-1163 Ivan Petroff, Report on 

the Population, Industries, and Ke- 
sources of Alaska, pp. 24, 26; W. H. 
Dall, ‘* Tribes of the Extreme North- 
west,” in Contributions to North 
American Ethnology, i. (Washington, 
1877) pp. 35 5sg-3 A. Krause, Dre 
Vinkit-Indianer, p. 326. : 

xvii ZTOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) 365 

According to ancient custom, the men of the first clan Exogamy 

or group of six septs may not marry women of their own Ea 
clan or group of six septs, but must marry women of the descent 
other clan or group of five septs ; similarly the men of the nee 
second clan must always marry women of the first clan, not : 
of their own. The children are reckoned to the clan and 
sept of their mother. However, even in the first half of the 
nineteenth century this rule of exogamy was no longer 
strictly observed, and men were allowed to marry women 
even of their own sept. Old people attributed the great 
mortality of their tribe to the new practice of inbreeding. 
A man’s heir is his sister’s child ; the son inherits very little 
from his father. A man serves in the house of his future 
father-in-law for a year ; after that he receives payment for 
his services and takes his wife home. Rich men have three 
or four wives.! ; 

It deserves to be noted that the Tinnehs share with the Belief 
coast tribes the belief in the transmigration of souls or She in 
the reincarnation of the dead. Thus, with regard to the the trans- 
Chepewyans, a Tinneh tribe, we read that “ they have some Shea 
faint notions of the transmigration of the soul ; so that if a and the re- 
child be born with teeth, they instantly imagine, from its eed. 
premature appearance, that it bears a resemblance to some 
person who had lived to an advanced period, and that he 
has assumed a renovated life, with these extraordinary tokens 
of maturity.” And of the Tinnehs or Dénés in general 
Father Petitot observes that “the ancient faith in 
metempsychosis and the transmigration of souls is deeply 
rooted in a great number of tribes. It is usually the little 
children born with one or two teeth (a circumstance common 
enough among the Dénés) who pass for persons resuscitated 
or reincarnated. It is the same with those who come into 
the world soon after the death of somebody. The testimony 

1 Admiral vy. Wrangell, ‘‘Einige de la Russie (St. Petersburg, 1862), 

Bemerkungen iiber die Wilden an der 
Nordwest - Kiiste von Amerika,” in 
K. C. v. Baer und Gr. v. Helmersen, 
Bettrage zur Kennintss des russischen 
Reiches, 1. (St. Petersburg, 1839), 
pp. 104 sg. Compare T. de Pauly, 
Description ethnographique des peuples 

Peuples de PAmérique russe, pp. 9, 
10; A. Krause, Dre Thinkit-Judianer, 
p. 326. 

2 Alexander Mackenzie, Voyages 
Srom Montreal through the Continent 
of America (London, 1801), p. cxix, 

366 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

of Hearne confirms my assertion. I had much trouble in 

dissuading the Hareskins from this superstition, and I doubt 

whether I succeeded. J could not banish from the mind of 

a young girl the idea that she had lived before her birth 

under a different name and with different features than 

those with which I was familiar; nor could I prevent an old 

woman from claiming the possession of a neighbour’s child 

under the specious pretext that she recognized in it the 

transmigrated soul of her deceased son. I have known of 

Belief of several such cases. The Hurons shared the same belief. 

ee According to Malte-Brun, they buried their little ones beside 

carnation the paths, in order that the women who passed by might 

of infants. receive their souls and bring them afresh into the world. 

This power of reincarnation is by the Dénés extended 

equally to the animals. I have known an unhappy old 

mother who grieved because a professional witch assured 

her that she had seen her dead son prowling on the bank of 

the river in the likeness of a bear. It seldom happens after 

the death of a conspicuous savage that his companions do 

not say they have seen him transformed into a two-footed 

cariboo, a bear, or an elan.”*? Again, Father Morice tells 

us that “ metempsychosis was believed in by the Carriers 

and the Sekanais and very likely by the other two tribes 

also [the Chilcotins and the Nahanes], though I could not 

positively affirm this. It amounted, in their estimation, to 

the regeneration of persons who had led a virtuous life and 

were supposed to be rewarded therefor by a new birth. 

Transformations into beings of a lower order, however, than 

that of their former condition, were repugnant to their 
psychological ideas.” ” 

When we remember how closely a belief in the reincar- 

nation of the dead is associated with the totemic system of 

1 E. Petitot, Afonographie des Déen2- year 1636. See Relations des Jésuites, 
Dindjié, p. 59... Under the name 1636, p. 130 (Canadian reprint, 
Déné-Dindjié the writer includes the Quebec, 1858). 
whole Tinneh stock (of. cit. pp. 23 
sq.). ‘I have not found the passage of 2 Father A. G. Morice, ‘ The 
Hearne to which Father Petitot refers Western Dénés, their Manners and 
in confirmation of his statement. Customs,” Proceedings of the Canadian 
The account of the Huron belief in stitute, Toronto, Third Series, vol. 
the reincarnation of infants comes vii. Fasciculus 1 (Toronto, 1889), 
from a Jesuit missionary report of the p. 61. 

xvii. TOTEMISM AMONG THE TINNEHS (DENES) — 367 

the Central Australian aborigines,’ we need not be surprised Totemism 
at finding the same belief held by totemic peoples in other *sociated 
parts of the world ; and if the view is correct that totemism incarnation 
in its origi imply a theory invented to explain the facts 7,1" 9" 
in its origin was simply a theory invented to explain the facts aj59 in 
of conception and childbirth, the coincidence of the belief in Australia. 
reincarnation with the practice of totemism in the same 

tribes may not be accidental but vital. 

The Tinneh or Déné Indians possess the classificatory The classi- 
system of relationship. Thus in the T4-n4-tinne tribe, who Eat 
seem to be the Hare Indians, in the generation above his of rela- 
own a man applies the same term Sa-/d@ “ my father ” to his popes 
father, and to his father’s brother ; he applies the same term eal 
A-na “my mother” to his mother, to his mother’s sisters, indians. 
and to the wives of his father’s brothers. In his own genera- 
tion he has separate terms for “my elder brother” (S#n-no- 
ga) and “my younger brother” (S#n-no-gd-yd-za), for “my 
elder sister” (Sa-da-za) and “ my younger sister” (Sa-da- 
2a-yd-za); and he applies the same terms “ elder brother,” 
“younger brother,” “elder sister,” “younger sister” to his 
first cousins, the sons and daughters of his father’s brothers 
or of his mother’s sisters. In the generation below his own 
he applies the same term Sa-yd-za “my son” and Sa-to-a 
“my daughter” to his own sons and daughters and to his 
nephews and nieces, the sons and daughters both of his 
brothers and of his sisters.” 

Again, among the Loucheux or Kutchins in the genera- The classi- 
tion above his own a man applies the same term Ze-angh aaa 
“my father” to his father and to his father’s brothers ; he of rela- 
applies the same term Ma-aingh “ my mother” to his mother ee 
and to his mother’s sisters. In his own generation he has sericea 
separate terms for “my elder brother ” (Soon-da-ga), “ my hina” 
younger brother ” (Sa-ché), “ my elder sister” (Sa-che), and 
“my younger sister” (Sa-chith); and he applies the same 
terms “elder brother,” “younger brother,” “elder sister,” 

“ younger sister” to his first cousins, the sons and daughters 

of his father’s brothers or of his mother’s sisters. In the 

1 See above, vol. i. pp. 182 sg., sanguinity and Afinity, pp. 236 and 
188 sgq. Table II. pp. 293 sgq- 
2 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- 

The 
Eskimo 
appear to 
be without 
the institu- 
tions of 
totemism 
and 
exogamy. 

However, 
Mr, E. W. 
Nelson 
reportsthat 
totemism 
exists 
among the 
Eskimo of 
Bering 
Strait. 
Marks 
which Mr. 
Nelson 
regards as 

368 TOTEMISM IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

generation below his own he applies the same term Sa-tin-ge 
“my son” and Sa-che “my daughter” to his own sons and 
daughters and to his nephews and nieces, the sons and 
daughters of his brothers. But he applies different terms 
Soo “my nephew (?)” and Sa-#e(?) “my niece” to the sons 
and daughters of his sisters.’ 

| 

§ 8. Reported Totemism among the Eskimo 

From almost all the accounts which have been given of 
the Innuit or Eskimo, who range over an immense but 
dreary and inhospitable region from Bering Strait on the 
west to Greenland on the east, it would seem that the 
institutions of totemism and exogamy are wholly lacking 
among that people. In these respects, therefore, if the 
accounts are true, the Eskimo resemble their neighbours in 
north-eastern Asia, the Chukchee and Koryak.? On this 
subject one good authority, Mr. W. H. Dall, definitely says 
that “the totemic system is not found among the Innuit.” ® 
However,a subsequent writer, Mr. E. W. Nelson, who has given 
us a valuable account of the Innuit or Eskimo about Bering 
Strait, believed that he had found totemism in that branch 
of the race. He says: “ From Kuskokwim river northward 
to the shores of Bering strait and Kotzebue sound the 
Eskimo have a regular system of totem marks and the 
accompanying subdivision of the people into gentes.”° What 
Mr. Nelson calls the totem marks are carved on weapons 
and implements of many sorts, painted on garments and 
wooden utensils, and tattooed on faces. Some of these 

1 L. H. Morgan, Systems of Con- and sisters. And further in their lan- 
sanguinity and Affinity, pp. 239 and guage the words for uncle and aunt are 
Table II. pp. 293 sgg. Inhis mono- derived from the words for father and 
graph on the Tinnehs or Dénés the mother. See E. Petitot, Monographie 
missionary Father E. Petitot gives des Dénd-Dindjié (Paris, 1876), p. 76. 
pr anar aneseeace of ae ets et 2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 348, 352. 
classificatory system of relationship i 
among them; for he tells us that they ghee etege Bs tig pea Paeca 
have no word in their language for sources \Loudou,-1070), B:,745: . 
cousins, whether first cousins or cousins *'W. E. Nelson, ‘The Eskimo 
further removed; they call them all about Bering Strait,” Zzghteenth An- 
brothers and sisters. Further, they %#a/ Report of the Bureau of American 
have no words for brother and sister in “¢Anology, Part i. (Washington, 1899) 
general, but they have special terms to PP» 19-518. ' 
distinguish elder from younger brothers f E. W. Nelson, of. cit. p. 322. 

xvi. REPORTED TOTEMISM AMONG THE ESKIMO 369 

marks represent or refer to the wolf, the otter, the ermine, totemic are 
the raven, and the gerfalcon. “ Arrows or other weapons neienag 
marked with the sign of the wolf or other animal totem painted on 
mark are believed to become invested with some of the Symen's, 
- qualities of the animal represented and to be endowed with tattooed 
special fatality”! “Women belonging to the wolf gens ° @° 
braid strips of wolfskin in their hair, and the young men Totemic 
and boys wear a wolf tail hung behind on the belt. It is ee i 
said to have been the ancient custom for all to wear some wozn by 
mark about the dress by which the gens of each person ee 
might be distinguished.”* “It is customary for hunters to clan. 
carry about with them an object representing their totem. 

A man belonging to the raven gens carries in his quiver a 

pair of raven feet and a quill feather from the same bird. 

The gerfalcon man carries in his quiver a quill feather of 

that totem bird.”* Further, we are told that some of the Totemic 
masks worn by the Eskimo at their festivals represent the ™S** 
totemic animals, and that on these occasions the wearer 

of such a mask is believed to become the creature whose 

mask he wears, or at least he is supposed to be endowed 

with its spiritual essence.* 

Such in brief is the evidence on which Mr. Nelson relies Mr. 
to prove the existence of totemism and totemic clans among Noon’ - 
the Eskimo. It does not seem to me to be sufficient ; and totemism 
until more cogent arguments are adduced, I prefer to nue 
acquiesce in the opinion of Mr. W. H. Dall that the totemic seems 

: z insufficient. 
system is not found among the Eskimo. 

1E. W. Nelson, ‘“‘The Eskimo p. 322. 

about Bering Strait,” Zighteenth An- 2 E. W. Nelson, of. cit. p. 324. 
nual Report of the Bureau of American 3 E. W. Nelson, of. cit. p- 325+ 
Ethnology, Part i. (Washington, 1899), 4 E. W. Nelson, of. cé¢. p- 395- 

VOL. HI 28 

CHAPTER XVIII 
GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE AMERICAN INDIANS 

§ 1. Guardian Spirits in general 

pesides the WE have now completed our survey of totemism in the usual 
totem of sense of the term, that is, of clan totems, in North America. 
ag But besides the clan totem, which was hereditary either in 
cotter the male or the female line and was shared by every member 
possessed Of the clan, many North American Indians stood individually 
cies in a certain mystic relationship to a supernatural being, 
which they commonly called their guardian spirit, which they neither 
acquire’ shared with others nor transmitted to their descendants, As 
selvesin this guardian spirit generally appeared in the form of an 
dreamsand —, 
didnot animal, and as the man often, though not always, respected 
aera the species of animal in which he believed his mysterious 
offspring. patron to be embodied, it is clear that these guardian spirits 
or tutelary animals bear some resemblance to totems, 
and accordingly I have called them individual totems’ to 
distinguish them from the hereditary totems of the clans. 
These To this it has been objected by Professor E. B, Tylor? 
eninge that the guardian spirit of each individual Indian, even 
been called when it is embodied in an animal, is something entirely 
ineividual Gifferent from the totem of the clan and ought not to be 
designated by the general name of totem, even with the 
qualifying epithet individual or personal. The distinction 
between the two is indeed manifest, and both in my original 
treatise and in my subsequent writings I have been careful 
to maintain it; for whenever I speak of totems or totemism 
in the abstract without qualification, I always refer to the 
1 Vol. i. 49 sgg. 
2 EL B. Tylor, in fax, ii. (1902) pp. 2 sg. 
370 

CH. XVII GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN GENERAL 371 
totems of clans. Yet the attitude of respect and affection Resem- 
in which a man stands towards his totemic animal in the Dn 

strict sense of the word so closely resembles that in which he guardian 
stands towards his guardian spirit in animal form, that it tf4,° 
seems, at least at first sight, difficult to separate them totem. 
entirely and to affirm that they are wholly unconnected with 

each other. Indeed some of the most eminent American Theory 
ethnologists, who have personally studied totemism and the Wat the 
system of guardian spirits as living institutions among the fs derived 
Indians, are so strongly impressed by the connection between pee 
the two that they derive the clan totem directly from the spirit. 
guardian spirit, believing that it is nothing but the guardian 

spirit of an individual ancestor of the clan transmitted by 
inheritance to his descendants whether in the male or the 
female line. But if the clan totem could be proved to have 
originated in this way, it would be hard to bestow the name 

of totem on the guardian spirit of the descendants and yet 

to deny it to the same guardian spirit of the ancestor. This 

view of the origin of the clan totem will be discussed later 

on. Whether we accept it or not, the weight of authority 

by which it is supported entitles it at least to a respectful 
consideration. 

Others again, admitting a relation between the clan Contrary 
totem and the guardian spirit, invert it by supposing that os 
the guardian spirit is not the original of the clan totem but guardian 
that on the contrary it has been developed out of it at a Cprived 
time when the totemism of the clans was falling into decay, from the 
and when consequently individuals, deprived of the protection “" '°™ 
of the clan totem, looked about for a personal guardian of 
their own to supply its place.’ In support of this view 
it might be urged, that whereas individual totems or 
guardian spirits in the form of animals are rare in Australia, 
where clan totemism is,.or rather was lately, in full bloom, 
they were far commoner in North America, where on the 

1 This is, if I understand them 
aright, the view of Mr. E. S. Hartland, 
Dr. A. C. Haddon, and Messrs. H. 
Hubert and M. Mauss. See E. S. 

7902, p. 742; H. Hubert et M. 
Mauss, ‘Théorie générale de la 
Magie,” ZL’ Année Sociologigue, vii. 
(Paris, 1904) pp. 325g. Mr. A. R. 

Hartland in Fo/k-Lore, xi. (1900) p. 
68; A. C. Haddon, in Report of the 
British Association Meeting at Belfast, 

Brown, Fellow of Trinity College, 
Cambridge, tells me in conversation 
that he shares this view, 

372 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

other hand clan totemism would seem to have been decadent, 
the sanctity of the relation between a man and his clan 
totem being at least much less prominent in America than 
in Australia.’ 
In this Whether either or neither of these views as to the 
scerey relation of guardian spirits to clan totems be correct, the 
relation to Subject deserves to be considered in a treatise on totemism, 
aa and accordingly I shall now give some account of the 
tocon- guardian spirits of the American Indians. But to prevent 

es confusion, I have hitherto treated the American clan totems 
spirit by independently and have reserved the consideration of the 
iste guardian spirits for a separate chapter. I shall describe the 
institution of guardian spirits as it existed in the various 
tribes, and shall then compare its diffusion with that of clan 
totemism, in order to see whether the comparison may throw 
light on the relation between the two. 
§ 2. Guardian Spirits among the Algonkins 
Guardian The existence of guardian spirits of individuals is best 

spirits or attested among the tribes of the Algonkin stock in Eastern 
best America and again among some of the tribes of the North- 
rug West. We shall begin with the Algonkins, among whom 
Algonkins. the guardian spirit of the individual was known as the 
manitoo.2 The following account of the manitoo or manitou 
is given by the historian Mr. Francis Parkman, who drew 
his knowledge of it from life as well as from books. It 

applies to the Iroquois and Hurons as well as to the 

Algonkins :— 
Francis “ Besides ascribing life and intelligence to the material 
ae world, animate and inanimate, the Indian believes in super- 
of the natural existences, known among the Algonquins as Manitous, 
manitoo. 

and among the Iroquois and Hurons as Okies or Otkons. 

~ 

1 [ have again and again emphasised 2 The word is variously spelt as 
the absence of information as to the manitoo, manitou, manito, manido, 
religious aspect of totemism among the monedo, munedoo, and so forth. The 
North American Indians; but as this spelling #as¢tou represents the French 
lack of information may be due rather pronunciation and ought not to be 
to the inattention of observers than t adopted in English. Compare Hand- 
the indifference of the Indians, I ak book of American Indians north of 
with hesitation on the subject. Mexico, i. 800 sg. 

xvit GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 373 

These words comprehend all forms of supernatural being, The termis 
from the highest to the lowest, with the exception, possibly, 2 £0"! 
of certain diminutive fairies or hobgoblins, and certain giants designat- 
and anomalous monsters, which appear under various forms, yourc 

grotesque and horrible, in the Indian fireside legends. There beings or 
are local manztous of streams, rocks, mountains, cataracts, and oe 
forests. The conception of these beings betrays, for the most 

part, a striking poverty of imagination. In nearly every 

case, when they reveal themselves to mortal sight, they bear 

the semblance of beasts, reptiles, or birds, in shapes unusual 

or distorted. There are other manztous without local habita- 

tion, some good, some evil, countless in number and indefinite 

in attributes. They fill the world, and control the destinies 

of men,—that is to say, of Indians: for the primitive Indian 

holds that the white man lives under a spiritual rule distinct 

from that which governs his own fate. These beings, also, 
appear for the most part in the shape of animals. Some- 
times, however, they assume human proportions ; but more 
frequently they take the form of stones, which, being broken, 

are found full of living blood and flesh. 

“Each primitive Indian has his guardian manztou, to The 
whom he looks for counsel, guidance, and protection. These pho 
spiritual allies are gained by the following process. At the guardian 
age of fourteen or fifteen, the Indian boy blackens his face, pias 
retires to some solitary place, and remains for days without by fasting 
food. Superstitious expectancy and the exhaustion of ae oan 
abstinence rarely fail of their results. His sleep is haunted puberty ; 
by visions, and the form which first or most often appears eco 
is that of his guardian smanztou,—a beast, a bird,a fish, a appears in 
serpent, or some other object, animate or inanimate. An ered 
eagle or a bear is the vision of a destined warrior; a wolf, i$ his. 

a guardian 
of a successful hunter; while a serpent foreshadows the spirit, and 
future medicine-man, or, according to others, portends oeecne 
disaster. The young Indian thenceforth wears about his about him. 
person the object revealed in his dream, or some portion of 
it,—as a bone, a feather, a snake-skin, or a tuft of hair. 

This, in the modern language of the forest and prairie, is 
known as his ‘medicine. The Indian yields to it a sort of 
worship, propitiates it with offerings of tobacco, thanks it in 

prosperity, and upbraids it in disaster. If his medicine fails 

374 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

to bring the desired success, he will sometimes discard it and 
adopt another. The superstition now becomes mere fetich- 
worship, since the Indian regards the mysterious object which 
he carries about with him rather as an embodiment than as 
a representative of a supernatural power.” ! 
The un- Thus it appears that a man’s career in life might be 
scrupulous decided by the animal of which he happened to dream at 
and : 
cowardly puberty. Mr. Parkman knew an old Dacota chief, who was 
might avail sreatly respected, but had never been to war, though he 
ofthis came ofa fighting family. The reason of his pacific life was 
superstition that at his initiatory fast he had dreamed of an antelope, the 
fighting. peace-spirit of his people.” It is obvious that cowardly and 
unscrupulous youths might take advantage of this superstition 
to shirk the hardships and dangers of war; they had only to 
profess to have dreamed of an antelope or other timorous 
Women creature, and the thing was done. “Women fast as well as 
fast as well men,—always at the time of transition from childhood to 
maturity. In the Marrative of John Tanner, there is an 
account of an old woman who had fasted, in her youth, for 
ten days, and throughout her life placed the firmest faith in 
the visions which had appeared to her at that time. Among 
the Northern Algonquins, the practice, down to a recent day, 
was almost universal.” ? 

Thus From the preceding account we gather that manztoo was 
manitoo : ° os * 
Wasa a general term including most of the spirits of nature in 

Ree which the Algonkins believed. Thus the guardian spirit of 
term for all the individual was only one of a large class of spirits to which 
pesca tat the common name of manztoo was given. This description of 
The the manztoo agrees with that of the early Jesuit missionaries, 
Case one of whom writes that the Montagnets, an Algonkin tribe of 
individuals Canada “ give the name of manzfoo to every nature superior 
ividoied to man, whether good or bad. That is why, when we speak 
ofthese of God, they name him sometimes the Good Manitoo, and 
maniioo. when we speak of the devil, they call him the Wicked 
rok Manitoo. A\lthose who have special knowledge of the good 
account or bad Manztoo they call Mantouzstouekeht. And so far as 

vam these men know only the wicked Manztoo, that is to say, the 

1 Francis Parkman, 7he Jesuits in 2 Francis Parkman, of. ¢z¢. p. Ixxi. 
North America, Fourth Edition(Boston, note}, 
1870), pp, Ixix,-lxxi, | 3 Francis Parkman, of. ¢é¢. p. Ixxi. 

xvut GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 375 

devil, we call them sorcerers.” ! These sorcerers were 

supposed to be able to kill people by invoking their manztoo. 
They would shut themselves up in their hut, and the spirits 
would bring them the souls of their enemies in the shape of 
stones or other objects, which the sorcerer then struck with 
a sword or an axe, till the blood ran out and reddened the 
weapon ; whereupon the person whose soul suffered in this 
fashion fell sick and died.* Before going to hunt, a man 
would retire to a small hut and there consult his manztoo, 
who was expected to tell him where to find game The 
spirit or, as the Jesuits called him, the devil also communi- 
cated with the Montagnet Indians in dreams. A man would 
dream, for example, that an elk appeared to him in his sleep 
and said to him, “ Come to me.” On waking from sleep the The man 
dreamer would seek that elk till he found it, and having Kus te 
stabbed it to death he would open the carcase and discover Which he 
in it some hair or a stone; and this object, whatever it was, ‘em? 

he would carefully keep in order to be afterwards lucky in apr 
finding and killing many animals. The precious thing, spshaath 
which thus served as a talisman, was hidden in a bag, into ina bag. © 
which the owner would suffer no one else to look.’ 

The following is the account which the Jesuit Charlevoix, 
the historian of French America, gives of the guardian spirit ; 
like that of Parkman it appears to apply to the Hurons and 
Iroquois as well as to the Algonkins :— 

“ They address themselves to the evil genii only to pray Charle- 
not to harm them, but they suppose that the rest are com- ey 
mitted to the guardianship of men, and that every man has of the 
his own. In the Huron tongue they are called ofk¢s and in ”°*’” 
the Algonkin sanzztoos. The Indians have recourse to them 
in the dangers they incur, in the enterprises they undertake 
and when they wish to obtain some extraordinary favour. 

There is nothing, however unreasonable and immoral, which 
they do not think themselves entitled to ask of them. 
But they are not under their protection at birth. To merit 
that favour they must be able to handle the bow and arrow, 

1 Relations des Jésuttes, 1637, p. 49 3 Jétd. 1633, p. 17 (Canadian 
(Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). reprint). 

2 Ibid. 1637, Pp. 49, 50 (Canadian 4 Jbid. 1637, p. So (Canadian 
reprint). Teprint). 

376 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

and many preparations are needed before they can receive it. 
It is the most important part of their life. The following 
are the principal circumstances. 
The “They begin by blackening the boy’s face, then they 
paeeen make him fast for eight days without giving him anything 
spirit at all to eat, and it is requisite that his future guardian 
anlage genius should manifest himself to the boy in dreams during 
dreaming. this time. The hollow brain of the poor lad, who has just 
arrived at puberty, cannot fail to furnish him with dreams, 
and every morning they are at great pains to make him tell 
them. Nevertheless the fast often ends before the appointed 
time, few boys having the strength to prolong it so far ; 
however, that makes no difference; here, as elsewhere, the 
convenient custom of allowing dispensations is practised. 
The guardian genius is always the thing of which the boy 
has oftenest dreamed; and in truth the thing is only a 
symbol or figure under which the spirit manifests himself. 
But it has happened to these people as to all who have 
departed from the primitive religion ; they have clung to the 
figure and lost sight of the reality. 
The “ However, these symbols signify nothing by themselves, 
guardian iS sometimes it is the head of a bird, at others the foot of an 
sometimes 
apart ofan animal, or a piece of wood, in short any common or worth- 
baie & Jess thing. Nevertheless they keep the thing with as much 
wood, etc. Care as the ancients took in the preservation of their Penates. 
There is indeed nothing in nature, if we can believe the 
savages, which has not its spirit; but there are spirits of 
all orders, and all have not the same virtue. When there 
is anything which they do not understand, they attribute to 
it a superior genius, and the mode of expressing themselves 
is to say, ‘It is a spirit.” Similarly, but in a higher degree, 
with men : those who have singular talents or perform extra- 
ordinary feats are spirits ; that is, they have a guardian genius 
of an order above the common. Some, and especially the 
jugglers, try to persuade the multitude that they are subject to 
ecstatic transports. . . . The jugglers never fail to announce 
that in their pretended ecstasies their genii impart to them 
great knowledge of the most distant things and of the 
future; and as chance (supposing you will not allow that 
the Devil has a hand in it) will sometimes have it that they 

xviut GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 377 

devine or guess aright, they gain great credit thereby and 
are esteemed geniuses of the first order. 

“ As soon as a boy has been told what he is thenceforth The | 

to regard as his tutelary genius, he is carefully instructed as Seale 
to his obligation of honouring it, of following the advice and 
which he will receive from it in sleep, of deserving its 
favours, of reposing all his trust in it, and of fearing the 
effects of its wrath if he fails to acquit himself of his duty. 
The ceremony ends by a feast, and it is also usual to tattoo 
the figure of his oz or manztoo on the boy’s body. It 
would seem that so solemn an engagement, of which the 
mark is ineffaceable, should be inviolable; nevertheless 
very little is needed to break it. 

“The savages are unwilling to acknowledge themselves 
in the wrong, even in regard to their gods; and they make 
no scruple of justifying themselves at the expense of the 
deities. So the first time they must either condemn them- 
selves or cast the blame on their guardian genius, it is 
always the latter who is at fault; they look out for another 
without more ado and with the same precautions as in the 
first instance. The women have also their manztoos or okkis, Women 
but they pay less attention to them than the men, perhaps oe 
because they give them less to do.”? manitoos. 

The following is Schoolcraft’s account of the guardian School. 
spirit or personal manitoo among the Algonkins: “To give (a's | 
some idea of the Indian mythology as above denoted, it is of the 
necessary to conceive every department of the universe to oa 
be filled with invisible spirits. These spirits hold in their Algonkins. 
belief nearly the same relation to. matter that the soul does 
to the body: they pervade it. They believe not only that 
every man, but also that every animal, has a soul... . 
Dreams are considered by them as a means of direct Belief in 
communication with the spiritual world; and hence the acetal 
great influence which dreams exert over the Indian mind 
and conduct. They are generally regarded as friendly 
warnings of their personal sanztos. No labor or enterprise 

1 Charlevoix, Aistotre dela Nouvelle Le Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons 
France (Paris, 1744), vi. 67-70. (Paris, 1865), pp. 160 sg. Sagard’s 
Sagard also tells us that the name for travels were first published at Paris in 
a spirit in Huron is o&¢ and in Algon- 1632. 
kin manztoo. See F. Gabriel Sagard, 

The 
medicine- 
bag. 

Fasts and 
dreams, 
their 
importance 
for the 
Indians. 

Distinction 
between 
totems and 
guardian 
spirits. 

378 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

is undertaken against their indications. A whole army is 
turned back if the dreams of the officiating priest are un- 
favorable. A family lodge has been known to be deserted 
by all its inmates at midnight, leaving the fixtures behind, 
because one of the family had dreamt of an attack, and 
been frightened with the impression of blood and toma- 
hawks. To giye more solemnity to his office the priest or 
leading meta exhibits a sack containing the carved or 
stuffed images of animals, with medicines and bones con- 
stituting the sacred charms. These are never exhibited 
to the common gaze, but, on a march, the sack is hung up 
in plain view. To profane the medicine sack would be 
equivalent to. violating the altar. Dreams are carefully 
sought by every Indian, whatever be their rank, at certain 
periods of youth, while fasting. These fasts are sometimes 
continued a great number of days, until the devotee becomes 
pale and emaciated. The ahimals that appear propitiously 
to the mind during these dreams, are fixed on and selected 
as personal manttos, and are ever after viewed as guardians. 
This period of fasting and dreaming is deemed as essential 
by them as any religious rite whatever employed by 
Christians. The initial fast of a young man or girl holds 
the relative importance of baptism, with this peculiarity, that 
it is a free-will or self-dedicatory rite.” 4 

Again, in regard to the Algonkin tribes which clustered 
round Lake Michigan, Schoolcraft tells us that “each clan 
or family has a totem, which serves to keep up the line of 
descents, This is different, in principle, from the system of 
guardian spirits. Every individual, male and female, has one 
of the latter, no matter what the totem may be. Totems are 
by descent—guardian spirits by choice or experience. This 
experience is chiefly sought in fasts and dreams, a series of — 
which are undertaken for this purpose, at the age of puberty. 
The fast is undertaken to prepare the body for the dream. 
These dreams are continued until some animal or bird, or 
other animate object, appears, which is fixed on as the 

' Henry R. Schoolcraft, Oveéta, or Indians, their History, Condition and 
Characteristics of the Red Race of Prospects, New Revised Edition 
America (New York and London, (Buffalo, 1851), pp. 212 59. 

1845), pp. 455 59.3 td., The American 

xvul GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 379 

genie, or guardian spirit. Thus the mind of the Indian, 

dark in itself, gropes after truth. Feeling the need of some Trustin the 
supernatural power, it aims to strengthen itself by reliance Sata 
on the shadowy, the mysterious, and the symbolic. It is 
believed that the guardian spirit leads the man safely through 

the vicissitudes of life, preserves him in battle, and gives him 

success in the chase.” ? 

The following account of guardian spirits appears, like Keating's 
the foregoing, to apply to the Algonkin Indians of Lake aor 
Michigan, particularly to the Pottawatamies, who ee guardian 
the country at the south end of the lake. “ Independently *Pi" 
of the name which he bears, and of the Zo¢em or badge of 
family to which he lays claim, an Indian has frequently a 
kind spirit to watch over him and assist him. This tutelar 
saint is, of course, held in high veneration, and nothing is 
done that could in the least offend him. The mode in The 
which each Indian becomes acquainted with the name or ech 
nature of this ministering spirit, is by dreams, in which he animal 
fancies that the Master of Life reveals himself to him in his A aa 
sleep, under the form of some tangible object in creation, supposed 
generally of an animal; under this shape the Great Spirit pompody 
holds converse with him, and the Indian ever after supposes Spirit. 
that this is the form in which he may expect to see the 
Great Spirit appear to him. To this animal, whom he 
considers as a medium of communication between him and 
the Master of Life, he addresses his prayers and states his 
wants; he consults it in all difficulties, and not unfrequently 
conceives that he has derived relief from it. Of course, he The 
abstains from eating of the animal, and would rather starve sages oo 
than sacrilegiously feed upon his idol. But he holds the his tutelary 
animal as a friend to himself alone. He knows that others *"™" 
have different spirits, and hence does not think himself 
bound to protect that animal against his companions, 
because he knows that there is no virtue in the animal for 

any one but himself. Sometimes, instead of the whole Sometimes 

. ue . . . h: 
animal, it is only in some part of it that the charm resides, Mesum 
1 Henry R. Schoolcraft, Jxdéan believe in magic, witchcraft, part only 

SOICErY, OF an 

Tribes of the United States, v. (Phila- 
delphia, 1856) p. 196. In the next 
sentence Schoolcraft adds: ‘ With the 
rest of the Algonquin tribes, they 

and the power and influence of minor 
monedos, as well as one great ruling 
good monedo, and one great counter- 
acting bad »onedo.” 

animal. 

Points of 
resem- 
blance 
between 
the totem 
and the 
guardian 
spirit. 

Guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Potta- 
watamies. 

380 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

and in this case he will feel no hesitation in eating of all 
the other parts of the beast.” ? 

From the foregoing account it appears that when a man 
has acquired a guardian spirit in the form of an animal, he 
carefully abstains from eating the flesh of any animal of 
that species, though he does not object to other people 
partaking of it. This attitude of a man to his tutelary 
animal resembles that of a man to his clan totem. Further, 
it is of interest to observe that the practice of splitting a 
totem, which is sometimes applied with great advantage to 
the clan totem,” can be profitably applied also to the 
individual totem or guardian spirit. Thus to pare down the 
claims of superstition to the narrowest limits is a sign both 
of intellectual and of economic progress. 

The Jesuit missionary Father De Smet has given us 
the following account of guardian spirits among the Potta- 
watamies : “ When the time tomes to give a child a name, 
the parents make a great feast. They send to all the guests 
a small leaf of tobacco or a small ring, which is their manner 
of invitation. After the repast the oldest member of the 
family proclaims the name, which has'generally reference 
either to some distinctive mark or to some dream of the 
child or perhaps to some good or evil trait in his character. 
This ceremony takes place for boys when they have attained 
the age of seventeen. Previously they are bound to undergo 
a very rigorous fast of seven or eight days, during which the 
parents recommend their son to pay great attention to the 
dreams which the Great Spirit may send him, and which 
will reveal to him his future destiny. For example, if he is 
to be a chief or a great warrior, it will be revealed to him 
by the number of animals which will fall beneath his toma- 
hawk, or by the number of scalps which he will take from 
his enemies in his dreams. The animal which presents itself 
to him will become his totem (dodéme), and all his life long 
he will carry about him a badge of it, whether it be a claw, 
a tooth, a tail, a feather, or what not.”* Further, Father 

1 William H. Keating, Expedition 3 Le R. P. De Smet, Voyages 
to the Source of St. Peters River aux Montagnes Rocheuses et séjour 
(London, 1825), i. 117 sg. chez les tribus indiennes de P Oregon, 

2 See above, p. 100. Nouvelle édition (Brussels and Paris, 

xvi GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 381 

De Smet tells us that before the tomb of a warrior these 
Indians set up “the post of the braves; on the top of it 
they paint in red the animal or totem (dodéme), the guardian 
spirit of the deceased, and all the persons present make one 
or more marks on it. These marks are red crosses, by 
which they mean to represent all the ghosts of their van- 
quished foes whom they wish to serve their comrade as 
slaves in the other world. I have seen posts which had 
eighty to a hundred of these crosses.” From these passages 
it is clear that the missionary De Smet fell into the same 
mistake as the interpreter J. Long? of confusing the guardian 
spirit with the totem. 

Similarly, the Ottawas, another Algonkin tribe, revered The 
their manztoos, as we learn from an old letter of a Catholic nie 
missionary. He writes that “where the superstition of Ottawas. 
these peoples appears most extravagant is in the worship 
they pay to what they call their manztoo. As they know 
hardly anything but the beasts with which they live in the 
forests, they imagine that in these beasts, or rather in their 
skins, or in their feathers, there resides a sort of genius 
who governs all things and is the Master of Life and 
Death. According to them there are manztoos common to 
a whole nation, and particular #anztoos for each person. 

“Oussakita, they say, is the grand manztoo of all the General 
beasts that walk upon the earth or that fly in the air. It inc tes 
is he who governs them; so when they go hunting, they the whole 
offer him tobacco, powder, lead, and well tanned skins, “™* 
which they fasten to the end of a pole and set up in the 
air. ‘QOussakita, they say to him, ‘we give you to smoke, 
we offer to you that with which to kill the beasts. Deign 
to accept these presents, and suffer not that the beasts escape 
our shafts. Let us kill a great many of them, and the 
fattest, that our children may lack neither garments nor 
food,’ They give the name of Michibichi to the manitoo 
of the waters and of the fish, and they make him a some- 
what similar sacrifice when they go afishing or when they 

1873), p. 393. The account given Fo, xi. (Lyons, 1838-1839) Pp. 479- 
by De Smet of the customs of the 498. 

Pottawatamies was first published in 1 De Smet, of. cz#. p- 39!- 

the Annales de la propagation de la 2 See above, pp. 51 59: 

382 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

undertake a voyage. This sacrifice consists in throwing into 
the water tobacco, provisions, and kettles, begging that the 
waters of the river may flow more gently, that the rocks 
may not break their canoes, and that he would grant them 
an abundant fishing. 
Particular “Besides these common manitoos, each has his own 
eee) a particular one, Who is a bear, or a beaver, or a bustard, or 
some such creature. They wear the skin of that animal in 
war, in the chase, and on journeys, being persuaded that it 
will save them from every danger and cause them to succeed 
Theman in their undertakings. When a savage wishes to get a 
Ee manitoo, the first animal which presents itself to his imagina- 
which he tion in sleep is usually the one on which his choice falls. 
seen He kills an animal of the species, puts its skin, or its feathers 
aportion if it is a bird, in the most honourable part of his hut, and 
ais prepares a feast in its honour, during which he harangues 
the creature in the most respectful terms, after which it is 
recognized as his mantztoo.”» 
The The guardian spirit or personal manztoo also played an 
faa important part in the beliefs and customs of the Ojibways, 
spirit an important Algonkin tribe. The evidence of the Indian 
ae interpreter John Long on this subject has been already 
quoted.” The Ojibway creed and ptactice in regard to the 
manitoo or munedo are thus explained by William W. 
Warren, the historian of the Ojibways, who had himself 
Ojibway blood in his veins :— 
‘Warren's “ They believe in a multiplicity of spirits which pervade 

are all nature, yet all these are subordinate to the one Great 
ojibway Spirit of good. This belief is as natural (if not more so) as 
ere * the belief of the Catholics in their interceding saints, which 

Spirit and in some respects it resembles, for in the same light as inter- 

aan cessors between him and the Great Spirit, does the more 

spifits. | simple Red Man regard the spirits which in his imagination 
pervade all creation. The never-failing rigid fasts of first 
manhood, when they seek in dreams for a guardian spirit, 
illustrate this belief most forcibly. 

"ppe Great “ Ke-che-mun-e-do (Great Spirit) is the name used by the 

Spirit (R&- Ojibways for the being equivalent to our God. They have 

che" - 

e-d0}. 1 Lettres édifiantes et curteuses, Nouvelle édition, vi. (Paris, 1781) pp» 172°174- 
2 Above, p. 52. 

xvin) GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 383 

another term which can hardly be surpassed by any one in 
the English language, for force, condensity, and expression, 
namely Ke-zha-mune-do, which means pitying, charitable, 
overruling, guardian and merciful Spirit; in fact, it ex- 
presses all the great attributes of the God of Israel. It 
is derived from Ke-zha-wand-e-se-roin, meaning charity, 
kindness—Ke-zha-wus-so expressing the guardian feeling, 
and solicitude of a parent towards its offspring, watching 
it with jealous vigilance from harm ; and Shah-wau-je-gay, 
to take pity, merciful, with J/un-e-do (spirit). There is 
nothing to equal the veneration with which the Indian 
regards this unseen being. They seldom even ever mention 
his name unless in their J7/e-da-we and other religious rites, 
and in their sacrificial feasts; and then an address to him, 
however trivial, is always accompanied with a sacrifice of 
tobacco or some other article deemed precious by the 
Indian. They never use his name in vain, and there is no 
word in their language expressive of a profane oath, or 
equivalent to the many words used in profane swearing by 
their more enlightened white brethren. Instances are told The 
of persons while enduring almost superhuman fasts, obtaining a 
a vision of him in their dreams ; in such instances the Great 
Spirit invariably appears to the dreamer in the shape of a 
beautifully and strongly-formed man. And it is a confirmed 
belief amongst them, that he or she who has once been 
blessed with this vision, is fated to live to a good old age 
and in enjoyment of ease and plenty. 

“ All other minor or guardian spirits whom they court in The minor 
their first dream of fasting appear to them in the shape of Sa 
quadrupeds, birds, or some inanimate object in nature, as the obtained by 
moon, the stars, or the imaginary thunderers ; and even this pre 
dream-spirit is never mentioned without sacrifice. The dream 
itself which has appeared to the faster, guides in a great 
measure his future course in life, and he never relates it 
without offering a sacrificial feast to the spirit of the dream. 

The bones of the animal which he offers are carefully 
gathered, unbroken, tied together, and either hung on a tree, 
thrown into deep water, or carefully burnt. Their beliefs 
and rites, connected with their fasts and dreams, are of 
gteat importance to themselves, more so than has been 

384 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

generally understood by writers who have treated of the 
Algics.” * 
Peter An instructive account of the Ojibway belief in guardian 
edd spirits is given by the Rev. Peter Jones, a full-blooded 

of the Ojibway Indian, who had himself fasted in his youth to 
jibway 

belief obtain a guardian spirit, but without success. He says :— 
Every “In addition to their belief in the existence of these 
medicine general gods, each pow-wow conjurer and medicine man 
man has 

hisown has his personal or familiar gods, which are of his own 
era imagining. The method they take to obtain the favour of 
spirit, He these is by fasting and watching. The Indian youth from 
ear er ta the age of ten to manhood are encouraged by their parents 
and dream- and the old people to fast, with the promise that if they do 
seu, us they will entertain them in the evening by the relation of one 
of their traditions or tales. Inspired with the hope of gaining 

favour with some god, and looking forward to the promised 

reward at the end of the day, they rise before the sun, take 

a piece of charcoal, which they pound to powder, and with it 

blacken their faces, the girls only blackening the upper part. 

During their fast they abstain from all food and drinks ; 
towards sunset they wash their faces and then eat a little 

broth or soup which has been prepared for them; in this 

way they go on for several successive days, the longer the 

better, and the more mumnedoos they will be likely to 
propitiate. All this time they notice every remarkable event, 

dream, or supernatural sound ; and whichever of these makes 

the most impression on their minds during their fast, 
suggests the particular spirit which becomes their personal 
munedoo as long as they live, and in all emergencies and 

Power dangers they will call upon him for assistance. . . . By the 
es agency of these wunedoos they pretend to possess the power 
of the of bewitching one another, performing extraordinary cures, 
munede?. foretelling future events, vanquishing their enemies, and 
charming the pretty Indian girl they intend to marry. If 

they chance to dream of seeing a munedoo standing on a rock 

in the lake, they imagine they have obtained the assistance 

1 William W. Warren, History of the — show an analogy with the ancient and 

Ojibways (St. Paul, Minn., 1885), pp. primitive customs of the Hebrews— 

63-65 (Collections of the Minnesota their faith in dreams, their knowledge 

Historical Society). The writer adds: and veneration of the unseen God, and 
‘*These facts are mentioned here to the customs of fasting and sacrifice.” 

xvut GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 385 

of a powerful god. To dream of seeing an old grey-headed 

man is taken as a token of long life; or of a pretty woman, 

that they will be blest with more wives than one. If they tvuiner- 
happen to dream of sharp-pointed instruments, or anything 7>!HY. 
that is proof against the arrow, tomahawk, or bullet, they 
fancy themselves proof against the shot of their enemy. 
When they dream of animals or fowls they imagine they are 
invested with the power of self-defence as possessed by these 
creatures. A poor Indian at Lake Huron used to boast 

that he had obtained the spirit of a bat. The following 
Ojibway tradition of a war exploit will show the confidence 

they place in dreams :— 

“A canoe manned with warriors was once pursued by a Ojibway 
number of others, all filled with their enemies. They en- heim 
deavoured to escape, paddling with all their might, but the of the 
enemy still gained upon them; then the old warriors began 728i?! 
to call for the assistance of those things they had dreamt of possessed 
during their fast-days. One man’s munedoo was a sturgeon, Caank 
which being invoked, their speed was soon equal to that of spirits. 
this fish, leaving the enemy far behind; but the sturgeon 
being short-winded, was soon tired, and the enemy again 
advanced rapidly upon them. The rest of the warriors, 
with the exception of one young man who, from his mean 
and ragged appearance, was considered a fool, called the 
assistance of their gods, which for a time enabled them 
to keep in advance. At length, having exhausted the 
strength of all their munedoos, they were beginning to give 
themselves up for lost, the other canoes being now so near 
as to turn to head them, when just at this critical moment 
the foolish young man thought of his medicine bag, which in 
their flight he had taken off from his side and laid in the 
canoe. He called out, ‘Where is my medicine bag?’ The Power 
warriors told him to be quiet; what did he want with his bce 
medicine bag at this perilous time? He still shouted, medicine- 
‘Where is my medicine bag?’ They again told him to ™* 
paddle and not to trouble them about his medicine bag. As 
he persisted in his cry, ‘ Where is my medicine bag?’ one 
of the warriors seeing it by his side took it up and threw it to 
him. He, putting his hand into it, pulled out an old pouch 
made of the skin of a Saw-dill, a species of duck. This he 

VOL. II “2c 

Ojibway 
story of 
invulner- 
ability 
conferred 
by the 
Spear 
guardian 
spirit. 

386 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

held by the neck to the water. Immediately the canoe 
began to glide swiftly at the usual speed of a Saw-dz//; and 
after being propelled for a short time by this wonderful 
power, they looked back and found they were far beyond the 
reach of the enemy, who had now given up the chase... . 
The young man then took up his pouch, rung the water out 
of it,and replaced it in his bag; telling the Indian[s] that he 
had not worn his medicine bag about his person for nothing, 
—that in his fast he had dreamt of this fowl, and was told 
that in all dangers it would deliver him, and that he should 
possess the speed and untiring nature of the Saw-éz// duck. 
The old warriors were astonished at the power of the young 
man whom they had looked upon as almost an idiot, and 
were taught by him a lesson, never to form a mean opinion 
of any persons from their outward appearance. 

“ Another story related by our people illustrates the re- 
liance they place on the power and help of these sunedoos :— 
Many years ago an old chief had occasion to go to war 
with a neighbouring tribe of Indians. He assembled all his 
warriors together, and, after informing them of the object he 
had in view, called them to him one by one, and inquired 
what they had dreamt of during their fast-days, and what 
munedoos they could rely on for assistance. Those who had 
had dreams, and those who had had none at all, he placed 
by themselves. All who had. dreamt of wars, or things 
proof against the arrow, tomahawk, or bullet, he selected for 
the expedition. When he came to the last man and asked 
him what he had dreamt of, he replied with a long whining 
tone ‘Akneed’ Tee chief, not understanding what he 
meant, repeated the question; the man replied as before, 
‘ Ahneed? ‘What do you say?’ said the chief. ‘ Ahneed’ 
was again the answer. The chief inquired what he meant 
by ahneed; when the warrior surprised him by stating that 
during his fastings he dreamed of ahnzt, that is, a spear. 
The chief asked, ‘And what good will a spear do you?’ 
‘As the point of the spear is proof against the arrow, toma- 
hawk, and bullet, so is my body against all the shot of the 
enemy. ‘Very well, said the chief, ‘you shall go with me 
to the war. The chief, with his select warriors, then left for 
the scene of action; and, after crossing a river in canoes, 

xvit GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 387 

they fell upon the enemy, whom they soon conquered, de- 
stroying many of them. In all the battles they fought, not 
one of the old chief’s party fell. The success and preservation 
of this war party was attributed solely to the aid of the 
munedoos obtained by dreams. 

“J well remember, in my early days, when I used to Fruitiess 
blacken my face and fast, in order to obtain the favour of pane 
some familiar god, that one day, being thirsty, I took a sip guardian 
of water. The moment I had done so I remembered I wag ‘Pitt. 
fasting. The thoughtless act filled me with sorrow, and 
wept the greater part of the night, fearing that now no 
munedoo would ever communicate himself to me. In all my 
fastings I never had any vision or dream ; and, consequently, 
obtained no familiar god, nor a spirit of the rank of a pow- 
wow.” } 

From the foregoing account it appears that a man is Thusa 
supposed to acquire the qualities of his guardian spirit or ee 5 
manitoo (munedoo). Thus if his guardian spirit is a sturgeon, to acquire 
he acquires the power of swimming fast like the sturgeon ; if ui ae 
his guardian spirit is a duck, he acquires the power of guardian 
skimming swiftly over the water like a duck; and if his ;h"y3, 
guardian spirit is a spear (and it is to be remembered that the respect the 

Indians commonly attribute spirits even to inanimate objects), Sir re, 
he acquires the power of being invulnerable like a spear. sembles a 
In this respect the guardian spirit or sanitoo resembles chau 
the clan totem; for as we have seen, a man is sometimes 
supposed to acquire the qualities of his clan totem, indeed 
to be in some measure identified with it? Another point of 
interest in this valuable account of the guardian spirits is 
that some men, less imaginative and perhaps honester than 
their fellows, failed to dream of anything at the critical 
moment and so never claimed to possess a mysterious patron. 
On the other hand, the possession of a guardian spirit is 
éssential to the medicine-man or magician (fow-wow) ; from 
which we may infer that as a class medicine-men and 
magicians are either more imaginative or less scrupulous 
than their fellows. 

Amongst the Blackfeet, another Algonkin tribe, many. 

! Rev. Peter Jones, History of the 2 See above, pp. 55 sg., 106, and 
Ojebway Indians, pp. 87-91. vol. ii. pp. 8 sg. 

Rev. E. F, 
Wilson’s 
account of 
guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Blackfeet. 

The 
medicine- 
bag. 

Mr. 
Grinnell’s 
account of 
guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Blackfeet. 

388 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHaP. 

but not all men had their guardian spirits. The following 
account of the custom was given to the Rev. Edward F. 
Wilson by a Blackfoot chief named Big Plume: “ Young 
men go up on to a hill, and cry and pray for some animal 
or bird to come to them. Before starting out they wash 
themselves all over and put off all their clothing and orna- 
ments except a blanket. For five or six days they neither 
eat nor drink, and they become thin. They take a pipe with 
them and tinder and flint, and a native weed or bark for 
smoking (not matches or tobacco). When the pipe is filled 
they point the stem to the sun and say, ‘ Pity me, that some 
animal or bird may come to me!’ Then they address the 
trees, the grass, the water, and the stones in the same manner. 
If any one crosses their path while so engaged, they call 
aloud to them to warn them off, saying, ‘I am living alone. 
Do not come near!’ While in this state they dream, and 
whatever animal or bird they see in their dream becomes 
their medicine or guardian through life. They are told also 
in a dream what description of herbs or roots to gather as 
their medicine, and this they collect and put carefully into a 
small bag to keep as a charm. They also kill the animal 
that they dreamed of, and keep its skin as a charm. No 
one knows what is the medicine they have gathered ; it is 
kept a profound secret. The little bag is kept in the tent, 
and no one may touch it but the owner. Other Indians 
would be afraid to meddle with it. There is no particular 
age for young men to engage in the above rites. They start 
away in the evening—only in summer. Some go of their 
own accord, others are bid to do so by their fathers or elder 
brothers. If they do not go, any sickness that comes upon 
them will certainly be fatal, or if shot by an enemy they will 
certainly die.” ! 

Another account of the guardian spirits of the Blackfeet 
is given by Mr. George Bird Grinnell, who is well acquainted 
with the tribe. He says: “The Blackfeet men often went 
off by themselves to fast and dream for power. By no 
means every one did this, and, of those who attempted it, 
only a few endured to the end,—that is, fasted the whole 

1 Rev. Edward F. Wilson, ‘‘ Report Aritish Association, meeting held at 
on the Blackfeet Tribes,” Aeport of the Manchester, 1887, p. 187. 

xvi. GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 389 

four days,—and obtained the help sought. The attempt 

was not usually made by young boys before they had gone 

on their first war journey. It was often undertaken by men 

who were quite mature. Those who underwent this suffer- 

ing were obliged to abstain from food or drink for four days 

and four nights, resting for two nights on the right side, and 

for two nights on the left. It was deemed essential that 

the place to which a man resorted for this purpose should 

be unfrequented, where few or no persons had walked; and 

it must also be a place that tried the nerve, where there 

was some danger. Such situations were mountain peaks ; 

or narrow ledges on cut cliffs, where a careless movement 
might cause a man to fall to his death on the rocks below; 

or islands in lakes, which could only be reached by means 

of a raft, and where there was danger that a man might be 
seized and carried off by the S#-yé-tip-p2, or Under Water 
People; or places where the dead had been buried, and 
where there was much danger from ghosts. Ora man might 

lie in a well-worn buffalo trail, where the animals were 
frequently passing, and so he might be trodden on by a 
travelling band of buffalo; or he might choose a locality 
where bears were abundant and dangerous. Wherever he 

went, the man built himself a little lodge of brush, moss, and 
leaves, to keep off the rain; and, after making his prayers to 

the sun and singing his sacred songs, he crept into the hut 

and began his fast. He was not allowed to take any cover- 

ing with him, nor to roof over his shelter with skins. He 
always had with him a pipe, and this lay by him, filled, so 

that, when the spirit, or dream, came, it could smoke. They 

did not appeal to any special class of helpers, but prayed 

to all alike. Often by the end of the fourth day, a secret 
helper—usually, but by no means always, in the form of 

some animal—appeared to the man in a dream, and talked 

with him, advising him, marking out his course through life, 

and giving him its power. There were some, however, on Not every 
whom the power would not work, and a much greater number ee 
who gave up the fast, discouraged, before the prescribed time guardian 
had been completed, either not being able to endure the lack ans it. 
of food and water, or being frightened by the strangeness or 
loneliness of their surroundings, or by something that they 

390 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

thought they saw or heard. It was no disgrace to fail, nor 
was the failure necessarily known, for the seeker after power 
did not always, nor perhaps often, tell any one what he was 
going to do.”? 
Catlin’s The painter Catlin, who lived among the Indians and 
oe knew them well, has given an account of their guardian © 
spirits spirits and medicine-bags. When he wrote it in 1832, he 
pa Sad was living at the mouth of the Yellowstone River, on the 
Ojibways, upper Missouri, surrounded by Indians of many tribes, 
Crows, et’ Crows, Blackfeet, Ojibways, Assiniboins, and Crees; and as 
"he does not in his description distinguish between the tribes, 
we may fairly assume that it applies equally to all. Of 
these tribes the Blackfeet, Ojibways, and Crees belong to 
the Algonkin stock, while the Crows and Assiniboins are 
Meaning of Of the Siouan or Dacotan stock. After explaining that the 
oe word “medicine” applied; by the whites to Indian beliefs 
signifies “ mystery, and nothing else,” “ every thing mysterious 
or unaccountable,” and that “medicine-men” are native 
physicians or doctors, who are “all supposed to deal more 
or less in mysteries and charms, which are aids and hand- 
maids in their practice,” Catlin proceeds as follows :— 
The “The Indians do not use the word medicine, however ; 
ae but in each tribe they have a word of their own construction, 
synonymous with mystery or mystery-man. The ‘ medicine- 
bag’ then is a mystery-bag ; and its meaning and importance 
necessary to be understood, as it may be said to be the 
key to Indian life and Indian character. These bags are 
constructed of the skins of animals, of birds, or of reptiles, 
and ornamented and preserved in a thousand different ways, 
as suits the taste or freak of the person who constructs 
them. These skins are generally attached to some part of 
the clothing of the Indian, or carried in his hand—they are 
oftentimes decorated in such a manner as to be exceedingly 
ornamental to his person, and always are stuffed with grass, 
or moss, or something of the kind; and generally without 
drugs or medicines within them, as they are religiously 
Trust of | closed_and sealed, and seldom, if ever, to be opened. I find’ 
bier that every Indian in his primitive state, carries his medicine- 
medicine. bag in some form or other, to which he pays the greatest 
bags. 1 George Bigd Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge Tales (London, 1893), Ppp- 191-193. 

xvit GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 391 

homage, and to which he looks for safety and protection 
through life—and in fact, it might almost be called a species 
of idolatry ; for it would seem in some instances as if he 
actually worshipped it. Feasts are often made, and dogs 
and horses sacrificed, to a man’s medicine; and days, and 
even weeks, of fasting and penance of various kinds are 
often suffered, to appease his medicine, which he imagines 
he has in some way offended. This curious custom has 
principally been done away with along the frontier, where 
white men laugh at the Indian for the observance of go 
ridiculous and useless a form ; but in this country it is in full 
force, and every male in the tribe carries this, his supernatural 
charm or guardian, to which he looks for the preservation of 
his life, in battle or in other danger; at which times it 
would be considered ominous of bad luck and an ill fate to 
be without it. 

“The manner in which this curious and important article 
is instituted is this: a boy, at the age of fourteen or fifteen 
years, is said to be making or ‘forming his medicine,’ when 
he wanders away from his father’s lodge, and absents himself 
for the space of two or three, and sometimes even four 
or five, days; lying on the ground in some remote or 
secluded spot, crying to the Great Spirit, and fasting the 
whole time. During this period of peril and abstinence, 
when he falls asleep, the first animal, bird, or reptile, of 
which he dreams (or pretends to have dreamed, perhaps), he 
considers the Great Spirit has designated for his mysterious 
protector through life. He then returns home to his father’s 
lodge, and relates his success; and after allaying his thirst, 
and satiating his appetite, he sallies forth with weapons or 
traps, until he can procure the animal or bird, the skin of 
which he preserves entire, and ornaments it according to his 
own fancy, and carries it with him through life, for ‘good 
luck’ (as he calls it); as his strength in battle—and in 
death his guardian Spirit, that is buried with him, and which 
is to conduct him safe to the beautiful hunting-grounds, 
which he contemplates in the world to come. 

“The value of the medicine-bag to the Indian is beyond 
all price; for to sell it, or give it away, would subject him 
to such signal disgrace in his tribe, that he could never rise 

Sacrifices 
to the 
“medicine,” 

Mode 

of obtain. 
ing the 
“medicine” 
or guardian 
spirit. 

The fasting 
dream and 
the vision. 

Trust of 
the Indians 
in their 
Medicine- 

bags ; the 
loss of 
them is 
deemed 
disgraceful, 
but can be 
tepaired by 
slaying an 
enemy and 
taking his 
medicine- 
bag. 

Dr. W. J. 
Hoffman's 
account of 
guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Meno- 
minees. 

The 
guardian 
spirit was 
an animal 
or bird 
seen by a 
youth ina 
fasting 

" dream. 

392 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

above it; and again, his superstition would stand in the 
way of any such disposition of it, for he considers it the gift 
of the Great Spirit. An Indian carries his medicine-bag 
into battle, and trusts to it for his protection; and if he 
loses it thus, when fighting ever so bravely for his country, 
he suffers a disgrace scarcely less than that which occurs 
in case he sells or gives it away; his enemy carries it off 
and displays it to his own people as a trophy; whilst the 
loser is cut short of the respect that is due to other young 
men of his tribe, and for ever subjected to the degrading 
epithet of ‘a man without medicine, or ‘he who has lost 
his medicine, until he can replace it again; which can only 
be done, by rushing into battle and plundering one from an 
enemy whom he slays with his own hand. This done, his 
medicine is restored, and he is reinstated again in the 
estimation of his tribe; and even higher than before, for 
such is called the best of medicine, or ‘sedicine honourable?) 

Another Algonkin tribe who have, or had till lately, 
guardian spirits or manztoos are the Menominees of North- 
eastern Wisconsin. I will quote from Dr. W. J. Hoffman, 
who has given us an elaborate memoir on the tribe, the 
following account of the custom :— 

“Until quite recently it was customary for each Indian 
youth to pass through a certain process of ‘fasting and 
dreaming, whereby he might receive a manifestation from 
the Great Unknown as to what particular animate form he 
might adopt as ... his guardian mystery. The course of 
procedure necessary for the young aspirant for honors to 
pursue was to leave the camp and go into the forest, there 
to remain in meditation, abstaining from all food, until 
gradual exhaustion produced that condition of ecstasy during 
which various forms of animals, or birds, appeared to him. 
The first of these forms to clearly impress itself on his 
mind was adopted as the special gift of the Great Mystery, 
and was thereafter supposed to act as an adviser in times 
of indecision; a monitor when the Indian was in danger, 
or an intercessor with the superior sanzdos when special 
power or influence was desired. During the period of 

1 Geo. Catlin, Letters and Notes on of the North American Indians, Fourth 
the Manners, Customs, and Condition Edition (London, 1844), i. 35-37- 

xviul GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 393 

probation the lad’s friends or parents would keep watch that 
no danger overtook him while in the forest, and furthermore, 
that his fasting was not carried to the point of danger to 
life and health. 

“ Among some of the Algonquian tribes the animal or A man’s 
bird forms that may thus be adopted by an Indian are nik 
sometimes the same as the totem of which he is a member. be identical 
Under such circumstances the animal representing the totem, “i? bis 
and the ‘familiar’ or manzdo, is seldom hunted or shot ; Respect 
but should he be permitted to hunt such an animal the shewn for 

. : é the animal 
hunter will first address the animal and ask forgiveness guardian. 
for killing him, telling him that certain portions, which 
are tabu, shall be set up in the place of honor in the 
wtkomek, For instance, should an Indian of the Bear totem, 
or one whose adopted guardian is represented by the 
bear, desire to go hunting and meet with that animal, due 
apology would be paid to it before destroying it. The 
carcass would then be dressed and served, but no member 
of the Bear totem would partake of the meat, though the 
members of all other totems could freely do so. The hunter 
could, however, eat of the paws and head, the bones of the 
latter being subsequently placed upon a shelf, probably over 
the door, or in some other conspicuous place. Due reverence 
is paid to such a relic of the totem, and so strictly observed 
is this custom that no greater insult could be offered to the 
host than for any one to take down such bones and to cast 
them carelessly aside. Due reverence must be had by the 
Indian for his so-called guardian or manido, neglect in this 
direction being considered as the direct cause of misfortune 
or sickness. A feast then becomes necessary as an offering 
to induce the manzdo to return and to again manifest its 
favor to the Indian.”? 

The Sauks, Foxes, and Kickapoos, all of them belonging Guardian 
to the Algonkin stock, also obtained guardian spirits OF ee ks 
personal sanztoos by means of fasts and visions.” Foxes, etc. 

Lastly, the institution of the guardian spirit or manztoo 

1 Ww. J. Hoffman, M.D., ‘The 2 W. Jones, ‘“‘The Algonkin J/anz- 
Menomini Indians,” Fourteenth Annual tou,” Journal of American Folk-Lore, 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, xviii. (1905) pp. 183-190. 

Part i. (Washington, 1896) pp. 64 sg. 

Guardian 
spirits 
(manitoos) 
among the 
Delawares, 
Loskiel’s 
account of 
them. 

Hecke- 
welder’s 
account of 
guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Delawares, 

394 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

was found also among the Delawares or Lenapes, the most 
easterly tribe of the Algonkin stock. It has been described 
as follows by the old Moravian missionaries, whose account 
is apparently meant to apply also to the Iroquois. “Our 
missionaries have not found rank polytheism, or gross 
idolatry, to exist among the Indians. They have, however, 
something which may be called an idol. This is the Manizto, 
representing in wood the head of a man in miniature, which 
they always carry about them, either on a string round 
their neck or in a bag. They hang it also about their 
children, to preserve them from illness and ensure to them 
success. When they perform a solemn sacrifice, a sanztto, 
or a head as large as life, is put upon a pole in the middle 
of the house. But they understand by the word manztto 
every being, to which an offering is made, especially all 
good spirits. They also look upon the elements, almost all 
animals, and even some plants, as spirits, one exceeding the 
other in dignity and power.... The manzttos are also 
considered as tutelar spirits. Every Indian has one or 
more, which he conceives to be peculiarly given to assist 
him and make him prosper. One has in a dream received 
the sun as his tutelar spirit, another the moon; a third, an 
owl; a fourth, a buffaloe; and so forth, An Indian is 
dispirited, and considers himself as forsaken by God, till he 
has received a tutelar spirit in a dream; but those who 
have been thus favored, are full of courage, and proud of 
their powerful ally.”? 

Again, the missionary Heckewelder, who lived among 
and near the Delawares or Lenni Lenape for more than 
thirty years, has given us an account of the fasts and visions 
by which they obtained their guardian spirits. The descrip- 
tion appears to apply also to the Iroquois, with whom 
Heckewelder was acquainted. Under the head of “ Initiation 
of Boys” he writes thus :— 

“{T do not know how to give a better name to a super- 
stitious practice which is very common among the Indians, 
and, indeed, is universal among those nations that I have 
become acquainted with. By certain methods, which I shall 

1G. H. Loskiel, Aystory of the the Indians in North America (London, 
Mission of the United Brethren among 1794), i. 39 59. 

xviit. GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ALGONKINS 395 * 

presently describe, they put the mind of a boy in a state of A boy's 
perturbation, so as to excite dreams and visions; by means ™"C an 
of which, they pretend that the boy receives instructions perturbed 
from certain spirits or unknown agents as to his conduct in acne 
life, that he is informed of his future destination and of the and the 
wonders he is to perform in his future career through the ane, his 
world. When a boy is to be thus initiated, he is put under ade 
an alternate course of physic and fasting, either taking no apeae td 
food whatever, or swallowing the most powerful and earn is nee 
medicines, and occasionally he is made to drink decoctio 

of an intoxicating nature, until his mind becomes sufficiently 
bewildered, so that he sees or fancies that he sees visions, 

and has extraordinary dreams, for which, of course, he has 

been prepared beforehand. He will fancy himself flying 
through the air, walking under ground, stepping from one 

ridge or hill to the other across the valley beneath, fighting 

and conquering giants and monsters, and defeating whole 

hosts by his single arm. Then he has interviews with the 
Manitto or with spirits, who inform him of what he was 

before he was born and what he will be after his death. 

His fate in this life is laid entirely open before him, the 

spirit tells him what is to be his future employment, whether 

he will be a valiant warrior, a mighty hunter, a doctor, a 
conjurer, or a prophet. There are even those who learn or 
pretend to learn in this way the time and manner of their 

death. 

“When a boy has been thus initiated, a name is given The boy 
to him analogous to the visions that he has seen, and to the cana Or 
destiny that is supposed to be prepared for him. The boy, accords 
imagining all that happened to him while under perturbation, ae ‘ 
to have been real, sets out in the world with lofty notions of 
himself, and animated with courage for the most desperate 
undertakings. The belief in the truth of those visions is Universal 
universal among the Indians. I have spoken with several ae 
of their old men, who had been highly distinguished for their in the truth 
valour, and asked them whether they ascribed their achieve- pet 
ments to natural or supernatural causes, and they uniformly visions. 
answered, that as they knew beforehand what they could do, 
they did it of course. When I carried my questions farther, 

and asked them how they knew what they could do? they 

S spirit. 

1 

Dr. S. R. 
Riggs’s 
account of 
guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Sioux or 
Dacotas. 

The 
armour 
god. 

Tabooed 
parts of an 
animal, 

396 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

never failed to refer to the dreams and visions which they 
had while under perturbation, in the manner I have above 
mentioned. I always found it vain to attempt to undeceive 
them on this subject. They never were at a loss for examples 
to shew that the dreams they had had were not the work of 
a heated imagination, but that they came to them through 
the agency of a mannttto.” i 

§ 3. Guardian Spirits among the Sioux or Dacotas 

The Sioux or Dacotas also had their guardian spirits, 
but apparently these were not acquired in dreams but were 
bestowed on the youth by older men. On this subject 
Dr. S. R. Riggs, who laboured as a missionary among 
the Dacotas from 1837 to 1883, and has given us a 
dictionary and grammar of their language, tells us that 
“in the ancient times the exhortation to a young man 
was ‘Guard well your sacred armor’; and that consisted 
of the spear, an arrow, and a bundle of paint, with 
some swan’s down painted red, to which were sometimes 
added some roots for the healing of wounds. These were 
wrapped together in strips of red or blue cloth, and 
could be seen in pleasant days carefully set up outside of 
the lodge. These were given by an older man, who was 
believed to have power over spirits, and who had, in the act 
of consecration, made to inhere in them the spirit of some 
animal or bird, as the wolf, the beaver, the loon, or the 
eagle. Henceforth these, or rather the one which became 
each one’s tutelar divinity and his armor god, were sacred 
and not to be killed or eaten until certain conditions were 
fulfilled. ... The reception of the wo-ta-we, or armor, by 
the young man places him under certain pledges which he 
must, if possible, redeem in after life. It taboos or con- 
secrates certain parts of an animal, as the heart, the liver, 
the breast, the wing, etc. Whatever part or parts are 
tabooed to him he may not eat until by killing an enemy 

1 Rev. John Heckewelder, “An neighbouring States,” Z7azsactions of 
Account of the History, Manners, and the Historical and Literary Committee 
Customs of the Indian Nations, who of the American Philosophical Soctety, 
once inhabited Pennsylvania and the i. (Philadelphia, 1819) pp. 238 sg. 

XVII GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE SIOUX 397 

he has removed the taboo.”? From this account it appears 

that the spirit of an animal or bird was conjured into a 

young man’s weapons and so became his guardian spirit or 
“armour god.” Henceforward the weapons were sacred 
(wah-kon, wakan) and might not be touched by a woman. 

A man prayed to his weapons in the day of battle.” Also 

he often made an image of the sacred animal which had Image of 
entered into his weapons, and this image he carried about ‘)< sacred 
with him, regarding it as having a direct influence upon his 
everyday life and ultimate destiny. 

The Dacotas had also their medicine-bags or mystery- sfedicine- 
sacks, as some American writers prefer to call them, with keel 
which were associated certain divinities or guardian spirits. 

These spirits were bestowed upon young men at the time 
when they were initiated into the secret society or order of 
the Mystery Dance, and were therefore only possessed by 
members of that order. We were told that each spirit of 
the medicine-bag was not a separate god, but a god-power, 
a sacred or mysterious (wakan) power, derived from certain 
great gods called Oonk-tay-he (Unkteht)4 Immediately after 
the creation of the world and of men these gods gave the 
Indians the medicine-bag (mystery-sack) and instituted the 
medicine or mystery dance. “ They ordained that the sack 
should consist of the skin of the otter, raccoon, weasel, 
squirrel, loon, one variety of fish, and of serpents. It was 
also ordained that the sack should contain four species of 
medicines of wakan qualities, which should represent fowls, 
medicinal herbs, medicinal trees, and quadrupeds. The 
down of the female swan represents the first, and may be 

1S. R. Riggs, Dakota Grammar, 
Texts, and Ethnography (Washington, 
1893), pp. 219, 220 (Contributions to 
North American Ethnology, vol. ix.). 

2 Rev. Stephen R. Riggs, LL.D., 
‘*The Theogony of the Sioux,” 
American Antiquarian, li. (1879-1880) 
p. 270. 

3 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘A Study 
of Siouan Cults,” Eleventh Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1894), p. 443. Mr. 
Dorsey adds: ‘‘ Parkman says (in his 
Jesutts in North America, p. xxi. note) 
that the knowledge of this guardian 

spirit comes through dreams at the 
initiatory fast. If this is ever true 
among the Dakota, it is not the rule. 
This knowledge is communicated by 
the ‘war-prophet’” (of. cit. pp. 
443 5q.). 

4 Rev. Stephen R. Riggs, D.D., 
“The Theogony of the Sioux,” 
American Antiquarian, ii. (1879- 
1880) p. 270; Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, 
“© A Study of Siouan Cults,” Zveventh 
Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethno- 
logy (Washington, 1894), p.445. As 
to the secret society or order of the 
Mystery Dance see below, pp. 463 sg¢. 

Guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Omahas. 
Edwin 
James's 
account. 
The 
Wahconda, 
a Protean 
god, the 
greatest 

GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

398 

seen at the time of the dance inserted in the nose of the 
sack, Grass roots represent the second, bark from the roots 
of the trees the third, and hair from the back or head of 
a buffalo the fourth. These are carefully preserved in the 
sack. From this combination proceeds a wakan influence 
so powerful that no human being, unassisted, can resist it.” 1 

The Omahas, a tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock, 
had also their guardian spirits. On this subject one of our 
earliest authorities on the tribe writes as follows: “The 
Wahconda is believed to be the greatest and best of beings, 
the creator and preserver of all things, and the fountain of 
mystic medicine. Omniscience, omnipresence, and vast 
powers are attributed to him, and he is supposed to afflict 
them with sickness, poverty, or misfortune, for their evil 

and best of deeds. . . . Their Wahconda seems to be a Protean god ; 

beings. 

he is supposed to appear to different persons under different 
forms. All those who are favoured with his presence become 
medicine men or. magicians, in consequence of thus having 
seen and conversed with the Wahconda, and of having 
received from him some particular’ medicine of wondrous 
efficacy. He appeared to one in the shape of a grizzly bear, 
to another in that of a bison, to a third in that of a beaver, 
or owl, etc., and an individual attributed to an animal, from 
which he received his medicine, the form and features of 
the elephant. All the magi, in the administration of their 
medicine to the sick or afflicted, mimic the action and voice, 
variously exaggerated and modified, of the animal, which, 
they say, is their respective medicine, or, in other words, that 
in which the Wahconda appeared to them.” * 

” 

1 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ A Study 
of Siouan Cults,” Zveventh Annual 

specific one.” There appear, in fact, to 
have been anumber of Wakanda. See 

Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 
(Washington, 1894), p. 440. 

2 Edwin James, Account of an Ex- 
pedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky 
Mountains under the Command of Maj. 
S. H. Long (London, 1823), i. 246 sg. 
On this account it is remarked by the 
Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, our best authority 
on the Omahas, that the writer ‘‘ mis- 
took the generic term Wahconda for a 

Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘*A Study of 
Siouan Cults,” Efeventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1894), pp. 372 599., 430. The 
mistake corrected by Mr. Dorsey 
resembles Gason’s mistake as the 
Mura-Mura of the Dieri, which was 
in like manner corrected by the Rev. 
Otto Siebert. See vol. i. p. 148. In 

. both cases the mistake was made by a 

layman and corrected by a missionary. 

XVII GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE SIOUX 399 

A somewhat fuller account of the mode in which among Miss _ 
the Omahas a youth obtained his guardian spirit is given $5. 
us by Miss Alice C. Fletcher, who speaks of the guardian account of 
spirit as “the personal totem.” She tells us that the guardian saa a 
spirit or personal totem “ was not received from an ancestor, obtaining a 
was not the gift of any living person, but was derived through dea a 
a certain rite, by the man himself. . . . This rite, called by 
the untranslatable name MWon-zhin-zhon, has been observed 
up to the present time. When the youth had reached the 
age of puberty, he was instructed by his parents as to ila 
he was to do. Mboistened earth was put upon his head an 
face, a small bow and arrows given him, and he was directed 
to seek a secluded spot upon the hills, and there to chant 
the prayer which he had been taught, and to lift up his 
hands wet with his tears to heaven, and then to lay them 
upon the earth; and he was to fast until at last he fell into 
a trance or sleep. If, in his trance or dream, he saw or 
heard anything, that thing was to become the special 
medium through which he could receive supernatural aid. 

The ordeal over, the youth returned home to partake of 
food and to rest. No one questioned him, and for four days 
he spoke but little, for if within that time he should reveal 
his vision, it would be the same as lost to him. Afterwards The youth 
he could confide it to some old man, known to have had ajo OM 

similar manifestation, and it then became the duty of the which i 
youth to seek until he should find the animal he had seen trance and 

in his trance, when he must slay it and preserve some part to keep 
. : se some part 
of it (in cases where the vision had been of no concrete of it hae 
form, symbols were taken to represent it); this memento ated 
. . oe . alisman, 
was ever after to be the sign of his vision, his totem, the 
most sacred thing he could ever possess, for by it his natural 
powers were to be so reinforced as to give him success as a 
hunter, victory as a warrior, and even the .power to see 
into the future.” This guardian spirit or personal totem 
“opened a means of communication between man and the 
various agencies of his environment, but it could not transcend 
1 Alice C. Fletcher, Zhe Import of — totem appears to have been unknown 
the Totem, a Study from the Omaha to the Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, our 
Tribe (Salem, Mass., 1897), pp. 3 5g. principal authority on the tribe, who 
It is remarkable that this mode of has given us a full account of their 
obtaining a guardian spirit or personal _totemic system, See above, pp. 94 599. 

Assimila- 
tion of men 
in character 
and power 
to their 
guardian 
spirits. 

400 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

the power of its particular species; consequently all totems 
were not equally potent. Men who saw the Bear in their 
visions were liable to be wounded in battle, ag the bear was 
slow of movement, clumsy and easily trapped, although a 
savage fighter when brought to bay. Winged forms, such 
as the Eagle, having greater range of sight than the creatures 
which traveled upon the ground, could bestow upon the men 
to whom they came in the dream the gift of looking into 
the future and foretelling coming events. Thunder gave the 
ability to control the elements, and the authority to conduct 
certain religious rites.” Thus among the Omahas a man 
was supposed to partake of the nature of his guardian spirit, 

-just as among some totemic peoples a man is thought to 

Guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Mandans. 
Lewis and 
Clark's 
account. 

Costly 
sacrifices 

to a man’s 
“medicine.” 

partake of the nature of his clan totem. 

Another Indian tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock 
who had guardian spirits were the Mandans. Thus the 
explorers Lewis and Clark, who visited the tribe in 1804, 
tell us that “the whole religion of the Mandans consists in 
the belief of one great spirit presiding over their destinies. 
This being must be in the nature of a good genius since it 
is associated with the healing art, and the great spirit is 
synonymous with great medicine, a name also applied to 
everything which they do not comprehend. Each individual 
selects for himself the particular object of his devotion, 
which is termed his medicine, and is either some invisible 
being or more commonly some animal, which thenceforward 
becomes his protector or his intercessor with the great spirit; to 
propitiate whom every attention is lavished, and every personal 
consideration is sacrificed. ‘I was lately owner of seventeen 
horses,’ said a Mandan to us one day, ‘ but I have offered them 
all up to my medicine and am now poor.’ He had in reality 
taken all his wealth, his horses, into the plain, and turning 
them loose committed them to the care of his medicine and 
abandoned them for ever. The horses less religious took care 
of themselves, and the pious votary travelled home on foot.” ? 

1 Alice C. Fletcher, 7Ze /mport of the Command of Captains Lewts and 
the Totem, a Study from the Omaha Clark to the Sources of the Missouri, 
Tribe (Salem, Mass., 1897), p. 6. etc. (London, 1905) i. 196. 

2 History of the Expedition under 

XVIII GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE SIOUX 4ol 

The Prince of Wied, who visited the Mandans in 1833, The Prince 
thus describes their belief in guardian spirits: “They npn 
undertake pothing without first invoking their guardian spirit of the 
or medicine, in their language choppenih (ch guttural), who ra 
is generally indicated to them by dreams. When they spirits. 
would choose their medicine or guardian spirit, they fast Sacrifice 

of finger- 
three, four, or more days, betake themselves to secluded spots, joints in 
do penance, even offer joints of their fingers—some of which biota 
are missing in nearly all of them,—lament, howl, and cry to guardian 
the Master of Life or to the First Man, that these would ‘Pits. 
vouchsafe to shew them their guardian spirit. In this 
feverish state they dream, and the first animal or other 
object that presents itself to them in their dream is chosen 
as their guardian spirit (medicine). Every one of them has 
such a guardian, which is sacred to him. In the prairie 
there is a great hill, on which they set themselves motion- 
less several days together, lamenting, howling, and fasting. 
Not far from it is a hole, into which they creep for the 

night.” 1 - 

Another Indian tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock Guardian 
who had guardian spirits were the Hidatsas or Minnetarees 5 te 
of the Upper Missouri. On this subject our principal Hidatsas 
authority on the tribe, Dr. Washington Matthews, observes * Minne 
that “every man in this tribe, as in all other neighboring 
tribes, has his personal medicine, which is usually some 
animal. On all war-parties, and often on hunts and other 
excursions, he carries the head, claws, stuffed skin, or other 
representative of his medicine with him, and seems to regard 
it in much the same light that Europeans in former days 
regarded——-and in some cases still regard — protective 
charms.” ? 

§ 4. Guardian Spirits among the Creek Indians 

Among the Creek or Muskogee Indians also lads at 
puberty obtained guardian spirits by means of fasts and 

1 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse 2 Washington Matthews, Z¢hmo- 
in das Innere Nord-America (Coblenz, graphy and Philology of the Hidatsa 
1839-1842), ii. 166. Indians (Washington, 1877), Pp. 50- 

VOL. III - 2D 

402 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

Guardian visions. The following account of the custom by Colonel 

spirits : : : 5 
mnigne eee Benjamin Hawkins appears to have been written about the 
Creek or year I 800 :— 

eras “The Ceremony of initiating Youth into Manhood—At the 

Colona age of from fifteen to seventeen, this ceremony is usually 

Benjamin performed. It is called Boos-e-tau, in like manner as the 

Hawkins 2 

account. annual Boosketau of the nation. A youth of the proper age 
gathers two handsfull of the Sou-watch-cau, a very bitter root, 
which he eats a whole day; then he steeps the leaves in 
water and drinks it. In the dusk of the evening, he eats 
two or three spoonfulls of boiled grits. This is repeated for 
four days, and during this time he remains in a house. The 
Sou-waich-cau has the effect of intoxicating and maddening. 
The fourth day he goes out, but must put on a pair of new 
mocassins (stz-la-pica). For twelve moons, he abstains from 
eating bucks, except old ones, and from turkey cocks, fowls, 
peas and salt. During ‘this period he must not pick his 
ears, or scratch his head with his fingers, but use a small 
stick. For four moons he must have a fire to himself, to 
cook his food, and a little girl, a virgin, may cook for him ; 
his food is boiled grits. The fifth'’moon, any person may 
cook for him, but he must serve himself first, and use one 
spoon and pan: Every new moon, he drinks for four days 
the possau (button snakeroot), an emetic, and abstains for 
these days from all food, except in the evening a little boiled 
grits (humpetuh hutke). The twelfth moon, he performs for 
four days, what he commenced with on the first. The fifth 
day, he comes out of his house, gathers corn cobs, burns 
them to ashes, and with these rubs his body all over. At 
the end of-this moon, he sweats under blankets, then goes 
into water, and this ends the ceremony. This ceremony is 
sometimes extended to four, six, or eight moons, or even to : 
twelve days only, but the course is the same. During the 
whole of this ceremony the physic is administered by the 
Is-te-puc-cau-chau thluc-co (great leader), who in speaking of 
the youth under initiation, says, ‘I am physicking him’ 
(Boo-se-jt-jite saut lt-to-mise-cha), or, ‘I am teaching him all 
that is proper for him to know’ (xauk o-mul-gau e-muc-e-thlt- 
jite saut létomise cha). The youth, during this initiation, does 
not touch any one except young persons, who are under a 

xvit GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG CREEK INDIANS 403 

like course with himself, and if he dreams, he drinks the 
possau.”? 

In the forggoing account no express mention is made of Miss M. A. 

the medicine, mystery, or guardian spirit which presumably Oven’s 
is supposed to appear to the boy in his fast; but this of the 
omission is supplied by Miss Mary Alicia Owen, in her Muskesee 
book on the Muskogee or Musquakie Indians. She writes: obtaining a 
“ During the nine years of novitiate, the training from month one ss 
to month and year to year grows more severe and continuous. 
The fasts that at first were deprivation from one mea 
lengthen, till they stretch over days and nights of abstinence 
from both food and water ; and other hardships increase in 
proportion. In addition, his father has spent what he can 
to obtain the goodwill and assistance of the shaman towards 
making the boy a fine man, this assistance consisting out- 
wardly in the shaman’s spinning round and round before the 
door of the sweat-lodge after he has been sweated, and 
singing prayers and flattery to the boy’s totem. Also the 
father gives as many Religion dances as he can afford, and, 
during the last year of the trial, has him, for eighty days, 
taught to lead the Religion dance. Finally, comes the nine 
days’ fast, during which the poor young wretch wanders 
solitary in the woods, dreams feverish dreams supposed to be 
prophetic, and one special dream which tells him what his 
‘medicine’ is to be, and, sometimes, what his vocation is. 
Before the fast is over, it is incumbent upon him to find the 
thing which constitutes his medicine, obtain possession of it 
without causing its death or destruction, and place this part 
obtained in a little bag, to be worn under the left arm.” ? 

* 

§ 5. Guardian Spirits among the Californian Indians 

The Acagchemem Indians of San Juan Capistrano in 
California had also their guardian spirits, as we learn from 

1 Benjamin Hawkins, ‘The Creek 1884) pp. 185 sg. He explains that 
Confederacy,” Collections of the Georgia ‘‘grits” are ‘‘ maize pounded into 
Historical Soctety, iii. (Savannah, 1848) grits.” 
pp. 78 sg. This account is reproduced 
with verbal alterations by Mr. A. S. 2 Mary Alicia Owen, Fo/k-lore of the 
Gatschet, in his Migration Legend of Musquakie Indians of North America 
the Creek Indians, i. (Philadelphia, (London, 1904), pp. 67 sg. 

Guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Acag- 
chemem 
Indians of 
California. 
Father 
Boscana’s 
account. 

404 GUARDIAN SPIRITS [N AMERICA CHAP. 

Father Boscana, one of the old Spanish missionaries who 
laboured among them in the days when California still 
belonged to Spain. His account runs thus, “ Although, 
ignorant as they were of the knowledge of the true God, the 
moral instruction given by parents to their children was 
contained in the precepts of Chinigchinich,! which were 
strongly impressed upon their minds, that they might become 
good, and avoid the fate of the evil. The perverse child, 
invariably, was destroyed, and the parents of such remained 
dishonored. At the age of six or seven years, they gave 
them a kind of god as protector; an animal, in whom they 
were to place entire confidence, who would defend them 
from all dangers, particularly those in war against their 
enemies. They, however, were not to consider this animal 
as the real God, for he was invisible, and inhabited the 
mountains and bowels of the earth ; and if he did appear to 
them at any time, it was in the shape of an animal of the 
most terrific description. This was not Chinigchinich, but 
another called Zouch, signifying a Devil. That they might 
know the class of animal, which the God, Chinigchinich, had 
selected for their particular veneration, a kind of drink was 
administered to them, made from a plant called P7zéat, which 
was reduced to a powder, and mixed with other intoxicating 
ingredients. Soon after taking this preparation, they became 
insensible, and for three days were deprived of any sustenance 
whatever. During this period they were attended by some 
old men or women, who were continually exhorting them to 
be on the alert, not to sleep for fear the coyote, the bear, the 
crow, or the rattlesnake might come; to observe if it were 
furious or gentle, and to inquire of the first that should come, 
what were its desires. The poor Indian, thus intoxicated, 
without food or drink, suffering under delirium, beheld all 
kinds of visions ; and when he made known that he had seen 
any particular being, who explained the observances required 

1 According to Father Boscana, this 
Chinigchinich was a god whom the 
Indians feared, venerated, and re- 
spected. He is said to have first 
taught in the town of Pubuna and 
afterwards in all the neighbouring parts, 
explaining the laws and establishing 

the rites and ceremonies necessary to 
the preservation of life. See Lzfe i 
California, by an American (New 
York, 1846), p. 254. For the full 
title of this rare and valuable work, see 
the following note. 

xvi) GUARDIAN SPIRITS OF WASHINGTON INDIANS 405 

of him, then they gave him to eat and drink, and made a 
grand feast; at the same time advising him to be particular 
in obeying the commands of the mysterious apparition.” * 

§ 6. Guardian Spirits among the Indians of Washington 
State 

The custom of possessing or claiming guardian spirits was Guardian 
widespread among the Indian tribes of the Chinook and seolass ae 
Salish stocks in the State of Washington and the adjoining Chinook 
southern part of British Columbia. Further north it was <°4Salsh 
found also among the Tinnehs. We shall take the tribes 
roughly from south to north. 

Thus with regard to the Twana and Klallam tribes of The éeman- 
Washington we are told that “the practical part of their rior 
religion is a compound of shamanism and spiritism, called in the Twana 
Chinook jargon ¢amanous, tamahnous, or tamanamus, and the elas 
word expresses their idea so completely that it has been Indians. 
somewhat adopted into English, for the word expresses a 
combination of ideas for which we have no exact English 
equivalent. Zamanous is a noun, and as such refers to any 
spiritual being, good or bad, more powerful than man and 
less powerful only than God or Satan. Hence the being 
may be a good or bad ¢amanous. It is also used to 
express the work of influencing any of their spirits by 
incantation. The word is also an adjective, and as such is 
used to describe any stick, stone, or similar article in which 
spirits are at times supposed to dwell, and also any man, as 
a medicine man, who is supposed to have more than ordinary 
power with these spirits ; hence we often hear of ¢amanous 
sticks and tamanous men. It is likewise a verb, and to 
tamanous is to perform the incantations necessary to 
influence these spirits. In some cases it is done mainly by 
the medicine men, but in others by any one. I do not 
believe that these Indians ever had any idea of the Great 
Spirit before the coming of the whites. ... They firmly 

1 Friar Geronimo Boscana, ‘‘Chinig- ment of St. Juan Capistrano, Alta Cali- 
chinich ; a Historical Account of the fornia, called the Acagchemem Nation,” 
Origin, Customs, and Traditions of the in Lie zz California, by an American 
Indians at the Missionary Establish- (New York, 1846), pp. 270 sg. 

Each 
person has 
his or her 
guardian 
spirit 
(tamanous). 

.The 
guardian 
spirit 
(tamanous) 
obtained 
by a long 
fast and a 
vision. 

Power 
of the 
medicine- 
men, bad 
and good. 

406 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

believe in the presence and power of malignant spirits, 
and much of their ¢amanous is to conquer them and to gain 
their favor an} aid... . 

“Angelic spirits they believe to be constantly around. 
Every man and nearly every woman formerly was thought 
to have one which was called his or her ¢amanous. Such a 
spirit was supposed to guard the man or woman who often 
communed with itin the dark, when alone in the woods, and, 
by various incantations, invoked its aid in time of need. 
These angels were the most useful deities they had. 

“They believe that these spirits, both good and bad, may 
dwell at times in certain sticks or stones, hence these 
sticks and posts become objects of reverence. . . . 

“The first thing for a young man to do in the way of a 
sacred rite is to get his ¢amanous. In order to accomplish this 
I am told that.a father wquld send his son into the woods a 
long way from home, where he was not allowed to eat or 
drink during a period of from ten to thirteen days, though he 
was allowed to bathe often and keep up a good fire. At last 
his ¢amanous revealed itself to him, in the shape of some 
animal, either a bird or beast, which was afterwards sacred to 
him. They think that ordinarily such fasting would kill a 
man, but that he is kept alive by his zamanous, After this 
the Indian tamanouses for what he wishes very earnestly on 
somewhat the same principle that the Mohammedan prays. 
Hence they ¢amanous for wind, for gambling, and to cure 
the sick or cause sickness. 

“A wicked medicine man can, as they believe, in an 
invisible manner shoot a stone, ball, or poison into the heart 
of a person to make him sick. They believe this so firmly 
that they say when the heart of one who died was opened 
the stone or bone has been found init. He is also supposed 
to be able to send a woodpecker, squirrel, bear, or any 
treacherous animal to the heart of his enemy to eat his heart, 
plague him, make him sick, or kill him. The good medicine 
man finds out from his sickness what kind of animal it is and 
then tries to draw it forth, and while the common people 
make a noise, pounding on a rough drum, on sticks, halloing, 
singing, etc., the medicine man places his hands on some 
part of the body and draws forth, or says he does, the evil 

xvi GUARDIAN SPIRITS OF WASHINGTON INDIANS 407 

spirit, and when he says he has it he holds it between his 
hands, invisible, and blows it up or takes it to another man 
who throws a stone at it and kills it.”? . 

We may perhaps suppose that the animal or thing which 
a wicked medicine-man projects into a person’s body to make 
him sick is the medicine-man’s own famanous or guardian 
spirit. In any case we learn that the medicine-man is 
merely one who has more power with the spirits (¢asanouses) 
than ordinary people; his familiar spirit (¢amanous) is 
stronger than theirs, or he knows better than they how to 
use it. But the difference between him and common folk is 
one of degree rather than of kind; they all alike claim to 
possess familiar or guardian spirits. 

Sometimes these Indians conjured their guardian spirits The 
(tamanouses) into material objects ; for Mr. Eells tells us that a 
he has seen “two doors of dwellings, with figures painted on sometimes 
them, a head board to a bed, painted and slightly carved, a sonuet 
carved powder charge, a figured powder horn, and a cap material 
with the feathers of the red-headed woodpecker sewed into ee 
it, all of which are supposed to contain the spirit of the 
guardian angel and to protect the owner when in his house 
or asleep, and to assist him when hunting and travelling.” * 

“When a young man went forth to obtain his tamanous Washing 
he washed himself, much as already described, this cleansing (67! 
being very essential. A Klallam doctor told me that the acquisition 
children, if they wished to become strong tamanous men, euedaut 
were accustomed daily, both summer and winter, to bathe, spirit. 
remaining in water a long time, sometimes, he said, for hours, 

supposing they thereby gain the favor of the ¢amanous. 

He said that he did so when young.” ® 

1 Rev. Myron Eells, ‘‘The Twana, 
Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of 
Washington Territory,” Annual Report 
of the Board of Regents of the Smith- 
sonian Institution for the year ending 
June 30, 1887, Part i, (Washington, 
1889) pp. 672-675. Compare zd. 
“The Religion of the Clallam and 
Twana Indians,” American <Anti- 
quarian, ii. (Chicago, 1879-80) pp. 
10 sg., where Mr. Eells tells us that 
the animal which appeared to the young 
man in his fast ‘* was not the spirit, but 

the spirit dwelt in it.” 

2 Rev. Myron Eells, ‘‘ The Religion 
of the Clallam and Twana Indians,” 
American Antiquarian, ii. (1879-80) 
p. 12. : 

3 Rev. Myron Eells, ‘‘ The Twana, 
Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of 
Washington Territory,” danual Report 
of the Board of Regents of the Smith- 
sonian Institution for the year ending 
June 30, 1887, Part i. (Washington, 
1889) p. 678. 

Guardian 
spirits 
(tamano- 
wash) 

408 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

Again, in regard to the Kliketats, a group of eight tribes 
speaking a common language in Washington State, we are 
informed that they have “still a belief in familiar spirits, in 

among the Chinook ¢amanowash, whom they address when in difficulty. 

Kliketats. 

hey consider that supernatural aid, or tamanowash, may be 
obtained for five objects, namely, the cure or infliction of 
disease, skill in hunting, and in gambling, courage, and 
invulnerability ; lastly, success in the acquisition of property. 
A youth desirous of obtaining Zamanowash must adhere to 
strict cleanliness of person, and must abstain from sexual 
intercourse, as indispensable preliminaries; he must also 
leave the parental lodge of an evening and sleep by the 
shore of some distant and lonely lake, or in some other 
secluded place, night after night, until during sleep the 
tamanowash communicates with him. By this way of acting, 
on returning to the lodge jin the morning the parents know 
whether or not the son has been successful in his night’s 
quest. Either the ambition of the sire, the son, or of both 

Ata man's will prompt to perseverance in trial. It is an Indian belief 

eae that when an Indian dies, or is killed, his 7amanowash passes 
spirit to hisson. Some say they have a grizzly bear as tamanowash, 
Het others a woodpecker, the invulnerables an oak, and so on ad 
infinitum.” This account is interesting because it shews 
the acquired guardian spirit in the act of passing by heredity 
to a son and thus tending to become the totem of a clan. 
Guardian Of the Chinook and Kilamuke tribes on the Columbia 
en River we are told that “each Indian has his ¢amanuus, or 
among the spirit, which is selected by him at a very early age, and is 
Chine ‘generally the first object they see in going out to the woods 

muke tribes that has animal life. Others create from their imagination 

of the 
Columbia 
River. 

one that has never met mortal eyes. The choice of a spirit, 
however insignificant it may appear, has a great influence on 
their after-life ; for, by its supposed commands, they are 
directed to good or evil, as they conceive that a noncon- 
formity to its wishes would involve them in a multitude of 

wevils, for they suppose it is able to destroy health, or preserve 

1 Dr. W. F. Tolmie, ofthe Hudson’s Jsland and British Columbia (London, 
Bay Company service, quoted byJ. K. 1866), ii. 247 sg. 
Lord, Zhe Naturalist in Vancouver 

xvii GUARDIAN SPIRITS OF WASHINGTON INDIANS 409 

it, or inflict miseries without end. They at times, and 
particularly when in the water, pretend to hold converse 
with it, and talk to themselves in a low, monotonous tone 
of voice.”* Again, among the Pend d’Oreille Indians of 
Washington, when a lad approached manhood, he “ was sent 
by his father to a high mountain and obliged to remain 
until he dreamed of some animal, bird, or fish, thereafter to 
be his medicine, whose claw, tooth, or feather was worn as a 
charm.” ? 

§ 7. Guardian Spirits among the Salish Indians of 
Vancouver's Island and British Columbia 

Again, guardian spirits are believed in by the Cowichans, Guardian 
a group ’of Indian tribes of the Salish stock who inhabit a (yranoas) 
portion of the east and south-east coasts of Vancouver Island, among the 
and the country in the vicinity of the forty-ninth parallel of Cota 
North latitude from the sea to the Cascade Mountains ; they 
occupy the lower valley of the Fraser River as far as 
Spuzzum. Like other tribes in this part of America they 
flatten the heads of their children in infancy. With the 
Cowichans this flattening of the head is esteemed not only a 
great beauty but a mark of free birth; for slaves are not 
allowed to flatten the heads of their children, unless they are 
adopted into the tribe. “The fasting ceremony on entering 
manhood is one of the most interesting customs prevailing 
among the Cowitchans, and one on which it is very difficult 
to obtain correct information. The young man retires to 
the hills and fixes upon some spot convenient to water, in 
which to undergo the ordeal, and remains there as long as 
hunger will allow him, generally from three to five days. 
During this time frequent ablutions are performed, a fire is 
kept up, and no sleep allowed, which gradually weakens the 
nerves until he sees visions, in which his Zomanoas (guardian 
spirit or medicine) appears to him, usually in the shape of 
some beast, fish, or bird, and predicts the course of his future 

1 Charles Wilkes, Warrative of the 2H. H. Bancroft, Zhe Native Races 
United States Exploring Expedition, of the Pacific States of America 
New Edition (New York, 1851), v. (London, 1875-1876), i. 283 sg. 

118. 

410 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA 

CHAP. 

life. This Zomanoas is supposed to accompany the Indian 
in after life, guiding his actions for good or evil, and to it 
they address themselves in secret, never mentioning the name 
even to their nearest relations and friends. Returning to 
his village, half wild with the cravings of hunger, he seizes a 
knife, with which he rushes up and down, wounding all who 
come in his way, until, working himself into a state of frenzy, 
he sinks down exhausted, and is appropriated by the 
Tomanoas or medicine-man of his tribe, who, with dismal 
howls and a chorus of sticks and paddles, proclaims him 
a man and a warrior. The young women do not seem 
to retire into the woods, but sit apart in the lodge, 
bathing frequently, fasting, and undergoing a_ general 
purification.” * 

Guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Ahts of 
Vancouver 
Island. 

Among the Ahts of Vancouver's Island “stories are told 
of men who, going into the mountains to seek their 
‘medicine,—which means choosing a guardian spirit, on 
attaining manhood,—have associated with wolves, like the 
Arcadian mentioned in Pliny’s legend; and, after a time, 
body and soul have changed into the likeness of these 
beasts.”? “What is called the ‘medicine’ of the natives, 
is something which they seek after arriving at manhood, 
and which is only to be got by hard trial of privation or 
exposure. The Indian, taking with him neither food nor 
water, and only a single blanket to cover his body, ascends 
to the summit of a high hill not far from the encampment, 

and there remains for several days. 
to show to the people that he is actually at the place. 

He keeps a fire burning 
The 

longer he endures the more efficacious ‘medicine’ is he 

supposed to obtain. 

1 Capt. Wilson, ‘Report on the 
Indian Tribes inhabiting the Country 
in the Vicinity of the qgth Parallel of 
North Latitude,” Zvavnsactions of the 
Ethnological Society of London, New 
Series, iv. (1866) p. 281. As to the 
geographical situation of the Cowichans, 
see ibid. p. 278; Franz Boas, in 
Fifth Report of the Committee on the 
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. 10 
(Report of the British Association, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1889, separate 

As might be supposed of a people 

reprint, where the name is spelled 
K.au'itcin) ; Handbook of American 
Indians north of Mexico, i. 355. As 
to the flattening of the heads, see 
Capt. Wilson, of. cé#. pp. 279 5g. 

2G. M. Sproat, Scenes and Studies 
of Savage Life (London, 1868), p. 173- 
The Greek legend referred to in the 
text is found in Pliny, Natural History, 
viii. 81. See my note on Pausanias, 
viii. 2. 6 (vol. iv, 189 5q.). 

XVIII GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE SALISH 4it 

whose life and thoughts are bound almost within the limits 
of their bodily perceptions, this medicine generally comes 
through a dream in the form of an animal, as a wolf or eagle, 
when the sufferers body and mind are enfeebled and dis- 
ordered by hunger and exposure. Occasionally the medicine- 
seeker loses his reason, and wanders about and dies, and he 
is then believed to have gone further in search, and his 
return to the village is looked for month after month. The 
animal, thus supernaturally revealed to the native as hig 
‘medicine,’ is supposed, throughout his life, to be connected 
with him as only an untrained imagination could conceive or 
explain, and finally, as is believed by some of the natives, to 
receive into its body the Indian after his departure from the 
earth.”! This supposed transmigration of the dead man into 
the body of his tutelary animal is noteworthy. 

The faith in guardian spirits seems to have been common R. C. 
to all the tribes of the Salish stock in British Columbia, M@¥° 

on the 
whether on the coast or in the interior. Thus Commander Lagat 
R. C. Mayne, comparing the tribes of the interior with the oi,” 
tribes of the coast, writes as follows :—“ Their medicine- Indians. 

feasts are also much the same, and, like the others, they all 
wear charm-bags round their necks. The medicine-bag charm 
ordinarily worn is small, but on feasts and great occasions 
the chiefs and medicine-men wear very large ones. As a 
rule, nothing can be done without the aid of the medicine- 
men and their mummeries. The bag I have spoken of is, I 
believe, generally made of the skin of some animal, bird, or 
reptile, as the beaver, otter, polecat, or weasel ; eagle, mag- 
pie, or hawk ; snake or toad. Anything—dry grass, leaves, 
etc.—is stuffed into it, and it is carefully sewn up and orna- 
mented. Before a young man is admitted to be a man and 
a warrior, he has to get his medicine, which he does, or is 
supposed to do, by roaming about the woods, fasting and 
praying to the great spirit to help him to medicine, much in 
the same way, though to a less extent, as the medicine-men 
prepare themselves for the higher mysteries. His medicine- A man 
animal is the first animal, bird, or reptile he dreams of during popes 

“medicine” 

this process; and, having dreamt of it, he immediately kills os 
. . ee . . eeps its 
one, and it becomes his medicine for ever. His bag is or cin 

1G. M. Sproat, Scenes and Studies of Savage Life, pp. 173 sg., note. 

Dr. F. 
Boas 

on the 
guardian 
spirits of 
the Salish 
Indians. 

412 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

should be made. of this animal’s skin; but there is much 
trickery in all these matters.” ? 

On the same subject Dr. Franz Boas writes that “the 
religious concepts of the Salish tribes of the interior were 
also much simpler than those of the coast Indians. Since 
the social organization is simple, and ritualistic societies are 
not found,! the whole group of ideas connected with these 
concepts does not occur. The essential trait of the religious 
beliefs of these tribes is connected with the acquisition of 
guardian spirits. Each person is believed to have his 
guardian spirit, which is acquired by the performance of 
ceremonials. Only a few shamans are believed to have in- 
herited their guardian spirits from their parents who have been 
particularly powerful. All animals and objects possessed 
of mysterious powers can become guardian spirits, whose 
powers are somewhat differentiated. Objects referring to 
death—such as graves, bones, teeth, and also natural 
phenomena, such as blue sky, east and west, and powerful 
animals——could become guardian spirits of shamans. 
Warriors had weapons and strong animals for their guardian 
spirits ; hunters, the water, the tops of mountains, and the 
animals they hunted, or others that were themselves success- 
ful hunters. Fishermen had for their guardian spirits canoes, 
paddles and water animals ; and gamblers, a variety of smaller 
animals, and also objects used for securing good luck or 
wealth. The frequent occurrence of guardian spirits that 
are only part of an animal—as a deer’s nose, the left or 
right side of a thing, the head, the hand, the hair, or the tail 
of an animal—is remarkable.”? The suggestion which has 
been made® as to the reason for splitting a totem applies 
equally to the splitting of a guardian animal, whenever that 
animal is good to eat and the man desires to propitiate the 
creature by not devouring its flesh. 

1 Commander R. C, Mayne, Four of the Interior of British Columbia,” 
Years in British Columbia and Annual Archeological Report, 1905 
Vancouver Island (London, 1862), p. (Toronto, 1906), p. 222. 

302. 3 See above, vol. ii. p. 536 sg., and 

2 Franz Boas, ‘The Salish Tribes vol. iii. p. 100. 

xvil GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE THOMPSONS 413 

§ 8. Guardian Spirits among the Thompson Indians 

Among the Salish-speaking tribes of the interior who Guardian 
claimed to have guardian spirits are the Thompson Indians, vied st 
formerly known as the Couteau or Knife Indians. They Thompson 
inhabit a district of Southern British Columbia watered by '4#"s. 
the Fraser River and its tributaries, the Thompson and 
Nicola Rivers. A full and valuable account of their system mr. James 
of guardian spirits has been given us by Mr. James ahs Siena 
who is conversant with their language and by patien : 
enquiry has made himself intimately acquainted with the 
people. From him we learn that among the Thompscn Training 
Indians boys at puberty went through a long course of of youne 
training, which varied with the career which the youth had’ 
proposed to himself. Those who wished to become great 
hunters practised hunting and shooting in a ceremonial way. 

Those who desired to become great warriors prayed to the 
Sun and fought mimic battles. Those whose ambition it 
was to be gamblers danced and played with gambling 
sticks. Only warriors prayed to the Sun; the rest 
prayed to the Dawn of the Day. If a lad wished the fast 
to develop into an extraordinary man, the ceremonial "4 dream. 
isolation and practice extended over years, which he 
spent alone with his guardian spirit in the mountains, 
fasting, sweating, and praying until he gained the desired 
knowledge. Adolescent boys began their regular training 
when they dreamed for the first time of an arrow, a canoe, 
or a woman. This generally happerféd between the ages 
of twelve and sixteen years. They were then made to 
run races, with their bows and arrows in their hands, until 
they sweated, when they were sent to wash in cold water. 
This was repeated four times on each of four successive days. 
During these days the lad’s face was painted red all over, 
and he wore a headband of cedar or other bark, or sometimes 
of deer or other skin with the hair on. He also wore deer- 
hoof ornaments round his ankles and knees, an apron painted 
with designs symbolising his future occupations, and he used 
a tube for drinking through and a bone to scratch his head 
with. On the first night he had to repair to a mountain-top, 

414 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

light a fire, and dance and sing there all night. The fire 
served to announce to all that he had attained to puberty. 
The next three nights were similarly spent, the boy dancing, 
singing, and praying to the Dawn of Day, and also shooting 
arrows at targets in the early morning. Afterwards he left 
his home at intervals to spend days together in some lonely 
Use of the place among the mountains. There he fasted, sometimes for 
sweat-bath. many days, and cleansed himself by the use of purges, emetics, 
and the sweat-bath. In the sweat-bath he prayed to the 
spirit of sweat-bathing under the title of “ Sweat-bathing 
Grandfather Chief,” begging that he might be strong, brave, 
’ agile, lucky, rich, a good hunter, a skilful fisherman, and so 
forth. Also he would roll naked in the dew, or wash his 
body with branches covered with dew. Moreover, he 
practised a system of gymnastics, running, leaping, and 
shooting at marks. 
The animal “The ceremonial rites corltinued until the lad dreamed 
ne nich of some animal or bird. These particular animals or birds 
dreamed then became his protectors or guardian spirits for life, and to 
haere them he afterward prayed. Besides helping him, and pro- 
spicy ihe tecting him from danger, they also became ‘mediums, imparting 
and pre. tO him power and magic, also knowledge concerning the 
served its world of the living and that of the dead. They furnished 
skin entire. , , 7 : : 
him with a song, with which he called them up. Some 
Indians had only one protector, while others had many ; but 
of these usually one was chief. After receiving a guardian 
spirit, they painted their faces with designs symbolic of this 
spirit, often suggested by their dreams. They also decorated 
their clothing in accordance with instructions received from 
the guardian spirit. The lads then set out with bows and 
arrows to hunt the subject of their dreams. Having shot it, 
they took off the skin, which they preserved entire. 
Sometimes “Sometimes a boy would have dreams similar to those 
a oy adoro! his father, or at least about the same guardian spirit. 

the pais Sometimes his father would give him a piece of the skin or 
spirit as. @ feather of his own guardian spirit to take with him into 

his father. the mountains.. This was supposed to help him. Often the 

1 James Teit, Zhe Thompson Indians Memoir of the American Museum of 
of British Columbia, pp. 317-320 Natural History, April 1900). 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 

xvut GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE THOMPSONS 415 

boy dreamed about it, and it thus became one of his 
guardian spirits. Fathers would sometimes ask their sons 
about their dreams, would interpret them, and would give 
advice in regard to them. 

“Many Indians carried about with them wherever they The 
went a bag into which they put the skin of their guardian seca 
spirit. This bag was made of the entire skin of some bird skins of 
or animal which was one of the guardian spirits of the poe 
person. Others preferred taking a part of the feathers or animals. | 
skin, and wearing it around their person, especially tied tq 
their hair.” ? 

From this account we see that among the Thompson Thus the 
Indians in some cases the guardian spirits were hereditary, Sa es 
passing from father to son. However, Mr. Teit tells us that sometimes 
only a few shamans inherited their guardian spirits without “°*"*"- 
passing through the usual ceremonies at puberty; to such 
favoured persons the guardian spirits of their parents pre- 
sented themselves uncalled for in dreams and visions.? 

The guardian spirits of the Thompson Indians varied The _ 
with the man’s profession; some were appropriate to Sera 
shamans, others to warriors, others to hunters, others to of the 
fishermen, and others to gamblers. Many, however, might 7,pp75°" 
be possessed by men of different occupations. For example, varied with 
water was a guardian spirit of shamans, warriors, hunters, Sree 
and fishers; the sun, the thunder or the thunder-bird, the 
tops of mountains, the grizzly bear, wolf, eagle, and raven 
were guardian spirits of shamans and warriors ; the grizzly 
bear, wolf, coyote, owls of all kinds, and the raven were 
guardian spirits of shamans and hunters; the loon, all kinds 
of ducks, and all or almost all kinds of fish were guardian 
spirits of shamans and fishermen. On the other hand, each 
profession had certain guardian spirits which specially or 
even exclusively belonged to it. Among those which Guardian 
specially belonged to shamans were the moon, stars, the Spirits of 
Milky Way, the Pleiades, the Morning Star, sunset, wind, 
rain, rainbow, snow, ice, lake, cascade, fire, cold, heat, 
snow-capped mountains, the otter, badger, dog, skunk, 
weasel, ermine, chicken-hawk, swan, crane, snakes, lizards 

1 James Teit, Z4e Thompson Indians of British Columbia, pp. 320 sq. 
2 James Teit, of. czt. p. 354- 

Guardian 
spirits of 
warriors. 

Guardian 
spirits of 
hunters. 

Guardian 
Spirits of 

fishermen, 

Guardian 
spirits of 
gamblers. 

Some 
animals 
were not 
guardian 
Spirits. 

Knowledge 

of the 
names of 
animals 

gave power 

416 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

bird’s down, the cedar, fir, yellow pine, burnt trees, stumps, 
tobacco, and pipe. The following were guardian spirits of 
shamans only :—night, fog, blue sky, east, west, woman, 
adolescent girl, child, hands of men, feet of men, privates 
of men, privates of women, the bat, the land of souls, ghosts, 
grave-poles, cairns at graves, dead men’s hair, teeth, and 
bones. Amongst the guardian spirits which belonged 
specially or exclusively to warriors were blood and all 
kinds of weapons, including the arrow, bow, knife, toma- 
hawk, gun, bullet, and arrow-head. Among the guardian 
spirits which belonged specially or exclusively to hunters 
were the black bear, wolverine, lynx, marten, mink, deer, 
elk, beaver, hoary marmot, crow, magpie, blue grouse, deer’s 
tail, deer’s nose, and hunting snares. Among the guardian 
spirits which belonged specially or exclusively to fishermen 
were paddles and fishing utensils, such as nets, spears, lines, 
hooks, weirs, and parts of wejrs. On the other hand canoes 
were guardian spirits of hunters as well as fishermen. The 
guardian spirits of gamblers, runners, etc., included the 
following :—creek, spring, stone, dawn of day, horse, musk- 
rat, common marmot, rock-rabbit, big-hprn sheep, mountain- 
goat, buffalo, antelope, cariboo, porcupine, woodpeckers of 
all kinds, whip-poor-will, blue jay, willow grouse, ptarmigan, 
prairie - chicken, plover, goose, humming-bird, frog, some 
kinds of flies, horsefly, wasp, bee, mosquito, ant, spider, 
wood-worm, feathers, sweat-house, tools of various kinds, 
meccasins, red and black paint, dentalia shells, fir-branch, 
pine-cones, and fir-cones. Guardian spirits of women were 
the mountain goat, basket, kettle, root-digger, and packing- 
line. 

Animals which were not supposed to have any mysterious 
power did not become guardian spirits of men. Such were, 
for example, the mouse, chipmunk, squirrel, rat, fool-hen, and 
butterfly. Only few birds and hardly any trees or herbs 
could become guardian spirits. 

The Thompson Indians believe that all animals have 
names of their own, which may be revealed by the guardian 
spirits. The knowledge of these names gave a person more 

over them. power over the animals. Thus, if a man knew the name of 

1 James Teit, 7he Thompson Indians of British Columbia, pp. 354 59. 

xvir GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE THOMPSONS 417 

the grizzly bear and addressed him by it, the bear would at 
once become gentle and harmless. This knowledge was not 
imparted to others, except perhaps by a father to his son 

Among the guardian spirits of the Thompson Indians Some 
two classes seem especially remarkable. One of them is See 
the class of artificial objects, such as weapons, fishing tackle, spirits are 
tools, sweat-house, baskets, kettles, packing-lines, and so ee 
forth. The other is the class of guardian spirits which are others are 
only part of an animal or thing, such as a deer’s nose, ets Se 
bird’s down, blood, the nipple of a gun, the left or right side of things. 
of anything, the head, the hand, the hair, and the tail o 
an animal. Some Indians had guardian spirits of an 
unusual colour or of some particular colour, such as a grey 
tree, a white stump, a white horse, a black dog, a spotted 
dog, a spotted fish, a black fox, a blue sky, a red cloud, a 
black fog, a red fish, and so on. 

“It is evident from the above list that each person Each 
partook of the qualities with which his guardian spirit was Potook 
endowed. For this reason certain guardian spirits were of the 
also considered more powerful than others. Thus a man @ralities 
who had the grisly bear or thunder for his protector would guardian 
become a much better and fiercer warrior than another who 
had a crow, a coyote, or a fox. . . . Only warriors whose 
guardian spirits gave them the mystery of the scalp would 
take or wear scalps. In order to obtain this mystery, or, 
as it is expressed, to ‘know’ scalps and become proof 
against them, some warriors washed themselves in water in 
which arrow-heads had been placed, or prayed to the 
weapons for knowledge. If they wore a scalp and did not 
know its mystery, evil might befall them. A few men wore 
as many as ten or twelve scalps attached to their ‘horns,’ ? 
their hair, their belt, and their weapons. Scalps were 
looked upon as spirits by warriors who took them regularly. 

. . . Warriors who had the arrow, knife, or other weapon as Invulner- 
their chief guardian spirit, were protected against hostile UY oa 
weapons ; for instance, if an arrow struck them, which was certain 

: dian 
not often the case, the blood was vomited up, and the eae 
1 James Teit, Zhe Thompson which, stiffened with white clay, stood 
Indians of British Columbia, p. 355- upright on the top of the head. See 
2 The “horn” was a braid of hair James Teit, of. cit. p. 226. 
VOL, Ill 2E 

418 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

wound healed in a short time. They seldom wore armor, 
and generally took the most dangerous places in battle. . 
Some men committed suicide in the attempt to test the 
powers of their guardian spirits to bring them to life again. 
It has happened that a man who boasted of the powers 
of his guardian spirit was shot by some one desirous of 
testing the power of the guardian spirit of the boaster, or 
in order to find out if the man was bullet or arrow proof,” ! 
Dance Before they started on the war-path, the Thompson 
Sin Indians often took sweat-baths for several days and prayed 
spirits to their guardian spirits for success and protection. They 
before war. aisg used to dance a circular dance, against the sun’s 
course, in which the dancers, arrayed in paint and feathers 
and fully armed, went through a mimic battle. In this 
dance each man imitated the sounds of the animal which 
was his guardian spirit, shouting, grunting, and whooping 
withal, while the drums beht an accompaniment.” 
Shamans Shamans accomplished their supernatural feats by the 
pane help of their guardian spirits, who instructed them by means 
Fate of dreams or visions. Women as well as men could become 
wonders, Shamans. Some shamans had staffs painted with symbols 
of their guardian spirits. They were thought both to cause 
and to cure such sickness as was the effect of witchcraft or 
of the loss of the soul. Shamans could shoot their enemies 
with their guardian spirits ; the victim fell sick at once and 
complained of headache.’ 

§ 9. Guardian Spirits among the Lillooets 

Guardian Another tribe of the Salish stock who have guardian 
among the SPirits are the Lillooets. Their country is for the most part 
Lillooets. a long narrow valley in the south-west interior of British 
Columbia, beginning at Cayuse Creek, where it opens into 
the Fraser River, and extending through the mountains to 
Harrison Lake. Along the lakes and streams of this valley 

the greater part of the tribe have their homes. As among, 
1 James Teit, 7he Thompson Indians 4 James Teit, The Lillooet Indians 

of British Columbia, pp. 356 59. (Leyden and New York, 1906), p. 195 
. , 6 (The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
2 James Teit, of. czt. Pp. 350 Memoir of the American Museum of 

3 James Teit, of. cif. P- 360. | Natural History). 

xvi GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE LILLOOETS 419 

the Thompson Indians, young men went through a course The 

of training and obtained guardian spirits. The attainment aes # 
of puberty was marked by many dreams. Then the youth ; 
began his training. He painted his face red the first four 

days and afterwards yellow. Also’he painted his neck, 

chest, arms and legs yellow. He repaired to the mountains, The sweat- 
where. he built a sweat-house, sweated, fasted, and prayed. eee 
Thus he staid for a space of two, three, or four days or ; 
longer, if he could endure it without growing too weak. At 

home he sat most of the time apart from adults and women, 

Each evening he left the house, returning shortly after day: 

break. He retired to some lonely spot, where he slept or 

spent the night walking, running, shooting, and praying. 

Each morning he washed himself with fir-branches at a 

spring or in running water. On each of four nights he had 

to build a large fire on a mountain-top, and by its light 

he shot at small figures of deer made of bark or grass, 
praying that he might become an expert archer. At intervals 

also he répaired to the mountains and cleansed himself 

by sweating in a sweat-house, by purging himself with 
medicine, and by vomiting. During the intervals between 

their excursions to the mountains lads who were in training 
contended with each other by day in running and shooting. 

Also they burned and cut each other in the arms, chest and The 
legs to prove their endurance of pain. The Indians said aaea Ge 
that this custom of cutting each other with knives till they of each 
bled freely served to let out the bad blood and would make 
the sufferer insensible to fatigue, able to sustain the loss of 

blood, and capable of seeing and smelling blood without 
fainting. Most lads also slashed the points of their fingers 

in order to become lucky in war, the chase, and other 
avocations, These customs of cutting themselves and one 
another were also practised by the Thompson Indians and 

by the Shuswap. The mode of obtaining the guardian 

spirit was the same as in the Thompson tribe. Until they 
obtained their spiritual guardian lads prayed both to the 

Dawn of Day and to the Dusk of Evening. The course of 
training usually lasted from one to four years; but such as 

wished to become shamans or to excel in certain kinds 

of work continued to train at intervals for many years. 

420 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

The guardian spirit generally came to them in their first 
year. 

Animals The classes of animals and things which served the 

and things Thompson Indians as guardian spirits served also the 

which were _ , 7 n 

guardian Lillooets in the same capacity. The raven was a common 

oe guardian spirit. Persons who had him for their spiritual 

Lillooets. patron enjoyed prophetic gifts, especially they could foretell 
death and the weather. Some of the Lower Lillooet Indians 
had the seal as a guardian spirit. The strongest guardian 
spirits for warriors were the knife, gun, ball, arrow, thunder, 
sun, red-winged flicker, and hawks of three kinds. For 
hunters the most powerful guardian spirits were the wolf, 
lynx, wolverine, grizzly bear, deer, and beaver. The most 
potent for shamans were the dead, the raven, the golden 
eagle, the mink, and the owl. Some men had the thunder- 
bolt or thunder arrow-head as their guardian. Men who 
had the spirit of the sweat-house for their guardian spirit 
made a sweat-house for themselves of elk-skin supported 
on wands, and inside it they placed four large stones, which 
were heated to make the steam for the bath. Men who 
had a particular kind of snake (the /afz/s?) for their guardian 
spirit always wore its tail, or the entire ae. stuffed or 
blown out, attached to some part of their person? 

Guardian Young men often performed a “ guardian spirit dance” 

pao at the suggestion of their elders. Each of them in turn 

aaa rose and sang his song in presence of all the people. They 
also danced and mimicked their guardian spirit by motion, 
gesture, and cry. Similar “guardian spirit dances” used to 
be in vogue also among the Thompson Indians and the 
Shuswap.* 

sec Some powerful shamans of the Lower Lillooet Indians 

Lillooet had the dead as their guardian spirits and obtained from 
shamans. them their knowledge. To this end they trained by sleeping 
in burial-grounds at intervals extending over several years. 
Shamans bewitched their enemies by shooting them with 
their guardian spirit. They sharpened a feather, stick, or 
stone and tied it to some hair taken from the head of their 
intended victim. Also they tied to it some hair or feathers 

1 James Teit, The Lillooet Indians, 2 James Teit, of. cét, p. 283. 
pp. 265-267. 3 James Teit, of. c#t. pp. 285 5g. 

xvit GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE LILLOOETS 421 

from the animal that was their guardian spirit. Then they 
shot the magical object into their victim’s body. Like an 
elfin-arrow it left no mark, but the person wounded by it 
fell sick at once and died, unless another shaman succeeded 
in discovering and extracting the fatal bolt before it was 
too late. 

§ 10. Guardian Spirits among the Shuswap 

Another Indian tribe of the Salish stock who claimed Guardian 
to have guardian spirits are the Shuswap or Shushwap, Sits 
Their country is in the interior of British Columbia, to the Shuswap. 
north-east of that of the Thompson tribe. Dr. Franz Dr. F. 

: . < ae Boas’s 
Boas has given us an account of their guardian spirits as acco 
follows :— 

“The shaman is initiated by animals, who become his 
guardian spirits. The initiation ceremonies for warriors and 
shamans seem to be identical, the object of the initiation 
ceremonies being merely to obtain supernatural help for 
any object that appeared desirable. The young man, on 
reaching puberty, and before he had ever touched a woman, 
had to go out on the mountains and pass through a number 
of performances. He had to build a sweat-house, in which Use of the 
he stayed every night. In the morning he was allowed to S¥@4tbath. 
return to the village. He had to clean himself in the 
sweat-house, to dance and to sing during the night. This Appear- 
was continued, sometimes for years, until he dreamt that the ol a 
animal he desired for his guardian spirit appeared to him spirit ina 
and promised him its help. As soon as it appeared the een 
novice fell down in a swoon, ‘He feels as though he were 
drunk, and does not know whether it is day or night, nor 
what he is doing,’ The animal tells him to think of it if 
he should be in need of help, and gives him a certain song 
with which to summon him up. Therefore every shaman has 
his own song, which none else is allowed to sing, except 
when the attempt is made to discover a sorcerer. Sometimes 
the spirit comes down to the novice in the shape of a stroke 
of lightning. If an animal initiates the novice it teaches 
him its language. One shaman in Nicola Valley is said to 

unt, 

1 James Teit, Zhe Lillooet Indians, p. 287. 

Invulner- 
ability con- 
ferred by 
guardian 
spirit. 

Guardian 
spirits of 
shamans. 
Procedure 
of the 
shaman in 
healing the 
sick, 

CHAP. 

speak the ‘coyote language’ in his incantations. . . . After 
a man has obtained a guardian spirit he is bullet and arrow 
proof. If an arrow or a bullet should strike him he does 
not bleed from the wound, but the blood all flows into his 
stomach. He spits it out, and is well again. ‘ Braves,’ who 
have secured the help of spirits, are carried to the fighting 
ground. No! woman must see them when on their way, as 
else they would lose their supernatural power. When an 
attack is going to be made on a village the guardian spirit of 
the warriors will warn them. In dreaming or in waking they 
see blood flying about, and this is a sign that some one will 
be murdered. Before going on a war expedition warriors 
would fast and abstain from sleep for a whole week, bathing 
frequently in streams. It was believed that this would 
make them nimble-footed. 

“Men could acquire more than one guardian spirit, and 
powerful shamans had always more than one helper. The 
principal duty of the shaman was to cure the sick.” In 
doing so he wore a head-dress made of a mat about two 
yards long by one yard wide, so that the whole length of 
the mat hung down his back. “ As soon as the shaman 
puts on the headdress he ‘acts as though he was crazy,’ z.e. 
he puts himself into a trance by singing the song he had . 
obtained from his guardian spirit at the time of initiation. 
He dances until he perspires freely, and finally his spirit 
comes and speaks to him. Then he lies down next to the 
patient and sucks at the part of the body where the pain is. 
He is supposed to remove a thong or a feather from it, 
which was the cause of the disease. As soon as he has 
removed it he leaves the hut, takes off his mat, and blows 
upon the object he has removed from the body, which then 
disappears.” * 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘ The Shushwap,” in 
Sixth Report of the Committee on the 

422 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA 

on reaching manhood were accustomed 
to separate themselves and go away 

North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 93 
5g. (Report of the British Assoctation, 
Leeds, 1890, separate reprint), Com- 
pare G, M. Dawson, ‘ Notes on the 
Shuswap People of British Columbia,” 
Proceedings and Transactions of the 
Royal Society of Canada for the year 
1891, ix. (Montreal, 1892) Transac- 

tions, section ii. p. 13: ‘ Young men / 

alone into some solitary part of the 
country, where they would sometimes 
remain for three or fourmonths. They 
might hunt or trap, but must avoid 
contact with other people and keep 
away from habitations. . . . They also 
meditated and dreamed dreams till 
each discovered his particular guardian 
spirit,” 

xvit GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE SHUSWAP 423 

Many more details as to the guardian spirits of the Mr. James 
Shuswap are given by Mr. James Teit in his valuable mono- sie 
graph on the tribe.’ From him we learn that boys began to spirits 
train from the time that their voice changed or they first Sawant 
dreamed of women, arrows, and canoes. Most boys did not 
live apart from the people, but separated themselves at 
irregular intervals, extending from two or three days to 
upwards of as many weeks at atime. During their absence The 
they trained themselves with the object of obtaining a 
guardian spirit and of acquiring the requisite knowledge fot 
the profession they had chosen, such as that of the shaman, 
warrior, hunter, gambler, and so forth. Their training lasted 
from one to eight or ten years. During their first period of 
seclusion they fasted as long as they could, generally from 
four to ten days. Some lads built their sweat-house in a Use of the 
wild or lonely spot to which they repaired almost every S¥@*t-bath. 
evening, and after sweating and training all night they 
returned home at daybreak. Twinsdid not train to acquire 
guardian spirits, as they were supposed to possess them 
already. Young men prayed to the Dawn of Day, but Prayers to 
some also prayed occasionally to the Earth, the Sun, and cage 
the Darkness (or Night). Among the western bands of the animals, 
Shuswap many addressed themselves directly to animals, “* 
birds, weapons, and other material objects, rarely to the 
Dawn of Day, the Earth, the Sun, and the Darkness. The 
training consisted in running, jumping, shooting with arrows, 
and so forth. Some of the youths would set boulders rolling 
down the mountain-side and try to keep up with them as 
they bounded from crag to crag; also they climbed the 
mountains at evening, trying to overtake the shadow as it 
ascended the hillside when the sun went down.’ The lads Use of 
moreover purged themselves by drinking certain drugs, and PriB*tives 
they made themselves vomit by thrusting willow-twigs down emetics. 
their throats. They did not eat fat nor any fresh fish, The 

‘except the tail; and almost all cut their bodies at some oh tha 

cut their 
time during their period of training, for this cutting of the bodies, 

1 James Teit, Zhe Shuszoap (Leyden the American Museum of Natural 
and New York, 1909), pp. 588-590, zstory). 
601, 605-611, 612 sg. (The Jesup 2 James Teit, Zhe Shuswap, pp. 588 
North-Pacific Expedition, Memotr of sq. 

424 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

body was an important part of the preparation of warriors, 
hunters, and runners. The novice ran till he was hot, then 
cut the points of his eight fingers with a sharp arrow-stone, 
after which he sweat-bathed. Others usually cut four half- 
circles or four straight lines, not very deep, on the outside 
of each leg, between the ankle and the knee, with a stone 
knife or dagger, afterwards piercing the inside of each leg in 
four places between the ankle and the knee with the point 
of a dagger or, instead, cutting four dot-like cuts or four 
crosses. The novice made these cuts in very cold clear 
water, and afterwards sweat-bathed. Meanwhile he prayed 
that he might be able to bear pain well and that his wounds, 
if he received any, might quickly heal. The cutting of the 
finger-tips was supposed to let out all bad blood. Further, 
future warriors slashed their sides and breast, and future 
gamblers cut the tips of their tongues, some of them also 
swallowed the blood. This was supposed to make them 

lucky. 

Pictures of All boys and some girls at puberty painted pictures 

Leto on rocks during the middle or toward the end of their 

rocks. training. Most of the pictures represented the things seen 
in their dreams, and the painting of them was supposed to 
hasten the attainment of a guardian spirit or of other desirable 
objects.” 

Chastity “Both girls and boys were carefully watched from 

head childhood, and not allowed to smoke or have sexual connec- 

girls. tion until after their periods of training. To indulge in the 
latter during their training would have a disastrous effect on 
their future, would render of no avail the training they had 
undergone, and would make it impossible to obtain a 
manztou or become proficient in ‘mystery’ for a very long 
time. It would also make them heavy-footed, slow, and 
short-winded in after years.” * 

Some Among the Shuswap a few men inherited guardian 

guardian 

spirits were SPitits from their fathers, but spirits so inherited were 
inherited deemed to be not so powerful as those which a man 
by men . * . 

from their acquired for himself. For example, a man named Six- 
fathers, wilexken inherited from his father fire, water, the owl, and 

1 James Teit, The Shuswap, pp. 589 2 James Teit, op. cét. P. 590. 
Sg, 3 James Teit, of. ctf. Pe 590 

’xvit GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE SHUSWAP 425 

the coyote as guardian spirits, and these spirits often but these 
appeared to him in dreams and advised him. “ These ea 
protectors, however, were never of much value to Sixwilexken, aie 
for they did not really belong to him, and therefore he did elated 
not know the proper way to use them. Water, besides spirits. 
coming to him from his father, was also acquired by himself 

when training, and consequently he understood it perfectly, 

but the others he did not understand.” ? 

“Most men had several guardians, but generally one Most men 
was much more powerful than the others. Those of some pacar 
men were wholly helpful, and could not be used to harm spirits, 
any person ; while others had exactly the opposite properties, “7% 
In some parts of the tribe the dog, coyote, and water were more 
considered the most powerful of all guardian spirits. Other ke 
very powerful ones were the dead, cannibal, fox, tobacco, 
grisly bear, wolf, eagle, and pipe. The tobacco, pipe, and 
fox guardians were inseparable. A person obtaining the 
one also obtained the others. In the: same way the coyote 
and the cannibal were associated. The scalp guardian was 
often associated with the cannibal. Guardian spirits gener- 
ally thought to possess considerable power, and much used, 
were the thunder, loon, pinto horse, white horse, weapons of 
all kinds, hunger or famine, mountain-goat, otter, beaver, 
hare, owl, fire, rain, blood, woman, black bear, deer, scalp, 
man, boy. The woman guardian was sometimes called the The 
‘singing woman.’ She was not an ordinary woman, and “oman 

guardian, 
was acquired in conjunction with the black bear or the 
deer.”” Indeed the woman appears to have been a deer 
who changed into human form; for we read of a young 
man in training to whom a deer appeared and gave him 
advice. Afterwards he dreamed of a woman with her face 
painted with white and yellow stripes, who told him that 
she was the deer he had seen, and that she would help him 
and make him great ; whenever he wanted her aid, he was to 
paint his face with white and yellow stripes like hers, and 
then she would appear to him and help him. Similarly the The may 
guardian spirit called the ‘man’ was a fox, who could assume &¥*"dian, 
the form of aman. He was often called the ‘smoking man.’ * 

1 James Teit, Zhe Shuswap, p. 2 James Teit, of. czt. p. 606. 
605. 3 James Teit, of. cit. pp. 606 sg. 

Some 
guardian 
Spirits were 
especially 
powerful 
for 
shamans, 
others for 
warriors, 
and others 
for 
gamblers. 

Men par- 
took of the 
character 
of their 
guardian 
spirits. 

Advice 
given by 
guardian 
Spirits, 

426 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

“Of the guardians, the thunder, weapons, blood, and 
scalp were most powerful for warriors. The dead and 
the wolf were powerful guardians‘ of shamans, while for 
other people their assistance was of less value. The cannibal 
had power to assist particularly the shaman and the warrior. 
The loon, otter, pinto and white horse, were generally 
acquired by shamans. The woman, black bear, and deer 
were said to be powerful for gamblers. Some men acquired 
guardian spirits of a certain number, which seem to have 
possessed qualities of their own sufficiently different from 
that of the units of which they were composed to mark them 
as distinct. Among these were seven straws, seven trees, 
twins, two lakes, two boys, four plants, twenty coyotes. 
Guardians in the form of fish were very rare.” A boy and 
twins were very lucky guardians for gamblers.” 

“Persons partook largely of the character of their 
guardians ; for instance, a man who had the goat for his 
guardian could travel on steep rocks better than other people. 
A man who had the swan for his guardian spirit could make 
snow fall by dancing with swan’s down on his head, or by 
throwing swan’s down on the water.”* Similarly,a shaman 
who had the rain for his guardian spirit could procure rain. 
For that purpose he painted his face with red stripes or 
dots or with both, perhaps in imitation of the clouds and 
rain-drops ; and having done so, he went out of the house 
and walked round in a circle with the sun, singing his rain- 
song and saying, “My guardian spirit will go around the 
world until it meets rain and will bring it here.” Then he 
told the people, “If my guardian spirit finds it quickly, rain 
will fall soon, probably to-morrow ; but if he cannot find it 
quickly, it may be two or three days before rain falls.” * 

Guardian spirits advised men in sickness how to get 
well, and told them what to do in order to be successful in 
hunting and gambling.? Most men painted their faces and 
bodies as they were directed by their guardian: spirits in 
dreams; many also arranged their clothes, ornaments, and 
hair in accordance with the directions of their spiritual 

P aie Teit, Zhe Shuswap, p. y ti ae op. cit. p- oo: 
07. ; ames leit, of. ctf. p. 601. 
2 James Teit, of. cit. p. 609. > James Teit, of. cit. p, 607. 

xvut GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE SHUSWAP 427 

patrons. Some warriors painted their bodies the colour 
that their guardian’s body was believed to be.’ 

“Parts of animals, such as the heart, hoof, bone, hair, parts of 
tail, etc, were claimed as protectors by certain men, but ee 
generally they only represented the guardian in about the sacred as 
same way as a hawk’s feather in a man’s head-band repre- 8°#*dians. 
sented the hawk as one of the man’s guardians. A man 
was sometimes told by the guardian spirit to hold certain 
parts of animals sacred; and thus, according to the way 
some Indians look at it, these particular parts of the animal 
were of prime importance, for they represented the means 
by which the guardian power exercised its mysterious 
influence. Thus a deer’s tail, although called a man’s 
guardian, might, in the first place, be only a symbol, and 
have no special powers apart from the whole deer; or it 
might be the mystery part of the guardian power by which 
alone the latter could exercise its functions. In this case 
the part was more important than the whole, but still not 
altogether distinct nor independent of it; while, in the first 
case, the part was subordinate and formed an unimportant 
part of the whole, having no practical value excepting as a 
symbol. It seems, however, that there was a third class of 
things called guardians, which, although parts of a whole, 
were guardian spirits in the full sense of the word, and were 
looked upon as independent beings, with powers of their 
own, distinct from those of the whole object or animal of 
which they were part. Probably the best example of this 
class is blood. Only a very few warriors had the mystery The 
of the scalp. They scalped their enemies, and wore the "ystery of 

7 : the scalp. 
scalps or scalp-locks on their persons. On their return from 
war they held a scalp dance. ... The men having the 
scalp as their guardian often had the cannibal as well... . 
‘Some people, besides their ordinary guardians, had other 
protectors which they impersonated in dances.”? 

“Once at least, during the winter, the people gathered In winter 
in the largest underground house, and each in turn sang his !®¢ People 

. : gathered 
mystery-song,—either the most powerful song obtained from together 

his guardians, or the one best adapted for the purpose of 4""8 
1 James Teit, Zhe Shuswap, pp. 608 sg. Kies ae : 

2 James Teit, of. cit. pp. 609 sg. 

A shaman 
dies if his 
guardian 
spirit is 
destroyed 
or pre- 
vented 
from re- 
turning to 
him, 

Such 
guardian 
spirits 
resemble 
external 
souls. 

428 ° GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

the ceremony. This is said to have been done for the 
purpose of discovering whether any sickness were approach- 
ing, whether any one had been bewitched, or if any other 
evil were threatening. As nearly all the men were 
possessed of some shamanistic power, their spirits watched ; 
and if they saw or found any influence that would be 
harmful to the community, they reported it in their song. 
Thus the people were warned, and prepared to defend 
themselves. Each man, in his song, told whatever was 
wonderful or important that had happened to his spirit 
since last they sang the mystery-songs. A very few of the 
men danced when they sang. Another object in holding 
this ceremony was to train all the youths in the singing of 
their mystery-songs, to give them self-confidence, to find 
out how they were progressing in their training, what their 
guardians were, and who among them was likely to become 
greatest.” ! | 

“A shaman will die if his guardian spirit is destroyed, 
or if it is imprisoned, so that he cannot get it back. A 
person could also be bewitched by taking possession of the 
soul and imprisoning it in a medicine-bag. Some men had 
‘medicine-places’ where their guardian lived,—as, for 
instance, the place of sunrise, or the place of sunset; and 
when they bewitched a person by taking his soul, they sent 
it to these places, where it was kept captive by their 
guardian spirit. In such cases the shaman had to put on 
his mask, and, travelling in spirit to the place, attempted 
with the aid of his guardians, to take back the soul forcibly 
from its captors. If he failed in his task, he became sick 
himself, and felt like a man who had received a severe 
thrashing.” ? 

The belief that a shaman dies when his guardian spirit 
perishes is akin to the belief in the external soul, of which 
we have had examples in the bush-souls of West Africa? 
and of which we shall find more instances in the naguals of 
Central America.‘ 

1 James Teit, The Shuswap, p. 610. 3 Above, vol. ii. pp» 552, 593 599. 
2 James Teit, of. cit. pp. 612 sg. 4 Below, pp- 443 572. 

xvit GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG OTHER SALISH 429 

§ 11. Guardian Spirits among other Salish Tribes 

Other Indian tribes of the Salish stock who had Guardian 
guardian spirits were the Stseelis and Skaulits, which (ja, 
occupy reservations on the Harrison River, a tributary among the 
which flows into the Fraser River about a hundred miles Sie 
from its mouth. The guardian spirits, which they called 
sulias, were apparently obtained as a rule in the usual way 
by dreams, which the young men dreamed during their 
course of training at puberty. At such times the Stee 
lads made much use of the sweat-house, lanced their bodies 
and limbs with knives “to let the bad blood out and make 
them strong,” and forced long rods down their throats to 
oblige them to vomit... With regard to these guardian mr.c. 
spirits or su/zas Mr. Charles Hill-Tout writes as follows :— oe 

“Those who had one or more of the animals commonly the suéias. 
hunted for food as their su/éa were always successful hunters Men were 
of those animals. For example the man who had a deer eae 
sulia could always find and kill plenty of deer. And _ it hunters of 
was the same with respect to other animals, both birds and ee kes 
fish. The fisher whose su/za was a salmon never lacked for had for 
these fish. . . . A su/za whose material form was that of an ee 
edible object enabled the owner of it to be eminently successful spirits 
in his quest for that object ; but among the Stseelis success in ee 
hunting or fishing could be conferred upon the hunter or fisher 
by other sadza than those which inhabited or took the forms 
of the animals hunted ; though it usually came in that way. 

Certain sudza of a mythological character also gave success 
to their prodégés in their undertakings. The protégé of a 
certain one-legged being was noted for his success as a deer 
hunter. This man believed that his strange su/za used to 
drive the deer into the lake for him, where they were easily 
despatched. The bow and: arrow sulia also conferred the 

1 Ch. Hill-Tout, ‘ Ethnological 
Report on the Stseelis and Skaulits 
Tribes of the Halokmelem Division 

guardian spirits; but by referring to 
the guardian spirit as a ‘dream 
totem,” ‘‘dream sz/za,” etc., he 

of the Salish of British Columbia,” 
Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
xxxiv. (1904) pp. 311, 316, 323 sgg. 
The writer does not, so far as I see, 
explain how these tribes obtain their 

leaves us to infer, as I have done in 
the text, that the guardian spirit was 
the being or thing of which the lad 
dreamed at puberty. 

430° GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

when a power upon its owner to kill whatever he shot at; but this 
ners suli@ ind of sudta had one serious drawback. If an arrow broke, 
material the owner’s life was in danger. It would appear that this 
neg anait CSability belongs to all su/éa having the outward or material 
broke, his form of an inanimate object that was fracturable, such as 
Lanes spears, paddles and the like. There is deep significance in 
this. It seems to suggest that the life of the owner of such 
a sulia was bound up, or intimately connected, with the 
well-being or existence of those objects under which his 
sulta manifested itself; and one seems to catch here an 
echo of the ‘soul-box’ belief. I sought to learn as much 
as possible. concerning the relation which existed, or was 
supposed to exist, between the individual and his protective 
sulia, but could gather little beyond what I have recorded, 
and the following story: Once a man who had a she-bear 
for his sadza went out hunting bear. He followed one to 
its den in a cave. As he sought to enter the cave after the 
bear, the latter, who was really his suéza, caught hold of him 
and wanted him to stay and live with her as her husband. 
This the man refused to do, whereupon she said to him that 
when he died he should come and live with her, and be her 

husband. 
bacon “According to Francois a man paid regard to his 
a thar salia_ by following his instructions, but did not pray to him 
ae Bi in the sense in which we employ that word, nor feel under 
Suet 

wasaspirit, any special obligation to him for his help and protection. 
ae it Anything that the man could do would be a small matter in 
appear in the eyes of such a mystery being as his su/za. Nor, as far 
priate I could learn, did the hunter pay any regard or show 
respect to his prey because his suéza appeared to him in his 
visions in that form. The real su/za was a ‘spirit’ or 
‘mystery being’; and though it might take the form of a 
deer, or a bear, or any other animal, it could not be hurt or 
killed, even if the animal were slain. . . . He also stated 
that not everybody acquired a suéia, only those who: 
excelled in their special lines, such as great hunters, fishers, 
warriors, runners and the like; and that women as a rule 
never acquired sudia unless they were sewwa or witches.” } 

1C. Hill-Tout, ‘Ethnological Tribes,” Journal of the Anthropological 
Report on the Stseelis and Skaultis Jvstitute, xxxiv. (1904) Pp. 324 s¢s 

xvut GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG OTHER SALISH — 431 

According to this account, a Stseelis man not only did Thus the 

not respect the animals in which his guardian spirit was eon 
embodied, but actually hunted and killed them more success- to his 
fully than did other men who had not these animals for 8vardian 
their guardians. In this respect the attitude of the Stseelis (suéic) was 
to their guardian spirits differed from that of most other ea 
American Indians and resembled the attitude of the Australian 
Arunta and other Central Australian tribes to their clan eee 
totems ; for among these Central Australian tribes, as we have had special 
seen, the right and power to hunt and kill certain animal¢ Hania 
appear to be the special privilege of men who have thes¢ kl it. 
particular animals for their totems.1 Akin to this is another 
belief of the Salish tribes which Mr. Hill-Tout has recorded. 
He tells us that many of the Indians believe themselves to 
be descended from certain mythical creatures, half animals, 
half men, “and claim in consequence power over the animal 
descendants of them to-day whom they look upon as related 
to themselves. Thus the people of the Mountain-goat or 
Sturgeon ancestry believe they can secure animals of these 
species more readily than other people can, because of the 
supposed relationship existing between them ; ‘and they had 
esoteric formulas and ceremonies which they employed when 
they wished to capture them and which were thought to 
cause the fish or animals to yield themselves readily to their 
human kinsmen.”? 

Among the Salish tribes of the coast, as well as of the Among the 
interior, of British Columbia, the belief in guardian spirits coer 
would seem to have been universal; but on this subject we belief in 
have little exact information, probably because the tribes on oe 
the coast have been more modified by civilisation and have appears to 
therefore retained less of their ancient customs and traditions PvP" 
than the more secluded tribes of the interior. On this according 
subject Mr. C. Hill-Tout, who has investigated the relics of Hilrsck. 
savagery among the coast Salish, writes as follows :— 

“Belief in protecting spirits constitutes the chief 
feature of the religion of the Salish. Such beliefs were 

The Frangois referred to in the text 2 C. Hill-Tout, ** The Salish Tribes 
was one of Mr. Hill-Tout’s Indian of the Coast and Lower Fraser Delta,” 
informants. Annual Archaeological Report, 1905 

1 See vol. i. pp. 104-112, 214-242. (Toronto, 1906), p. 230. 

432 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

The Salish NOt confined to this stock; they were held in one form 
believed |, or another by practically all the aboriginal tribes of the 
was peopled New World when we first came in contact with them. It 
aia has its source, of course, in those animistic, anthropomorphic 
felt the conceptions common to primitive man the world over. The 
ee Salish in common with other tribes in the same plane 
spiritual of culture as themselves, peopled their environment with 
aha mysterious beings and sentient agencies of beneficent and 
maleficent character, mostly of the latter. The land, water 
and air teem with mysteries; they are surrounded on all 
sides with capricious beings that have power to harm or 
destroy them. They are at any moment of their lives 
liable to come under the influence of these—to be made 
their victims or their prey ; consequently they felt a vital 
need of some protecting, guiding influence in their lives ; 
and hence arose the oak of seeking and acquiring 
tutelar spirits. 
The | “The general fneihod of acquiring these guardian 
Sees spirits was by means of dreams and visions. These were 
obtained in not the ordinary dream or vision but others of a mystic 
acnam | order, which came to the novice or person seeking the 
pling spirits, only after long and special preparation. The seeker 
bathing, goes apart by himself into the forest or mountains in some 
and _ __ solitary spot close to a lake or some other body of water, 
ee and imposes upon himself a rigorous course of training, 
which is called kwakwazyistt by the Delta and some of 
the Island tribes and by other names in other divisions. 
This training consists of prolonged fasts, frequent bathings, 
forced vomitings and other exhausting bodily exercises. 
With the body thus enervated the mind becomes abnormally 
active and expectant and dreams and visions and hallucina- 
tions are as natural to the novice in such a state as 
breathing ; and we can readily understand how real must 
seem to him the visions of his looked-for spirit helper. 
The _ “Whatever object appears to him on these occasions, 
aay or rather what he conceives to be the spirit of the object, 
beany- becomes his totem or tutelary spirit. It may be anything 
wing" almost in nature—plant, bird, beast, fish, a tool, weapon 

animate or or any other inanimate object, or natural phenomena. As, 
inanimate ; 
anything Under the view he takes, everything in nature is possessed 

XVIII 

GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG OTHER SALISH 

433 

of a spirit and has mystery power, the spirit of a stick or may be 
stone can protect and lend him’ aid as well as the spirit ‘ncowed 

of living things. 

kind of hierarchical order among these ghostly helpers. 
Some things or objects were more ‘ powerful’ to aid than But some 
others, and some aided along special lines in one direction 

and others in another. 

Others 
If 

therefore the seeker after mystery powers was not satisfied 
with the first ‘spirit’ that came to him, or rather with the 
powers it bestowed, he would enter upon a second course 
of training and await the coming or vision of a second 
helper, or even of a third or a fourth, spending years perhaps 

in his seeking. 

Usually, however, he recognizes some mystery 

power, 

guardian 
Spirits are 

Some conferred great hunting more 
powers, others great running or fighting powers. 
again assisted the ‘medicine’ men in their cures. 

powerful 
than others, 

“Between the individual and his protecting spirit or Close re. 
spirits a very close and mysterious relationship is supposed 

to exist, 

which we use this word, but expects and looks for its aid 
and protection when needed. The totem is supposed to spirit. 
warn him by dreams and visions of impending danger and 
to assist him in difficult undertakings, and indeed in all 

the issues of his life.” ! 

§ 12. Guardian Spirits among the Kwakiutl 

lationship 
between 

He does not pray to his totem in the sense in aman 

and his 
guardian 

North of the great bulk of the Salish tribes are the Guardian 
Kwakiutl on the coast of British Columbia, and among 

them also we find a system 

1 Ch, Hill-Tout, ‘*The Salish Tribes 
of the Coast and Lower Fraser Delta,” 
Annual Archeological Report, 1905 
(Toronto, 1906), pp. 229 sg. Mr. 
Hill-Tout calls the guardian spirit a 
* personal totem.” The Siciatl of 
Sechelt Peninsula, in British Columbia, 
may serve as an example of the changes 
which have come over the Indians of 
the coast. They are devout Catholics, 
with an imposing church which they 
built at their own expense and now 
maintain generously; they have a 
commodious town-hall, a2 handsome 
band-stand facing the bay, and a 

VOL. HI 

of guardian spirits, with this 

convenient system of water-works. 
Each house has its own garden, in 
which European fruits and vegetables 
are grown. The men engage in 
fishing or timber-cutting throughout 
the year. Some of them are expert 
hunters and export much venison 
to the Vancouver market. Yet 
even among these civilised Indians 
reminiscences of guardian spirits have 
been detected. See C. Hill-Tout, 
“Report on the Ethnology of the 
Siciatl of British Columbia,” Journal 
of the Anthropological Institute, xxxiv. 
(1904) pp. 20 sg., 26 s¢g. 
2F 

spirits 
among the 
Kwakiutl, 

434 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

difference, however, that though a lad still acquires his 
guardian spirit by fasting’and washing, his choice among 
the spirits is not unlimited; he can only obtain as his 
patron one or more of a certain limited number of spirits 
which are hereditary in his clan. On this subject our 
authority is Dr. Franz Boas, who writes as follows :— 
Dr. “We have now to deal with another class of legends 
ae — which relate entirely to spirits that are still in constant 
guardian contact with the Indians, whom they endow with super- 
Ne natural powers. In order to gain their help, the youth 
KwakiutlL must prepare himself by fasting and washing, because 
only the pure find favor with them, while they kill the 
impure. Every young man endeavors to find a protector 
Analogy of this kind. It is clear that this idea corresponds exactly 
ieee to the manztou of the Algonquin Indians, and that we have 
ong to deal here with the elementary idea of the acquisition 
North of a guardian spirit, which has attained its strongest develop- 
ete ment in America. Its specific character on the North 
spirits have Pacific Coast lies in the fact that the guardian spirit has 
one ae become hereditary. This is the case among the northern 
ayoung tribes of British Columbia. It is alsé the case among the 
et ony, Kwakiutl and among the Chinook. When the youth pre- 
one of the pares to meet a guardian spirit, he does not expect to 
heen find any but those of his clan. This is probably the reason 
for the relatively small number of such spirits—for among 
the Indians of the plains, among whom each man has his 
individual spirit, their number is unlimited—and it has also 
given occasion for the development of a more elaborate 
mythology relating to these spirits.”? 
a cine “Owing to the fact that these spirits are hereditary,. 
the sitet their gifts are always contained in the legend detailing 
the spirit. their acquisition by the ancestor of a clan. The principal 
gifts in these tales are the magical harpoon which ensures 
success in sea-otter hunting ; the death bringer which, when 
pointed against enemies, kills them; the water of life 
which resuscitates the dead; the burning fire which, when 

pointed against an object, burns it; and a dance, a song, 

1 Franz Boas, “The Social Organiza- United States National Museum for- 
tion and the Secret Societies of the 7895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 393 59. 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 

xvul GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 435 

and cries which are peculiar to the spirit. The gift of this The dance 
dance means that the protégé of the spirit is to perform aon 
the same dances which have been shown to him. In these The dancer 
dances he personates the spirit. He wears his mask and 3" hie 
his ornaments. Thus the dance must be considered a ornaments 
dramatic performance of the myth relating to the acquisition ad 
of the spirit, and shows to the people that the performer personates 
by his visit to the spirit has obtained his powers and“ 
desires. When nowadays a spirit appears to a youn 
Indian, he gives him the same dance, and the youth also 
returns from the initiation filled with the powers and 
desires of the spirit. He authenticates his initiation by 
his dance in the same way as his mythical ancestor did. 

“The obtaining of the magical gifts from these spirits 
is called ¢lokoala, while the person who has obtained them 
becomes saualaku, supernatural, which is also the quality 
of the spirit himself. The ornaments of all these spirits Ornaments 
are described as made of cedar bark, which is dyed red ee 
in the juice of alder bark. They appear to their devotees the dances 
only in winter, and therefore the dances are also per- et 
formed only in winter. For this reason they may con- winter, 
veniently be called the winter ceremonial.” + 

Among the spirits which thus appear to Kwakiutl Four 
young men and endow them with supernatural powers four soeela 
principal ones may be distinguished, namely (1) Wexalagz/es spirits 
(“ making war all over the earth”), (2) Bazbakualanu Xsitwae Se 
(‘the first one to eat man at the mouth of the river ”), 
(3) Matem, who lives on the top of steep mountains, and (4) 
the Ghosts. Of these the first (W2zxalagilis) confers various The gifts 
supernatural powers ; he can make his votaries invulnerable, eae 7 
or at least insensible to the pain of wounds so that they invuiner- 
cannot be killed however much they may be hacked and 27% 4 
slashed ; or again he can give his devotees power to catch fire, fying, 
the invisible spirit of disease, which is constantly flying fom us 
about in the air in the form of a worm, and when they dead, ete. 
have caught it they can throw it at their enemies, who 

die of its effects instantaneously. The second of the spirits 

1 Franz Boas, ‘The Social Organiza- United States National Museum for 
tion and the Secret Societies of the 7895 (Washington, 1897), p. 396. _ 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 

436 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

(Baxbakualanu Xstwae) makes his disciples into cannibals 
(Hamatsas) by instilling into them a craving for human 
flesh ; or he enables them to handle and swallow fire 
without being burned; or he gives them the knack of 
smashing people’s skulls; and there ‘are other gifts and 
graces of similar sorts with which he endows them. The 
third spirit (#fatem) is a bird, and he gives the youths the 
power of flying. The fourth class of spirits (the Ghosts) 
bestow on their votaries the useful gift of resurrection or the 
power of returning to life after they have been killed.’ 

§ 13. Guardian Spirits among the Haidas and Tlingits 

No regular There is little or no evidence that a regular system of 
caine guardian spirits, such as we have described, prevails among 
Spirits the Haidas and Tlingits, both of whom have or had a 
Here ihe system of clan totemism. Among the Haidas, it is true, 
Tiingits. we hear of “patron deities” such as Property-Woman, 
oie Master Carpenter, He-who-jumps-about-on-One-Leg, or 
among the Master Hopper, Death-by-Violence, the Slave Powers, the 
Haidas. Spirit of Mourning, the Spirit of Theft, the Strength-Spirit, 

and the Medicine-Spirit ; but these do not appear to have 

been guardian spirits of individuals in the strict sense of 

the word; though a man by eating certain medicines, 

especially a plant called zaz, could sometimes see Property- 
Spirits Woman passing by and thereby grow rich.” Again, 
Mae members of a secret society among the Haidas were 
members believed to be inspired by a particular spirit such as the 
of sees ~=Dog-eating Spirit, the Grizzly-bear Spirit, the Wolf Spirit, 
among the the Fire-throwing Spirit, the Gambling Spirit, and so forth. 
Maidas. But these spirits also appear to have differed from the 

guardian spirits of individuals such as we have found them in 

other Indian tribes.2 Much more analogous to the personal 

guardians or wanzttoos of individuals were the‘spirits which 

1 Franz Boas, ‘*The Social Organiza- and New York, 1905), pp. 29 sgq. 
tion and the Secret Societies of the (Zhe Jesup North Pacific Expedition, 
Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the Memoir of the American Museum of 
United States National Museum for Natural History). 

7895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 394 sg. 
2 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 3 J. R. Swanton, of. cz. pp. 
the Ethnology of the Haida (Leyden 160 sg9. 

xvii =GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE HAIDAS 437 

were supposed to animate Haida shamans. As tothe mode 4 Haida 
in which the shaman acquired the spirit or spirits Dr. G. erases 
M. Dawson writes thus: “The office of séa-ga, shaman or acquires 
medicine-man, is not, like the chieftaincy, hereditary, but aoe 
is either chosen or accepted in consequence of some tendency course of 
to dream or see visions, or owing to some omen. The a 
would-be doctor must go through a severe course of initia- 

tion. He must abstain from connexion with women, and 

eat very little ordinary food, and that only once a day, in 

the evening. He goes into the woods and eats ‘ medicine,’ 

of which the Momeses uniflora was pointed out to me ds 

one of the chief constituents. This plant is hot and bitter 

to the taste. A course of this character continued for some 
months, or even for a year, causes the body to become thin, 

and the mind may eventually be somewhat deranged, or at 

least the ska-ga pretends to see strange things. He speaks 
mysteriously, and soon takes an acknowledged place in the 
tribe.”’ This mode of acquiring a spirit through a vision 
brought about by fasts and maceration of the body is 
identical with the mode in which among so many tribes 

a youth at puberty obtains his guardian spirit or manztoo. 
Personal cleanliness was an essential condition to obtaining personal 
a spirit. Indeed, “ whether a man were a shaman or not, “<anliness 
he could increase his physical power, or obtain property, tothe 
success in hunting, fishing, war, etc. by rigid abstinence fee 
from food and drink, by remaining away from his wife, guardian 
bathing in the sea, taking sweat-baths, etc. He would ‘Pitt 
drink warmed salt water often, and take fresh water after- 

wards, when all the contents of his stomach were ejected, 
leaving him so much the ‘cleaner.’” ? 

Every Tlingit, it is said, has his own guardian spirit Guardian 
called ¢« kinajek, but how he acquires it we are not told. If on re 
he is a bad or unclean man, the spirit may leave or even Tiingits. 
kill him.’ However, among the Tlingits, as among the Mode in 
Haidas, the way in which a shaman acquires the spirits ee 
essential to the exercise of his profession closely resembles shaman 

1G. M. Dawson, Report on the 2 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 
Queen Charlotte Islands, 1878 (Mon- the Ethnology of the Haida, p. 40. 
treal, 1880), p. 122 B (Geological 3 A. Krause, Die 7linkit-Indianer 
Survey of Canada). (Jena, 1885), p. 292. 

acquires 
the spirits 
of his 
profession. 

The 
mystery of 
the otter’s 
tongue. 

The spirit- 
mask, 

Spirits love 
cleanliness 
and the 
sound of 
rattles and 
drums. 

438 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

the way*in which ordinary men elsewhere obtain their 
guardian spirits or manitoos. When a Tlingit wishes to 
become a shaman or medicine-man, he betakes himself to a 
forest or a mountain far from the haunts of men. There he 
stays for two, three, or four weeks, living on the root of the 
Panax horridum. The length of his stay depends on the 
speed or tardiness with which the spirits manifest themselves 
to him. When at last they come, the chief spirit sends to 
the novice a river-otter in whose tongue the whole mystery 
and power of the medicine-man’s craft are believed to be 
embodied. When the otter meets the man, the two stand 
still, and the man utters the single syHable O! O! O! O! 
four times in different notes ; whereupon the otter falls down 
on its back, obligingly stretching out its tongue, which the 
future shaman snips off and deposits in a basket specially 
made for the purpose. This precious talisman he carefully 
conceals, for were an uninitiated person to find it he would 
go mad on the spot. The skin of the otter is stripped off 
and kept by the shaman as a badge of office, but the flesh 
is buried in the ground. If, however, after a long stay in 
the wilderness the would-be shaman cannot summon up 
spirits, he repairs, still fasting, to the grave of a dead medicine- 
man, spends the night with the corpse, and takes one of its 
teeth or a little finger in his mouth, in order to be able to 
conjure the spirits and so gain possession of the magic 
otter’s tongue. After that, lean and famished, he returns 
home to give proof of his newly acquired skill in conjuring. 
His rank and reputation depend on the number of spirits 
whom he has at his bidding. For every one of them he has 
a special name, a special song, and a special wooden mask, 
which he puts on when he personates the being so represented. 
The words which he utters while he wears a spirit-mask are 
believed to be inspired by the spirit. It is only in the 
winter and at the time of the new or the full moon that 
these revelations of the spirit take place.' All spirits love 
cleanliness and the sound of the rattle and the drum. 
Therefore the shaman who is to summon them up must 

1H, J. Holmberg, “Uber die (Helsingfors, 1856), pp. 348-3533 A. 
Vélker des russischen Amerika,” c/a Krause, Die Tlinkit-Indtaner, pp. 
Soctetatts Sctentiarum Fennica, iv. 284 sqq. 

XVHI GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE HAIDAS 

439 

have practised abstinence for months beforehand: the hut 
in which the invocation is to take place must be carefully 
cleaned ; and the songs must be sung and the dances danced 
with great precision to the beat of the drum.' 

§ 14. Guardian Spirits among the Tinnehs or Dénés 

The Tinnehs or Dénés of Alaska and of North-West Guardian 
British America had, like so many Indian tribes, their ae a 
guardian spirits. Thus with regard to the eastern Tinnehf Tinnehs or 
we are told that “an inferior species of ‘ totemism’ obtairls °° 
among them. Each hunter selects, as a species of familiar 
spirit, some animal, and invariably a carnivorous one. 
According to their custom, the man can then neither eat nor 
skin, and if avoidable, not even kill the object of his choice. 

The taking of the ‘totem’ is not, so far as I am aware, the 
occasion of any religious ceremony, as is the case among 

some of the plain tribes. Pictures of various animals used Pictures of 
in the olden day to be distributed among the natives by the age 
traders, each individual receiving that of his totem. When to which 
a hunter had been unsuccessful he pulled this picture out of aot 
his medicine bag, laid it before him, and taking some tobacco 

from the same receptacle, paid adoration to the spirit by 
smoking and making it a speech. After this proceeding he 
returned with renewed ardor to the chase, and generally with 
success.” * 

Again, the Catholic missionary Father Petitot tells us Father 
that the Tinnehs have “ what is called xagualism or todemism Fetter 

or worship of the beast, a form of fetishism the most abject guardian 
and the most material that could be found, since it makes of '.° 
the animal a god or an instrument of the divinity, while it Tinnebs, 
makes of God an animal or a brutal incarnation. They call 
their fetishes e/kzzsz, ellone, allon on, according to their dialects. 
. . . The Slave Indians give the name of eélone to the elan, 

the Hareskins to the reindeer, and the Montagnards to the 

1 A. Krause, Die Tlinkit-Indianer, 
p- 292. 

2 «*Notes on the Tinneh or Chepe- 
wyan Indians of British and Russian 
America,” Annual Report of the Board 

of Regents of the Sinithsonian Institu- 
tton for the year 1866 (Washington, 
1867), p. 307. In this article the 
notes on the Eastern Tinnehs are by 
Mr. Bernard R. Ross, of the Hudson’s 
Bay Company. 

Father 
Morice 

on the 
guardian 
spirits 

of the 
Western 
Tinnehs or 
Dénés. 

440. GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

beaver, all, therefore, to the animal on which they principally 
subsist and which thus becomes the efficient cause of their 
life: The worship called xagualism, if the name of worship 
can be applied to certain vain practices, consists, (1) in wear- 
ing on the person a relic of the animal-genius which has 
revealed itself to an Indian in a dream ; (2) in resorting toa 
certain secret!practice for the purpose of pleasing the animal, 
because the animal itself has prescribed in a dream the 
practice to the person whom it is good enough to take 
possession of; (3) in abstaining with the greatest care from 
injuring, tracking, killing, and especially eating the flesh of 
the zagual, which is then called &é, ata, ay, a, ey according 
to the dialects. It is simply the taboo of the Polynesians. 
Almost all the savages, even after baptism, have retained a 
repugnance for their old taboo. They no longer venerate it, 
they even consider it evil, but they continue to refrain from 
it for that reason, and we do not put any constraint on 
them. Time will efface these childish fears.” * 

Another Catholic missionary, Father A. G. Morice, has 
given us an account of the guardian spirits of the Western 
Tinnehs or Dénés. He says: “They also attached to 
dreams the same importance as did most people of antiquity. 
It was while dreaming that they pretended to communicate 
with the supernatural world, that their shamans were invested 
with their wonderful power over nature, and that every 
individual was assigned his particular zagwal or tutelary 
animal genius. Oftentimes they painted this genius with 
vermilion on prominent rocks in the most frequented places, 
and these rough inscriptions are about the only monuments 
the immediate ancestors of the Dénés have left us.”* Again, 
Father Morice writes: “The individual or personal totem is 
well known as being some material object or being, most 
generally some animal, ordinarily revealed in dreams to a 
person who is bound thereafter to look upon it as sacred 
and to be especially revered and protected. In return 
for this reverence on the part of the person, the totem is 

1 Le R. P. E. Petitot, AfZonographie Customs,” Proceedings of the Canadian 
des Dénd-Dindjié (Paris, 1876), p. 36. Jsstitute, Toronto, Third Series, vol. 

2 Father A. G. Morice, ‘‘The vii, Fasciculus 1 (Toronto, 1889), p. 
Western Dénés, their Manners and 161. 

xviat GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE TINNEHS 441 

believed to particularly help and powerfully protect its human 
relative, as the individual is supposed to be.”’ Elsewhere 
Father Morice has explained the belief and custom more 
fully as follows :— 

“ Alongside of these, however, was another class of Belief of 

spirits, which had on earth, in the animate or inanimate ee 
world, representatives wherein were embodied, as it were, things in 
some of their own marvellous powers over nature. In the Daye 3° 
estimation of the Dénés, and I think I may say practically ha a 
of all the North American Indians, all the present entiti¢s iets 
in nature were at one time endowed with human-like faculties. 
Even trees spoke and worked and fought, and the fowls of 
the air and the animals of the earth were then men like our- 
selves, though possessed of potent virtues which are not ours. 
This magic, though now somewhat reduced in strength, has 
remained in the brute creation, and is the means whereby 
man can communicate with the spirit world, and by whose 
aid he is enabled to succeed in his quest after happiness and 
the necessaries of life... . 

“ Now, those spirits, which are personified by the repre- The 
sentatives of the vegetable or animal kingdoms, occasionally Pts °' 

animals 
manifest themselves to man, and give evidence of their and plants 
. . “4° ° : oe : sometimes 
friendly dispositions by adopting individuals and protecting adopt men 
them through life, in return for some consideration shown ee 
their present concrete forms or symbols. In a word, they through 
are the link which connects man with the invisible world, lif. 
and the only means of communing with the unseen: ¢hese 
are the personal totems of the Dénés, and, I cannot help 
thinking, of most of the American aborigines as well. . 
“Tt has been said that totemism is a purely social Totemism 
institution. I feel absolutely no hesitation in denying this, ‘ssent#lly 
religious. 
in so far at least as the Dénés are concerned. Totemism 
among them is essentially and exclusively connected with 
their religious system, and I am inclined to believe that the 
gentile totem is nothing else than an extension to the entire 
clan of an institution which was originally restricted to the 

individual. 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘‘Notes, Zvansactions of the Canadian Lustitute, 
Archeological, Industrial, and Socio- iv. (1892-93) p- 203- 
logical, on the Western Dénés,” 

The 
guardian 
spirit 
revealed in 
a dream. 

Intimate 
connection 
between a 
man and his 
guardian 
spirit. 

No man 
will kill 
or eat his 
guardian 
animal. 

Sacrifices 
to the 
guardian 
spirits. 

Guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Eskimo. 
Mr. W. 
H, Dall’s 
account. 

442 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

“The personal totem revealed itself usually in dreams, 
when it appeared to its future protégé under the shape of an 
animal, etc., which was. to be thenceforth his tutelary genius. 
Sometimes the totem animal was met in the woods under 
striking circumstances, and even at times went so far as to 
speak to the Indian. 

“Thenceforth the most intimate connection existed 
between the two. The native would be careful to carry on 
his person and publicly expose in his lodge the spoils of 
that animal, its entire skin or part of it, which he would not 
suffer to be treated lightly. Occasionally he would even 
carve a rough representation of the totem. He would 
treasure any object——such as a stone or a _ vegetable 
excrescence,—between which and his totem he fancied he 
saw a striking resemblance. He would paint its form or 
symbol in bright vermilion jon conspicuous rocks along lakes 
or rivers, etc. Under no circumstance would anything 
induce him wilfully to kill, or at least to eat the flesh of the 
being the prototype of which had become, as it were, sacred 
to him. In times of need he would secretly invoke its 
assistance, saying: ‘May you do this or that to me!’ 
Before an assault on his enemies or previous to his chase of 
large game, he would daub its symbol on his bow and 
arrows, and if success attended his efforts, he would 
sometimes thank it by destroying in its honor any piece 
of property on hand, food or clothing, or in later times 
tobacco, which he would throw into the water or cast into 
the fire as a sacrifice.” ? 

§ 15. Guardian Spirits among the Eskimo 

Further, the system of guardian spirits is found at the 
extreme north-west of America among the Eskimo or Innuit 
of the Yukon district in Alaska. On this subject Mr. 
W. H. Dall, one of our best authorities on Alaska, writes 
thus :— 

“The totemic system is not found among the Innuit. 
Each boy, when arrived at the age of puberty, selects an 

1 Rev, A. G. Morice, ‘‘ The Canadian Dénés,” xaual Archaological Report, 
1905 (Toronto, 1906), pp. 204 s¢. 

xvul GUARDIAN SPIRITS AMONG THE ESKIMO 443 

animal, fish, or bird, which he adopts as a patron. The 
spirit which looks after the animals of that species is 
supposed tg act henceforth as his guardian. Sometimes the 
animal is selected in early childhood by the parents. If he 
has long-continued want of success in his pursuits, he will 
sometimes change his patron. They do not abstain from 
eating or using the flesh and skin of the animal which they 
have chosen, as do some tribes of Indians. They always 
wear a piece of the skin or a bone of that animal, which 
they regard as an amulet, and use every precaution against 
its loss, which would be regarded as a grave calamity. 
® Pari : 

When desiring assistance or advice they do not themselves 
seek it, but employ a shaman to address their patron spirit. 
These customs do not extend to females.” * 

§ 16. Guardian Spirits among the Central American Indians 

The Indians of Central America seem also to have had Guardian 

very commonly their guardian spirits, which amongst them ea 

are best known under the name of mnaguals. The earliest among the 

account of the custom is given by the Spanish historian (¢"™ 

Herrera. It applies to the Indians of the province of Cerquin Indians. 
in Honduras, and apparently refers to the state of things in 
the year 1530. The account runs thus :— 

“The Devil deluded them, appearing in the shape of a Herrera’s 

1 by A 2 account. 
lion, or a tiger, or a coyote, a beast like a wolf, or in the Thesoeial 
shape of an alligator, a snake, or a bird, that province was an 
abounding in creatures of prey, which they called naguales,*n'm 

signifying keepers or guardians; and when the bird died, life was 

the Indian that was in league with him died also, which ae 

often happened and was looked upon as infallible. The pope ae 
manner of contracting this alliance was thus: the Indian life ee 
repaired to the river, wood, hill, or most obscure place, where ™&n that 
- when one 
he called upon the devils by such names as he thought fit, of the two 
talked to the rivers, rocks, or woods, said he went to weep, ees ae ‘ 
that he might have the same his predecessors had, carrying also. 
a cock or a dog to sacrifice. In that melancholy fit he fell 

asleep, and either in a dream or waking saw some one of 

1 W. H. Dall, -llaska and its Resources (London, 1870), p. 145. 

Thomas 
Gage's 
account of 
these 
animal 
doubles. 

GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA 

444 CHAP. 

the aforesaid birds or other creatures, whom he entreated to 
grant him profit in salt, cacao, or any other commodity, 
drawing blood from his own tongue, ears, and other parts 
of his body, making his contract at the same time with the 
said creature, the which, either in a dream or waking told 
him, ‘Such a day you shall go abroad a-sporting, and I will 
be the first bird or other animal you shall meet, and will be 
your zagual and companion at all times.’ ‘Whereupon such 
friendship was contracted between them, that when one of 
them died, the other did not survive, and they fancied that 
he who had no zagual could not be rich.”? 

The Indians believed that the death of their xagual 
would entail their own. Legend has it that in the first 
battles with the Spaniards on the tablelands of Quetzalte- 
nango the zaguals of the Indian chiefs fought in the shape 
of serpents. The magual of the head chief was especially 
conspicuous because it! had the form of a great bird 
resplendent in green plumage. The Spanish general, Pedro 
de Alvarado, killed the bird with his lance, and in the same 
moment the Indian chief sank dead to the ground.” 

Nor did this superstition perish with the Spanish 
conquest and the nominal conversion of the Indians to 
Christianity. In the seventeenth century the Englishman 
Thomas Gage, who was curate of a parish among the 
Pokonchis of Guatemala about 1630,? has told us that many 
of these Indians “are deluded by the devil to believe that 
their life dependeth upon the life of such and such a beast 
(which they take unto them as their familiar spirit), and 
think that when that beast dieth they must die; when he 
is chased, their hearts pant ; when he is faint, they are faint ; 
nay, it happeneth that by the devil’s delusion they appear in 
the shape of that beast (which commonly by their choice is 
a buck, or doe, a lion, a tiger, or dog, or eagle), and in that 

1 Antoniade Herrera, General History 
of the Continent and Islands of America, 
translated into English by Capt. John 
Stevens, iv. (London, 1726) pp. 
138 sg. I have modernised the trans- 
lator’s spelling, punctuation, and use 
of capitals. 

2 Otto Stoll, Die Ethnologie der 
Indianerstimme von Guatemala (Ley- 

den, 1889), p. 58, citing as his authori- 
ties Fuentes, i. p. 50; Milla, Héstoria, 
p. 17. I have not seen the works of 
Fuentes and Milla. 

3D. G. Brinton, ‘* Nagualism, a 
Study in Native American Folk-loreand 
History,” Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society, xxxiii. (Phila- 
delphia, 1894) p. 32. 

XVIII GUARDIAN SPIRITS 445 

shape have been shot at and wounded.”? The credulous 
curate relates at great length how a certain Indian was said 
to be able to turn himself into a lion or rather a puma, and 
how once, when a puma had been shot, the man appeared 
with a bruised face and accused the shooter of having 
wounded him ; the writer also waxes eloquent on a terrific 
battle fought between two rival chiefs in the likeness of a 
puma and a jaguar respectively.” 

Towards the end of the seventeenth century Francisco Nuiez de 
Nufiez de la Vega, Bishop of Chiapas and Soconusco, found pies F 
the same superstition still rampant among his flock and zaguais, 
fulminated against it as a work of the Devil. From his long 
denunciations, which have been collected and translated by 
D. G. Brinton, I will extract a few passages :-— 

“There are certain bad Christians of both sexes who do 
not hesitate to follow the school of the Devil, and to occupy 
themselves with evil arts, divinations, sorceries, conjuring, 
enchantments, fortune-telling, and other means to forecast 
the future. These are those who in all the provinces of New 
Spain are known by the name of Nagualists. They pretend 
that the birth of men is regulated by the course and move- 
ments of stars and planets, and by observing the time of 
day and the month in which a child is born, they prognosti- 
cate its condition and the events, prosperous or otherwise, of 
its life ; and the worst of it is that these perverse men have 
written down their signs and rules, and thus deceive the 
erring and ignorant. 

“These Nagualists practise their arts by means of A child’s 
Repertories and superstitious Calendars, where are repre- 7¢s%0/ was 
sented under their proper names all the zaguals of stars, bymeansof 
elements, birds, fishes, brute beasts and dumb animals; with saperiaal 
a vain note of days and months, so that they can announce the names 
which corresponds to the day of birth of the infant. This Suk 
is preceded by some diabolical ceremonies, after which they erent 
designate the field or other spot, where, after seven years stars, | 
will have elapsed, the wagual will appear to ratify the tlc. wee 

bargain. As the time approaches, they instruct the child to 

1 Thomas Gage, 4 New Survey of 2 Thomas Gage, of. cit. pp- 383- 
the West Indies, third edition(London, 38% 
1677), p. 334- 

Trans- 
formation 
of men into 
animals, 
etc. 

A man’s 
life bound 
up with 
that of his 
nagual, 

The native 
Reper- 
tories or 
Calendars, 
by which 
the Indians 
discovered 
their 
naguals. 

446 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

deny God and His Blessed Mother, and warn him to have no 
fear, and not to make the sign of the cross. He is told to 
embrace his xagual tenderly, which, by some diabolical art, 
presents itself in an affectionate manner even though it be a 
ferocious beast, like a lion or a tiger. Thus, with infernal 
cunning they persuade him that this zagual is an angel of 
God, who will’ look after him and protect him in his after 
life. To such diabolical masters the intelligent Indians 
apply, to learn from these superstitious Calendars, dictated 
by the Devil, their own fortunes, and the zagua/s which will 
be assigned to their children, even before they are 
baptized. . . . 

“ At present, all are not so subject to the promptings of 
the Devil as formerly, but there are still some so closely 
allied to him that they transform themselves into tigers, 
lions, bulls, flashes of lightjand globes of fire. We can say 
from the declaration and solemn confession of some penitents 
that it is proved that the Devil had carnal relations with 
them, both as zzcubus and succubus, approaching them in the 
form of their zagual; and there was one woman who 
remained in the forest a week with the demon in the form 
of her zagual, acting toward him as does an infatuated 
woman toward her lover. Asa punishment for such horrible 
crimes our Lord has permitted that they lose their life as 
soon as their zagual is killed; and that they bear on their 
own bodies the wound or mark of the blow which killed it ; 
as the curas of -Chamula, Copainala, and other places have 
assured me.” * 

With regard to the Repertories or Calendars by means 
of which the Indians determined their children’s xaguals, 
Bishop Nufiez de la Vega says: “The Indians of New 
Spain retain all the errors of their time of heathenism 
preserved in certain writings in their own languages, ex- 
plaining by abbreviated characters and by figures painted in 
a-secret cypher the places, provinces, and names of their 
early rulers, the animals, stars, and elements which they 

1 Francisco Nufiez de la Vega, Con- American Folk-lore and History,” 
stituctones dioecesanas del Obispado de Proceedings of the American Philo- 
Chiappa, Ninth Pastoral Letter, quoted sophical Society, xxxiii. (Philadelphia, 

and translated by D. G. Brinton, inhis 1894) pp. 26 sg., 29. 
‘* Nagualism, a Study in Native 

XVIII GUARDIAN SPIRITS 

447 

worshipped, the ceremonies and _ sacrifices which they 
observed, and the years, months, and days by which they 
predicted the fortunes of children at birth, and assign 
them that which they call the zaguals. These writings are 
known as Repertories or Calendars, and they are also used 
to discover articles lost or stolen, and to effect cures of 
diseases. Some have a wheel painted in them, like that of 
Pythagoras, described by the Venerable Bede ; others portray 
a lake surrounded by the xaguals in the form of various, 
animals.” ? 

Thus, whereas according to Herrera the Indian found Different 
his own zagual or guardian spirit by dreaming, according to foo 
Nufiez de la Vega it was determined for him at birth by his which the 
parents, who cast his horoscope by means of a sacred */#ualwas 
Calendar or Almanack. It is obvious that the former 
method, which agrees with the mode adopted by the North 
American Indians in procuring their manztoos or guardian 
spirits, is the more primitive of the two, since the casting of 
a horoscope by an astrological calculation based on a written 
document implies a considerable advance in culture. How- 
ever it was acquired, it is plain that the animal nagual with 
whose life the life of a man was thought to be bound up 
partook of the nature of an external soul, and was identical 
in principle with the animal doubles or bush souls, of which 
we have met with many examples in West Africa.? 

Relics of xagualism seem to have lingered among the Relics of 
Central American Indians down to the middle of the oe 
nineteenth century ; for the German traveller K. Scherzer nineteenth 
reported at that time that the Indians of Santa Catalina °°" 
Istlavacan, in Guatemala, still received at birth the name of 
some animal, which was commonly regarded as their guardian 
spirit for the rest of their life. The name was bestowed by 
the heathen priest, who usually heard of a birth in the 
village sooner than his Catholic brother.’ 

1 Quoted by D. G. Brinton, in his 
“Nagualism, a Study in Native 
American Folk-lore and History,” 

SantaCatalina Istlavacana (Frauenfuss), 
ein Beitrag zur Culturgeschichte 
der Urbewohner Central - Amerikas,” 

Proceedings of the American Philo- 

sophical Society, xxxiii. (1894) p. 25. 
2 See above, vol. ii. pp. 552, 593 599- 
3 K. Scherzer, ‘‘ Die Indianer von 

Sttaungsberichte der philosoph.-histor. ° 

Classe der kaiserl. Akademie der 
Wissenschaften (Vienna), xviii. (1856) 
p- 235. Much more evidence bearing 

Guardian 
spirits 
among the 
Roocooyen 
Indians of 
French 
Guiana, 

‘The 
Indians 
will not eat 
the flesh 
of their 
guardian 
animals, 
But the 
medicine- 
spirits 
only com- 
municate 
with the 
medicine- 
men. 

448 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, 

§ 17. Guardian Spirits among the South American Indians 

The Roocooyen Indians of French Guiana, in South 
America, have also their guardian spirits. They believe 
that every species of animal, plant, and thing has its 
medicine-spirit or mystery-spirit ; the term used by them to 
express medicine or mystery is piay, and like other Indian 
tribes of Guiana they apply the same word to a medicine- 
man or sorcerer. Thus, for example, there is a medicine- 
spirit of the species of birds known as Aoccos or crested 
curassows (Crax tomentosa); there is a medicine-spirit of 
ravens; there is a medicine-spirit of peccaries; there is a 
medicine-spirit of tapirs ; and there is a medicine-spirit of 
manioc. Every Indian chooses a medicine-spirit for 
himself, only one; it becomes his protector, his guardian 
angel, and he will never eat of the flesh of the corresponding 
animal; for example, if he has the medicine-spirit of tapirs 
for his guardian, he will not eat tapirs. The medicine-spirits 
communicate only with the medicine-men. Common people 
have, indeed, their medicine-spirits ; they invoke them, they 
believe in them, and they abstain’ from eating their 
representatives, but the spirits do not communicate with 
them. On the other hand the medicine-spirits keep the 
medicine-men informed on many subjects ; it is from them 
that the medicine-men get all their power and through them 
that they perform all their operations. The more powerful the 
medicine-spirit, the more powerful is the medicine-man who 
has it for his patron; for example, the medicine-spirit of 
ravens is more powerful than the medicine-spirit of manioc, 
and a medicine-man who had the manioc spirit for his 
guardian has been known to change it for the raven-spirit. 
The medicine-spirits live in the sky after the fashion of 
Indians ; they have a large house and a chief calied Cooloon, 
who sends down the water of which he has no need above, 
and the water so sent down is the rain.’ 

more or less on the subject has been sophical Society, xxxiii. (Philadelphia 
collected, mostly from Spanish sources, 1894) pp. 11-73). 

by D. G. Brinton in the memoir to 1 Henri Coudreau, Chez nos Indiens, 
which reference has already been made guatres années dans la Guayane 
(Proceedings of the American Philo- francaise (Paris, 1895), pp. 204 sg., 

XVII GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN SOUTH AMERICA 449 

Further, it would seem that the Indians of Cundinamarca, Guardian 

an old province now comprised in the State of Colombia, sae ike 
had also their guardian spirits. For concerning them we Indians of 
read that “besides the divinities of whom we have spoken, arog 
each Indian had a lake, a mountain, a rock, or some other 
object, which had revealed itself to him by the trembling 
with which he had been seized in passing near it; when he 
wished to implore its help, he fasted for a certain number of 
days. The strictest of them abstained from flesh and fish 
and ate only herbs without any seasoning. During the whole 
time that this fast (which they called zaga) lasted, they lived 
in the most complete retirement, did not wash, and did not 
go near their wife. They then applied to some priest (chgue) 
who had observed the same fast, and*they sent him their 
offering, which was usually the figure of some animal in gold. 
The priest repaired to the spot which had been indicated, 
and after having removed his garments and wrapped the 
offering in cotton, he addressed a prayer to the divinity, 
then cast the offering into the water or buried it, according 
to the nature of the spot ; then he went away backwards 
till he came to the place where he had left his garments. 
He who had sent him gave him for his trouble two pieces of 
cotton cloth and a little gold. After that he assembled his 
relations and friends, with whom he celebrated an orgy.” ? 

§ 18. Observations on American Guardian Spirits 

The foregoing account of guardian spirits among the The 

American Indians suggests several observations. In regard set of 
° . ° . Fars ardian 
to geographical diffusion, the system of guardian spirits ebities 

is found among tribes which have not, or at least which ae 

are not reported to have, the system of clan totemism, diffusion 

- Tribes with guardian spirits but without clan totems are mre 
otems. 

tthe Blackfeet, Dacotas, the Californian Indians of San Juan 
Capistrano, the Salish of British Columbia, the Central 

209. That the Aocco is the Crax 1H. Ternaux-Compans, Zssaz sur 
tomentosa is mentioned by R. Schom- ancien Cundinamarca (Paris, 1.d.), 
burgk, eisen in Britisch. Guiana pp. 44 sg. The writer refers to the 
(Leipsic, 1847-1848), ii. 47. As to Spanish historian P. Simon, the greater 
the curassows, see Alfred Newton, part of whose work was still in manu- 
Dictionary of Birds (London, 1893-96), script when Ternaux-Compans wrote in 
pp. 126 sq. the first half of the nineteenth century. 

VOL. III 2G 

When the 
guardian 
spirit is 
an animal, 
the votary 
will not eat 
its flesh. 
In this 
respect the 
guardian 
spirit 
resembles 
a clan 
totem. 

450 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

American Indians of Honduras and Guatemala, and some 
South American tribes, particularly the Roocooyens of 
French Guiana. To the American aborigines who have 
guardian spirits but not clan totems are probably to be added 
the Innuit or Eskimo of the Yukon district in Alaska.’ On 
the other hand some tribes which have clan totems are not 
reported to have guardian spirits of the kind here dealt with. 
Such are the Pueblo Indians, the Haidas, and perhaps the 
Tlingits. It is quite possible that these apparent discrep- 
ancies between the range‘of guardian spirits and the range of 
clan totems are due simply to defects in our information ; 
still, taking the evidence as it stands, we must conclude that 
the two systems do not coincide with each other throughout, 
but that, while they do coincide to a great extent, they also 
overlap. These facts point both to a connection and toa 
difference between clan totems and guardian spirits, and the in- 
dication is confirmed by a comparison of the things themselves. 

1. For in the first place, when the guardian spirit appears 
in the form of an‘ animal, the man often, perhaps generally, 
abstains from injuring animals of that species and from 
eating their flesh. In this respect, therefore, the guardian 
spirit closely resembles the clan totem. It is true that 
the rule does not universally hold good; one very remark- 
able exception is the custom of killing the animal of 
which a man has dreamed at puberty and thereafter pre- 
serving its skin or some other part of its body as a talisman.* 
Again, according to Mr. C. Hill-Tout, the guardian 
spirit (swdéaz) of a Stseelis Indian is precisely the animal 
which he kills with the greatest facility. Thus, if his 
guardian spirit (sw/¢a) is a deer, he kills plenty of.deer ; if it 
is a salmon, he catches plenty of salmon; and sot with 
respect to other animals, birds and fish* However, few 
guardian spirits are quite so long-suffering and complaisant ; 
most of them even appear to entertain a strong, though 
perhaps unreasonable, objection to be killed and eaten 

1 For reported traces of clan totems 411, 414. 

among the Eskimo see above, pp. 4 C. Hill-Tout, “‘ Ethnological Re- 
368 sg. port on the Stseelis and Skaulits 

2 See above, pp. 52, 379, 393, 439, Tribes,” Journal of the Anthropolo- 
440, 442, 448. gical Institute, xxxiv. (1904), Pp. 324. 

3 See above, pp. 375, 382, 399, j See above, pp. 429-431. 

XVIII ON AMERICAN GUARDIAN SPIRITS 451 

by their votaries, and far from aiding in the quest for them- 
selves and their brethren they visit the rash hunter who 
has shot or wounded them with their severe displeasure. 
It would seem, therefore, that the self-sacrificing guardian 
spirits of the Stseelis stand somewhat by themselves. 
Leaving them out of account, we may say that in general, 
whenever the guardian spirit takes the form of an animal, 
the conduct of the votary towards his patron strongly 
resembles the conduct of a man towards his clan totem. 

2. Some of the guardian spirits consist not of wholg The _ 
animals but of parts of animals; and in such cases the eee 
votary is only bound to abstain from eating a particular part the clan 
of the creature, while he is free to partake of all the rest.) (Ovmr S 
‘This is a point of resemblance between guardian spirits and a part of 
those clan totems which I have called split totems; and *" ae 
it seems not improbable that the same motive which has led 
men to split their animal totem has led them also to split their 
animal guardian spirit, whenever the animal was good to eat. 

3. In many cases a man is believed to acquire the qualities A man ac- 
of his guardian spirit. For example, if it runs or flies cane 
quickly, so can he; if it is far-sighted, so is he; if it is of his 
impenetrable, he is invulnerable ; if it is fierce and warlike, era 
he is the same.2 We have seen that among some peoples as he does 
men are supposed to be endowed with the physical and stale 
mental qualities of their clan totems.* In this respect, 
therefore, the guardian spirit again resembles the clan totem. 

4. Amongst the Central American Indians and to some In some 
extent among the Shuswaps the guardian spirit appears to Pena 
partake of the nature of an external soul, the man and his spirit, like 
guardian being united by such a bond of sympathy that the panel 
death’ of the one entails the death of the other.® Traces of the nature 
similar beliefs with regard to clan totems have met us er 
among the tribes of Central Australia and the Siena of the soul. 
Ivory Coast. This is another link between the guardian 

spirit and the clan totem. 

1 See above, pp. 376, 412, 417, 427. 4 See above, pp. 55 sg.3 vol. ii. 
2 As to split totems see above, pp. PP. 8 sg. 
i op ese es i PP 10, 11,145 VO 5 See above, pp. 428, 443 599. 
3 See above, pp. 385, 386 s¢., 400, 6 See above, vol. i. pp. 124-130, 
417, 426. vol. ii, pp. 551 5979. 

452 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

5. Amongst several tribes of North-West America the 
guardian spirit which has been acquired by a father is 
transmitted by him to his children; in other words, it has 
become hereditary in the male line.’ Now when guardian 
spirits in the form of animals have become hereditary, it is diffi- 
cult to distinguish them from the totems of families or clans. 

But on 6. But while there are many points of resemblance 
re otner between the guardian spirit and the clan totem, there are 
guardian also some points of difference. Apart from the important 
ale fae and obvious difference in the modes of acquisition, the 

peigions one being usually obtained by the person in a dream, the 
cnaracter . . . . 
than the Other inherited from his father or mother, we can hardly fail 
na to note the much more deeply religious character of the 
apparently guardian spirit. Putting aside differences of detail, such as 
Ai repei necessarily occur in an institution spread over so very wide 
spirit, diss an area, we gather that on the whole the guardian spirit is 
pact from more or less clearly distinguished from its material embodi- 
embodi- fe ment, whether that is an animal, a plant, a stone, a weapon, 
prayersand OF What not; and that to this spirit the man turns with 

sacrifices confidence in time of trouble, praying to it to help him and 
a ai sacrificing his property and even his own flesh and blood to 
it in order to secure its favour. This is very different from 
totemism in the strict sense of the,word. In spite of the loose 
modes of speech in which many writers indulge on this subject 
totemism is not properly a religion at all;? totems are not 
viewed as higher powers whose favour has to be wooed by 
prayer and sacrifice. On the contrary they are regarded as 
material, not spiritual; as the brothers or sisters, not the 
lords and masters, of men and women; and far from 
supplicating their good graces, men sometimes compel them 
by magic ceremonies to multiply and be killed for the 
support of the community. Thus a wide gulf divides the 
guardian spirit from the clan totem: with the guardian 

spirit we have passed from magic to religion. 
Both the mode and the time of acquiring a guardian 

1 See above, pp. 408, 412, 414 sg., _ the fundamental difference of principle 
424 59., 434. between magic and religion. It was 

2? When I first published Zotemzsm the epoch-making researches of Spencer 
in 1887 I made the mistake of regard- and Gillen in Central Australia which 
ing totemism, in one of its aspects,as a __ first revealed the important part played 
systemof religion. See above, vol.i.pp., by magic in totemism. Compare vol. 
4 5gg._ Moreover, I failed to discern! i, pp. 105, 116-118, 

XVIII ON AMERICAN GUARDIAN SPIRITS 453 

spirit are remarkable. The mode is usually the vision of a The _ 
fancy distempered by hunger, solitude, and exposure, the pro- ued 
duct of a sick mind in a sick body. The time is commonly commonly 
the arrival of puberty, that mysterious season big with so many 4) ea 
far-reaching consequences, when the vital principle in the at puberty. 
individual is for the first time ripe for reproducing itself, when 

the glimmering light of life, the smouldering torch, is fanned 

into a glow, ready to be handed on to the next in that long 

chain of runners which stretches back into the darkness of 

an immeasurable past and forward into the darkness of an 
immeasurable future. No wonder that to the savage, whose 
ignorance on this profound subject is hardly deeper than our 

own, the attainment of manhood and womanhood should be 

fraught with a strange significance ; no wonder that he should 

deem it to be encompassed by snares and pitfalls innumerable, 

and should seek in his simple fashion to keep his feet from falling 

into them by means of many quaint rites and curious observ- 

ances, of which we have not as yet succeeded in fathoming the 
meaning. Among these rites and observances not the least 

quaint and curious is the acquisition of a guardian spirit in 
dreams. 

It is scarcely necessary to point out what an immense Faith in 
source of confidence and strength this faith in guardian spirits aae 
must be to its votaries.1 To take a simple example, it a great 
seems to be a common article of belief that by the acquisi- aoaias 

ce 
tion of a guardian spirit a man becomes invulnerable.’ ana 
Consider how such a belief, firmly held, must animate tia aa 
men in battle, how it might nerve even a coward to ininvuiner- 
deeds of heroism. We may surmise that this superstition phat 

example, 
accounts for part at least of the dauntless courage with which it 
which many savages have faced European troops armed fag be of 
with the most deadly weapons of precision. It is possible Sha dee 
that thousands of the dervishes who within our own life- fighting 
time have hurled themselves with magnificent bravery on 
the serried fire-vomiting British squares in Africa and India 
have gone to their death, not merely with visions of Paradise 
opening to their eyes above the bayonets and the smoke, but 

3} Compare Dr. A. C. Haddon, in 2 See above, pp. 385, 386 59., 417 
Report of the British Association, 59., 422, 435. 
Belfast, 1902, p. 743. 

‘The dis- 
integrating 
influence of 
individual- 
ism, which 
such a faith 
promotes, 
may be 
counter- 
acted by 
religious 
associa- 
tions or 
secret 
societies. 

Similarity 
of the pro- 
cesses of 

454 GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP. 

in the firm persuasion that they were in possession of infallible 
talismans which rendered their bodies impenetrable to lead 
and steel. To a fighting race such a creed may be of 
priceless value ; it may convert them into a nation of con- 
querors. Yet superstition is a two-edged weapon which as 
often cuts the hand that wields it as the head against which 
it is swung. The blind courage with which it inspires 
its partisans may lead them to death as easily as to victory ; 
instead of destroying others they may themselves be destroyed. 

But while the faith in personal guardian spirits is 
unquestionably a spring of confidence and courage to the 
individual, it has its inconveniences and even dangers to 
society. For it tends to make each man a tower of strength 
to himself and therefore independent of his fellows; it 
loosens the social bonds and dissolves the community into 
its elements. The disintegrating tendency of a religion 
which exalted the salvation of the individual above the 
welfare of the state was one of the main forces which 
brought about the disruption of the Roman empire.’ Yet 
some of the savages with whom we are concerned have to a 
certain extent ingeniously contrived to obviate the danger 
arising from the selfish nature of personal guardian spirits ; 
for they have united all persons who have the same 
guardian spirit in a sacred league or association, thus 
combining the advantages of individualism with the benefits 
of society. These sacred associations or secret societies 
will be considered in the following chapters. 

Another observation suggested by our review of guardian 
spirits among the American Indians is that in many 

acquiring a tribes the process by which a man becomes a shaman 

guardian 

spirit and 
becoming 
a shaman. 

or medicine-man is practically the same as that by which 
common people acquire their guardian spirits, From this 
it seems to follow that in some communities shamans or 
medicine-men differed originally rather in degree than in 
kind from their fellows ; they did not form a separate class 
or profession, but merely claimed to possess in a fuller 
measure than others that spiritual power to which every 
adult fancied himself capable of attaining. 

1 T have explained this more fully elsewhere (Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Second 
Edition, pp. 25° 599-)- 

XVIII ON AMERICAN GUARDIAN SPIRITS 455 

Further, it is worth while remarking that the implicit 7, 
faith which savages repose in the alleged dreams of others implicit” 
as well as in their own must place an instrument of ae " 
incalculable power in the hands, not only of crack-brained eer 
visionaries, but also of cool-headed, ambitious, and unscrupul- dreams ny 
ous schemers, Such men have only to disguise their own ee 
artful machinations under the specious form of revelations powerful 
received in visions to have them accepted and put into anna 
practice by their simple-minded fellows. We can scarcely and _ 
doubt that in savage communities many men have risen to “>to. 
the highest positions of influence and authority by adroitly 
playing on the superstitious faith of the multitude in the 
truth of dreams, 

If, reviewing all the facts, we ask how totemism and the rhe 
faith in guardian spirits are related to each other, the answer auenee 
will largely depend on the view we take of the origin relation 
of both. If the origin of totemism is to be sought, as I baleen 
incline to believe, in a crude attempt to explain the mystery spirits and 
of conception and childbirth, and if the origin of the faith (clms 
in guardian spirits is to be sought in dreams and the vagaries largely on 
of a disordered fancy, it might seem at first sight that the age 
two things, to wit, totems and guardian spirits, are distinct, the origin 
and that, however much their fully developed forms resemble Se 
each other, they ought not to be confounded. Yet it that totems 
deserves to be borne in mind that conceptional totemism pened 
itself, like the system of guardian spirits, may be in large phi have 
measure a product of dreams ; or, to be more explicit, we originated 
may suppose that a pregnant woman often judges of the i" Seams. 
nature of the creature which has entered into her womb, 
not merely by what she has seen or heard in her waking 
hours, but also by the visions of sleep, and that she may 
determine her child’s totem accordingly ; in short, under a 
system of conceptional totemism a child’s totem may 
frequently be the thing of which its mother dreamed at 
the time when she first felt her womb quickened. If that 
were so, it would clearly forge another and a strong link in 
the chain of evidence which binds the totem to the guardian 
spirit, since a man’s guardian spirit is commonly the thing 
of which he dreamed at puberty. In point of fact, it would 
seem that women often give the rein to superstitious fancies 

456 .: GUARDIAN SPIRITS IN AMERICA CHAP, XVIII 

about their offspring in consequence of dreams which they 
had during their pregnancy.1 Whatever may be thought 
of this hypothesis, the resemblances between totems and 
guardian spirits are unquestionably both many and close ; 
and when guardian spirits are hereditary in a family, it 
‘becomes difficult to distinguish them from totems. 

But so long Nevertheless, so long as the relation between totems 
sha and guardian spirits is still to some extent obscure, as it 

between admittedly is, we shall do better not to prejudge the question 
a of their affinity by applying to both of them the generic 
spiritsis name of totem. As I am responsible, I believe, for that 
oe application, it is incumbent on me provisionally to withdraw 
best not to the expression “ individual totem” as a term for the guardian 
call them os ws peels A 
both bya SPirits of individuals, and to express the regret which I 
common feel at having too hastily assumed the two things to be 
name different species of a common genus. If future research 
should establish the link, at present doubtful, between the 
two, it will be easy to reinstate the expression “ individual 
totem ” or “ personal totem” as an alternative name for the 
guardian spirits of individuals. 
For a For a similar reason it is desirable to find another name 
simlar js for what I’ have called the “sex totem”; because the 
ae connection between the “sex totem” and the clan totem 
another 1S still more obscure than the connection between the clan 
ree totem and the guardian spirit. Dr. A. C. Haddon has 
called “sex proposed to substitute the expression “animal brethren” 
totem." for “sex totem.”” But the proposed term would not be 
distinctive, because it would apply equally to the clan totems in 
all the cases where the totems are animals. Until a better 
term has been found, the expression “sex totem” may be 
allowed to pass muster, and no very serious harm is likely to 
follow from its temporary retention, since the customs and 
beliefs to which it applies are apparently restricted to a 
comparatively small area in South-East Australia. Perhaps 
the phrase “sex patron” might be preferable. 
1 See some evidence in my Adonis, lect many more instances of such fancies. 
Aitis, Osiris, Second Edition, pp. 71 2 Report of the British Association, 
sgg. No doubt it would be easy tocol- _ Bristol, 1902, pp. 744 59. 

CHAPTER XIX 

SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE INDIANS OF THE 
UNITED STATES 

§ 1. Secret Societies tn General 

IN many tribes of North American Indians there exist Religious 
certain religious associations, dancing bands, or secret ooo" 
societies, as they may be variously called, which present dancing 
some points of resemblance to totemic clans, though they 2ands °F 

differ from them in at least one fundamental respect, in as societies 
much as they are not necessarily, like totemic clans, groups of Noct ue 
kinsfolk, each member of which is born into his respective American 
group, but corporations composed of members who have aca 
voluntarily joined their respective bodies at some time in their 

life, and who need not be blood relations one to the other, 

I have already called attention to these sacred associations in 
America and have briefly characterised them.’ They belong 

to a class of secret or religious societies which meet us 
among many savage races in many parts of the world, and 

which are. especially prevalent in Melanesia and West 
Africa. The whole subject of these associations has lately 

been discussed by Professor Hutton Webster in an able 

and erudite treatise? From a comprehensive survey of Theory 
the institution he infers that such societies, with the sacred ne 
dances or dramas which form the main part of their ritual, have been 
have been developed out of those rites of initiation, which ¢v¢loped 

out of 
in many savage communities young people of both sexes totemic 
clans. 
1 Vol. i. pp. 46 sg. Hutton Webster, Ph.D., Professor of 

Sociology and Anthropology in the 
2 Primitive Secret Societies, a Study University of Nebraska (New York, 
in Early Politics and Religion, by 1908). 

457 

Religious 
associa- 
tions or 
secret 
societies 
appear to 
be more 
closely 
related to 
totemism 
in North 
America 
than 

elsewhere. 

458 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuap. 

are obliged to submit to before they are allowed to marry ; 
and these rites of initiation themselves he would deduce 
from the structure and functions of totemic clans. However 
rites of initiation on the one hand and secret societies on the 
other may have originated, and however they may be related 
to each other, certain it is that both are found flourishing 
among totemic peoples, rites of initiation conspicuously 
among the totemic tribes of Australia, secret societies 
among the totemic tribes of North America. The coincid- 
ence suggests a natural, though not a necessary, inference 
that both institutions are intimately connected with totemism. 
The exact nature of these connections has not yet been 
fully explained; and while the researches of Professor 
Webster have certainly thrown light on the relation of 
totemism to secret societies, the more fundamental. question 
of the relation of totemism ,to rites of initiation remains very 
obscure. I have not attempted to deal with it in this work. 
A separate treatise would be required to discuss it. Indeed 
so long as we are still in the dark as to the exact meaning 
of most of these initiatory rites, for example the rite of 
circumcision and kindred mutilations,’ it would obviously 
be vain to expect that we should understand how they are 
related to totemism. A comprehensive investigation of the 
ceremonies observed by both sexes, especially the males, at 
puberty is needed to supply a large gap in the science of 
primitive man. 

If, after passing over in silence the secret societies of 
Melanesia and West Africa, I now propose to give some 
account of the similar societies in North America, it is because 
the relation of the institution to totemism in that continent 
is, or seems to be, a good deal clearer than in Melanesia and 
Africa. Indeed it might speciously be held that in America 
we possess in the system of guardian spirits a connecting 
link between totemism and secret societies which is either 
absent or not so conspicuous elsewhere. Whether such a 
view will ultimately prove to be well founded or not, it has, 
in the present state of our knowledge, a sufficient degree of 

1 T have hazarded a suggestion on wiew, November 1904, pp. 204-218), 
this subject elsewhere (‘*The Origin but I attach little weight to my con- 
of Circumcision,” Zhe Judependent Re- —_ jécture. 

XIX SECRET SOCIETIES IN GENERAL 459 

plausibility to warrant me in taking some notice of the 

sacred associations, dancing bands, or secret societies of the 

North American Indians. But as the relation of these 

bodies to totemism is admittedly problematical and at best 
indirect, I shall not attempt a complete survey of them, but 

shall content myself with illustrating their nature by typical 
examples. The prevalence of secret societies or dancing such 
bands is well attested among tribes of the great Siouan and societies 
Algonkin stocks in the heart of North America, among the among the 
Pueblo Indians of the South-West, and again among the eae 
tribes of the North-West Pacific coast. Further, they exist and _ 
among some of the Californian Indians, who lack the agin 
organisation in totemic clans. I have already given some Pueblo 
account of the sacred associations of the Pueblo Indians ;} 242" 
it remains to do the same for the other tribes. As it is Indians of 
desirable to adopt a uniform terminology, I shall call these 60” 
bodies secret societies, though the description is not so nie nan 
strictly applicable to them as to the similar associations in west 
Melanesia and Africa, where a much greater degree of : irri 
mystery shrouds their doings than in North America. ~ 
Indeed among the American Indians no secret is made of 

the society to which a man belongs, and the mummeries of 

the members are often, perhaps generally, a public pageant 

at which the whole tribe may assist as spectators. Sacred 

or religious associations might be a more exact description 

of these corporations in North America. Yet for the sake 

of recalling their essential relation to similar, though more 

secret, bodies elsewhere, the general designation of secret 

societies may be retained. 

§ 2. Secret Societies among the Siouan or Dacotan Indians 

“ Among the Siouan family of Indians,” says Miss Alice Miss A. C. 
C. Fletcher, “there are societies, religious in character, which Ace 
are distinguished by the name of some animal. Each Societies of 
society has a ritual composed of chants and songs to be sung ail aa 
during different parts of the ceremonies, having words 
describing in simple and direct terms the act which 
accompanies the music. These musical rituals, it is often 

1 See above, pp. 229 sg. 

Member- 
ship of 
these 
societies 
was not 
determined 
by kinship 
but by 
participa- 
tion ina 
common 
vision. 

The 
societies are 
commonly, 
but not 
always, 
named 

after 
animals. 

460 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cnuavr. 

claimed, have been received in a mysterious or supernatural 
manner, and are therefore regarded as possessing a religious 
power. . . . Some societies admit women to membership, 
through their own visions, or occasionally by those of their 
husbands, but more generally by means of the visions of 
male relatives. ... Membership in these societies is not 
confined to,any particular gens, or grouping of gentes, but 
depends upon supernatural indications over which the 
individual has no control. The animal which appears to a 
man in a vision during his religious fasting determines 
to which society he must belong.”? And elsewhere Miss 
Fletcher tells us that the structure of these religious societies 
“was based upon the grouping together of men who had 
received similar visions. Those who had seen the Bear 
made up the Bear society ; those to whom the Thunder or 
Water beings had come formed the Thunder or the Pebble 
society. The membership came from every kinship group 
in the tribe, blood relationship was ignored, the bond of 
union being a common right in a common vision. These 
brotherhoods gradually developed a classified membership 
with initiatory rites, rituals, and officials set apart to conduct 
the ceremonials.” * 

Of these two accounts the second implicitly corrects a 
somewhat too sweeping statement made in the first. The 
secret societies of the American Indians are commonly, but 
not always, designated by the names of animals; for being 
based on visions or hallucinations and named after the 
things which have appeared, or are alleged to have 
appeared, to visionaries in an abnormal state of mind, their 
names and their mysteries may be just as varied as the 
fancies of a famished and superstitious savage. In this 
respect the mysteries of the societies resemble the guardian 
spirits of individuals, and the reason for the resemblance is 
manifest ; both are figments of dreams. 

For example, among the Dacotas there is a Society of 

1 Miss Alice C. Fletcher, ‘Elk Bureau of Ethnology (Washington, 
Mystery of the Ogallala Sioux,” in 1894), p. 497- 
Ann. Rept. Peabody Museum, 1884, 2 Miss Alice C. Fletcher, Zhe Ju- 
pp. 276, 277, quoted by the Rev. J. port of the Totem, a Study from the 
Owen Dorsey, ““A Study of Siouan Omaha Tribe (Salem, Mass., 1897), 
Cults,” Zieventh Annual Report of the |p. 7. 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG SIOUAN INDIANS 461 

Those who have Visions or Revelations from Ghosts; the The Ghost 
members of the society can draw pictures of ghosts with Society an4 
impunity and they, or some of them, have the features Society 
of their faces drawn awry by ghosts. Again, there is a *mong th 
Dacotan Society of Those who have Revelations from the 
Buffalo. A member of the society has been known to have 
visions of buffaloes and to decorate himself accordingly, 
putting cockleburs in his hair or a little red hoop on his 
head, just as he saw the buffalo in his dream adorned with 
cockleburs or a little red hoop. Again, there is a Dacotan 
Society of Those who have Revelations from Goats. Goats are 
very mysterious, because they walk on cliffs and other high 
places without falling down. Hence people who dream of 
goats or have revelations from them imitate the actions of 
the animals, scrambling up and down steep places where 
other people would break their necks, and leaving no mark 
behind them.’ 

The Omahas, a tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock, Societies of 
had also their Society of Those who have Supernatural the Ghosts 

Wolves, 
Communications with Ghosts. The persons so favoured oly 
called themselves Ghosts, and when they danced they Hones 
painted their bodies grey, no doubt in imitation of ghosts.” Buffaloes, 
‘. . Thunder, 

There is another Omaha Society of Those who have Super- etc. among 
natural Communications with Wolves. Members of this ba Se 
society in dancing wear wolf skins and mimick the actions : 
of wolves.’ Similarly members of the Society of Those who ieee 
have Supernatural Communications with Grizzly Bears dance jyenrdance. 
in imitation of grizzly bears and wear skins of grizzly bears 
or necklaces of their claws." So members of the Omaha The Horse 
Society of Those who have Supernatural Communications “"°* 
with Horses mimick the gait and actions of horses in their 
dance, and they wear horses’ mains round their necks and 
horses’ tails sticking out stiffly behind.’ Similarly members ‘The 
of the Omaha Society of Those who have Supernatural Puftalo 
Communications with Buffaloes pranced about in the character 
of buffaloes with the skin and horns of the animal’s head on 

1 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘A Study Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethno- 
of Siouan Cults,” Zleventh Annual logy (Washington, 1884), Pp. 353- 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 3 /d., op. cit. pp. 348 sg. 
(Washington, 1894), pp. 497 59. 4 Id., op. cit. P» 349- 

2 Jd. “Omaha Sociology,” Thzrd 5 ld., op. ctt. P» 348. 

Rain- 
making 
ceremony 
of the 
Buffalo 
Society. 

The 
Wacicka 
Society. 

Its dance 
in spring. 

462 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuapr. 

their own heads and the tails fastened to their belts. 
According to one account, when the corn was withering 
through long drought the members of the Buffalo Society 
used to come to the rescue by making rain. This they did 
by dancing round a vessel full of water and spurting the 
water into the air in imitation of rain; then they upset the 
vessel, spilt the water on the ground, and falling down lapped 
it up, bemiring their faces in the act.’ Again, the Omahas 
had an order or society of Thunder shamans composed of 
such as had dreams or visions of the Thunder-being, the 
Sun, Moon, or other celestial phenomena.? But the principal 
society of the Omahas bore the name of Wacicka, the 
meaning of which appears to be uncertain. Under other 
names the society seems to have existed in other tribes, 
including the Dacotas, the Winnebagoes, arid the Ojibways 
or Chippewas. The society danced in the spring of the 
year, beginning on a fine day when the grass was about six 
inches high. It is said, though it is also denied, that lewd 
rites formed part of this vernal dance, and our informant, the 
Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, thought that the report was confirmed 
by the Ponka phrase, “ My little sister (or my female friend), 
grass abounds. Let us delight in each other.” If he is 
tight in this view, we may conjecture that the rites, like 
those of the King and Queen of May among ourselves, were 
originally intended to promote the growth of vegetation by 
sympathetic magic. In the dance the dancers carried bags 
made of the skins of otters or other animals, and some of 
them mimicked the cry of the otter or that of the flying 
squirrel by means of a whistle. With these bags they 
pretended to shoot at each other.’ 

This pretence of shooting at each other introduces us to 

! Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘*‘ Omaha 
Sociology,” Zhird Annual Report of 
the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1884), pp. 347 sg. I do not 
know whether the American buffalo 
(bison), like the Indian buffalo, loved 
to wallow in mud ; if it did, we could 
understand why members of the Buffalo 
Society grovelled in the mire at this 
ceremony. The same habit of the 
animal might also explain why the duty 
of making rain fell to the lot of the 

Buffalo Society; to the Indian fancy 
the buffalo rolling in the wet mud 
might seem to be calling for rain. 

2 Td. A Study of Siouan Cults,” 
Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau 
of Ethnology (Washington, 1894), p. 
395- 

3 fd. **Omaha Sociology,” Zhird 
Annual Report of the Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1884), pp. 
342-346. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG SIOUAN INDIANS 463 

a very remarkable feature in this society, namely, the power Power of 
of death and of resurrection claimed by the members. On oe 
this subject I will quote the testimony of an experienced claimed by . 
missionary, Dr. S. R. Riggs, who laboured long among the Dombess 
Dacotas and has bequeathed to us valuable works on these Watan 
Indians. The Wakan Wacipi or Mystery Dance of the Meas 
Dacotas is the equivalent of the Wacicka Society of the 
Omahas. On this subject Dr. Riggs says: “ This is a secret pr. Riggs, 
organization, which is entered through mysterious death and evidence. 
mysterious resurrection. As it appears to have been cont 

fined mainly to the eastern portion of the Dakota Nation, it 

is Supposed to have been derived from some other Indians 

at no very remote date. The Dakota themselves, however, 

claim that it was communicated to them by the great 
Unktehi or god of the waters. It is a form of religion 

which has doubtless largely supplanted older forms of 
worship. The badge of the order is the wakan sack, or sack tye badge 
of mystery. The great water god ordained that this should of the 

be the skin of the otter, raccoon, weasel, squirrel, loon, or a ake? 
species of fish and of snakes. It should contain four kinds medicine. 
of medicine and represent fowls, quadrupeds, herbs, and apie 
trees, Thus grass roots, the bark of tree roots, swan’s 5% 
down, and buffalo hair are the symbols which are carefully 
preserved in the medicine sack. . .. After the proper 
instruction in the mysteries, the neophyte practiced watch~ 

ings and fastings and was purified for four successive days 

by the vapor bath. Then came the great day of initiation. py. 
The ceremonies were public. A great deal of cooked initiation 
provisions was prepared. At the sacred dance which [~~ ”™ 
witnessed four decades ago, there were half a dozen large 

kettles of meat. The arrangements for the dance consisted The dance 
of a large tent at one end, whose open front was extended Sede 
by other tents stretched along the sides, making an oblong bag. 
with the outer end open. Along the sides of this inclosure 

sat the members, perhaps a hundred in number, each one 

having his or her ‘sack of mystery. At a given signal 

from the officiating old men, all arose and danced inward 

until they became a solid mass, when the process was 
reversed and all returned to their seats. Near the close of 

the performance those who were to be initiated were shot by 

Carver's 
account of 
the dance 
of the 
medicine- 
bag. 

Com- 
munication 
of a spirit 
which kills 
and brings 
to life 
again, 

Simulated 
death of 
the novice. 

The re- 
suscitation 
of the 
novice. 

464 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES ciap. 

the ‘sacks of mystery, and falling down they were covered 
with blankets. Then the mysterious bean or shell which 
they claimed had produced death, was extracted by the 
same mysterious power of the sack of mystery, and the 
persons were restored to a new life. But this new life came 
only after the throes and the bitterness of death. Then he 
has a ‘sack’ given him, and is thenceforth a member of the 
order of the sacred mysteries.” ! 

The earliest account of a ceremony of this kind with 
which I am acquainted is that of Captain J. Carver, who 
travelled in the region of the great lakes between 1766 and 
1768. Amongst the Naudowessies, a Siouan or Dacotan 
tribe, he witnessed the initiation of a candidate into the 
Wakon-Kitchewah or Friendly Society of the Spirit, which 
apparently answered to the Wacicka of the Omahas and 
the Wakan Wacipi of the Dacotas. At the ceremony the 
officiating priest told thé candidate “that he himself was. 
now agitated by the same spirit which he should in a few 
moments communicate to him; that it would strike him 
dead, but that he would instantly be restored again to life ; 
to this he added, that the communication, however terrifying, 
was a necessary introduction to the advantages enjoyed by 
the community into which he was on the point of being 
admitted. As he spoke this, he appeared to be greatly 
agitated ; till at last his emotions became so violent, that 
his countenance was distorted, and his whole frame con- 
vulsed. . At this juncture he threw something that appeared 
both in shape and colour like a smiall bean, at the young 
man, which seemed to enter his mouth, and he instantly fell 
as motionless as if he had been shot. The chief that was 
placed behind him received him in his arms, and, by the 
assistance of the other two, laid him on the ground to all 
appearance bereft of life. 

“Having done this, they immediately began to rub his 
limbs, and to strike him on the back, giving him such blows, 
as seemed more calculated to still the quick, than to raise 

1S. R. Riggs, Dakota Grammar, nesota Historical Society for the year 
Texts, and Ethnography (Washington, 7867 (Saint Paul, 1867), pp. 35, 37- 
1893), pp. 227-229. For a fuller 40 (quoted by me in The Golden 

account see G. H. Pond, ‘Dakota Bough, Second Edition, iii. 432 59.) 
Superstitions,” Collections of the Min- also below, pp. 468 sg. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG SIOUAN INDIANS 465 

the dead. During these extraordinary applications, the 
speaker continued his harangue, desiring the spectators not 
to be surprized, or to despair of the young man’s recovery, 
as his présent inanimate situation proceeded only from the 
forcible operation of the spirit, on faculties that had hitherto 
been unused to inspirations of this kind. The candidate lay 
several minutes without sense or motion; but at length, 
after receiving many violent blows, he began to discover 
some symptoms of returning life. These, however, were 
attended with strong convulsions, and an apparent obstruc- 
tion in his throat. But they were soon at an end; for 
having discharged from his mouth the bean, or whatever it 
was that the chief had thrown at him, but which on the 
closest inspection I had not perceived to enter it, he soon 
after appeared to be tolerably recovered. 

“This part of the ceremony being happily effected, the The novice 
officiating chiefs disrobed him of the cloathes he had usually seers 
worn, and put on him a set of apparel entirely new. When garments. 
he was dressed, the speaker once more took him by the 
hand, and presented him to the society as a regular and 
thoroughly initiated member, exhorting them, at the same 
time, to give him such necessary assistance as, being a 
young member, he might stand in need of. He then also 
charged the newly elected brother to receive with humility, 
and to follow with punctuality the advice of his elder 
brethren. All those who had been admitted within the 
rails, now formed a circle around their new brother, and the 
music striking up, the great chief sung a song, celebrating as 
usual their martial exploits. ... 

“The whole assembly were by this time united, and the The dance 
dance began; several singers assisted the music with their sed 

medicine- 
voices, and the women joining in the chorus at certain bag: 
intervals, they produced together a not unpleasing but of killing 
savage harmony. This was one of the most agreeable People by 
entertainments I saw whilst I was among them. I could fas te 
not help laughing at a singular childish custom I observed eae 
they introduced into this dance, and which was the only them. 
one that had the least appearance of conjuration. Most of 

the members carried in their hands an otter or martin’s skin, 

which being taken whole from the body, and filled with 

VOL. Ill 2H 

Power 

of the 
medicine- 
bag to kill 
and to 
make alive 
again. 

Medicine 
feast and 
dance 
among the 
Winne- 
bagoes, 
The 
Medicine 
Society. 

466 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cnap. 

wind, on being compressed made a squeaking noise through 
a small piece of wood organically formed and fixed in its 
mouth. When this instrument was presented to the face of 
any of the company, and the sound emitted, the person 
receiving it instantly fell down to appearance dead. Some- 
times two or three, both men and women, were on the 
ground together; but immediately recovering, they rose up 
and joined again in the dance. This seemed to afford even 
the chiefs themselves infinite diversion. I afterwards learned 
that these were their Dez Penates or Household Gods. 
After some hours spent in this manner the feast began; the 
dishes being brought near me, I perceived that they consisted 
of dog’s flesh ; and I was informed that at all their public 
grand feasts they never made use of any other kind of 
food.” ? 

In the ceremonies here described by Carver the presenta- 
tion of a squeaking skin! at the dancers and their consequent 
simulation of death were clearly intended to illustrate the 
magical power of the medicine-bag to kill and to make alive 
again. If there could be any doubt as to this interpretation 
of the rite, it would be removed by the following account of 
a medicine feast held among the Winnebagoes, another 
Indian tribe of the Siouan or Dacotan stock. The 
informant, Mr. J. E. Fletcher, was Indian Sub-agent at 
Turkey River. He says :— 

“This feast is an ancient custom or ceremony; it is 
accompanied with dancing, and is sometimes called the 
medicine dance. The members or communicants of this 
feast constitute a society having secrets known only to the 
initiated. ... They have no regular or stated times for 
holding this feast; and all the members do not attend at 
the same time, but only such as are invited by the master 
of the feast. Persons desirous of joining this society will, 
in some cases, use the most rigid economy for years, to 
enable them to lay up goods to pay the initiating fee. This 
fee is not fixed at any stipulated amount; those who join 
pay according to their ability... . When one or more 
persons make application to join the society, preparations 

1 J. Carver, 7ravels through the Edition (London, 1781), Pp» 271- 
Interior Parts of North America, Third 278. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG SIOUAN INDIANS 467 

are made for a feast and dance, which is held in an arched Prepara- 
lodge, or bower, constructed of poles, and covered with tent- Hae 
cloth and other materials. The size of the bower is made to the 
to conform to the number of persons to be invited, and this Sie: 
number depends much on the ability of the person who 

makes the feast. The width of a bower is about sixteen 

feet, the length varying from ten to seventy-five yards. 

The members of the society sit on each side of the bower, 

the centre being reserved for dancing. Candidates for Fasting 
admission into this society are required to fast three days hone 
previous to being initiated. At some period during this candidates. 
fast they are taken by the old medicine men to some 
secluded secret spot, and instructed in the doctrines and 
mysteries of the society ; and it is said that the candidates 

are during this fast subjected to a severe sweating process, by 
covering them with blankets, and steaming them with herbs ; 

the truth of this saying is not here vouched for, but the 
appearance of the candidate, when brought forward to be 
initiated in public, corroborates it. 

“The public ceremony of initiation usually takes’ place Publiccere- 
about 11 o'clock, A.M. The public exercises of dancing, oyy°r 
singing, praying, and exhorting, which precede the initiations, 
commence the previous morning. Before the candidates 
are brought forward, the ground through the centre of the 
bower is carpeted with blankets and broadcloth laid over 
the blankets. The candidates are then led forward and 
placed on their knees upon the carpet, near one end of the 
bower, and facing the opposite end. Some eight or ten 
medicine men then march in single file round the bower 
with their medical bags in their hands. Each time they 
perform the circuit they halt, and one of them makes a 
short address: this is repeated until all have spoken. They 
then form a circle and lay their medicine bags on the carpet 
before them. Then they commence retching and making Pretence of 
efforts to vomit ; bending over until their heads come nearly ia 
in contact with their medicine bags, on which they vomit, or medicine- 
deposit from their mouth a small white sea-shell about the SO". 
size of a bean; this they call the medicine-stone, and claim medicine- 
that it is carried in the stomach and vomited up on these ™& 
occasions. These stones they put in the mouth of their 

468 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuavp. 

medicine bags, and take up their position at the end of the 
bower opposite to and facing the candidates. They then 
advance in line, as many abreast as there are candidates ; 
Pretence of holding their medicine bags before them with both hands, 
er they dance forward slowly at first, and uttering low guttural 
thrusting sounds as they approach the candidates, their step and voice 
the . : : . . . A 
medicine. iNcreasing !in energy, until with a violent ‘Ough!’ they 
pal at thrust their medicine bags at their breasts. Instantly, as 
: if struck with an electric shock, the candidates fall prostrate 
on their faces—their limbs extended—their muscles rigid 
and quivering in every fibre. Blankets are now thrown 
over them, and they are suffered to lie thus a few moments : 
as soon as they show signs of recovering from the shock, 
they are assisted to their feet and led forward. Medicine 
bags are then put in their hands, and medicine stones in 
their mouths; they are now medicine men or women, as 
the case may be, in full communion and fellowship. The 
new members, in company with the old, now go round the 
bower in single file, knocking down members promiscuously 
by thrusting their medicine bags at them.”? 
The From these accounts it would seem that the instrument 
erin of death and resurrection is a small white shell, which 
andre. initiated men are supposed tq have in their bodies, and 
ae which being projected into the body of another person first 
be a small kills him and then restores him to life. This is confirmed 
page by the Dacotan legend of the origin of the medicine-bag ; 
initiated for it is said that Onktehi, the great spirit of the waters, 
are thousht « produced myriads of little shells, whose virtue is to restore 
intheir life to those who have been slain by the medicine-bag. 
a an¢ Waving taken this precaution, the god chose four other 

ies Pro- candidates and repeated the experiment of initiation with 
the body. Success, for after killing them with the bag he immediately 

nau resuscitated them by throwing one of the shells into their 
himand vital parts, while he chanted certain words assuring them 
tien Te. , that it was only sport and bidding them rise to their feet. 
tolife. | That is why to this day every initiated Dacota has one of 

these shells in his body.” Hence at the initiation ceremony, 

after feigning to be killed by the medicine-bag and to come 

1 J. E. Fletcher, in H. R. Soa States, iii, (Philadelphia, 1853), pp. 
craft's Indian Tribes of the Unite 286 sq. 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG SIOUAN INDIANS 469 

to life again, the candidate “ convulsed, strangling, struggling, 
and agonizing, heaves up the shell which falls from his mouth 
on a sack placed in readiness to receive it.”? To the same 
effect we are told that in the Otter Dancing Society of the 
Winnebagoes, which appears to be only another name for their 
Medicine Society as described by Mr. J. E. Fletcher, “the 
members of this order shot at one another with their otter- 
skin bags, as has been the custom in the Wacicka dancing 
society of the Omaha. Some have said that they waved 
their otter-skin bags around in order to infuse the spirit of 
the otter into a bead in its mouth, and that it was by the 
spirit of the otter that they knocked one another down. 
Each one who practised this dance professed to keep some 
small round object in his breast to cough it up before or 
during the dance, and to use it for shooting one of his 
companions in the neck. He who was thus shot did in 
turn cough up the mysterious object, and at the end of the 
dance each member swallowed his own shell or pebble.” ? 

In the following account of the Dacota “clans,” it seems Philander 
clear that the so-called “clans” are religious associations Presets, 
or secret societies of the kind with which we are here con- “clans” 

‘ ‘ h 
cerned, The writer was a Mr. Philander Prescott, formerly eliglogs 
United States Interpreter at St. Peters. He says :— societies 

among the 

“As for clans, there are many, and there are secret pacotas. 
badges. All that can be noticed, as to clans, is, that ‘all 
those that use the same roots for medicines constitute a 
clan. These clans are secretly formed. It is through the 
great medicine-dance, that a man or a woman gets initiated 
into these clans. Although they all join in one general 
dance, still the use, properties, etc., of the medicine that 
each clan uses is kept entirely secret from each other. 
They use many roots of which they know not the properties 
themselves ; and many of them have little if any medicinal 
properties in them. These clans keep up constant feuds 
with each other; for each clan supposes that the other 
possesses supernatural powers, and can cause the death of 

1G. H. Pond, ‘Dakota Super- 2 Rev. J. Owen Dorsey, ‘‘ A Study 
stitions,” Collections of the Minnesota of Siouan Cults,” Zleventh Annual 
Historical Society for the year 1867 Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 

(Saint Paul, 1867), quoted in Ze (Washington, 1894), p. 429. 
Golden Bough, Second Edition, iil. 433. . 

Men 
initiated 
into the 
medicine- 
dance and 
society 
have a 
sacred 
animal 

470 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cnav. 

any person, although he may be living at a remote distance 
from it. These clans have been kept up from time im- 
memorial, and are the cause of most of the bloodshed 
among the Sioux. If a person dies, it is laid on some 
one of a different clan; and from that time, revenge is 
sought by the relations of the -deceased, and all the super- 
natural powers are set to work to destroy the supposed 
offender. If this fails, then medicine is tried; and if that 
does not succeed, then the more destructive weapons, such 
as the knife, axe, or gun, are made use of, and often prove 
effectual.” “The men, when initiated into the great 
medicine-dance and clan, have some animate object of 
veneration, which they hold to as sacred through life. 
Whatever it may be, they cannot or dare not kill it, or 
eat any part of the flesh thereof. Some fix on a wolf, 
some a bear, some a deer, a buffalo, an otter; others 

which they different kinds of birds, or different parts of animals ; some 

will not kill 

-noreat, If Will not eat the tail or rump-piece, others the head, the 
they do so, liver, and so on. Some will not eat the right wing, some 

trouble 
will befall 
them. 

the left, of a bird; the women also are prohibited from 
eating many of the parts of the animal that are forbidden. 
When they enter into the clan, any person that breaks any 
of these rules, by eating anything forbidden, brings upon 
himself trouble of some kind. The offence is the same, 
even if accidentally committed. If an Indian has bad luck 
in hunting, he at once says some one has been breaking 
their laws, either by eating some parts of the animal for- 
bidden, or they have stepped over it, or on it, particularly 
a woman; if she steps over any of the things held 
sacred, a great trouble is soon expected in the family ; 
therefore precaution is taken, as soon as possible to appease 
the animal held in veneration, for they think that diseases 
arise from some animal entering in spirit into their system, 
which kills them.”? 

Amongst the Mandans, another Indian tribe of the 

1 Philander Prescott, ‘‘Contribu- Unzted States, ii. (Philadelphia, 1853), 
tions to the History, Customs, and p. 171. 
Opinions of the Dacota Tribe,” in H. 2 Philander Prescott, of. c#t. Pp. 
R. Schoolecraft’s Zzdian Tribes of the, 175. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG SIOUAN INDIANS 471 

Siouan or Dacotan stock, all the men were divided according an the 
to their age into six classes or societies, each distinguished oe Z 
from the other by badges and by the code of rules which Maidane 
they observed. Each society had its dance and accom- }0% = 
panying song, and though the dances were on the whole accord- 
similar in all the classes, the songs differed. The six er 
societies or classes, according to the Prince of Wied, were into six 

. societies, 
these :— each with 
1. The Mad Dogs, or The Dogs whose Name Zs its badge 

Unknown. These consisted of lads from the age of ten ae pee 
a 

to fifteen years. They wore a war-pipe (zikoschka) made Degs. 
of the wing-bone of the wild goose. In dancing, three of 
them had a long and broad piece of red cloth hanging 
down behind them from the neck to the ground. When 
boys wished to join the society in order to become men, 
they applied to members of the society, addressed them as 

“ Fathers,” and purchased the privilege of joining the suciety 

by presents of blankets, powder, lead, horses, or other 
property, which their fathers paid for them. 

2. The Crows or Ravens.—These were young men from The Crows 
twenty to twenty-five years of age. Members of this society % ®*ve"s: 
wore raven feathers on their heads and a double war-pipe, 
composed of two wing-bones of a wild goose fastened 
together. Entrance into this society was also obtained by 
purchase. The purchasers had to give a feast lasting forty 
nights in the medicine-hut, and during all that time they had to 
place their wives at the disposal of the members of the society. 

3. Lhe Soldiers-—These were the most distinguished The 
warriors. They wore a large pipe made of the wing-bone 5°! 
of a crane, and in the dance they painted the upper part of 
their faces red and the lower part black. They formed a 
kind of police, and the conduct of all important affairs, such 
as migrations, buffalo-hunting, and so forth, was entrusted to 
them. ; 

4. The Dogs.—These wore in the dance a great hat of The Dogs. 
various colours, with many feathers of the raven, magpie, 
and horn-owl attached to it; also they carried a great war- 
pipe made of the wing-bone of a swan. Three of them had 
red strips of cloth hanging down their backs. Any man 
might throw a piece of flesh into the ashes of the fire or on 

The 
Buffaloes. 

The Stags. 

Sexual 
licence at 
initiation, 

Societies 
among the 
Hidatsas 
or Minne- 
tarees. 

472, SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuav. 

the ground for these three and say, “ There, dog! eat it 
up!” and the three men were then obliged to fall upon the 
flesh and devour it raw like dogs or beasts of prey. 

5. The Buffaloes—lIn the dance they wore the skin of 
the head and the long mane of a buffalo with its horns on 
their heads; at their backs they had imitations of buffalo 
tails. Two chosen members of the society wore on their 
heads complete masks representing buffalo heads with horns. 
These two might never flee before the enemy ; and in dancing 
they always kept on the outside of the band and mimicked 
all the movements and sounds of the buffalo. 

6. The Black-tailed Stags—This consisted of all men 
over fifty years of age. They all wore a chaplet of grizzly 
bear’s claws. 

Membership of all these societies was bought and sold. 
The buyer had always to place his wife at the disposal of 
the seller during the festival which celebrated his initiation. 
If he was unmarried, he had to borrow a friend’s wife for the 
purpose. A man would often come with three or four 
women, who granted their favours to the members of the 
society on the evening of the dance. This custom may 
possibly be a relic of sexual communism, such as was kept 
up in some Australian tribes at marriage or puberty and in 
Fiji at the rite of circumcision.” 

The Hidatsas or Minnetarees, another Siouan or Dacotan 
tribe of the Missouri valley, were divided into bands or 
societies, which differed for men and women. Each society 
had its own songs, dances, and ceremonies, which were to a 
certain extent secret. Amongst the men’s societies were the 
Foxes, the Dogs, and the Little Dogs ; amongst the women’s 
societies were the Fox-Women and the Geese. The members 
of the Fox-Women’s society were usually from fifteen to 
twenty years old. Each society held ceremonial processions, 
in which the performers followed one another in a circle, 
tripping along with very short steps and singing as they 

1 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse presumably they ranged from twenty- 
in das Innere Nord-America (Coblenz, _ five to fifty. 
1839-1841), ii. 138-143. The writer 

does not mention the ages of the me 2 See vol. i. pp. 311-313, 419, 484, 
of the third, fourth, and fifth societies; 545, vol. ii. 145 sgg. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG SIOUAN INDIANS 473 

moved. These processions were commonly called “medicine- 
dances” by the whites.! 

Lists of thre Minnetaree bands or societies, together with Societies of 
their characteristic badges, have been recorded by the Prince pa aaa 
of Wied. The societies of the men were as follows :-— 

1. The Stone Society or The Society of the Little Rock,— The 
It consisted of boys from ten to eleven years of age, who S"* 
wore feathers on their heads. 

2. The Society of the Great Swords.—The members were The Great 
lads of fourteen or fifteen years of age. In the dance they S¥°* 
carried swords. As swords were rare among the Indians 
and were procured only from traders, this society was 
probably of modern origin. 

3. The Society of the Ravens.—The members were youths The 
of seventeen or eighteen years of age. BE 

4. The Society of the Little Prairie Foxes—They wore The | 
skins of otters and wolves. poe. 

5. The Society of the Little Dogs-—They wore feathers on The Little 
their heads and strips of red or blue cloth across their shoulders, P°8* 

6. The Society of the Old Dogs.—They were equipped The old 
like the preceding with the addition of a wolf's skin, a rattle P°8*- 
(shishikue), and a war-pipe. 

7. The Society of the Bow-lances.’—They carried feathers The Bow- 
on their heads and bow-lances in their hands. janes: 

8. Lhe Society of the Foes—They carried muskets. The Foes. 

9. The Society of the Buffaloes-——They wore on their The 
heads the skin of a buffalo’s head, with the horns; round Buffaloes. 
their bodies they had bands of cloth with bells fastened to 
them and to their legs; and as weapons they carried spears, 
guns, and shields. 

10. The Society of the Ravens.—These were the oldest the 
men. Each carried a long spear wrapt in red cloth with Ravens. 
raven feathers hanging from it. They wore feathers on their 
heads and finely decorated garments. 

1 Washington Matthews, Z¢hno- 
graphy and Philology of the Hidatsa 

two ends of the weapon. These 
unserviceable implements were ap- 

Indians (Washington, 1877), pp. 46 
5G.5 153, 155 59-5 189, 192, 197. 

2 Some of the American Indans 
carried spears bent into the form of 
bows by means of string tied to the 

parently more for ceremony than for 
use. See G. A. Dorsey, 7he Cheyenne, 
L, Ceremonial Organization (Chicago, 
1905), Pp. 20, 24 sg. 

The Hot 
Water. 

Women's 
Societies. 

The Wild 
Geese. 

The Foes. 

The 
Skunks, 

Societies 
among the 
Crows, 

Sexual 
licence at 
initiation. 

Societies 
among the 
Assiniboins, 

474 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuav. 

11. The Society of the Hot Water—This was identical 
with the first society. The members danced naked among 
glowing coals and took meat out of a pot of boiling water. 
Their hands, part of the forearms, and the feet were painted 
red. ; 

Among the Minnetarees the societies of the women were 
as follows :—- 

1. The Society of the Wild Geese-—This consisted of the 
oldest women. In dancing they carried wormwood and a 
cob of maize. 

2. The Society of the Foes—They wore long pendants 
of shells and beads on their temples and a feather across the 
front of the head. 

3. The Society of the Skunks ——Their faces were painted 
black with a white stripe down the nose in imitation of the 
skunk." 

The same authority, Prince Maximilian of Wied, tells us 
that bands or societies existed also among the Crows, “as 
among all the Indians of the Missouri.” The Crows belong 
to the Siouan or Dacotan stock. Their societies were named 
as follows: 1. the Buffalo Bulls; 2. The Prairie Foxes; 
3. The Ravens; 4. The Shorn Heads; 5. The Padachische ; 
6. The Stone Tomahawks; 7. The Little Dogs; 8. The 
Great Dogs. Each society had its own dance. Admission to 
a society was by purchase, and the buyers on this occasion 
gave up their wives to the sellers, as among the Mandans.” 

The Assiniboins, another Siouan or Dacotan tribe, were 
divided into eight societies, none of which, curiously enough, 
took its name from an animal. The societies were :—1. The 
People of the Girls; 2. The People of the Rocks or Stones ; 
3. The People of the Open Water (Les gens du large); 
4. The People of the Canoes; 5. The People of the Woods ; 
6. The People of the Age; 7. The People of the Bones ; 
and 8. The People of the Mountains.’ 

1 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse 
in das Innere Nord-America (Coblenz, 
1839-1841), ii. 217-219. It will be 
noticed that there are two Societies of 
Ravens among the men. The writer 
calls both of them De Rabenbande, La 

Bande des Corbeaux, but the native 
names which he gives are different for 
the two societies. 

2 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Resse 
in das Innere Nord-America, i. 401. 

3 Id., op. cit. i. 440 sg. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG ALGONKIN INDIANS 475 

§ 3. Secret Societies among the Algonkin Indians 

The custom of religious associations, dancing bands, or Religious 
secret societies was found also among the Indian tribes of pasmeaite sil 
the great Algonkin stock; indeed, according to the Prince societies 
of Wied it was common to all the Indian nations of North pe 
America. These associations, bands, or societies had each 
their own name and code of rules, their own dance and song; 
and served in part like police to maintain order in the 
camp, on the march, in hunting, and so forth... Amongst the societies 
Blackfeet, an Algonkin tribe, the Prince of Wied heard of ,pore the 
seven such bands or societies, namely :— 

1. The Mosquitoes—These were boys, many of them The Mos- 

not more than eight or ten years old. Some young men, 7° 
and occasionally even one or two old men, belonged to this 
society. The members had no police duties. Their business 
was to play youthful pranks’ when the fancy took them 
they would run about the camp pinching and scratching men, 
women, and children, just like mosquitoes. They had no 
respect for persons, but would tweak a grave and reverend 
senior by the nose as fast as look at him. For these out- 
rages there was no redress. Resistance was useless ; it only 
brought the whole swarm, like hornets, upon the sufferer. 
With this society the young began their career in life, rising 
to the higher orders as they grew older. The little imps 
wore as a badge of their order an eagle’s claw fastened by a 
leathern strap to the wrist ; and they had a special way of 
painting themselves, as indeed had the members of all the 
societies. 

2. The Dogs——tThese consisted of young married men. The Dogs. 
Their special badge was not known to the Prince. 

3. The Praivie Foxes or Prairie Dogs?—This was a The | 
police society composed of married men, The badge of {7ure 
their order was a baton like a shepherd’s crook, wrapt in 
otter’s skin and adorned at intervals with eagle feathers. 

4. Those who Carry the Raven.—Their badge was a long The Raven 
pole covered with red cloth and decorated with a long row C2: 

1 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse 2 «Die Prairie-Fiichse, Les Chiens 
in das Innere Nord-America, i. 576. de prairie.” 

The Bulls 
with Thin 
Horns, 

The 
Soldiers, 

The 
Buffalo 
Bulls, 

Admission 
to the 
societies 
was by 
purchase. 

Medicine- 
dance 

of the 
Blackfeet 
women : 
imitation 
of buffalo 
cows. 

476 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuar. 

of close-set ravén feathers. They discharged police duties, 
looking to the maintenance of order. 

5. The Bulls with the Thin Horns.—\n dancing they 
wore horns on their caps. Their tents were pitched in the 
middle of the tribal circle. In case of tumults arising it 
was their duty to help the Soldiers to restore order. 

6. The Soldiers.—These were the most esteemed warriors, 
They acted as police in camp and on the march. In public 
councils they gave the casting vote on questions of peace 
and war, of shifting the camp, of migrating after the game, 
and so forth, Their badge was a wooden tomahawk with 
hoofs of the buffalo cow fastened to the handle. 

7. The Buffalo Bulls—This was the highest in rank of 
all the societies. In their medicine-dance the members 
wore a cap from which hung down the long front hair and 
mane of a buffalo. Also they carried a rattle of buffalo 
hoofs, which they rattled in the dance. They were too old 
to do police duties; for they had passed through all the 
other societies and were looked upon as living in retirement. 

To all these societies new members were elected and 
had to pay their footing. |Medicine-men and _ other 
distinguished persons had to pay more than common folk. 
If the wife of one of the members committed adultery, the 
society would assemble, and after smoking in one of their 
tents would drag the woman from her tent at night, abuse 
her at their pleasure, and cut off her nose. The husband 
could not protect her even if he wished. He was compelled 
to divorce his erring spouse.’ 

The medicine-dance of the Blackfeet women was 
peculiar. It was not held annually. Some men danced in 
it with the women. A great wooden hut was built, and all 
the women who were to dance arrayed themselves in their 
gayest finery. The rest of the women and the men looked 
on, the men beating drums and rattling rattles to the steps 
of the dancers. On the last day, when the dance was over, 
an imitation of a buffalo park was given. Men, women, 
and children arranged themselves in two lines which 
diverged at an acute angle from the medicine-hut. Then 
out of the hut came women crawling on all fours and 

1 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Rezse dn das Innere Nord-America, i. §75-579% 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG ALGONKIN INDIANS 477 

imitating the gait and action of buffalo cows. Some men 
mimicked buffalo bulls, but were at first repelled by the 
women. Then fires were lit to windward, as used to be 
done in buffalo hunts, and the women, still playing the part 
of buffalo cows, snuffed the smoke and retreated into the 
hut. That ended the festival. This dance was sometimes 
danced in summer, whenever the fancy took them.) 

A later account of the Blackfeet societies has been mr. G. p. 
given us by Mr. G. B. Grinnell, who knows the tribe well, Grinnell’s 
Before he wrote in 1893 many or all of the societies had of the 
united in a sort of federation known as All Comrades pene 
(I-kun-uh-kah-tst). “This association of the All Comrades The _ 
consisted of a dozen or more secret societies, graded accord- es mes 
ing to age, the whole constituting an association which was Comrades, 
in part benevolent and helpful, and in part military, but 
whose main function was to punish offences against society 
at large. All these societies were really law and order 
associations. The J/#t-siks, or Braves, was the chief 
society, but the others helped the Braves.” * 

By the year 1893 many of the societies of the Blackfeet 
had, with the changed conditions of life, ceased to exist or 
had even been forgotten. They were a part of the old wild 
free life of the Indians ; and when the buffaloes disappeared, 
and the Blackfeet, instead of roving over the prairies after 
the herds, had settled about a government agency and tried 
to pick up a living in a humdrum way by regular work, 
they no longer cared to maintain the societies. However, ist of 
in the Pi-kun-i tribe Mr. Grinnell was able to obtain the s°ieties 
following list of societies composing the association or she hese 
federation of the All Comrades (/-kun-uh-kah-tsz). In this rie 
list the societies are arranged in the order from boyhood to rades, ~ 
old age :—* 

1 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Reise 2G. B. Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge 

in das Innere Nord-America, i. 575 Tales (London, 1893), pp. 220 sq. 
5g. 3 G. B. Grinnell, of. cz, p, 221. 

[TABLE 

Admission 
to the 
societies 
was by 
purchase. 

478 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuar. 

SOCIETIES OF THE ALL COMRADES 

Society. Composed of 

Little Birds : ‘ Boys from fifteen to twenty years old. 
Pigeons. F : Men who have been to war several times. 
Mosquitoes F . Men who are constantly going to war. 
Braves a : : Tried warriors, : 
All Crazy Dogs . 5 Men about forty years old. 
Raven Bearers . Old men. Dogs and Tails are different 
Dogs societies, but they dress alike and dance 
Tails. 5 : together and alike. 
Horns (among the : 

Blood Blackfeet) Obsolete among the Piegans, but still exists 
Kit-foxes (among the among the Bloods. 

Piegan Blackfeet) 
Catchers or Soldiers . In 1893 this society had been obsolete for 

25 or 30 years, perhaps more, 

“Bulls : : é In 1893 this society had been obsolete for 

50 years. 

“The societies known as Little Birds, Mosquitoes, and 
Doves are not really bands of the All Comrades, but are 
societies among the boys and young men in imitation of 
the l-kun-uh-kah-tsi, but of comparatively recent origin. 
Men not more than fifty years old can remember when 
these societies came into existence. Of all the societies of 
the J-kun-uh-kah-tsi, the Szn-o-pah, or Kit-fox band, has 
the strongest medicine. This corresponds to the Horns 
society among the Bloods. They are the same band with 
different names. They have certain peculiar secret and 
sacred ceremonies, not to be described here. The society of 
the Stum-iks, or Bulls, became obsolete more than fifty years 
ago. Their dress was very fine,—bulls’ heads and robes. 

“The members of the younger society purchased 
individually, from the next older one, its rights and 
privileges, paying horses for them. For example, each 
member of the Mosquitoes would purchase from some 
member of the Braves his right of membership in the latter 
society. The man who has sold his rights is then a member 
of no society, and if he wishes to belong to one, must buy 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG ALGONKIN INDIANS 479 

into the one next higher. Each of these societies kept 
some old men as members, and these old men acted as 
messengers, orators, and soon. The change of membership 
from one society to another was made in the spring, after the 
grass had started. Two, three, or more lodge coverings were 
stretched over poles, making one very large lodge, and in this 
the ceremonies accompanying the changes took place. 

“In later times, the Braves were the most important The 
and best known of any of the All Comrades societies. The rane ee 
membets of this band were soldiers or police. They were 
the constables of the camp, and it was their duty to preserve 
order, and to punish offenders.” Among the property 
of: the Brave society were two stone-headed arrows, one 
rattle, and one shield called “shield you don’t sit down 
with.” The man who carried the rattle was called Brave 
Dog ; and the man who carried the shield was forbidden to 
sit down for four days and four nights after he received it ; 
during the whole of that time he had to run about the 
camp or the prairie whistling like a rabbit. Why he did 
so, we are not told.” 

Corresponding to the All Comrades association of The | 
the Blackfeet was the association called the Warriors a7ers 
(Beninena) of the Arapahoes, another Algonkin tribe. It among the 
consisted of eight degrees or orders, including nearly all Ties 
the men of the tribe above the age of seventeen or there- degrees or 
about. Those who were not enrolled in one of the orders anna 
were little respected and might not take part in public “iation. 
ceremonies or go on the war-path with the rest. Each of 
the first six orders had its own peculiar dance, and the 
members of the principal orders had also their peculiar staff 
or badge of rank. The six orders were these :— 

1. The Fox men—This was the lowest order. It The Fox 
consisted of young men up to the age of about twenty-five "*” 
years. They had no special duties or privileges, but they 
danced the Fox dance, 

2. The Star men—These were young warriors about The Star 

thirty years old. They danced the Star dance. mens 

1G, B, Grinnell, Blackfoot Lodge Tales (London, 1893), p. 222. 
2 G. B. Grinnell, of. cit, p. 223. 

The Club 
men, 

The Spear 
men. 

The Crazy 
men, 

The Dog 
men. 

The Nuna- 
hawu. 

480 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cnuap. 

3. The Club men.—These were all men in the prime 
of life and formed an important part of the Warriors. The 
four leaders carried wooden clubs and in an attack it was 
their duty to gallop ahead, strike the enemy with the clubs, 
then ride back and lead the charge. The post was one of 
great danger, but also of great honour, and there were 
always candidates for a vacancy. The rest of the order 
carried sticks with a horse’s head rudely carved on one end. 
In desperate battles they were expected to plant these 
sticks in front of the line and fight there to the death. 

4. The Spear men.—They acted as policemen in the 
camp, on the march, and on the hunt. They saw to it that 
the tribal customs were observed and the chief's orders 
obeyed. They were regarded as the representatives of the 
law and were never resisted in the discharge of their duties 
and the infliction of punishment. 

5. The Crazy men.—These were men over fifty years of 
age. They were not expected to goto war. Their duties 
were religious and ceremonial. They danced the Crazy 
dance, which well deserved its name. Their insignia 
consisted of a bow and a bundle of blunt arrows. 

6. The Dog men——The four leaders of this society were 
the generals and directors of battle. In forming the line of 
cavalry for the charge they dismounted, anchored themselves 
to the ground by means of their lances, and stayed there till 
the battle was won or lost. No man might retreat without 
their orders; and even after they had given the order to 
retire, they might not themselves budge till some of their 
own order had ridden up to them, dragged their lances out 
of the ground, and scourged them away. If in the confusion 
of the retreat they were forgotten by their comrades, they 
were expected to die at their posts. They took little part in 
the fight, but the mere sight of these men driving their 
lances into the ground wound up the warriors to a pitch of 
desperate bravery. 

7. The Nunahawu.—The meaning of this word is un- 
known. This wasa secret order. The members had no dance, 
and none but themselves witnessed their ceremonies. They 
did not fight, but accompanied the war parties, and every 
night in secret performed rites and offered prayers for victory. 

xIx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG ALGONKIN INDIANS 481 

8. The Water-pouring men—This was the highest order, The water- 
and numbered only seven men, among whom were the rane 
oldest warriors of the tribe. They poured water over the hot 
stones in the sweat-house to make the steam for the sweat- 
bath ; hence their name. Their ceremonies were performed 
in a large sweat-lodge, which, when the whole tribe camped 
together, stood in the centre of the tribal circle between the 
entrance and the lodge in which the sacred medicine-pipe 
was kept." 

With reference to the Crazy dance, which was danced by The Crazy 
the Cheyennes as well as by the Arapahoes, a Cheyenne ag 
poet in a moment of fine frenzy composed a song, of which pahoes and 
the following is a literal translation :— Shoe 

The buffalo head— Ya-ha-ya! 
The half buffalo— 
(repeat ad libttume). 

This beautiful composition alludes in a graceful manner 
to the costume of some of the dancers in the dance.” The 
Crazy dance is described as follows by Mr. James Mooney :— 
“Men, women, and children took part in the ceremony Mr. J. 
dressed in skins or other costume to represent various Sa 
animals, as buffalos, panthers, deer, and birds, with one bear, of the 
two foxes, and seven wolves, besides two ‘medicine wolves.’ ¢”Y 
Each strove to imitate the animal personated in action as 
well as in appearance. It was the business of the two 
foxes to be continually running and stumbling over the 
others in their efforts to escape from the crowd. The dance, 
whose essential feature was the doing of everything by 
contraries, had its parallel among many eastern tribes, 
particularly among the old Huron and Iroquois. It was 
considered the most picturesque and amusing dance among 
the prairie tribes. The ‘half buffalo’ of the song refers to 
the robe worn by certain of the dancers, which consisted of 
the upper half of a buffalo skin, the head portion, with the 
horns attached, coming over the head of the dancers. The 
dance was an exhibition of deliberate craziness in which the 
performers strove to outdo one another in nonsensical and 

Dance. 

1 James Mooney, ‘The Ghost-Dance (Washington, 1896) pp. 986-989. 
Religion,” Fourteenth Annual Report 2 James Mooney, of. cit. pp. 1032 59. 
of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part ii. 

VOL. II! 21 

The 
Festival of 
Dreams or 
the Mad 
Festival 
celebrated 
by the 
Canadian 
Indians 
towards the 
end of 
winter, 

482 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuap. 

frenzied actions, particularly in constantly doing the exact 
opposite of what they were told to do. It was performed 
only in obedience to a vow made by some person for the 
recovery of a sick child, for a successful war expedition, or 
for some other Indian blessing. It lasted four days, the 
performers dancing naked the first three days and in full 
dance castume on the fourth. The leaders in the absurdities 
were two performers whose bodies and cheeks were painted 
with white clay, and whose ears were filled with hair shed 
by the buffalo, which was believed to confer strong 
‘medicine’ powers. They carried whistles, and shot at the 
spectators with blunt arrows. Almost every license was 
permitted to those two, who in consequence were really held 
in dread by the others. Among other things the crazy 
dancers were accustomed to dance through a fire until they 
extinguished it by their tramping. This was done in 
imitation of the fire-moth, called ahakda, ‘crazy, by the 
Arapaho, which hovers about a flame or fire and finally flies 
into it. They also handled poisonous snakes, and some- 
times, it is said, would even surround and kill a buffalo by 
their unaided physical strength. The Cheyenne dance 
differed somewhat from that of the Arapaho. It was last 
performed in the south about ten years ago.”? 

This Crazy Dance was apparently akin to the Festival of 
Dreams or the Mad Festival, which the Canadian Indians 
celebrated towards the end of winter. It might be proclaimed 
in the last days of February and might last three or four 
weeks. The whole population of the village seemed to go mad. 
Men, women, and children would rush about almost naked 
and apparently insensible.to the cold ; sometimes they would 
disguise themselves with masks and paint. In a state of 
frenzy they ran from hut to hut smashing and upsetting 
everything, and pouring cold water or hot ashes on the 
inmates. Each of these maniacs had dreamed, or pretended 
to dream, of something, and he would not leave a house till 
one of the inmates had guessed his dream and carried it out 
in practice ; and if this was not done at once, the dreamer 
redoubled his fury and threatened to burn and destroy 

.1 James Mooney, ‘*The Ghost-Dance of the Bureau of Ethnology, Part ii. 
Religion,” Fourteenth Annual Refort (Washington, 1896) p. 1033. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG ALGONKIN INDIANS 483 

everything, The dream might be that the dreamer was to 
receive a present, and in that case the person who guessed 
it was bound to present the dreamer with the thing 
dreamed of, cost him what it might ; for it was believed that 
the dreamer’s life depended on his getting what he had 
dreamed of. But he would not say in plain words what the 
thing was which he had seen in sleep ; he would only hint at 
it in dark enigmatic language or perhaps only by means of 
gestures. At the end of the festival the Indians said that 
they cast madness out of the village. The early Jesuit 
missionaries who described this strange festival compated it 
very justly both to the Saturnalia of ancient and to the 
Carnival gf modern times; they noted that it fell at the 
same time of the year as the Carnival... The resemblance 
between the three festivals was probably more than 
superficial.’ 

Corresponding to the Warriors’ Association of the The 
Arapahoes was the Warriors’ Association (Vétgu) of the Peau 
Cheyennes, another Algonkin tribe of the great prairies, of the 
The association comprised six societies, which were named eee 
as follows: 1. Dog men; 2. Fox men or Flint men; 3. ing six 
Pointed- ees men or Coyote warriors; 4. Red Shield or Stes 
Buffalo Bull warriors; 5. Bowstring men; 6. Crazy Dogs? 
These societies were not graduated according to age and 
rank. A man of any age might become a member of any 
society. Each society was ruled by a chief and four 
assistants, and had its own paints, costumes, songs, and 
dances. Four of the societies admitted four maidens to The four 
their lodge; these maidens were generally daughters of ar 
chiefs. The warriors called the maidens of their own society societies. 
“sisters” and might not marry them ; but they were free to 
marry the maidens of another society. These maidens 

1 Relations des Jésuttes, 1656, pp. 3 James Mooney, in Handbook of 
26-29 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, American Indians north of Mexico, i. 
1858); Lafitau, A/eurs des sauvages 256. The names of the Cheyenne 
amériguains (Paris, 1724), i. 367-369; societies are given somewhat differently 
Charlevoix, Héstotre de la Nouvelle by Mr. G. A. Dorsey, who substitutes 
France (Paris, 1744), vi. 82 sgg. Hoof- Rattle Warriors and Wolf 

Warriors for Fox Men and Crazy Dogs. 

2 T have collected and discussed See G. A. Dorsey, The Cheyenne, 1. 
examples of such Saturnalia in Zhe Ceremonial Organization (Chicago, 
Golden Bough, Second Edition, iii. 70 1905), pp. 3, 15-29 (Field Columbian 
*sgg.y 138 syg. Museum, Publication 99). 

The Coyote 
Warriors. 

The Red 
Shield 
Warriors. 

The Dog 
Men. 

The 
Bowstring 
Warriors. 

The Wolf 
Society. 

The 
Midewiwin 
or Great 
Medicine 
Society 

of the 
Ojibways. 

484 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuayr. 

occupied prominent places in all dances and they sat in the 
midst of the circle in front of the chiefs at all councils. 
Apparently they were expected to remain chaste.’ The 
Coyote Warriors were so called because the head chief 
carried a sacred hide of the coyote with the hair left on, 
and because, moreover, the Coyote Warriors imitated the 
coyote in speed, cunning, and endurance. They could 
outstrip their fellow-tribesmen in running long distances. 
The Red Shield Warriors took their name from a large red 
shield of buffalo hide with the tail of the buffalo hanging 
from it. And because they wore the scalp of a buffalo as a 
head-dress they were sometimes called the Buffalo Warriors. 
The Dog men told astory how their society originated with 
the help of dogs. The dog is the emblem of the society, 
and the members hold the animal sacred. The Bowstring 
Warriors were unmarried and used an inverted mode of 
speech. They fought desperately, their bodies painted red, 
and they carried stuffed screech-owls on their heads. Every 
one of these warriors took with him into battle a curiously 
constructed bow-spear, the emblem of their society, which 
none but members of the society might touch. The 
implement was a combination of a spear and a bow, and to 
all appearance was equally ill; adapted to serve as the one 
and the other. The Wolf society, as the most recent of the 
six societies is called by one of our authorities, is said to 
have been founded by an Owl-man, who fell in with wolves 
which had the power of transforming themselves into men.” 

The great Algonkin tribe of the Ojibways had a 
celebrated society called the Mzdewzwzn, that is, the Society 
of the Shamans (/zdes), which was popularly known as the 
Grand Medicine Society. It had its equivalent in the 
Medicine or Mystery Societies of other tribes, such as the 
Wacicka Society of the Omahas and the Wakan Wacipi 
Society of the Dacotas® Membership of the society was 
supposed to confer on the initiated a high degree of spiritual 
power ; and the ceremony of initiation, as in the case of the 

1G. A. Dorsey, The Cheyenne, I. 18, 19, 20 599-5 24 5g., 26 sgg., 
Ceremonial Organization, pp. 16,53-55- 54 59- 
2G. A. Dorsey, of. cit. pp. 16- 3 See above, pp- 462 sgq. 

x1x SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG ALGONKIN INDIANS 485 

other Medicine Societies which have been referred to, con- The 
sisted essentially in a pretence of death and resurrection, the praca 
candidate feigning to be killed by the powerful “ medicine ” comprisea 
or charms of the society and afterwards to be restored to life lags 
by the same means.’ and re- 

It is believed that the society was instituted by a SU7ecHon. 
powerful and benign spirit named Dzhe Manido or ase is 
Minabozho, who is only second to Kitsht Manido, the Great ola ae 
Spirit. It was he who interceded with the Great Spirit Bntaning 
that the Indians might learn how to provide themselves bya power- 
with the good things of the earth, and how to ward off eallets 
disease and death, and it was he who taught them the */¢”adozke. 
medicinal virtues of plants. The method which he followed 
in his instructions is dramatically rehearsed at the initiation 
of a candidate into the society, and amongst the members 
are handed down the traditions as to the origin of the world 
and of mankind. The members of the society, called 
Midé, are of both sexes and unlimited in number. The 
idea of joining the society may be suggested to a lad during 
the fast at puberty, when he obtains his guardian spirit. 

But it need not be so suggested. In any case a candidate Applica- 
applies to one of the priests of the society for admission, Bia: 
and if the application is granted he receives an instructor, 

who informs him as to the course of training and the 
entrance fees which have to be paid. The course of Course of 
instruction preparatory to admission to the society may last suction 
for several years; many men have impoverished themselves 

by the payment of fees and the preparations for the feast 

to which the priests are invited. The sacred symbol of the The sacred 

society is a small white shell.? waieene 

1 H.R. Schoolcraft, Jadian Tribes 
of the United States, v. 420-441 ; J. G. 
Kohl, Xitscht-Gami (Bremen, 1859), 
i. 59-76; W. J. Hoffman, ‘‘ The 
Midewiwin or Grand Medicine Society 
of the Ojibwa,” Seventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1891), pp. 143-300. Compare 
W. W. Warren, ‘History of the 
Ojibways,” Collections of the Minnesota 
Historical Soctety (Saint Paul, Minn., 
1885), pp. 65 sgg. Mr. Hoffman’s 
elaborate account of the society and its 

rites is based on his personal investiga- 
tions among the Ojibways in the years 
1887, 1888, and 1889, when he ob- 
tained his information from the chief 
Mid priests, living at Red Lake and 
White Earth reservations, as well as 
from other members of the tribe (of. 
cet, p. 155). 

2 W. J. Hoffinan, ‘‘ The Midewiwin 
of the Ojibwa,” Seventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1891), pp. 163 sg.; za. ‘The 
Menomini Indians,” Fourteenth Annual 

486 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuar. 

4 
There are four orders or degrees among the members of 

Four orders 

- io the society, and a member may rise through them from the 

Society. lowest to the highest. The higher his order or degree, the 
greater is his supernatural or magical power supposed to 
be.’ “The amount of influence wielded by Midé generally, 
and particularly such as have received four degrees, ts beyond 
belief. The rite of the Midewiwin is deemed equivalent toa 
religion—-as that term is commonly understood by intelligent 
people—and is believed to elevate such a Mzdé to the nearest 
possible approach to the reputed character of Mznabozho, and. 
to place within his reach the supernatural power of invoking 
and communing with K7ztshz Manido himself.” * 

Training During his training the candidate is taught by his 

te preceptor the songs or rather incantations which form part 
of his stock in trade, and he learns the magical or medicinal 

Purifica- uses of herbs, plants, and trees. For four days before the 

apes the ceremony of initiation he purifies himself in the sweat-house. 

bath. This purification is absolutely essential.* “In all ceremonies, 

prophetical or medico-magicai, great reliance is placed on 
the vapor-bath. This bath consists of a tight lodge, which 
Sanctity of is filled with vapor by casting water on heated stones. It 
ot is entered with sacred feelings, and is deemed a great means 
of purification. Secret arts are here often disclosed between 
Medais of high power, which could not be imparted in other 
places, or positions, believed to be less subject to the 
influence of sanctifying power. They are called Madodiswon 
—their use, a consecrated practice, in order to ask something 
which is wished not to be made public, some private request. 
Vapor-baths are not a matter of luxury or sensuality among 
the Indians of North America; their use belongs to the 
Medicine rite. They are prohibited to the vulgar, and not 
authorised, and are used in consecrated cases, and according 
to prescribed forms, which must not be departed from.” * 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 
Part i. (Washington, 1896) pp. 66 

sq. From J. G. Kohls account 
(Kitschi-Gami, i. 59 sgg.) we learn 

of the Ojibwa,” Seventh Annual 

Report of the Bureau of Ethnology 

(Washington, 1891), pp. 164, 225 sg. 
2 W. J. Hoffman, of. cit. p. 274. 

that even an infant in the cradle might, 
on the application of its father, be 
initiated into the society. Perhaps 
this was a later development. 

1 W. J. Hofiman, ‘‘ The Midewiwin 

3 W. J. Hoffman, of. ct¢. pp. 191-201. 

4 W. J. Hoffman, of. cit. p. 204. 

5 H.R. Schooleraft, Jvdian Tribes 
of the United States, v. (Philadelphia, 
1856) pp. 423 sg. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG ALGONKIN INDIANS 487 

The ceremony of initiation takes place in a temporary The Grand 
structure erected for the purpose; it is a large oblong peat 
enclosure, the walls of which consist of poles wattled with 
branches and leafy twigs. It is only partially roofed. The 
structure is called the W/zdawin or Medewigan ; amongst the 
whites it goes by the name of the Grand Medicine Lodge. 

The ceremonies are public and may be attended by women Initiation 
as well as by men, but the ritual is unintelligible to the ““™0"™ 
uninitiated.'_ The essential part is the pretence of killing 
the candidate and bringing him to life again. One after The — 
another the priests present their medicine-bags at him as if lea 
to shoot him. These bags are made each of the skin of a 
particular animal, which may be any of a great variety of 
species, such as the otter, the raccoon, the weasel, the wolf, 
the red fox, the grey fox, a snake, the great owl, and so 
forth ; and they often retain the shape of the animal, with 
its head, tail, and even the feet still attached. In the bag 
are kept the owner’s sacred possessions, such as the magic 
red powder used in the preparation of the hunter’s incanta- 
tions, also amulets and fetishes of various sorts. Above all] The sacred 
they contain the mzgzs, the sacred white shell, the symbol (migieh oat 
of the society; and when the bags are presented at the the symbol 
candidate, they are supposed to project the shell into his ae 
body. At the last discharge he falls forward apparently 
lifeless to the ground. Then the priests lay their medicine- 
bags on his back, and after a few moments one of the 
sacred shells drops from his mouth. The seemingly dead Pretence 
man now shews signs of life, but when the chief priest en 
replaces the shell in his mouth, he instantly falls to the wince 
ground as before. But the priests bring him back to life him to tite 
again by marching round him and touching his body in 8%. 
various places with their medicine-bags. When the 
candidate has quite revived, he receives a new medicine-bag 
made of an otter-skin, or perhaps the skin of a mink or 
weasel. Init he places his sacred white shell (#dgzs), and 
immediately puts its magical virtue to the proof by pretending 

1 W. J. Hoffman, ‘‘The Midewiwin United States, v. (Philadelphia, 1856) 
of the Ojibwa,” Seventh Annual pp. 428, with Plate 32; J. G. Kohl, 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology Kitschi-Gami (Bremen, 1859), i. 60 
(Washington, 1891), pp. 187 sg.; H. — sg., 66 sg. 
R. Schoolcraft, Zzdian Tribes of the 

In this 
ritual 

the sacred 
white shell 
seems to 
be an 
instrument 
both of life 
and of 
death, 
like the 
mistletoe 
of Balder. 

488 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuayv. 

to shoot every person present in the lodge with it. Each 
person so menaced obligingly falls forward as if shot dead 
by the magic power of the shell. Formerly the person so 
shot was expected to lie motionless and apparently lifeless 
till one of the initiated members of the society brought him 
or her to life again by presenting his medicine-bag at his or 
her body; but in modern times, apparently, the rigour of 
this rule has been relaxed, and after lying still for a few 
minutes é¢ach of the slain is permitted to effect his own 
resurrection without the help of the magical bag. When 
they all have been shot and all have revived, they make a 
pretence of swallowing and spitting out their shells, after 
which they replace them in their medicine-bags. A feast at 
the expense of the new members immediately follows.! The 
ceremonies of admission to the three higher orders or 
degrees of the society are very similar ; they all repeat the 
rite of the mimick death and resurrection.’ 

In this ritual the part played by the sacred white shell 
is somewhat ambiguous. Its entrance into the body seems 
to kill, and the person killed by it appears to revive as soon 
as he has succeeded in disgorging it. Hence J. G. Kohl 
was informed “ that these shells signify the sickness, the evil 
which is inherent in man, but which by zealous effort and 
by common religious worship he is able to discharge 
and put away from himself.”* On the other hand Mr. 
Hoffman appears to regard the shell (szg¢s) as an implement 
of life rather than of death ; for he speaks of “shooting the 
sacred migis—life—into the right breast of the candidate.” * 
We may perhaps suppose that the shell is charged with the 
double virtue of life and of death, and that in this respect it 
resembles the sacred mistletoe which, though it was said to 

UW. J. Hoffman, ‘‘ The Midewiwin 
of the Ojibwa,” Seventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1891), pp, 213-218, 220; H. R. 
Schoolcraft, Jndian Tribes of the 
Ontted States, v. (Philadelphia, 1856) 
pp. 428-433; J. G. Kohl, Avétschz- 
Gamti, i. 64-68, 69, 71. As to the 
sacred shell (mzgzs), Mr. Hoffman 
says: ‘The migis referred to in this 
description of the initiation consists of 
a small white shell, of almost any 

species, but the one believed to resemble 
the form of the mythical #Zgis is similar 
to the cowrie, Cypraca moneta, L.” 
(op. ctl. p. 220), 

2 W. J. Hoffman, of, cit. pp. 224 
5gg., especially pp. 225 59., 234 5q-, 
248, 265. 

3 J. G. Kohl, A7tschi-Gamt, i. 71. 

4 W. J. Hoffman, “* The Midewiwin 
of the Ojibwa,” Seventh Annual Report 
of the Bureau of Ethnology (Washing- 
ton, 1891), p. 215. 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG ALGONKIN INDIANS 489 

contain Balder’s life, yet proved the instrument of his death 
when it was discharged full at his body. 

The Menominees, an Algonkin tribe of Wisconsin, have The Grand 
or had a Grand Mystery Society called JMztawit, which pais 
appears to have been substantially identical with the (1Zitawi) 
Midewiwin society of the Ojibways. It is said to have Beng 
been founded by the mythical being MM/anabush or Great minees. 
Rabbit, who is clearly identical with the Ojibway Mznabozho, 
the founder of the MWrdewiwin society. The members were 
shamans, and consisted of men and women, and also a few 
young boys and girls, who had been initiated into the 
mysteries either directly or by proxy. Formerly, the Fourorders 
society comprised four orders or degrees, which differed from res 
each other in rank ; and the members of each order had a 
distinctive mode of painting their faces. Admission to the 
society had to be paid for. The ceremonies of initiation Ceremonies 
resembled those of the Ojibways ; the candidate had to go laren 
through a pretence of being killed and brought to life again. killing the 

candidate 

The magical instrument of death and resurrection was the ang pring- 
medicine-bag. It was made of the skin of an animal, such Hd him to 
as the mink, beaver, otter, or weasel, and contained various * 
mysterious objects, particularly the sacred shell (koxapamik) 

with which the candidate was shot at initiation. The 
initiatory rites were performed in a medicine lodge called 
mitawtkomik, a temporary structure erected by medicine- 
women. It was sixty or seventy feet long by twenty feet 

wide. The framework consisted of poles bent and fastened 
together at the top so as to form a series of arches, and the 

whole was covered with rush-mats. At initiation the Power 
medicine-men pretended to shoot the candidate with their ae 
medicine-bags, and at the last shot the young man_ fell bag and of 
forward apparently lifeless. Afterwards a shell dropped tga 
from his 

mouth, whereupon he gradually revived. A 
1 Fr. Kauffmann, Salder, Mythus 

und Sage (Strasburg, 1902), pp. 19-24, 
45-48. Compare Zhe Golden Bough,? 

translation of the Edda which I con- 
sulted. I only inferred that Balder’s 
life was hidden for safety in the mistle- 

iii. 236 sgg., where in treating of this 
legend I was prevented from using the 
full force of the evidence in favour of 
my hypothesis by reason of a mistake, 
as it now appears to be, in the German 

toe (of. cit. iii. 349 59., 446 sgg.); but 
if Professor Kauffmann is right, what I 
merely inferred is expressly stated in 
our most ancient authority for the 
Balder legend, namely the Voluspa, 

The six 
societies 

of the 
Arickarees, 

490 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuar. 

medicine-bag was then presented to him, and armed with it 
he went about the lodge shooting at people with the bag, 
just as the medicine-men had shot at him. The persons 
aimed at by him moaned and sank to the ground, but 
soon recovered themselves. The Menominees believed that 
on swallowing his sacred shell a medicine-man gained the 
power of transferring its mysterious virtue to his medicine- 
bag merely by breathing upon it. This pretence of 
swallowing the shells was carried out by the medicine-men 
at the initiatory rites.’ 

§ 4. Secret Societies among the Arickarees 

The Arickarees or Arikaras, a tribe of the Caddoan family, 
speaking a language closely akin to that of the Pawnees,’ 
had also their dancing-bands or secret societies. When 
the Prince of Wied visited the tribe in 1833 he found six 
such societies among them, as follows :—* 

1. The Bears—These were old people, who in dancing 
wore as badges some parts of a bear, such as pieces of the 
skin or a necklace of claws. 

2. The Mad Wolves.—They wore a wolf-skin down 
their back with a slit through which they thrust their head 
and an arm. 

3. The Foxes.—They wore fox-skins on various parts of 
their bodies. 

4. The Mad Dogs.—In dancing they carried rattles in 
their hands. 

5. The Mad Bulls—These were the most distinguished 

1 W. J. Hoffmann, M.D., ‘‘ The 
MenominiIndians,” Fourteenth Annual 
Report of the Bureau of Ethnology, 
Part i. (Washington, 1896) pp. 66- 
138, especially pp. 68, 71 sg., 75 59., 
83 59-5 99-102. As to the meaning of 
the name JVanabush (‘Great Rabbit”), 
see 67d. p. 114 note ?, With regard 
to the mythical being whom the Algon- 
kins called Menzbozho, Manibosha, 
Manabosho, Manabush, Michabo, etc., 
the Great Hare, see Relations des 
Jésuittes, 1670, p. 93 (Canadian reprint, 
Quebec, 1858); Charlevoix, Histotre 

de la Nouvelle France (Paris, 1744), vi. 
64; W. W. Warren, “History of the 
Ojibways,” Collections of the Minnesota 
Historical Soctety, v. (St. Paul, Minn., 
1885) pp. 56, 79; P. Jones, History 
of the Ojebways, pp. 32 sgg.3 D. G. 
Brinton, Ayths of the New World 
(New York, 1876), pp. 175 599. 

2 Handbook of American Indians 
north of Mexico, i. 83. See also 
above, p. 146. é 

3 Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, Xetse 
zn das innere Nord-America (Coblenz, 
1839-1841), ii. 240 sg. . 

xix SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE ARICKAREES 491 

men. In the dance they wore a buffalo’s scalp with the 
horns. 

6. The Soldiers——They discharged the same duties as 
the Soldiers among the Mandans. 

5. Secret Society among the Maidus of California 
Ly SZ 

The Maidu tribe of Central California have or had a The secret 
secret society called Ku-mek, literally “ the assembly-house ” tre yi, ctas 
r “dance-house.” Boys were initiated into it at the age pf f Cali- 

twelve or a little younger. Not all the youths joined it, a 
though the older members tried to persuade them to do so, 
telling them that if they did not they would be devoured by 
wild beasts, or would fall over precipices, or be drowned, 
and that they would go the left-hand way into darkness. 
After a novice had been initiated the old men laid their 
right hands in turn on his left shoulder; and a new name, 
the name of his manhood, which was generally the name of 
his father or of some other near relative, was added to his 
baby name. For ten days after the ceremony he must 
refrain from all flesh meat, and might eat nothing but 
acorn-porridge.! . 

Fuller information as to the society has been collected Importance 
and published by Mr. Roland B. Dixon2 From him we sodty. 
learn that among the Maidus of the Sacramento Valley the 
Secret Society was a very important institution. Its leaders 
were the leaders of the tribe or community, and regulated 
the dance organisation. When the old men of the order 
decided that certain boys or young men should be initiated, 
they went to their houses, dragged them out, and carried 
them to the dance-house, a large circular, semi-subterranean The dance- 
and earth-covered structure, which played a great part in 
the life of the community. The choice of the boys or men 
to be initiated was supposed to be made by the spirits, who 
communicated their wishes to the old men. When the boys Initiation 
or men to be initiated were brought into the dance-house, a Sateponis: 

1S. Powers, Tribes of California 2 Roland B. Dixon, Zhe Northern 
(Washington, 1877), pp. 305 sg. (Cov- <Alaidu (New York, 1905), pp. 322- 
tributions to North-A merecan Ethnology, 333 (Bulletin of the American Museum 
vol. iii. ). of Natural History, vol, xvii. Part iii.). 

492 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES chap. 

shaman gave each of them a wand, which was hung up in 
the dance-house until the end of the initiation ceremonies. 
After that the shaman rubbed sacred meal, compounded of 
acorns and birch-seed, into the hair of the candidates, and 
having made them lie down he ran round them several times 
with a lighted brand in his hand. For some time after the 
ceremony the 'novices might not eat flesh, and they must 
use a scratching-stick for their heads. They remained in 
seclusion in the dance-house; and if they were obliged to 
quit it for any occasion they covered their heads with 
The blankets or skins till their return. They were taught the 
eros various dances, and when they had learned them all they re- 
new names, ceived new names, which were supposed to have been imparted 
to the shaman by the spirits. With his new name the novice 
received the badges of the society, which were a netted cap 
and a plume-stick. For several weeks after initiation the 
head of the newly initiated member might not be washed nor 
the sacred meal removed which was clotted among his hair. 
Fach Each Maidu village or group of villages had its branch 
ee hay Of the Secret Society, and each branch was presided over 
its branch by a leader or Grand Master, as we may call him. His 
of the functions were to some extent judicial, for he was expected 
society and to settle all such disputes as could not be settled in other 
its Grand : . . 4: 
Master, Ways; he also took a prominent part in warlike expeditions 
who was and often led them in person. Asa rule the Grand Master 
nme ful shaman, and in that capacity was greatl 
shaman, WAS a powerlul s ’ p y- g y 
feared, for his magical powers were believed to exceed those 
of common shamans.’ Indeed we are told that “the shaman 
was, and still is, perhaps the most important individual 
among the Maidu. In the absence of any definite system 
of government, the word of the shaman has great weight : 
as a class they are regarded with much awe, and as a rule 
‘The Grand are obeyed much more than the chief.”* The Grand 
esa ma Master of the Secret Society, who is also a shaman, 
Society is possesses charms which kill a man merely by touching 

thought to his bare skin;* indeed he can inflict disease and death 

1 Roland B, Dixon, Zhe Northern 327 sq., 332. 
Maidu, pp. 322-327. As to the dance- 3 Roland B. Dixon, of. czt. p. 267. 
houses, see 26d. pp. 168 sgq. * Roland B. Dixon, of. cét. p. 272. 
2 Roland B. Dixon, of. cit. pp. 272 

XIX SECRET SOCIETY AMONG THE MAIDUS 493 

on whole villages. He possesses a sacred cape made of be able 
feathers, shells, and bits of stone with a small stone mortar ee i 
in the middle of it. This cape was used by him in the death on 
secret incantations by which he brought sickness and death vies y 
on hostile villages ; for taking the cape and certain roots his incan- 
with him he would go to windward of the doomed village, ““°"* 
and laying the cape on the ground would put the roots 

under the mortar and ignite them. Then.as the smoke blew 
towards the houses of the enemy, he would say, “Over 

there, over there, not here! Do not come back this way. 

We are good. Make those people sick. Kill them, they 

are bad people.” If the people in the village got wind 

of the spells thus cast upon them, they took elaborate pre- 
cautions to annul their deadly influence by fumigating all 

the houses, dancing, singing, shaking coccoon rattles, and 

other approved methods of counteracting an enemy’s magic. 

When the magical cape was not in use, the Grand Master ‘The 
kept it hidden in a mat or bag far away from the village eae 
for it was certain death for any one but himself to touch 

the mysterious object. At his death it was always buried 

or burned with him. But the Grand Master worked magic The Grand 
for the good of his own people as well as for the injury Erion 
of his enemies. He was believed to make rain when it ana en. 
was needed, and to ensure a good supply of salmon and tee 
a plentiful crop of acorns, which formed the staple food of salmon 
the tribe. Indeed he took to himself all the credit for good "4°" 
crops and fine seasons. Every day at dawn he was supposed 

to stand on the roof of the dance-house and to sing songs 

in imitation of the matutinal chorus of the earliest birds.’ 

The Maidu Indians used to dance many elaborate The 
ceremonial dances in their dance-houses, and though we Gv-monial 
are not told that the dances belonged specially to the the Maidu. 
members of the Secret Society, we may, on the analogy 
of other Indian tribes, reasonably infer that some of them 
did so. Certainly the date of the principal dance was 
settled by the Grand Master of the society.” Some of 

these dances have a special interest for us, because like 

1 Roland B. Dixon, Zhe Northern Californian Indians, see below, pp. 
Maidu, pp. 328, 331 sg. As to the 494 s¢9. . ; 
acorn food of the Maidus and other 2 Roland B. Dixon, of. c7t. p. 288. 

Sonie of 
these © 
dances 
were 
magical 
rites in- 
tended to 
increase 
the food- 
supply : 
the dancers 
wore the 
skins and 
mimicked 
the action 
of the 
animals 
which they 
wished to 
multiply. 

The Acorn 
Dance to 
increase 
the supply 
of acorns. 

In the 
Acorn 
Dance the 
dancers 
imitate the 
knocking 
down of 
acorns 
from the 
trees, 

494 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuav. 

the zntichtuma ceremonies of the Central Australians they 
aimed at increasing the supply of food by means of 
sympathetic magic, the dancers mimicking the animals 
which they desired to multiply. On this subject Mr. 
R. B. Dixon tells us that “where animals are represented, 
particularlv in the region of the North-western Maidu, the 
dancer$ wear either the skin of the animal in whole or in 
part (as in the Bear, Deer, and Coyote dances), or ornaments 
which in some way symbolize the animal or bird in question. 
In none are any masks worn. In these dances, the per- 
sonators of the animals endeavor to imitate the actions 
of the animal, and to utter its characteristic cries. The 
purpose of these animal dances (confined very largely ‘to 
the Sacramento Valley area) is said to be varied. Some— 
like the Deer, Duck, and Turtle dances—have for their 
purpose the increase of the animals in question, that food 
may be plenty, and seem to have as an important feature 
a’ prayer or address in which the animal is besought to 
multiply and increase. Other dances, such as the Bear 
dance, are to soothe and pacify the animal, and render it less 
likely to attack hunters. Other dances still, like the Coyote 
dance, seem to refer to the Coyote myths at times, and the 
part the Coyote played in the creation and during the time 
of the ‘first people” One of the dances of the Sacramento 
Valley people, although not an animal dance, seems to have 
for its purpose the one which was referred to in the first class 
of animal dances; namely, the increase of the food-supply 
of the people, acorns here being desired instead of game.”? 
The last of these dances, which we may perhaps call 
the Acorn dance, is held about April when the leaves are 
well out on the trees. In the course of the dance acorn- 
flour is sprinkled at the foot of the main central post of the 
dance-house, and one of the dancers four times expresses 
a wish that the chief may have plenty of acorn-flour. 
Then all the spectators, both men and women, take long 
poles in their hands and dance round the main post, after 
which they strike the post with their poles.’ This last part 

1 Roland B. Dixon, Zhe Northern 304-306. The native name for the 
Maidu, pp. 285 sg. dance is akz. 
2 Roland B. Dixon, of. cét. pp. 

XIX SECRET SOCIETY AMONG THE MAIDUS 

495 

of the ceremony | is interpreted by Mr. Dixon with much 
probability “as symbolical of the striking of the branches 

of the oaks in the autumn in the process of gathering 
acorns.” For “the collection and preparation of acorns Pupertauee 
for food were among the most important industries of the 020s 
Maidu, in common with most of the Central Californian article of 
tribes. At the time in the autumn when the acorfis are aoe Ue 
ripe, every one is busy. The men and larger boys climb Indians. 
the tree$, and, by the aid of long poles, beat the branches 
knocking off the acorns. The women and smaller children 

gather these in burden-baskets, and carry them to the 
village, storing them in the granaries or in the large storage- 

baskets in the houses.” Indeed “ the chief dependence of 

the Maidu, in common with most of the Indians of the 

central part of the State, was upon the acorn. The Maidu 
recognize about a dozen different varieties of these. In the 
creation myth it is declared that the Creator’s first act, after 
forming the dry land, was to cause a great oak-tree to 

spring up, on which grew all the twelve varieties of acorns.” ® 

One who knew the Californian Indians well in the days 

when they were still but little contaminated by contact 

with the whites has estimated that more than half of the 

food of the tribes which lived in oak forests consisted of 
acorns. Of one tribe he says that “like all their brethren 

they are also very fond of acorns, and the old Indians cling 
tenaciously to them in preference to the finest wheaten 
bread.”® The acorns were pounded into meal, which was Acorn-meal 
then baked into bread; and a characteristic sound which reer 
greeted the ears of a traveller as he approached an Indian 

village in an oak forest used to be the monotonous thump, 

thump of the pestles wielded by the patient women as they 
prepared the daily bread for the household.’ In antiquity 

1 Roland B. Dixon, The Northern Dixon, The Northern Maidu, pp. 

Maidu, p. 286. 

2 Roland B. Dixon, of. cé#. p. 184. 

3 Roland B. Dixon, of. cét. p. 181. 

4S. Powers, Zribes of California 
(Washington, 1877), pp. 415 59. 

5 S. Powers, of. cét. pp. 187 sg. 

6 S. Powers, of. cit. p. 49. As 
to the preparation of the acorns for 
food, see zbid. p. 188; Roland B. 

184 sgg. As to the kinds of acorns 
which are used as food Mr. R. B. 
Dixon says (of. ci#. p. 181): ‘‘Although 
the acorns of all species of oaks grow- 
ing in the region are eaten, some 
varieties are distinctly preferred to 
others. In general Quercus Kelloggii, 
Newberry, Quercus chrysolepis, Lieb- 
mann, and Quercus Wislisent, A.D.C., 

The 
autumn 
Acorn 
Dance of 
the Cali- 
fornian 
Indians. 

Elaborate 
dances of 
the Maidus 
of the 
Sacramento 
Valley. 

496 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cuap. 

the mountaineers of Lusitania, the modern Portugal, lived 
for two thirds of the year on acorns, which they dried, 
ground, baked into bread, and stored up for future use.' 

We need not wonder, therefore, that acorns, as the 
staple food of many tribes, should have played a part in 
their religion, and that religious or magical rites should 
have been performed to secure a plentiful crop of them. 
Some Californian tribes held an acorn dance in autumn. 
Thus the Tatus danced soon after the acorns were ripe, 
men and women, decked with feathers and white owls’ down, 
tripping it together at evening within a circle of fires, 
while a rude barbaric music gave the time to their steps. 
Such acorn dances, we are told, were common in all these 
parts.” Amongst the Hololupai Maidus the acorn dance 
was one of the most important of their many dances, 
They called it “the all-eating dance” and danced it “in 
autumn, soon after the winter rains set in, to insure a 
bountiful crop of acorns the following year.” Men and 
women, adorned in all their finery, danced standing in two 
circles, the men in one circle and the women in the other. 
In the intervals of the dance two priests, wearing gorgeous 
head-dresses and long mantles of black eagle feathers, took 
their stations on opposite sides of one of the pillars which 
supported the roof, and there chanted solemn prayers to 
the spirits. From time to time the dancers refreshed 
themselves with acorn-porridge? 

The dances of the Maidus in the Sacramento Valley 
were the most numerous and elaborate. They had a 
regular dance-season, beginning in October and continuing 
through the winter till April or May.* Their country is 
a level park-like land with miles and miles of waving 
grass and flowers and magnificent open groves of oak,? 

were the favorite species.” Mr. A. alische Geographie von Griechenland 

S. Powers mentions the chestnut-oak 
(Quercus densiflora) as the species of 
which the acorns were made into 
bread (77tbes of California, p. 49). 

1 Strabo iii. 3. 7, p. 155. The 
ancient Greeks, especially the Ar- 
cadians, also ate acorns. See Hesiod, 
Works and Days, 230 sg. ; Herodotus 
i. 66; Neumann and Partsch, Physik- 

(Breslau, 1885), pp. 381 sg. 
2S. Powers, Tribes of California, 
Pp. 143 sg.; compare 20. pp. 155, 
224, 325, 354 59- 
op. 

3S. Powers, 

‘4 Roland B. Dixon, Zhe Northern 
Maidu, pp. 287, 288, 

5 Roland B. Dixon, of. cit. p. 126. 

ci. pp. 285 

Se 

XIX SECRET SOCIETY AMONG THE MAIDUS 497 

where the Indians gathered the acorns and danced the 
acorn-dance. 

But while the Maidus thus aimed at increasing the supply But these 
of food, both animal and vegetable, by sympathetic or pee 
imitative magic, mimicking the appearance and gait of were not, 
animals and simulating the gathering of acorns, it is to be ho Conttal 
remembered that these magical rites were not, like the Austratians, 
analogous magical rites of the Central Australians, per- aay 
formed by members of totemic clans who had acorns bers of 
or the particular kinds of animals for their totems; for in penis 
common, apparently, with all the Californian tribes the 
Maidus were without totems and totemic clans. Their 
example may, therefore, serve to remind us that such 
ceremonies may be performed by non-totemic just as 
well as by totemic peoples, and that accordingly their 
occurrence in any particular tribe is not of itself a proof 
of totemism. . 

Amongst the north-eastern Maidus men become shamans Among the 
by dreaming of spirits, just as in so many Indian tribes men ae 
acquire guardian spirits by their fasting visions. All the become 

° ae : shamans 
great Maidu shamans have many spirits, some of which are py dream- 
animals, while other spirits live in rocks, lakes, and so on, ing of 
Shamans who dream of thunder become weather-prophets. ae 
Every shaman must do exactly what the spirits tell him, children of 
or they will kill him. While any man can become aarealso 
shaman who has had the necessary dreams, the profession sap sien 
is hereditary; all the children of a male or a female of the same 
shaman without exception are bound to become shamans hi." * 
too, though generally not until the death of the father or father or 
mother. But while they inherit the profession from their eee 
parent, they must also see the spirits in their dreams; 
only the spirits which thus appear to them are those which 
formerly appeared in dreams to their father or mother. 

Thus the same spirits remain in the family for generations. 

Such hereditary patrons, especially when they take the form Such 
of animals, bear a close resemblance to totems; and this aie 
resemblance is much increased by the rule that “ whatever resemble 
animal a man dreams of during his first set of dreams when Wiens 
he is just beginning to be a shaman, that animal he may shaman 
never eat or kill. Should he do so, he would die., ‘If he a 

VOL, III 2K 

dreanis of 
an animal, 
he may 
never eat 
or kill the 
creature. 

Marriage 
customs of 
the Maidus, 

Right to 
marry a 
wife's 
sisters. 

The 
Levirate. 

Avoidance 
of the wife’s 
mother. 

498 SECRET SOCIETIES IN THE UNITED STATES cn. 1x 

kills his dream, he kills himself?”! Thus it would seem 
that the shaman’s life was believed to be bound up with 
that of the animal of which he had dreamed ; it was what 
the Central American Indians would call his magual;* it 
was the vehicle in which his soul was deposited. However, 

many men did not dream of animals at all; indeed 
mountains, rocks, and lakes appeared oftener to the 
visionary? 

While the Maidus, like the rest of the Californian 
Indians, appear not to have been organised in totemic and 
exogamous clans,‘ they observed some of the marriage 
customs which we have found practised by totemic tribes of 
Indians. Thus, a man had a right to marry his wife’s 
sisters; and if he did not exercise his right, it passed to his 
brother. Such a right points to a former custom of 
marriage between a group of brothers on one side and a 
group of sisters on the other. Again, the law of the levirate 
used to be generally, though not invariably, observed ;° that 
is, a man usually married the widow of his deceased brother. 
Finally, a man and his wife’s mother neither looked at nor 
spoke to each other; a woman always covered her head 
when she met her daughter’s husband.’ 

1 Roland B. Dixon, Zhe Northern 
sVardu, pp. 274-283 (the passage 
quoted in the text is on p. 277). 

2 See above, pp. 443 sg¢. 

3 Roland B. Dixon, Zhe Northern 
sVatdu, p. 277. 

* Roland B. Dixon, of. cé#. p, 223. 

5 Roland B. Dixon, of. cit. p. 241: 
““If one of two brothers marries one 

of two or more sisters, the other brother 
has the right to marry the remaining 
sister, or sisters, if the first brother 
does not.” 

® Roland B. Dixon, of. cit. pp. 
239, 241. 

7 Roland B, Dixon, of, cét. 
230 5d. 

pp. 

CHAPTER XX 

SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE INDIANS OF NORTH- 
WEST AMERICA 

§ 1. General Features of these Societies 

AMONG some of the Indian tribes of North-West America, Secret 
especially those which dwell on the coast, secret societies ore 
played a great part in the social life of the people, and the north-west 
members gave elaborate dramatic performances, in which oe 
they personated their guardian spirits. As these guardian 
spirits commonly, though by no means always, took the 
shape of animals, the actors in the sacred dramas often 
dressed in the skins and feathers of the beasts and birds 
and mimicked the actions and cries of the creatures with 
considerable fidelity. In the opinion of Dr. Boas, who has According 
studied the subject with care and to whose researches among ae ihe 
the Indians of the North-West Pacific Coast we owe much guardian 
valuable information, the secret societies in their present ‘Pits the 
form have spread from the Kwakiutl to the other tribes of of the 
this region. He thinks, if I apprehend him aright, that Sat 
the guardian spirit or mzanitoo is the source both of the of the 

. eee secret 
hereditary clans and of the secret societies: when men oF gocieties. 
women transmitted their guardian spirit to their de- 
scendants, these descendants became a clan with the 
hereditary guardian spirit for its totem; when the guardian 
spirit acquired by individuals was not transmitted by them 
to their descendants, it became, not the totem of a clan, 
but the patron of a secret society, the members of which 
consisted of all those who had acquired that particular 
spirit for their guardian." The theory, which has the merit 

1 Franz Boas, ‘The Social Organ- Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
ization and the Secret Societies of the United States National Museum for 

499 

500 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuar. 

of clearness and simplicity, will be considered later on. 
Here, without entering into the questions of the origin and 
diffusion of the secret societies, I shall describe some typical 
examples of them in a roughly geographical order, proceed- 
ing from south to north. But before doing so it may be 
well to quote an account of these societies which sets forth 
Mr.j. A. their main general features. The writer is Mr. J. Adrian 
Jacobsen’s Jacobsen, who travelled repeatedly among the Indians of 
the secret the North-West Pacific coast, and whose brother Mr. Philipp 
societies of Jacobsen lived amongst them for years, knew their languages 

coke (or one of them), and studied their customs. The account 
runs thus :— 

Belief that “ However diverse the gods and the hero-tales of savages 

Bods may appear in the different continents, they have almost all 

appear in ‘i : : 

the form of this feature in common, that besides the gods and men the 
es animals also play a very important part, and the thought 
themselves that the gods or spirits assume by preference animal forms 

festiata May be found amongst nearly every people of the earth. 
Nowhere perhaps does this thought appear more sharply 
expressed than among the inhabitants of the north-west 
coast of America. There, according to the belief of the 
Indians, the various deities come down to earth at different 
times and in many forms, shew themselves to men, and take 
part in the festivals celebrated in their honour. Most of these 
gods are well-disposed to men; indeed almost every family 
claims to be descended from some god or other, so that an 
intimate intercourse thereby exists to a certain extent 
between gods and men. Besides the tribal gods they 
believe also in evil spirits, which can visit mankind with 
misfortune ; but their power is inferior and they can pretty 
easily be banished and rendered innocuous by the medicine- 
man and the mighty spirits of all sorts who are in league 
with him. 

The “The task of representing the gods is undertaken in 

gods are ° : : 7 A 

represented eVery tribe by some intelligent and, according to their own 

by masked account, inspired men; they form the Secret Societies, in 

and in- A . . é 
spired order that their secret arts and doctrines, their mummeries 

1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 660- «the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
662; compare pp. 336, 393; za@ in pp. 674-677 (Report of the British 
Twelfth Report of the Committee on Association, Bristol, 1898). 

XX GENERAL FEATURES OF THESE SOCIETIES 501 

and masquerades may not be revealed to the uninitiated and men, the 
to the public. The intention of these exhibitions is to con- a ae 
firm the faith of the young people and the women in the Secret 
ancient traditions as to the intercourse of the gods with men S°cletes. 
and as to their own intimate relations to the gods. In Extravag- 
order to convince possible doubters, the members of the iced 
Secret Societies have had recourse to all kinds of mysterious by these 
means, which to a civilised man must appear the height of (Or... 
savagery ; for example, they mutilate their bodies, rend of the 
corpses in pieces and devour them, tear pieces out of the at 
bodies of living men, and so on. Further, the almost 
morbid vanity of the North-Western Indians and _ their 
desire to win fame, respect, and distinction may have served 

as a motive for joining the Secret Societies; since every 
member of them enjoys great respect. 

“There were and still are hundreds of masks in use, The masks 
every one of which represents a spirit who occurs in their qiguetadi 
legends. In the exhibitions they appear singly or in groups, the wearers 
according as the legend to be represented requires, and the '™° 8° 
masked men are then looked upon by the astonished crowd, 
not merely as actors representing the gods, but as the very 
gods themselves who have come down from heaven to 
earth. Hence every ‘such representative must do exactly 
what legend says the spirit did. If the representative wears 
no mask, as often happens with the Hametzes (the Cannibals 
or Biters) or the Pakwalla (Medicine-men), then the spirit 
whom he represents has passed into his body, and accord- 
ingly the man possessed by the spirit is not responsible for 
what he does amiss in this condition. As the use of masks Hence the 
throws a sort of mysterious glamour over the performance ee 
and at the same time allows the actor to remain unknown, sacred 
the peculiarly sacred festivals are much oftener celebrated ace 
with masks than without them. In every Secret Society masked. 
there are definite rules as to how often and how long a 
mask may be used. Amongst the Quakiutl the masks 
may not, under the heaviest penalties, be disposed of for 
four winters, the season when such festivals are usually 
celebrated. After that time they may be destroyed or 
hidden in the forest, that no uninitiated person may find 

them, or they may be finally sold. The masks are made 

502 SECRET SOCIETIES [IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuapr. 

The masks only in secret, generally in the deep solitude of the woods, 

are made 
in secret ; 
no un- 
initiated 
person 
may wit- 
ness the 
process. 

New 
songs and 
dances are 
constantly 
invented. 

The 
badges. 

The Great 
Dance of 
the Spirits 
in late 
autumn. 

The mask 

of the Sun. 

in order that no uninitiated person may detect the maker at 
work. How strictly the mystery is guarded may be seen 
from the following example. In the village of Nouette, in 
north-west Vancouver, an Indian was once busy carving a 
mask, when his half-grown son, who had noticed that his 
father often Went into the wood, one day sought him out in 
his retreat. Thereupon the father fell into such a rage that 
he killed his own son on the spot, lest he should betray the 
sacred affair. 

“The dance is accompanied by a song which celebrates 
in boastful words the power of the gods and the mighty 

‘deeds represented in the performance. At the main part of 

the performance all present join in the song, for it is gener- 
ally known to everybody and is repeated in recitative again 
and again. It seems that; new songs and new performances 
are constantly springing up in one or other of the villages 
through the agency of some intelligent young man, hitherto 
without a song of his own, who treats in a poetical fashion 
some legend which has been handed, down orally from their 
forefathers. For every man who takes part in the perform- 
ances and festivals must make his début with a song com- 
posed by himself. In this way hew songs and dances are 
constantly originating, the material for them being, of course, 
always taken from the tribal deities of the particular singer 
and poet. 

“ Besides the masks other badges of the Secret Societies 
are worn, which I will discuss later.! 

“Of the dances which do not, so far as I know, belong 
to the four Secret Societies 1 may mention the Naualock or 
Nawalok, that is, the Great Dance of the Spirits. This 
dance usually takes place in late autumn. Several Indians 
disguised with masks take post behind a curtain. The 
type of mask used in this dance generally portrays J/zs- 
missallami (the God of the Sun)—a mask in the shape of 
the sun with half-shut eyes and a revolving wheel, which 
represents the motion of the sun. Most of the other masks 
portray the sun in the form of an eagle, as he loves to visit 
the earth. Whereas most of the dances can only be per- 

1 As to the badges of red cedar bark, see below, p. 504. 

XX GENERAL FEATURES OF THESE SOCIETIES — 503 

formed in winter, this dance can also exceptionally be 
performed in July. For example, I visited the Quakiutl 
village of Nakortok in July 1885. When the Indians 
learned that I particularly wished to have the mask pertain- 
ing to the Mawalok dance, they began that dance; for 
several masks had served their time that season and could 
therefore be sold. The festival began with a number of 
men blowing on wooden flutes sometimes in the houses, 
sometimes in the woods, from morning to night, to the great 
terror of the young people. I was told that the sun-god 
was now leaving the sun in the shape of a great eagle and 
approaching the village. Then followed the dance, and at 
its close I procured the masks, which in accordance with 
custom had been used for four winters. 

“The time when the young Indian can be admitted to Amongst 
the Society is usually the attainment of puberty. Amongst oie oak 
the Ahts of West Vancouver the youth at that time of life is at puberty 
taken into the wood, where half the inhabitants of the village, Sait 
disguised in wolf-skins and wolf-masks and provided with woods 
the aforesaid flutes, blow on them continually and dance = 
the so-called Wolf dance. Then the children say that the i : oe 
youth has been carried off by the wolf in order to give him ae 
skokom tamtam, that is, a strong heart or faith. This per- 
formance is in an altered shape the Naualok of the Bella 
Coolas. The Catholic missionaries there call it ‘the boy’s 
Indian baptism,’ while the Indians themselves call it 
Klokwalla. It is naturally very difficult for a foreigner to 
obtain a thorough knowledge of the various customs observed 
in the Secret Societies; for few even of the Indians them- 
selves who are concerned in them understand what goes on 
in their midst. Only the members of a Secret Society can 
give information as to the procedure in it, but they are loth 
to betray anything, because otherwise their secrets would 
cease to be secrets, and also because the betrayal may be 
visited with heavy penalties or even with death.” ? 

To the same effect Dr. Boas tells us that in the belief 

1 J. Adrian Jacobsen, ‘‘Geheim- sologie und Urgeschichte (1891), pp. 
biinde der Kiistenbewohner Nordwest- (383)-(385) (appended to the Zedtsch77/t 
America’s,” Verhandlungender Berliner ftir Ethnologte, xxiii. 1891). 
Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, Eth- 

504 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap. 

Acquisition Of these Indians “all nature is animated, and the spirit of 

ae any being can become the genius of a man, who thus 
power acquires supernatural powers.” The native name for these 
Wokoala).- uch-coveted supernatural powers is ¢okoala, a Kwakiutl 
word which is used in the same sense also by the Nootkas, 
the Tsimshians, and the Bella Coolas. This diffusion of the 
Kwakiutl term for supernatural power seems to point, as Dr. 
Boas observes, to the wide influence which the ideas of the 
Kwakiut! on these subjects have exercised on their neigh- 
bours.? 
The badges With regard to the badges of the Secret Societies we are 
oe told that “the insignia of all these societies are made of the 
Societies bark of cedar, carefully prepared and dyed red by means of 
are made maple bark. It may be said that the secrets are vested in 
cedar bark. these ornaments of red cedar bark, and wherever these orna- 

ments are found on the north-west coast secret societies 
occur. I do not hesitate to say that this custom must have 
originated among the Kwakiutl, as it is principally developed 
among them, and as the other tribes whenever they have 
such societies designate them by Kwakiutl names. Historical 
traditions are in accord with this view.” ? 

§ 2. Secret Societies among the Indians of Vancouver Island 

Among the Nootkas of Vancouver Island there was a 
Secret Society called Z/okoala, whose members imitated 
The name 7ilokoala is a Kwakiutl word signifying 

a 'S the acquisition of a guardian spirit. The Nootka tradition 
have been is that the society was instituted by wolves who carried off 
be alees a chief's son and tried to kill him, but failing in the attempt 
who carried became his friends, taught him the rites of the society, and 
mage ordered him to instruct his people in them. Then they 
tried to kill carried the young man back to his village. Hence every 
new member of the society must be initiated by the wolves. 

The Secret 
Society of 

the Wolves 
among the wolves. 

him, but 
finally 

1 Franz Boas, in Fifth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 

of the British Association, Newcastle- 
upon-Tyne, 1889, separate reprint). 

of Canada, p. 52 (Report of the British 
Association, Newcastle - upon - Tyne, 
1889, separate reprint). 

2 Franz Boas, of. cit. p. 53 (Report 

Compare zd. ‘‘ The Social Organization 
and the Secret Societies of the K wakiutl 
Indians,” Report of the United States 
National Museum for 1895 (Washing- 
ton, 1897), Pp- 660 s9. 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES IN VANCOUVER ISLAND — 505 

At night a pack of wolves, that is, Indians dressed in wolf- initiated 
skins and wearing wolf-masks, make their appearance, seize N™., 1h* 

ritual of 
the novice, and carry him off into the woods. When the initiation 

wolves are heard outside the village coming to fetch the eae 
novice, all the members of the society blacken their faces eae 
10n O} 1S 

and sing this song :—“ Among all the tribes is great excite- jegend. 
ment because I am Z/okoala.” Next day the wolves return the 
young man to all appearance dead, and the members of the 
society have to revive him. It is believed that the wolves 
have put a magic stone, apparently a quartz, into his body, 
and that till the stone has been extracted he cannot come 
back to life. Thus the stone plays the same part in the 
Nootka ceremony as the white shell in the ceremonies of 
the Ojibways and other eastern tribes.’ The pretended dead Pretendea 
body is left outside the house ; two shamans go and extract “cath and 
the stone from it, and then the novice is restored to life. tion of the 
After the novices have been thus resuscitated, they are" 
painted red and black. Blood is seen to stream from their 
mouths, and they run at once to the beach and jump into 
the water. Soon they are seen to float lifeless on the surface. 
They have died the second death. A canoe is sent out to 
gather up the corpses, and when it has landed them on the 
beach, they suddenly revive and repair to the dance-house, 
where they remain for four days. They may eat nothing 
but dried fish and dried berries. At night during these 
four days dances are performed in the house, and the whole 
population is permitted to witness them.? 

Each festival of the Z/okoala Society lasts four days. 
is only celebrated when some tribesman distributes a large ae 
amount of property to the members of the society, and the of the 
most common occasion is the initiation of a new member. (ges of 

the Secret 

Sometimes it is held at the time of the ceremonies which Society 
( Tlokoala). 

It Duration 

! See above, pp. 467, 468, 485, 7895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 632 sg. 

487, 488, 489. 

2 Franz Boas, in Szxth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 47 sg. (Report of 
the British Assoctation, Leeds, 1890, 
separate reprint); 7d. ‘‘ The Social 
Organization and the Secret Societies 
of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Museum for 

The ceremony of the pretended killing 
of a chiefs son and his removal by 
men dressed in wolf-skins, with wolf- 
masks on their heads, was witnessed at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century 
by John R. Jewitt, a captive among 
the Nootkas. See Narrative of the 
Adventures and Sufferings of John R. 
Jewitt (Middletown, 1820), p. 119. 

Swan's 
account of 
the sacred 
dramas of 
the Secret 
Society. 

These 
dramas 
take the 
place of 
theatrical 
perform- 
ances, 

They are 
thought to 
have been 

506 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap. 

take place when a girl attains to puberty. The house of 
the man who pays for the celebration appears to be for the 
time being the sacred or taboo house of the society. As 
soon as the festival begins, the ordinary social organisation 
of the tribe is suspended, just as among the Kwakiutl.! The 
people then arrange themselves, not according to their clans, 
but according to their societies. Each society has its own 
song and festival, which members of the other societies have 
not the right to attend, though they may be invited to do 
so. There is a certain amount of hostility between the 
societies, and when they meet at night in the taboo house, 
the members of each society, sitting apart from the rest, 
indulge in continual railleries at the expense of the others. 
Apparently there are not separate societies for men and 
women.” 

The sacred dramas exhibited by the 7/okoala or Dukwally 
society of the Nootkas are very varied, as we may learn 
from the following account :— 

“The Dukwally and other tamanawas performances ® are 
exhibitions intended to represent incidents connected with 
their mythological legends. There are a great variety, and 
they seem to take the place, in a measure, of theatrical 
performances or games during the season of the religious 
festivals. There are no persons especially set apart as 
priests for the performance of these ceremonies, although 
some, who seem more expert than others, are usually hired 
to give life to the scenes, but these performers are quite as 
often found among the slaves or common people as among 
the chiefs, and excepting during the continuance of the 
festivities are not looked on as of any particular importance. 
On inquiring the origin of these ceremonies, I was informed 
that they did not originate with the Indians, but were 

revealed by revelations of the guardian spirits, who made known what 

the spirits. 

they wished to be performed. 

1 See above, pp. 333 59- 

2 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 48 sg. (Report 
of the British Association, Leeds, 1890, 
separate reprint); #a@. ‘* The Social 
Organization and the Secret Societies 

An Indian, for instance, who 

of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Aefort of the 
United States National Museum for 
14895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 633 
5g. 
3 Tamanawas performances are 
those which relate to guardian spirits. 
See above, pp. 405 sgy- 

xX SECRET SOCIETIES IN VANCOUVER ISLAND _ 507 

has been consulting with his guardian spirit, which is done 
by going through the washing and fasting process before 
described, will imagine or think he is called upon to repre- 
sent the owl. He arranges in his mind the style of dress, 
the number of performers, the songs and dances or other 
movements, and, having the plan perfected, announces at a 
tamanawas meeting that he has had a revelation which he 
will impart to a select few. These are then taught and 
drilled in strict secrecy, and when they have perfected them4 
selves, will suddenly make their appearance and perforn{ 
before the astonished tribe. Another Indian gets up the 
representation of the whale, others do the same of birds, and 
in fact of everything that they can think of. If any per- 
formance is a success, it is repeated, and gradually comes to 
be looked upon as one of the regular order in the ceremonies ; 
if it does not satisfy the audience, it is laid aside. Thus 
they have performances which have been handed down from 
remote ages, while others are of a more recent date.” ! 

The Lkungen or Songish, an Indian tribe of the Coast secret 
Salish stock who inhabited the south-eastern part of Sodeties 
Vancouver Island, had two secret societies. One of the two Lkungen 
societies, called Zeyiyiwan, might be joined by any member % Sonsish. 
of the tribe. He had only to go into the woods and there 
bathe and cleanse his body with cedar boughs continually 
till he dreamed of the dance which he wished to dance and 
the song he wished to sing. According to his dream he 
belonged to one of the five orders which composed the 
secret society, and each of which had its own mode of 
dancing. The other secret society called Dog-howlers 
(Qenganttel) was more select; for heavy payments were 
exacted at initiation so that none but rich people could join it. 

The festivals of the society, including the initiatory ceremonies, Winter 
took place only in winter. When a young man was to be oe 
initiated, his father feasted the society for five days, during initiation. 
which masked dances were performed. Persons who did 

not belong to the society were allowed to witness the 

1 J. G. Swan, Zhe Indians of Cape Musenm for 1895 (Washington, 1897), 
Flattery, p. 66, quoted by Franz Boas, pp. 637 59- 
in Report of the United States National 

Death the 
penalty for 
divulging 
the mys- 
teries. 

Dancing 
societies 
among the 
Shuswap, 
each with 
its guardian 
spirit, 
song, and 
dance. 

Modes of 
admission 
to the 
societies, 

508 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuar. 

dances, At the end of these days the novice was entrusted 
to four members of the society who bathed him in the sea 
and led him into the woods, where he remained till he met 
the spirit who was to initiate him. The mysteries of this 
society were kept profoundly secret ; any man who blabbed 
was torn to pieces.’ 

§ 3. Secret Societies among the Shuswap 

Among the Western Shuswap, a tribe of the Salish 
stock in the interior of British Columbia, the common people 
as distinguished from the nobles were divided into a number 
of groups, which were not strictly hereditary and appear to 
have been analogous to the dancing societies with which we 
are here concerned. Each group or society had its own 
guardian spirit, dance, and song. The guardian spirits or 
protectors were for the most part beasts or birds, such as 
Black Bear, Moose, Cariboo, Elk, Deer, Sheep or Goat, Beaver, 
Marmot, Hare, Buffalo, Wolf or Dog, Frog, Salmon, Owl, 
Ruffed Grouse, Prairie Chicken, and Goose ; but they also 
included such real or imaginary beings as Thunder-Bird, 
Service-Berry, Cannibal, Corpse, Wind, Rain, Rock-slide 
(or Avalanche), Arrow, Snow (or Snowshoe), and Hunger 
or Famine. Some of these groups were closely related to 
each other ; for example, the groups which had the Wolf or 
Dog, the Cannibal, and the Corpse for their guardian spirits 
appear to have formed parts of a larger unit, so that a 
member of any one of them had a right to dance the dances 
and sing the songs of the others. Similarly the groups 
which had the Beaver, Thunder-Bird, Frog, Wind, Rain and 
Arrow for their guardian spirits formed togethér a larger 
group or society.” : 

Any man could join any of these groups or societies by 
passing through a short training and fasting a few days in 

1 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 26 sg. (Report 
of the British Assoctation, Leeds, 1890, 
separate reprint); zd@. ‘‘ The Social 
Organization and the Secret Societies 
of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of 
the United States National Museum for 

1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 644- 
646. 

2 James Teit, The Shuswap (Leyden 
and New York, 1909), p. §77 (Zhe 
Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir 
of the American Museum of Natural 
History). 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE SHUSWAP 509 

the woods ; further he had to observe a rite of initiation in 
which he mimicked by dress and action the guardian spirit of 
the society. However, a son generally became a member of 
his father’s group or society in preference to any other.’ 

_ In the dances the dancers imitated their guardian spirits 
by their costume and gestures. For example, men im- 
personated moose, cariboo, elk, and deer, wearing the skins 
of these animals with the scalps on their heads and mimick- 
ing all the actions of the beasts at pasture, in combat, in the 
chase, and finally in capture or death. Some of the actord 
had antlers attached to their heads and necks. In the Prairie 
Chicken dance men and women imitated the cries and all 
the actions of the bird. In the Marmot dance one man 
played the part of a marmot, moving and whistling like the 
animal, while another man represented a trapper; the dance 
ended with the capture of the pretended marmot by the real 
man. In the Service-Berry dance women carried baskets 
and branches of service-berry bushes and acted the gathering 
of berries. In the Hunger or Famine dance the chief actor 
appeared almost naked and painted like a skeleton to 
represent famine, which was a figure of Shuswap mythology. 
In another dance hunters dressed as if they were travelling 
on snowshoes in cold weather ; they scattered much swan’s 
down about, probably in imitation of snow; and they sang 
the song of the Snow. Members of the Beaver Society wore 
masks and head-bands of beaver-skin, with a beaver tail in 
front ; and members of the Corpse and Cannibal societies 
wore masks representing corpses. No member of a 
society had a right to use the ceremonial dresses and 
ornaments of another society. Most of the dances were 
performed in the winter, but some could take place at 
any season.” 

In the opinion of Mr. James Teit, our chief authority on 
the Shuswap, this system of dancing societies was not native 
‘to, these Indians but was borrowed by them from the Carrier, 
Chilcotin, and Lillooet tribes, who in turn borrowed it from 
their neighbours on the coast, the Tsimshians, Bella Coolas, 
and Squamish. It seems to have first reached the Shuswap 

1 James Teit, The Shuswap, p. 577+ 
2 James Teit, of. cit. pp. 577-580. 

The 
dancers 
imitated 
their 
guardian 
spirits in 
costume 
and 
gesture, 

The 
Dancing 
Societies 
of the 
Shuswap 
have been 
borrowed 
from other 
tribes, 

sio SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuar. 

about the beginning of the nineteenth century and to have 
gradually spread until by 1855 it embraced almost all the 
western division of the tribe. 

§ 4. Secret Societies among the Bella Coolas 

Two kinds The Bella Coolas, the most northerly Indian tribe of 
ae cen the Salish stock in British Columbia, have two kinds 
among the Of ceremonial called respectively the Szsauk and the 
ce the Mustut. Of these the Szsauk ceremonies are mostly 
Sisauk and dramatic representations of the clan legends and therefore 
the Ausiu’, 4 not concern us here. On the other hand the Kusiut 
ceremonies are dramatic representations of the initiation of 
members of various clans into certain secret societies. 
The three The most important of these secret societies are the 
ee. Cannibals (/azole/a), the Laughers (O/x), and the Throwers 
(Datia).2 Membership of any of these societies is obtained 
by initiation. The novice receives a new name which he 
retains through life; and he wears a necklace of red cedar- 
Persona. bark over his blanket for a year. In the Kuszut ceremonies 
oo all the deities of heaven are personified by masked dancers, 
masked whose masks are adorned with designs representing the 
dancers. moon, the stars, the rainbow, thd kingfisher, the blossom of 
the salmonberry bush, and so forth, Amongst others the 
thunder-bird and his servant are thus acted by men in 
masks. The masks used in these dances are burnt 

Breaches immediately at the end of the dancing season. Any person 

ee oniat WHO breaks the laws of the Kusdut ceremonial is punished 
laws with death. To dance a dance to which a man has no 
punished 

right, to deride the ceremonies, and to make a mistake in 
dancing are all capital offences. The offender is summoned 
before a council of chiefs, and if he is found guilty the 
execution is entrusted to a shaman, who kills the culprit 
by witchcraft, throwing a magical object at him or perhaps 
taking him off by poison.’ 

with death. 

1 James Teit, The Shuswap, p. 581. 3 Franz Boas, in Seventh Annual 
2 Franz Boas, The Vythology of the Report of the Committee on the North- 
Bella Coola Indians (1898), p. 114 Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 6-11 
(The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, (Report of the British Association, 
Memoir of the American Museum of Cardiff, 1891, separate reprint); zd. 
Natural History). “The Social Organization and the 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE BELLA COOLAS 511 

A person who wishes to be initiated into the Cannibal The 

Society goes away into the forest to meet the guardian spirit Cannibal 
é é ciety ; its 

of the society. Formerly he had to live on human flesh rites of 

during his seclusion. Before his departure a slave was oemeo 

killed and one half of his body devoured by the Cannibals ; novice was 

the rest served as provision for the novice, who was paper 

tied up in the forest and left there, it might be, for many on human 

days. At last to his disordered fancy it seemed that his **™ 

guardian spirit appeared to him, carried him up to the sun; 

or to the House of Myths, and there initiated him into the 

order of the Cannibals. After that he returned to the returning 

village naked and with almost no hair on his head, the rest wv pets 

of it having been (so the Indians think) torn out by the wind possessed 

which blows remarkably fresh in the celestial regions. He eae 

was now in a state of frenzy, having lost his own soul, which Spirit, he 

was dispossessed and replaced by the cannibal spirit. So aaa 

he bit every person whom he could catch, and if he could not. while they 

catch any one he would bite his own arm. The object of the Suh (9 

ceremonial which followed was to pacify the new Cannibal and exor- 

by exorcising the dangerous spirit which possessed him and a 

restoring to him his lost human soul. For this purpose four 

masked men attended him crying “ Hop” to soothe his 

rage ; and people tried to throw a noose over his head and 

to bind him with ropes; but he slipped from the noose, 

broke the ropes, and escaped. This lasted four days: every 

night the new Cannibal danced in the dancing-house, and the 

people strove to pacify him by songs and dances, At the Final exor- 

end of the four days the ceremony of exorcising the sa/ptsa, 25m of the 

the monster which possessed him, took place. By means Spirit. 

of his incantations one of the masked men succeeded in 

making the Cannibal vomit the snake, the wolf, the eagle, or 

whatever it was that possessed him, into a large dish 

ornamented with red cedar-bark. Then the Cannibal was 

seen carrying the head of the animal under his left arm, 

while his attendants held fast the headless trunk in the rear, 

making it disgorge flesh and blood into a dish. Suddenly 

the monster disappeared, and the Cannibal was restored to 

Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl ton, 1897), pp. 646-651; za.,. The 
Indians,” Report of the United States Mythology of the Bella Coola Indians, 
National Museum for 1895 (Washing. p. 116. 

Seclusion 
and 
purification 
of the 
Cannibal 
after his 
frenzy was 
over. 

The 
Society 
of the 
Laughers. 

The 
Society 

of the 
Throwers. 

Secret 
Societies 
carried to 

512 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cua. 

his right mind. The contents of the dish were thrown into 
the water and the dish itself burned in the dancing-house, which 
was supposed to convey it to heaven. For four days afterwards, 
the Cannibal had to sleep in the rear of the house ; then he 
might enter it again, but like the priests of Dagon he had to 
jump over the threshold. After four days more he was led 
by many men to the river and pushed into it. This was the 
final purification. Then he was led back and wept because 
the spirit had left him entirely. But still for a long time 
he was subject to various restrictions. For two or three 
months he might not leave his house ; for a year he might not 
go near his wife; and for four years he might not gamble. 
But the separation of husband and wife has of late years been 
restricted to one month. Members of the Cannibal order who 
bit people also devoured corpses ; but weaker brethren con- 
tented themselves with merely tearing a dog to pieces and 
gobbling it up or, weaker still, they devoured raw salmon. 

The members of the other two Secret Societies, the 
Laughers and the Throwers, do not retire to the woods to 
be initiated, though the initiation: of the Laughers takes 
place in heaven. The Laugher walks on tight ropes, 
makes fun of everything, and scratches people with his nails, 
till they succeed in muffling up his head in a blanket, which 
acts as an extinguisher on his too exuberant sense of 
humour. The Thrower goes about with sticks and stones 
smashing household goods and canoes. This is calculated 
to afford him unmixed enjoyment, were it not for a 
tedious rule that the damage which he does by day he 
must pay for at night. It is seldom that the bill presented 
by pleasure has to be settled so promptly. 

§ 5. Secret Societies among the Kwakiutl 

Amongst the Indian tribes of North-West America the 
Kwakiutl appear to have carried the system of Secret 

1 Franz Boas, in Seventh Report of 
the Committee on the North-Western 
Tribes of Canada, pp. 10 sg. (Report 
of the British Association, Cardiff, 
1891, separate reprint); zd. ‘* The 
Social Organization and the Secret 

Societies of the Kwakiut] Indians,” 
Report of the United States National 
Museum for 1895 (Washington, 1897); 
pp. 649 sg. ; 2@., The Mythology of the 
Bella Coola, pp. 118-120. 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 

513 
Societies to the highest pitch, and Dr. Franz Boas, our thehighest 
principal authority on the. subject, is probably right in ee ee 
believing that the institution has spread from them to other Kwakiut. 
tribes of this region. It is to Dr. Boas that we owe most of pr. F. 
our information on the Secret Societies of the tribe, and pails 
_as the system is somewhat complex, it may be best to account 
begin by quoting his latest and clearest general exposition °f ™- 
of it. Afterwards, drawing on the copious store of materials 
with which his researches have provided us, I shall illustrate 
the general account by some details.! 

“All along the north-west coast is found a ritualistic 
organization which intercrosses the family organization in a 
most curious manner. This organization seems to be most 
marked among the Kwakiutl Indians, and I will describe 
the conditions found among them. 

“ Besides the crests, which are owned by each individual,” Every 
he has also the privilege, which is inherited, together with PUTO) 
the crests, of being initiated by a supernatural being. The privilege 
method of initiation is the same as that of the eastern eae by 
Indians, who find supernatural power after fasting. The a super. 
difference between the acquisition of supernatural power ha ae 
among the eastern Indians and that believed in by the seof_ 
Kwakiutl is that among the former the relation between the sangicele 
individual and the supernatural power is purely personal, Powers. 
while among the latter it is a family affair, each family having 
the right to be initiated by a certain supernatural being. 

The relation between this idea and the property in crests is 

To this treatise I shall 

1 Dr. Boas’s earlier accounts of the 
Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl are 
contained in the F7/th Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 52-56 (Report of the 
British Association, Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1889, separate reprint); and in 
the Sixth Report of the Committee on 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
pp. 62-80 (Report of the British 
Association, Leeds, 1890, separate 
reprint). His fullest exposition of the 
system is in his treatise ‘‘The Social 
Organization and the Secret Societies 
of the Kwakiutl Indians,” published in 
the Report of the United States National 
Museum for 1895 (Washington, 1897), 

VOL. III 

pp. 310-738. 
principally refer in the sequel, citing it 
for the sake of brevity as ‘‘ Secret 
Societies of the Kwakiutl.” The latest 
statement of Dr. Boas on this subject! 
with which I am acquainted is con- 
tained in his article, “‘ The Tribes of 
the North Pacific Coast,” in Annual 
Archeological Report, 1905 (Toronto), 
Pp. 243-246. It is this latest state- 
ment which I quote in the text. The 
system has also been discussed, on the 
basis of Dr. Boas’s information, by 
Professor Hutton Webster in his 
Primitive Secret Societies, pp. 147-152. 

2 As to the Kwakiutl crests, see 
above, pp. 321 s99., 329 59g. 

2L 

514 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA CHAP. 

also characteristic. They descend in the same manner, but, 
while the crest is inherited without any particular ritualistic 
performance giving the individual the right to the crest, the 
protection of the supernatural being must be acquired in 
each individual case by an initiation. There is an important 
difference between the traditions relating to the acquisition 
of crests and those which relate to the gift of magic powers 
by a supernatural being. While the ancestor acquired the 
crest for the whole family, he only acquired the privilege for 
his descendants to communicate with the same supernatural 
being. 
The super- “The supernatural beings who are the protectors of 
natural ~~ families are, comparatively speaking, few in number, and for 
protectors . = eas 
of families this reason a considerable number of families have the same 
eh supernatural being as their protector. Notwithstanding this 
hence fact, the method of initiation is different for each family, the 
famizes method being determined by the legend which accounts for 
have the the acquisition of the supernatural being as the family 
= protector. 
All persons “All the individuals in the tribe who have the same 
cael supernatural being as their protector are grouped together 
super- during the ritualistic performance in one group, which takes 
ose the place of the family organization that prevails during the 
are grouped rest of the year. Among all the north-west coast tribes 
together in . ous ° 
aSecret these ritualistic performances are confined to the winter 
Deca ae months, and the season is set off from the rest of the year 
urin . o4e ee . 
aiid as the sacred season. Since all the families participate in 
ee ie the rituals celebrated during the sacred season, the whole 
ceremonies family organization is broken up during this period. The 
formed. individuals initiated by supernatural beings form one group 
ormed ; : . . 2 
at this in the tribe. They are treated with particular regard and 
pean sit take the place of the high nobility. The uninitiated, on the 
organisa~ other hand, take the position of the common people. The 
conan uninitiated, in turn, are also subdivided into a number of 

in families groups, not according to the families to which they belong, 
is dissolved : e : ce 
andre. but according to their prospective position among the 

Leia initiated. Thus, young children, who will probably not 
Bernice: belong to the initiated for a considerable time to come, form 

tion in 
st = a group by themselves, The young men, older men, and 

Societies. those who in former times belonged to the initiated, and 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 515 

who have given up their membership in favor of their sons- 
in-law, each form a class by themselves. Thus, we find the 
whole tribe, instead of being arranged in families, arranged 
in two large groups, the uninitiated and the initiated. The 
uninitiated are subdivided into age classes, while the initiated 
are grouped according to the spirits by which each group is 
initiated. The most important among these are the Cannibal The four 
Spirit, the Ghost, the Grisly Bear, and the Fool Spirit. ees 

“ All the legends explaining the practices of these sacred 4,, 
societies relate some event telling how a member of the practices of 
family was carried away by one of these spirits; how he eri 
saw the spirit’s house, and the ritual, and how later on he ate ex- 
was taken back, and imitated what he had seen. , This, aoe by 
which is the characteristic explanation of practically all oe tell 
Indian rituals of North America, is, of course, merely a re- ce a of 
statement of the practices that are used at the present time, acon 
The reasons assigned for the various practices, the most away by a 
important among which is ritualistic cannibalism, show spirit saw 
material differences, not only among different tribes, but and on his 
even inside of the same tribe. Thus, the principal myth; 
explaining cannibalism relates the visit of four brothers to apy, 
the house of the cannibal spirit, who threatened to devour relating the 
them. By a stratagem the young men made their escape eee 
and reached their father’s house pursued by the cannibal, monial 
The father then invited the cannibal, pretending that he aa 
would make a feast for him. In the course of this visit, the 
cannibal was thrown into a ditch filled with red-hot stones, 
where he was burned, and from his ashes arose the mosquitoes. 

From this time on one of the sons imitated the actions of 
the cannibal, while another son imitated’ the actions of the 
grisly bear, who was the cannibal’s watchman. 

“In another tradition of the Kwakiutl, which accounts Another 
for the cannibalism of another family, it is told how eg 
young man, upon leaving his house in the evening, was institution 
taken away by the cannibal spirit, who took him to his oresag 
house, where he saw a dance performed, the singers being 
seated in a ditch, and the rainbow appearing during the 
dance in the house. While dancing, the cannibal killed and 
devoured a slave. Since that time the dance is performed 

in this manner by the young man’s family. 

The rituat 
consists 

of the 
initiation of 
the novice, 
his return, 
and the 
exorcising 
of the 
spirit. 

The novice 
carried off 
by the 
spirits. 

His return, 
and his 
dance, in 
which he 
personates 
the spirit. 

His 
ceremonial 
purifica- 
tion. 

516 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap. 

“Notwithstanding the difference of these traditions, the 
men initiated in these different forms by the cannibal spirit 
belong to the same society during the sacred season, The 
Cannibal is highest in rank in the tribe, and next to him is 
the Ghost Dancer. 

“ Among the Kwakiutl the ritual consists in the initia- 
tion of the novice, the return of the novice, and the exorcising 
of the spirit that possesses him. The usual sequence during 
the ritual is the following: The singers sit in the rear of 
the house, beating time on a plank with batons; in the left 
hand rear corner of the house is seated the man who beats 
the box-drum ; in front of the singers, near the fire, which 
is built in the centre of the house, sit the members of the 
initiated, those highest in rank in the middle, those of 
lower rank arranged all along both sides. The uninitiated 
sit in groups along the sides of the house, those lowest in 
rank, that is the women and children, near the door. 

“The ceremonial begins with a number of speeches and 
songs, and with some of the incidents of the potlatch} 
During these introductory incidents, the voices of the spirits 
are heard (represented by whistles, which are blown inside 
or outside of the house), and suddenly one among the 
uninitiated disappears. It is stated that he has been taken 
away by the spirits, and that at a set time he will return. 
On the day set for his return the whistles of the spirits are 
heard again, and the people go to search for the novice, who 
is generally found at some little distance from the houses, 
in the woods, and he is then brought back by the tribe, who 
arrange themselves in formal procession, Then follow a 
series of dances, partly performed by the novice who 
impersonates the spirit that possesses him. Other dances 
are performed and songs are sung in order to quiet the 
spirit. After four formal dances it is supposed that the 
spirit has left, and the novice has to undergo a ceremonial 
purification, which lasts for a’ considerable time, and consists 
essentially in ceremonial washings, which are repeated at 
intervals of four days, or multiples of four days. 

“This whole performance is interrupted by numerous 

1 That is, a festival accompanied by the distribution of property among the 
guests, See above, p, 262. 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 517 

accessory performances, consisting largely in dances of the otner 
older members of the initiated. These are often provoked “nces. 
by transgressions of the rules of behaviour during the sacred 
season, Thus, the Cannibal may be excited by failure to 
observe the rule that nobody is allowed to eat before the 
cannibal has eaten; or the Fool may be excited by mention 

of a long nose, which is believed to be characteristic of the 
Fool, 

“The dances themselves, as stated before, are panto- The dances 
mimic presentations of the acts of the spirits. As a rule, oe 
the first dance is performed by the novice, who is dressed in ing the 
certain rings made of hemlock branches, and with character- pate we 
istic face-painting, these being determined by the tradition 
of the initiation. In the second dance the novice appears Masks and 
wearing a mask, which represents the spirit which possesses °*48*- 
him. In the third dance he appears wearing rings made 
of cedar bark dyed red, which is a symbol of the sacred 
ceremonies. The form of these rings also depends upon the 
tradition explaining the ritual. In the last dance he appears 
again wearing the mask of the spirit.” ? 

With these general outlines of the system before us, we 
may now consider the institution somewhat more in detail, 
selecting for that purpose some main facts and typical 
examples out of the great store of information collected by 
Dr. Boas, 

We have seen? that the social organisation of the The social 
Kwakiutl changes with the seasons; during summer the oer 
tribe is organised in hereditary clans, during winter it is Kwakiutl 
organised in Secret Societies, each of which is composed of rea 
all persons who have received the same supernatural power seasons ; 
or secret from one of thespirits. The spirits are supposed to ial tiene 
be present with the Indians in winter; that is why in people are 
winter, as soon as the spirits arrive, the Kwakiutl drop their a eis: 
summer names, the hereditary clan names, and assume their during the 
winter names, the new names bestowed upon them by the eae ors 
spirits at initiation into the societies. The summer season, Socicties. 
when the system of hereditary clans is in force, is called by 
the Kwakiutl dazus, which term also designates those who 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘The Tribes of the North Pacific Coast,” Aznual Archao- 
logical Report, 1905 (Toronto), pp. 243-246. 2 Above, pp. 333 57- 

518 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap. 

have not been initiated by any spirit and might therefore be 
translated “uninitiated” or “ profane.” The winter season, 
when the system of Secret Societies is in force, is called by 
the Kwakiutl ¢sefsaeka, “ the secrets,’ a term which is also 
applied to the ceremonial itself. The Indians express this 
alternation of the seasons by saying that in summer the 
baxus is on top and the ¢setsaeka below, whereas in winter 
the dazus is below and the ¢setsaeka on top.) 
The whole “The object of the whole winter ceremonial is, first, to 
blame bring back the youth who is supposed to stay with the 
aimsat Supernatural being who is the protector of his society, and 
bringing then, when he has returned in a state of ecstasy, to exorcise 
novice from the spirit which possesses him and to restore him from his 
neat aie holy madness. These objects are attained by songs and by 
super- dances. In order to bring the youth back, members of all 
ee ae the secret societies perform their dances. It is believed that 
patron of they will attract the attention of the absent novice, until 
the secielY> Finally one of the dances may excite him to such a degree 
and at y y 4 
ae _that he will approach flying through the air. As soon as 
ous spirit he appears his friends endeavor'to capture him. Then 
ener begins the second part of the ceremony, the exorcising of the 
him. spirit ; or, as the Kwakiutl call it, the taming of the novice. 
This is accomplished by means of songs sung in his honor, 
by dances performed by women in his honor, and by the 
endeavors of the shaman. After the novice has thus been 
restored to his senses, he must undergo a ceremonial purifica- 
tion before he is allowed to take part in the ordinary pursuits 
of life. The strictness and severity of this purification 
depend upon the character of the dance. Novices must 
drink water through the wing bone of an eagie, as their 
mouths must not touch the brim of the cup ; they must suck 
no more and no less than four times, They must not blow 
hot food, else they would lose their teeth.” ? 
Serious When a mistake is made in the songs or dances which 
Pedi are intended to pacify the novice, the effect is not merely to 
by mis- renew the ecstasy of the novice; it also excites all the 
takes in . eae 
the ritual; Older members of the various societies and thus produces a 
such general ecstasy. A slip in rhythm, a wrong turn in the 
1 Franz Boas, ‘‘ Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl,” p. 418. 
2 Franz Boas, of. cit. pp. 431 sg. 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 519 

dance, to smile, and to chew gum, are all mistakes which mistakes 
have this serious result. The dancer who has made the j 60 Some: 
mistake thereby forfeits his place in the society and must punished 
undergo the ceremony of initiation again, which may be a “4°” 
very troublesome and costly affair. The greatest misfortune 

of all is for a dancer to fall in the dance. If this happens to 

a member of the Cannibal Society, he must lie like dead, 

till a man touches his neck with a staff in which blood is 
concealed, so that the fallen Cannibal’s neck appears to 
bleed ; then he is carried four times round the fire and 
disappears into the woods, where he stays till he is initiated 

afresh. It is said that in former times the unfortunate 
Cannibal who fell in the dance used to be killed, often at the 
instance of his own father. Among some of the Kwakiutl 

any dancer who made a mistake was tied up in a blanket, 
thrown into the fire, and roasted alive. The fall of a dancer 
appears to be regarded as an evil omen, signifying either 

that the spirit of the society is angry or that he will be 
defeated by the spirit of another tribe.’ 

The paraphernalia of the dances consist largely of The para- 

ornaments made of cedar bark, which is dyed in the juice Prem’! 
of alder bark, and they also include masks, whistles, and a 
carvings of various kinds. None of these might be seen by ahisites, 
the profane. If any uninitiated person beheld them in the ae 
old days, he or she was killed without mercy. By far the ¢, oie bark. 
greater part of the winter ceremonial is performed in a 
house set apart for the purpose. The house is called /opeku, 
“emptied,” because it is emptied of everything profane. 
Only when dances are performed may the uninitiated or 
profane enter the house. They must sit at the left hand 
side of the entrance. Most of the dances are performed in 
connection with feasts, but some are exhibited on the 
occasion of a potlatch or distribution of property.’ 

The number of members in each society is limited ; The 
hence a new member can only be admitted when an old one seat 
drops out, whose place the novice succeeds to. The reason ree 

imite 
! Franz Boas, ‘Secret Societies of 71 (Report of the British Association, ane 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 433-435; zd. in Leeds, 1890, separate reprint). 
Sixth Report of the Committee on the 2 Franz Boas, ‘‘Secret Societies of 
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. the Kwakiutl,” pp. 435 59. 

520 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuar. 

why the number is limited is that “the members of the 
society derive each their membership from the initiation of 
one of the ancestors of the nobility. These ancestors have 
each only one representative at a time. But many of them 
are grouped together.” ? 
The Secret The societies are arranged in two principal groups called 
sooer respectively the Je-emkoat (the Seals”) and the Kuekutsa. 
arranged Of these the Seals rank the higher. The two groups are 
eal hostile to one another; when the Seals are excited they 
groups, the attack and torment the Kwekutsa, and the latter in return 
eae tease and provoke the Seals. The Kuekutsa societies 
Seals”) embrace all who for the time being are not possessed by 
ee spirits. A member of any of the Kuekutsa societies may 
at any time be initiated by a new spirit and then he or she 
leaves their ranks. Or he may be possessed by his own 
guardian spirit and exhibit his dance or ceremony. In that 
case he is for the time being not considered as belonging to 
the Kuekutsa. Thus the Kuekutsa people correspond very 
nearly to the group of people who have resigned their places 
in favour of younger persons, but who can in like manner 
also enter again into the ranks of the nobility by marrying 
List of the and receiving with their wife a new name.” The Kuekutsa 
Kuchutsa societies are ten in number and are graduated according to 

Societies. 5 
age and sex’as follows :— 

Name of Society, Composed of 
1. Naanexsoku . . | Boys. 
2. Killer-whales . . | Young men. 
3. Rock-cods : . | Young men about twenty-five 
Men years old. 
: 4. Sea-lions : . | Older men. 
5. Whales . : . | Chiefs. 
6. Koskimos A . | Old men. 
7. Eaters . ° . | Head chiefs. 
8. Kekixalaku . . | Girls. 
Women 9. Hens . ‘ . | Young women. 
10. Cows e . | Old women. 
1 Franz Boas, ‘* Secret Societies of 2 Franz Boas, of. cit. pP- 419, 420 5 

the Kwakiutl,” pp. 418 sg. id. in Sixth Report of the Committee on 

xX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 521 

The number of these societies has undergone frequent 
changes, but the Killer-whales, Rock-cods, and Whales have 
always remained. The present societies of the women are 
new, as appears from two of the names, Hens and Cows." 

Among the Tlatlasikoalas, a branch of the Kwakiutl List of the 

who live at Newettee, the societies comprised in the group a airing 

which corresponds to the Kuekutsa are as follows :— aniene the 
latlasi- 
“—~ koalas. 
Name of Society. Composed of 
4. Se 
1. Puffins . , : Little boys. 
2. Mallard ducks. . | Boys. 
3. Sea anemones . . | Sick and lame people. 
Men 4. Halibut hooks . . | Young chiefs. 
5. Red cod . Third-class chiefs. 
6. Sea lions - | Men about thirty years old. 
7. Anchor lines of tribes | Old chiefs. 
8. Eating first . | Girls, 
Women | 9 Tsetsaexsak (a species | Women. 
of birds) 
10. Albatrosses « | Old women. 

Thus it appears that most of the Kuekudsa societies bear Origin of 
the names of animals. The Indians explain this by saying cere 
that the ceremonial was instituted at the time when men had the Secret 
still the form of animals, before the mythical transformer °°! 
had put everything into its present shape. The present 
‘ceremonial is a repetition of the ceremonial performed by the 
man-animals or, as we might say, a dramatisation of the 
myth. Therefore the people who do not represent spirits, 
represent these animals.’ 

The societies included under the group of the Me-emkoat The 
(“the Seals”) are many in number ; amongst them may be Sites 

of the 
mentioned the Cannibals (amatsas), the Fools (Mutlmatt), Cannibals, | 

the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 
p- 63 (Keport of the British Association, 
Leeds, 1890, separate reprint). For the 
Kwakiutl custom of obtaining a crest 
by marriage, see above, pp. 329 599. 

1 Franz Boas, ‘**Secret Societies of 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 419 sg. Compare 
id.,in Sixth Report of the Committee on 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, 

p. 64 (Report of the British Assoctation, 
Leeds, 1890, separate reprint). In 
this latter passage Dr. Boas gives the 
native name of the Girls’ Society as 
Kekyagalaka, ‘* Crows.” 

2 Franz Boas, ‘* Secret Societies of 
the Kwakiutl,” p. 419. As to the 
Tlatlasikoala, see zézd. p. 329. 

3 Franz Boas, of. czt. pp. 420 sg. 

522 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuapr. 

the Fools, the Grizzly Bears (Nane),and the Ghosts (Leldalendx). Of all 

iii the societies the chief is that of the Cannibals, and accordingly 

the Ghosts. during the season of the winter ceremonial the Cannibals are 

abe wa, at the head of the whole tribe.” Members of the Cannibal 
Society. Society are initiated by a spirit called by the terrible name 

Initiation. Of Baxbakualanuxstwae. They are possessed by a violent 
desire of eating men. The novice is supposed to be taken 
away by the spirit and to stay in his house for a long time. 
In fact he lives for three or four months in the woods. 
About the middle of this time he reappears near the village, 
and his sharp whistle and cries of “ Hap, hap, hap” (eating, 
eating, eating) are heard. Then he comes back to fetch a 

Return of female relative, who must procure food for him. Finally, 

He ao he returns to the village and attacks every one whom he can 

attempts of catch, biting pieces of flesh out of their arms and chests. 

pte As soon as he arrives ‘certain attendants called Healers 
him. (Heliga) run up to him swinging their rattles, which are 
supposed to pacify his fury. The office of these Healers is 
hereditary in the male line, and either four or six of them 
must accompany the Cannibal wherever the fit is on him. 
They close round him in a circle to keep him from getting 
at the people, and they utter the soothing cry of “ Hozs, 

hoip !” Their rattles are always carved with a design which 
Slaves Originally represented a skull. In olden times, when the 
Killed an’ Cannibal was in a state of ecstasy, slaves were killed for 
corpses him and he devoured them raw. Besides devouring fresh- 
ie killed slaves the Cannibals also devoured corpses ; but one 
Cannibals. of them has stated that it is much harder to eat fresh human 

flesh than dried corpses. The bones of the killed slaves 
were kept at the north side of the house, where the sun did 
not shine on them. During the fourth night” they were 
taken out.of the house, tied up, weighted with a stone, and 

1 Franz Boas, ‘Secret Societies of 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 419, 437, 466, 
468, 482, 714. Compare zd., in Sixth 
Report of the Committee on the North- 
Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 64-70 
(Report of the British Association, 
Leeds, 1890, separate reprint). In 
the latter work Dr. Boas gives a list 
of fourteen societies included in the 
Me-emkoat group. In his ‘Secret 

Societies of the Kwakiutl,” p. 419, he 
gives a list of only eight, but the list 
does not profess to be complete, and it 
is supplemented by many more societies 
or dances in the sequel. 

2 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, p. 63 (Report of the British 
Association, Leeds, 1890, separate 
Teprint). 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTEL 523 

thrown into deep water, because it is believed that if they 
were buried they would come back and take their master’s 

soul. When the Cannibal had bitten a piece out of the 

arm of an enemy and swallowed the flesh, he used to drink 

hot water for the purpose of inflaming, by sympathetic 
magic, the wound in the man’s arm. Nowadays, the ferocity The | 
of these customs has been mitigated; the cannibal no longer /7oCtty 

of 
actually bites flesh out of people’s bodies, but merely pinches castor 
up the skin with his teeth, sucks as much blood as he CAN, fnitigated. 
and secretly snips off a bit of skin with a sharp knife. He 

does not swallow the snippet, but hides it behind his ear till 

the dance is over, when he returns it to ‘the owner in order 

to satisfy him that it will not be used to bewitch him.’ 
Sometimes, when the new Cannibal returns from the woods 

after his initiation, he appears carrying a corpse, which is 

eaten after the dance. In order to be eaten the corpses The 
have to be prepared in a special way; for the Kwakiutl Setiaily 
bury their dead on trees, so that the bodies, by exposure to prepared 
the free circulation of the air, generally mummify and are aid 
therefore hard and uneatable. It is the business of the 
Healer to prepare the corpse to be devoured. For that 
purpose he soaks it in salt water, and slits the skin round 

the wrists and ankles; for the Cannibal may not eat the 
hands and feet, or he would die immediately. When the 
corpse is quite ready to be eaten, all the old Cannibals 
gather round it, naked and excited, like vultures round 
carrion. The master of the ceremonies carves the body and 
distributes the gobbets to the Cannibals, who bolt them; for 

they are not allowed to chew the flesh. After the meal the Bathing 
Healers arise, seize each one a Cannibal by the head, drag Seal 
them to the salt water, and duck them four times under it. in salt 
Every time the Cannibal bobs up spluttering, he cries “*"" 
“ Hap!” then down he goes again. After that they all 
return to the house in a more sober frame of mind. The 
paroxysm is over. They dance the following nights, looking 
downcast and sheepish, and do not utter their peculiar cry 

of “ Hap, hap!” Perhaps they remember that the day of 

1 Franz Boas, ‘* Secret Societies of see 7d. ‘Songs and Dances of the 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 437-441. Forthe Kwakiutl,” Josrnal of American Folk- 
legend of the foundation of the society, eve, i, (1888) pp. 52 57g. 

The 
Cannibal 
indemnifies 
those 
whom he 
has bitten. 

Ornaments 
of the 
Cannibal. 

Two 
character- 
istic dances 
of the 
Cannibal. 

After 

his first 
dance the 
Cannibal 
disappears 
to burst 
out again 
with 
dramatic 
effect from 
an inner 
room. 

524 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap. 

reckoning is at hand. For when the ceremonies are over 
the Cannibal has to indemnify by a payment of blankets all 
whom he has bitten, as well as the owner of the slaves whom 
he has devoured.! 

When he first returns from his initiation the Cannibal 
wears a head-ring, necklace, bracelet, and anklets made of 
hemlock branches. He does not wear the cedar - bark 
ornaments till his fourth dance. They consist of a heavy 
crown of plated cedar-bark and a necklace to match, with 
bracelets and anklets. Generally the Cannibal’s face is 
painted black all over, but some have two curved red lines 
on each cheek.? The Cannibal has two characteristic dances ; 
one represents him in his paroxysm of excitement seeking 
whom he may devour; the other represents him cooling 
down. In the first he dances stark naked in a squatting 
position, his arms extended sideways and trembling violently. 
On he comes with long slow steps, reaching out his arms 
first to the right and then to the left, his head lifted up, his 
lips protruding, his eyes wide open, looking for a human 
body. He is now dangerous, and his attendants surround 
him, two of them gripping him by the necklace to keep him 
off the people. In the second dance he stands erect. If 
not yet in his right mind, he is quieter and wears a blanket ; 
he holds his forearms upwards, with the elbows at his sides. 
His hands still tremble violently, and he dances in rhythmical 
time to the beat of the batons, stepping so high that his 
knees almost touch his chest.2 While he dances, whistles are 
heard sounding ; they represent the voices of the spirits.‘ 

After his first dance the Cannibal disappears into a 
secret room set apart for this purpose at the back of the 
house. It is called mawzt/ and is supposed to be the house 
of the mighty Bazbakualanuxsiwae himself, the spirit who 
initiates the Cannibals. The front of it, which answers the 
purpose of a stage curtain, is painted with the face either of 
the spirit himself or of his servant the raven. The room is 
always so arranged that when the Cannibal reappears he 
bursts out, with dramatic effect, from the very mouth of the 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘ Secret Societies of 3 Franz Boas, of. cit. PP. 443 59- 

the Kwakiutl,” pp. 441-443. : 
2 Franz Boas, op. cit. pp. 444-446. 4 Franz Boas, of. cit. p- 446. 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 525 

great painted face. His attendants run up to him as soon 

as he emerges and seize him by the necklace. Then he 
dances his dance. Soon after the Cannibal has retired 
behind the veil, his cries are heard in the inner room and 
presently he, or rather an actor who takes his place, is seen 
coming out backward at the side. He now personates the Persona. 
raven, the slave of the spirit, and wears a raven mask with Co. 
an enormous beak, the jaws of which he makes to gape and a masked 
shut rapidly with a loud clappering noise by pulling certain *“™" 
strings. At sight of the gaping, clappering mask, the singers 

burst into a song, saying how everybody’s heart goes pit-a- 

pat at the apparition of the hooked-beak cannibal mask. 
Afterwards another dancer dances wearing the mask of the 
mighty spirit Baxbakualanuxsiwae himself.’ 

While it is the business of the Healers to soothe and Attempts 
restrain the frantic Cannibal, members of the Kwekutsa he 
societies on the contrary try, somewhat imprudently, to societies to 

: . 2 : enrage the 
excite his fury. This they do by breaking some of the Canninai. 
many rules which regulate their behaviour to him; for 
example, they will offer him a kettle full of food and then, 
as soon as it begins to boil, they will upset it. Again, the 
Cannibals are excited by the sight or mention of various 
things, all referring to death. With one it will be the word 
“ ghost,” with another “skulls,” with another “head cut off.” 
Whenever any of these words occur in a song, or whenever 
any of these things is exhibited in a dance or in a painting, 
the paroxysm returns upon the Cannibal, the Fool Dancers 
shut the doors to prevent the escape of the people, and the 
Cannibal rushes round biting whomever he can get hold of? 

After they have bitten people, and particularly after Customs 
they have devoured slaves or corpses, the Cannibals have to eye 
observe many stringent rules before they are allowed to mix Cannibals 

: e after they 
freely with other people. As soon as they have eaten of a have eaten 
corpse, they swallow great quantities of salt water to make ria 
them vomit. The bones of the body which they have Disposal of 
devoured are preserved for four months. They are kept a als 

! Franz Boas, ‘Secret Societies of of Canada, pp. 65 sg. (Report of the a 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 446 sg. British Association, Leeds, 1890, 

2 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report of the separate reprint); 7. ‘* Secret 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes Societies of the Kwakiutl,” p. 445. 

Rules as to 
eating and 
drinking 
observed 
by the 
Cannibals - 
after a 
cannibal 
repast. 

526 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuav. 

alternately four days in their bedrooms on the north side 
of the house where the sun does not strike them, and four 
days under rocks in the sea. Finally they are thrown into 
the sea. The Cannibals may not go out of the house by 
the ordinary door, but must always use the secret door in 
the rear of the house. When one of them goes out for a 
necessary purpose, all the others must go with him, each 
carrying a small stick. They must all sit down together on 
a long log, and having done so they must rise again three 
times, only really sitting down the fourth time. Both before 
sitting down and before rising up they must turn four times. 
When they go back to the house they must raise their feet 
four times before they enter it. With the fourth step they 
actually pass the door and go in right foot first. In the 
doorway they turn four times and walk slowly into the 
house. They are not allowed to look back. 

Further, for four months after eating human flesh the 
Cannibal uses a spoon, dish, and kettle of his own, which 
are afterwards thrown away. Before.taking water out of 
a bucket or a brook, he must dip his cup thrice into the 
water, and he may not take more than four mouthfuls at 
one time. He must carry the wing bone of an eagle and 
drink through it, as his lips may not touch the brim of 
his cup. Also he carries a copper nail to scratch his head 
with, for his nails may not touch his skin, else they would 
drop off. For sixteen days after partaking of human flesh 
he may not eat any warm food, and for four months he is 
not allowed to blow hot food in order to cool it. For a 
whole year he may not touch his wife, nor gamble, nor 
work. When the dancing season is over, he feigns to have 
forgotten the ordinary ways of man and has to learn every- 
thing anew. He acts as though he were very hungry all 
the time’ What the intention of these curious restrictions 
may be, we are not told. Perhaps they are designed to 
keep the ghost of the Cannibal’s victim at bay or to throw 
him off the scent.” 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘Secret Societies of Assoctation, Leeds, 1890, separate 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 537 sg. Compare _ reprint). 
zd. in Sixth Report of the Committee 

on the North-Western Tribes of 2 Compare what is said about the 
Canada, p. 66 (Report of the British bones of the victim above, pp. 522 59. 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 527 

The whole ceremony of bringing back the novice after Mythical 
initiation is, according to the belief of the Kwakiutl, a cxplanation 
repetition of the ceremony performed by the wolves when ceremony 
they attempted to bring back their novices. Thus it of bringing 
resembles the ceremony of the Nootkas, in which the novice. 
initiation of the novice is conducted by men disguised as 
wolves.” 

Another important Secret Society of the Kwakiutl is The Secret 
that of the Grizzly Bears (ane). At initiation the members Seem 
of this society are not taken away by the spirit, but arg Rears. 
merely hidden in a corner of the house, whence at the 
proper moment they come forward to shew that they have 
been initiated. They are perhaps the most dreaded helpers 
of the Cannibals, for it is their duty, along with the Fool 
Dancers, to punish any breaches of the rules relating to the 
privileges of the Cannibals or to the winter ceremonial in 
general. The unfortunate transgressors were killed by the 
Bears and the Fool Dancers. They are also the watchers 
of the dancing house, and often, mustering on the roof, 
they frighten away people by their wild cries and threatening 
gestures. They always wear bear’s claws on their hands They wear 
and sometimes appear clad in bearskins. Their faces are ec tieen 4 
painted in imitation of the huge mouth of a bear. Their sometimes 
head rings and necklaces are made of red and white cedar Pa okins 
bark. In their dances they imitate the actions of a bear, bears. 
walking on all fours, pawing or scratching the ground, 
sitting on their haunches, and growling? 

The Fool Dancers (Moontlematla plural, Nutlamatl The Secret 
singular) form another important Secret Society of the ae 
Kwakiutl. They, like the Grizzly Bears, are messengers Dancers. 
and helpers of the Cannibals and help to enforce the 
ceremonial customs. Their mode of doing so is to throw 
stones at people and hit them with sticks; in serious cases 
they stab and kill the offenders with spears and axes. They Their tong 
are supposed to be initiated by certain fabulous beings with fi, as 
very long noses and bodies covered with loathsome filth, habits. 

Accordingly the Fool Dancers are thought to have very 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘ Secret Societies of 3 Franz Boas, ‘‘Secret Societies of 
the Kwakiutl,” p. 538. the Kwakiutl,” pp. 466 sg. 
2 See above, pp- 593, 504 5g. 

528 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuar. 

long noses, and they are sensitive on the subject; the 
mere mention of a long nose excites them. In their 
persons they are exceedingly filthy; they dislike even to 
see clean and beautiful clothing, so they tear and soil it. 
Theirex- They are supposed to be mad, and their behaviour does 
pavagan’ not bely the supposition, for they smash canoes, houses, 
kettles, and boxes, and play every wild prank conceivable. 
However, at the end of the dancing season they must 
indemnify the owners of all the property they have 
destroyed. They carry spears and clubs with which to 
despatch offenders, and in dancing they wear masks with 
Initiation long and curiously rounded noses. When any one wishes 
eee to be initiated into this madcap society, he begins to scratah 
his head and body violently, which is taken as a sign that 
he is inspired by the spirit of the winter dance. After four 
days he is confined ih the corner of the house, and comes 
out as a full-blown member at the next dance. When a 
young man is to be initiated into this loathsome order, the 
old members will take filth from their noses and fling it at 
him, which is believed to “throw the spirit of the winter 
ceremonial into him.” ? 
The Ghost Members of the Ghost Society are supposed to be 
pce “initiated by the ghosts and to receive magical or super- 
the novice natural powers from them. Hence the ghost dancer wears 
menue | head-ring and a necklace set with skulls. The dance 
into the represents a visit to the world of ghosts under the 
nether * . . . 
worldand €atth. Elaborate preparations are made for it. A ditch 
nee is dug behind the fire in the dancing-house, and speaking- 
natural tubes made of kelp are laid under the floor of the house 
eo so as to terminate in the fire. The ghost dancer, roped 
to an attendant, goes round the fire four times summoning 
the ghosts. After the fourth round he slowly disappears 
in the ditch near the fire. The people try to hold him 
back by pulling at the rope, but in vain; down he sinks 
into the ground. Then many voices are heard coming from 
the fire and saying that the ghosts have carried off the 
dancer, but that after so many days he will come back. 
However, these are not really the voices of the ghosts, 
they are merely the voices of people speaking from their 

1 Franz Boas, ‘Secret Societies-of the Kwakiutl,” pp. 468 sg. 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 529 

bedrooms through the kelp tubes. When the time for the 

dancer to return has come, an effigy of a ghost is seen 

to rise from the ground carrying the lost dancer. He 

sings this song :— 

I went down to the under world with the chief of the ghosts. There- 
fore I have supernatural power. 

The chief of the ghosts made me dance. Therefore I have supernatural 
power, 

fle put a beautiful ornament on to my forehead. Therefore I have 
supernatural power. 

The Ghost Society is said to rank as high as the 
Cannibal Society but to be opposed to it.! 

*The Kwakiutl have two Wolf dances, one called two Wolf 
Walasaxa and the other Ziokoala. In the Walasaxa Pe 
dance all the men of the tribe dress in blankets and Kwakiutl. 
head-dresses representing the wolf. They hide behind a Dance of 
curtain stretched across the rear of the house, and when Pgs 
the singers begin to sing, the pretended wolves come out wolves 
and march four times round the fire. On the fourth circuit fou"? "° 
they squat down and imitate the motions of wolves. The 
Tlokoala Wolf Dance corresponds almost exactly to the 
Tlokoala of the Nootkas.? The dancers wear frontlets 
consisting of small carved images of a wolfs head. It Legend of 
is said that the dance is derived from the wolves. The ‘N° origin 
legend runs thus. The sons of the chief of the wolves 7vokvaia 
were preparing to be initiated, when Mink found and as 
killed them. So he obtained their names and places in 
accordance with the rule that names and all the privileges 
connected with them may be obtained by killing the owner 
of the name, either in war or by murder. The slayer has 
then the right to put his own successor in the place of his 
slain enemy. In this manner names and customg have 
often spread from tribe to tribe. So when Mink had 
killed the sons of the wolf chief he came back wearing 
the wolf’s scalp as a head mask. Three times he danced - 

round the fire, covering his face and his head with his 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘Secret Societies of 64, 68-70 (Heport of the British 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 482 sg.; ¢d., in Association, Leeds, 1890, separate 
Sixth Report of the Committee on the _ reprint). 

North-Western Tribes of Canada, pp. 2 See above, PP- 503, 504 57. 
VOL. Ill 2M 

530 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap. 

blanket. Then the fourth time he uncovered himself and 
thus shewed that he had killed the wolves, All the 
animals tried to kill him, but they could not. So Mink 
obtained the wolfs name and the wolf’s supernatural power 
(tlokoala). The Wolf dancer sings a song which is intended 
to excite the Fool Dancers; for the Fool Dancers are 
thought to be friends of the wolf chiefs whom Mink killed.’ 

ie Some of the Kwakiutl have also a Salmon Society, the 

Boeiaty members of which dance the Salmon Dance. The novice 
: bee ’ who is to be initiated into the society disappears and 
wakiutl. 

In ther Stays in the woods for several months. When he is 
dance the brought back, the people hide all the eagle down, the symbol 

be 2 : 
ar ike = of wealth, but put it on when he enters in token that the 

aca es salmon brings affluence. The amount of property distri- 
leap of the buted by the novice’s father at initiation is as large as that 

Ose which is needed for the initiation of a Cannibal. The 
salmon dance is meant to imitate the leaping of the salmon, and 

oe the dancer sings the following song :— 

Many salmon are coming ashore with me. 

They are coming ashore to you, the post of our heaven. 

They are dancing from the salmon’s country to the shore. | 

I come to dance before you at the right-hand side of the world, 
overtowering, outshining, surpassing all; I, the salmon. 

Another song sung by a salmon dancer runs thus :— 

The salmon came to search for a dancer. 

ffe came and put his supernatural power into him. 

You have supernatural power. Therefore the chief of the salmon 
came from beyond the ocean. The people praise you, for they 
cannot carry the weight of your wealth.? 

The dance These songs seem to shew that the salmon dancer by 

stended cancing his Salmon Dance, in which he imitates the leaping 

to multiply of the«fish, is supposed to produce a plentiful catch of salmon, 
ee *Y the staple food of the tribe. If that is so, the Salmon Society 
of the Kwakiutl discharges a function like that discharged by 
the totemic clans of Central Australia, who multiply the edible 

1 Franz Boas, ‘‘ Secret Societies of to the rule that a man may obtain a 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 477-479; zd@., in name and the privileges which go with 
Sixth Report of the Committee on the it by killing its owner, see Franz Boas, 
North-Western Tribes of Canada, p. ‘** Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl,” 
68 (Report of the British Association, p. 335. 

Leeds, 1890, separate reprint). As 2 Franz Boas, of. cif. pp. 474 59- 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 531 

animals and plants by their magical ceremonies in order to 
ensure a supply of food for the community.’ 

Many other Secret Societies with their dances there are 
among the Kwakiutl, but it would be tedious and perhaps 
superfluous to enumerate them. I will conclude this account 
by noticing two dances which seem to be danced only by 
women. 

In the Komznoka Society of the Kwakiutl the novice, The 

whether a girl or a woman, disappears into the woods to be Seber 
initiated by the mighty spirit Baxbakualanuxstwae, who also <wakiutl 
initiates the Cannibals. When she is brought back by the “°"™ 
spirit, her hair appears to be falling out and her head is 
covered with blood, or what looks like blood, because it has 
been torn by the spirit. In each hand she carries a skull. 
At the sight the Cannibals cry “ Hap!” and dance up to her 
in their characteristic squatting attitude, eager to devour the 
heads she is carrying. The other members, present and 
past, of the society join in the dance and make as if they 
too were carrying heads. Thus she dances into the house, 
always surrounded by the Cannibals, who at last take the 
skulls from her hands, lick them, and eat the maggots and 
the dry skin which adheres to the grinning bones.” 

Another dance danced by Kwakiutl women is called The Toguit 
Togutt. The upper part of the dancer’s body is naked Teoria 
hemlock boughs are tied round her waist. The warriors women, 
before going on an expedition used to repair to the forest Effigy 
to meet the double-headed snake Sisiutl, which gives them nit 
great strength and power, After returning from the woods double- 
they engage a woman to dance the Zoguzt. Very elaborate ae 
arrangements are made for this dance. A double-headed (Sisiut)). 
snake, about twenty feet long, is made of wood, blankets, 
and skins and is hidden in a long ditch partly covergd with 
boards. Strings are attached to it, which pass over the 
beams of the house and are worked by men concealed in 
the bedrooms. As soon as the dancer appears, the people 
begin to sing and beat time. In dancing the woman acts 

1 See vol. i. pp. 104-112, 183-185, appearance of streaming blood and 
214 599. falling hair on the head of the novice 

2 Franz Boas, ‘‘ Secret Societies of | is produced by alder juice and some 
the Kwakiutl,” pp. 462 sg. The loose tresses. 

532 SECRET SOCIETIES IN*NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuapr. 

as though she were trying to catch something, and when she 
is supposed to have got it, she throws her hands back. 
Then the huge serpent rises out of the ground, wagging its 
two heads. If it does not move properly, the Cannibals, the 
Fool Dancers, the Bears and others jump up and drive the 
spectators out of the room, biting and striking them. Finally 
Pretence of the serpent disappears again into the ditch. Next a messenger 
ee calls upon one of the attendants to kill the dancer. This he 
bringing does apparently by driving a wedge through her head and 
on, Me splitting it open with a paddle, so that the blood streams 
down. But these are only clever conjuring tricks. Some- 
times a pretence is made of burning her in the fire; but by 
means of a double-bottomed box a corpse has been adroitly 
substituted for her and burned in her stead. The bones are 
afterwards raked out of the ashes and laid on a new mat. 
For four days the pedple chant over them. At last the bones 
themselves are heard to sing with the woman’s voice. This 
trick is played by means of a speaking-tube laid underground 
from the woman’s bedroom to the mat on which the bones 
are deposited. Next morning the woman is seen to be 
alive." Apparently the belief, or the pretence, is that she 
has been raised from the dead by the incantations chanted 
over her bones. The whole ceremony thus affords another 
example of the simulated death and resurrection which is so 
common a feature in the rites of Secret Societies. 

J. Dunn's These Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl are so curious 
coat and interesting that it may be well to quote an early 
Kwakiutl description of some of their ceremonies, as these were ob- 
aE MWe served near Fort M‘Loughlin, on Milbank Sound, in 1833 
Soundin and 1834. The writer, John Dunn, was an agent of the 
1833 and or . 
1834. Hudson Bay Company, living and travelling for years among 
the Indians of this coast from the Columbia River northward. 
He calls the Indians of Milbank Sound by the name of 
Belbellahs, or, as the word is now spelled, Bellabellas. They 
are a Kwakiutl tribe, and their name Bellabella is said to be 

a mere Indian corruption of the English word Milbank.” 

1 Franz Boas, in Sixth Report on Leeds, 1890, separate reprint). 
the North-Western Tribes of Canada, » Handbook of American Indians 
p. 67 (Report of the British Association, north of Mexico, i. 140 sq. 

XxX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUVUTL _ 533 

Mr. Dunn’s description of what he saw and heard is perhaps 
not the less valuable because it is untinged by theory. He 
writes as follows :-— 

“In the winter months these, as well as the neighbouring public 
tribes, assemble in great numbers in the ehief’s house, for oe 
the purpose of witnessing the chief imitate different spirits, the chief 
whom they are supposed to worship. He puts on, at imitates 
intervals, different dresses; and large masks, of different spirits, 
kinds, entirely covering his head and neck. The masks are tioap” 
made to open the mouth and eyes by means of secret springs, propriate 
invisible to the spectators; and different noises are sent forth. eee 
He dresses for each character behind a large curtain, drawn 
quite across the room, like the drop curtain in a theatre ; 
and then comes forth, and stands on a sort of stage in front of 
it, while the spectators are ranged on benches placed along the 
side walls. In one of his characters he imitates the rising Imitation 
sun, which they believe to be a shining man, wearing a eate 
radiated crown, and continually walking round the earth, 
which is stationary. He wears, on this occasion, a most 
splendid dress of ermine, and other valuable furs; and a 
curiously constructed mask, set round with seals’ whiskers, 
and feathers, which gradually expand like a fan; and from 
the top of the mask swan-down is shaken out in great 
quantities, according as he moves his head. The expand- 
ing seals’ bristles and feathers represent the sun’s rays; 
and the showers of down, rain and snow; the Indians Imitation 
chaunting at the same time, in regular order and in a low eat 
key, showing reverence, awe, and devotion. 

“ Sometimes the various divine personages are represented Sometimes 
by one man; sometimes there are two or three personators <1" 
on the stage all at once, representing different divinities. part in 
Our men were often invited to witness these geligious a 
exhibitions; but the greatest silence, attention, and decorum dramas. 
were expected from them. Our attendance they considered 
a high compliment; and they invariably made us presents, 
generally of skins, before we departed. One of our people, 

a half-breed, a funny volatile boy, son of Mr. Manson, used 
to imitate, on a sort of many barred fife, the noise made by 
the sacerdotal chiefs on the stage. The Indians, when they 
used to come to the fort and hear this, seemed much amazed ; 

At times 
the chief 
retires to 
solitude in 
the woods 
to hold 
converse 
with the 
Great 
Spirit. 

In his 
solitary 
musings no 
man may 
meet him 
under pain 
of death. 

534 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cnar. 

and often begged of me to check him. After the conclusion 
of the ceremony they have a feast, consisting generally of 
seals’ and dogs’ flesh, salmon, boiled and roast, and different 
kinds of berries. During the representation and the feast, 
there is a large wood-fire in the centre of the room. 

“As I acquired a knowledge of their language, I was 
admitted to much of their personal confidence, and soon 
became interpreter. 

“There is one very remarkable peculiarity of their 
religious customs which deserves to be noticed: and if I had 
not personal evidence of its reality, I should be slow to 
bring myself to a belief of its actual existence. The chief, 
who is supposed to possess the ‘right divine’ of governing, 
and to be the intermediate agent between the great solar 
spirit—the Creator and Supreme Ruler—and his creatures 
here below, retires at times, whenever he fancies himself 
summoned by the divine call, from the tribe, without giving 
them any previous intimation of his mission; and takes up his 
abode in the lonely woods and mountains, taking clandestinely 
with him a small stock of dried salmon for sustenance. 
When he is missed by his family, the report is spread abroad ; 
and then it is known that he has gone to hold familiar con- 
verse with the Great Spirit, who will, within a short time, 
descend to give him an interview. Intelligence has then 
been procured, from the Indian who saw him last on that 
day, as to his route, and the district of the woods 
and hills to which he is likely to confine his wanderings ; 
and a sacred boundary line is drawn round this district, 
within which it is a crime of profanation to pass, on hunting 
or fishing excursions, on pain of death. Should any unlucky 
Indian even meet this compound of chief and priest in his 
excursions, he is sure to be put to death; either by the 
chief himself, for he must be perfectly passive in the infuriated 
chief's hands; or, should the chief in his abstracted mood 
not attack him, he must, on his return to the tribe, 
acknowledge the guilt, and resign himself a voluntary victim. 
Should he conceal the fact of his meeting the chief, and 
should the chief, on his return, charge him with the fact, 
then he would undergo the most shocking torture. The 
duration of the chief’s absence on this mission is irregular 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE KWAKIUTL 535 

—at least it is long enough to exhaust his small stock 

of food, even with the utmost economy. It is often three 

weeks. When hunger pinches him (and he generally 

selects the most desert and dreary region, destitute of 
esculent fruits or roots) his imagination becomes inflamed ; 

and ‘what was before religion or superstition, becomes 

now frenzy ; during which the fancied interview with the 

Great Spirit occurs. He returns at last to the village, On his 
the most hideous object in nature, with matted hair, fe etlece 
shrunken cheeks, blood-shot eyes, and parched lips—his raggara, | 
blanket, which is his sole covering, all hanging in shreds eee 
about him, torn by boughs and brambles—his face all be- frenzied, 
grimed with filth; animated with all the unnatural ferocity geass 
of a demoniac. His return is by night, and as uncertain as to house 
his departure. He does not first arrive, generally, at his own wa a 
house: but rushes to some other, according to the blind bolting 

caprice of his wildness; and instead of entering it by the Head 
door, he ascends the roof, tears off one of the cedar-board 2”¢ torpid, 

. 3 ey. he can eat 
coverings, and plunges down into the centre of the family no more. 
circle ; he then springs on one of the full grown inmates, 
like a famished wolf—wrenches with his teeth a mouthful of 
his flesh, from his limbs or body, which he convulsively bolts 
down, without any process of mastication, but barely chopping 
the lump once or twice for the purpose of easier deglutition. 
No resistance is made, for the sufferer thinks that he has 
been ordered by the Great Spirit to yield up a part of his 
flesh and blood, as a sort of peace or sin offering to the 
priest. The chief then rushes to another house in the same 
way, and makes the same hurried repast. He continues this 
process along other houses ; until, in a few hours, he becomes 
exhausted, from the quantity of human living flesh that he 
has devoured. He is then taken home in a state of torpor ; 
and thus remains, like an overgorged beast of prey, for a 
couple of days. After his resuscitation he is languid and 
sickly ; and, as he must not partake of the usual food for a 
certain time after he has got his fill of the human sacrifice, 
he goes on but slowly to convalescence. 

“J have been, more than once, in close connexion with The 

one of these chiefs, after his restoration; and his breath Petsns 

‘ arin: whom he 
was like an exhalation from a grave. The wounds inflicted bites in nis 

frenzy are 
supposed 
to be con- 
secrated, 
and they 
are proud 
of their 
wounds, 
though 
they some- 
times die 
of them. 

The Secret 
Societies 
of the 
Tsimshians, 
Dawson's 
account of 
them. 

536 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuar. 

by his bite, though held as sacred trophies, often prove 
mortal. Their mode of cure is this:—-They apply eagle- 
down as a stiptic to check the hemorrhage ; and then apply 
a plaster, made of pine-tree gum. Several of the wounded 
and consecrated persons, after we established our fort,- 
finding their own mode of treatment ineffectual, came to 
our surgeon (applying to me first as interpreter) to have 
their rankling sores healed. They used to present a most 
hideous appearance; being jagged and torn, and often 
showing the clear indentations of the human teeth; and 
besides the fetor issuing from them was most noxious. The 
daughter of one of the chiefs (who practised this abomina- 
tion), the wife of one of our men, told me that her father, 
on his return to the village, after his sojourn in the woods 
and mountains, met an Indian on whom he flew, and whose 
side he continued to ‘bite and devour until his bowels 
protruded. The Indian made no resistance ; and when the 
chief ran off, he crawled to the village; and though every 
effort was made to heal his wounds, they were found to be 
too mortal for human remedy. He died soon afterwards, 
in their idea, a consecrated person. So much importance 
and pride do these Indians attach to these lacerations, that 
the youngsters, who have not had the good fortune to be 
thus scarred, apply lighted gunpowder to their limbs; and 
use other means to produce a holy gash.”? 

§ 6. Secret Societies among the Tsimshians 

To the north of the Kwakiutl the system of Secret 
Societies exists among the tribes which are divided into 
totemic clans of the normal type. The institution as it 
exists among the Tsimshians or Tshimsians is described as 
follows by Dr. G. M. Dawson :— 

“There are among the neighbouring Tshimsians four 
‘religions, or systems of rites of a religious character. 
These have no relation to the totems, but divide the tribe 
on different lines. They are known as (1) Szm-ha-latt, 

1 John Dunn, History of the Belbellahs by the author (of, c#t. p. 
Oregon Territory (London, 1844), pp. 271). 
253-259. These Indians are called 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE TSIMSHIANS 537 

(2) Mi-hla, (3) Nov-hlem, (4) Hop-pop. The first is the Six 
simplest and seems to have no very distinctive rites. The peated 
central figure of the worship of the second was at Fort , 
Simpson a little black image with long hair known as ‘the 

only one above.” The third are ‘dog-eaters, a portion of The Dog. 
their rite consisting in killing and cutting, or tearing to oe 
pieces, dogs, and eating the flesh They eat in reality, dogs. 
however, as little of the flesh as they can, quietly disposing 

of the bulk of it when out of sight. The op-pop or The 
‘cannibals’ are those who, in a state of real or pretended See el 
frenzy, bite flesh out of the extended arms of the people out of 
of the village as a part of their rite. When they issue forth eon 3 
for this purpose they utter cries like 4op-p0/—whence their bolt it. 
name. On this sound being heard all but those of the 

same religion get out of the way if they can, frequently 
pushing off in canoes for this purpose. Those of the same 

creed, and brave, resolutely extend their arms to be bitten. 

A man may belong to more than one religion, and is in 

some cases even forced to become initiated into a second, 

If, for instance, one should pass where dog-eaters are 
holding a solemn conclave, he may be seized and initiated 

as a dog-eater nolens volens. Great hardships are sometimes 
endured during initiation. The more savage religions Members 
pretend to mysterious supernatural powers, and go to great ia 
pains sometimes to délude the common people, or those of societies 
other creeds. At Fort Simpson, for instance, a young chief baicio 
was on one occasion carefully buried in the ground before- super- 
hand. When discovered the operators were pulling at Nera 
rope, and were supposed to be drawing the chief underground ‘sort to 
from the back of an island some way off. The rope after Novices i 
a time breaking, great apparent excitement occurs among oe 
the operators, who say the chief is now lost, bug catching pretence in 
sticks begin to dig in the ground, and soon unearth him oa 
to the great amazement of the vulgar. In this case, how- ignorant 
ever, the cold and cramped attitude so affected the chief “"®* 
that he was lame for life. They instil the truth of such 

stories especially in the minds of the young, who firmly 

believe in them. At Fort Simpson, in former days, they 

have even got up such things as an artificial whale, in some 

way formed on a canoe. This appeared suddenly on the 

Dr. Boas’s 
account of 
initiation 
intoa 
Secret 
Society 

of the 
Tsimshians, 

The novice 
is supposed 
to go to 
heaven, 
and on his 
return he 
appears 
floating on 
an artificial 
monster of 
the sort 
which 
forms the 
crest of the 
society, 

Masked 
dance re- 
presenting 
the novice 
in heaven 
surrounded 
by the 
spirits. 

538 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap, 

bay, seemingly swimming along, with a little child on 
its: back.” 

The ceremony of initiation into a Secret Society of the 
Tsimshian is described by Dr. Boas as follows :—* During 
the dancing season a feast is given, and while the women 
are dancing the novice is suddenly said to have disappeared. 
It is supposed that he goes to heaven. If he is a child, he 
stays away four days; youths remain about six days, and 
grown-up persons several months, Chiefs are supposed to 
stay in heaven during the fall and the entire winter. When 
this period has elapsed, they suddenly reappear near the 
beach, carried by an artificial monster belonging to their 
crest. Then all the members of the secret society to which 
the novice is to belong gather and walk down in grand 
procession to the beach to fetch the child. At this time his 
parents bring presents, particularly elk skins, strung upon 
a rope as long as the procession, to be given at a subsequent 
feast. The people surround the novice and lead him into 
every house in order to show that he has returned. Then 
he is taken to the house of his parents, and a large bunch 
of cedar bark is fastened over the door to show that the 
house is tabooed and nobody is allowed to enter. The 
chief sings while the cedar bark is being fastened. In the 
afternoon the sacred house is prepared for the dance. A 
section in the rear of the house is divided off by means of 
curtains; it is to serve as a stage on which the dancers 
and the novice appear. When all is ready, messengers, 
carrying large carved batons, are sent around to invite the 
members of the society, the chief first. The women sit 
down in one row, nicely dressed up in button blankets and 
their faces painted red. The chief wears the amhalatt—a 
carving rising from the forehead, set with sea-lion barbs, 
and with a long drapery of ermine skins—the others, the 
cedar bark rings of their societies. Then the women begin 
to dance. After a while a prominent man rises to deliver 
a speech. He says: ‘All of you know that our novice 
went up to heaven; then he made a mistake and has been 
returned; now you will see him.’ Then he begins the 

1G. M. Dawson, Report on the Queen Charlotte Islands, 7878 (Montreal, 
1880), p. 125 B. 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE TSIMSHIANS 539 

song; the curtain is drawn and masked dancers are seen 
surrounding the novice and representing the spirits which 
he has encountered in heaven. At the same time eagle 
down is blown into the air. After the dance is over the 
presents which were strung on the rope are distributed 
among the members of the secret society. 

“The novice has a beautifully painted room set apart 
for his use. He remains naked during the dancing season. 
He must not look into the fire. He must abstain from 
food and drink, and is only allowed to moisten his lips 
occasionally. He wears his head ring continually. After 
the ceremonies are all finished the festival of ‘clothing the 
novice’ is celebrated. He sits in his room quietly singing 
while the people assemble in the house. His song is heard 
to grow louder, and at last he makes his appearance. He 
has put off his ring of red cedar bark. Then the people 
try to throw a bear skin over him, which they succeed in 
doing only after a severe struggle. All the societies take 
part in this feast, each sitting grouped together. The 
uninitiated stand at the door. This ends the ceremonies.” * 

§ 7. Secret Societies among the Niskas 

The Niska Indians, who inhabit the valley of the Nass 
River, except its upper course, speak one of the chief 
dialects of the Tsimshian language and their customs are 
practically identical with those of the Tsimshians.2 They 
have six Secret Societies, which rank in the following order : 
—Semhalatt, Meitla, Lotlem, Olala, Nanestat, and Honanatt, 
the last of these being the highest. The ceremonies are 
said to have been derived from the Bellabellas, a Kwakiutl 
tribe on Milbank Sound,’ and this tradition is confirmed by 
the names of the Secret Societies, for with the exception of 
the first these are all Kwakiutl words. The Olala is a 
Cannibal Society corresponding to the Hamatsa of the 

1 Franz Boas, ‘The Social Organ- 2 Franz Boas, in Zenth Refort of 
ization and the Secret Societies of the ‘the Committee on the North-Western 
Kwakiut! Indians,” Report of the Tribes of Canada, p. 48 (Keport of the 
Onited States National Museum for British Association, Ipswich, 1895, 
1895 (Washington, 1897), Pp. 659 separate reprint). 

59. 3 See above, p. 532. 

Rules 
observed 
by the 
novice for 
some time 
after 
initiation. 

The six 
Secret 
Societies 
of the 
Niskas, a 
Tsimshian 
tribe. 

The 
Cannibal 
Society. 

The 
Semhalait 
Society. 

“Only a 
limited 
number of 
places in a 
society. 

The dis- 
appearance 
of the 
novice, 
and the 
attempts to 
bring him 
back. 

The Spirit 
of Sleep. 

5340 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuapr., 

Kwakiutl, and the members utter the same characteristic cry 
of “ Hap!” which is a Kwakiutl word meaning “eating.” 

The Semhalait Society is the lowest in rank; its 
ceremonies are not confined to the winter. A person joins 
it when he obtains the first guardian spirit of his clan and 
performs the appropriate ceremony. The ceremonies of 
the other societies take place in December. The badges 
of the societies are made of cedar-bark dyed red in a 
decoction of alder-bark. For each repetition of the 
ceremony a new ring is added to the head ornament 
of the dancer. In the Aedtla Society these rings are 
alternately red and white, twisted together. 

There are only a limited number of places in the 
societies, and a new member can be admitted only when 
he inherits the place pf a deceased member, or if a living 
member voluntarily transfers his place to him. If such a 
transference is to take place, the consent of the chiefs of 
the clans must first be obtained. Then one evening the 
chiefs during a feast surround the youth and act as though 
they had caught the spirit of the society in their hands and 
throw it upon the novice. The youth faints, and the 
members of the society, carry him round the fire and then 
throwing him upward shew to the people that he is lost. 
After some time, when the novice is expected back, the 
people assemble in the house, and all the members of the 
nobility try to bring him back by the help of their spirits. 
In order to do this they dance in all their finery, sometimes 
wearing the masks of their guardian spirits (zegnok). For 
example, if a man has the Spirit of Sleep for his guardian 
spirit, he will endeavour to bring back the lost novice by 
means of it. He will lie down as if overcome with sleep 
wearing @ mask with shut eyes. Then a chief steps up to 
him and tries to awake him by hauling the drowsiness out 
of him with both his hands. Upon that the eyes of the 
mask open and roll about, while the pretended ,sleeper rises 
to his feet. The chief who took the drowsiness out of him 

1 Franz Boas, in Tenth Report of the 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes 
of Canada, pp. 54 sg. (Report of the 
British Association, TUpswich, 1895, 
separate reprint); zd. ‘*The Social 

Organization and the Secret Societies 
of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
United States National Museum for 
1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 651 
5g. 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE NISKAS 541 

asks whether he shall try to put the people to sleep, and 
on being bidden to do so he throws his hands open, as if 
to allow the captured Spirit of Sleep to escape. So it enters 
the people and they shut their eyes as if fast asleep. After 
a time he gathers up the spirit again, and the people awake 
and sing, “Oh! how sleepy we are! Oh! how sleepy we 
are!” In that way the Spirit of Sleep proves his power 
and his presence, and he is asked to bring the novice back. 

Thus one man after another tries to lure the lost youth Reappear- 

back to his friends. If he does not come back by midnight 

ance of the 
* novice 

they break off and resume the ceremony next night. Early fioating on 

in the morning a killer-whale or some other animal, or 

an artificial 

whale or 

rather an effigy of it worked by ropes, is seen floating on the other 

river with the missing novice on its back. The people go 
forth to see him. Members of the Lotlem Society embark 
in a canoe and paddle, singing, to meet him. They take him 
on board their canoe and destroy the whale float which 
carried him. Meantime all the people have been chased 
into their houses by a member of the Lotlem Society who 
wears a bearskin. When the novice lands, he runs up and 
down the village street like one distracted, and the Cannibals 
follow him biting any of the profane who dare to leave their. 
houses. The novice catches a dog, tears it to pieces, and 
devours it as he roams from house to house. Then they 
enter the house of the novice, which becomes tabooed. A 
rope hung with red cedar-bark is stretched from the door of 
the house to a pole set up on the beach, so as to prevent 
people from passing in front of the house. Next day, 
however, four men dressed in bearskins, with rings of red 
cedar-bark on their heads, go from house to house inviting 
the people to come and see the dance of the novice and to 
learn his songs. After he has danced his dance before 
them, his uncle pays the chiefs who tried to bring’him back, 
and he distributes blankets among the other people also. A 
feast of berries and grease ends the ceremony, after which 
the novice is called “a perfect man.” * 

1 Franz Boas, in 7evth Report of the Organization and the Secret Societies 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Report of the 
of Canada, pp. 54, 56 sg. (Report of United States National Museum jor 
the British Association, Ipswich, 1895, 1895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 651, 
separate reprint); 7d@. ‘‘The Social 654-657. 

monster. 

He tears 
and de- 
vours @ 

dog. 

Initiation 
into the 
Cannibal 
Society. 
Pretence of 
killing the 
novice. 

The novice 
resorts to 
a grave 
and lies 
with the 
corpse. 

Return of 
the novice. 

The 
novices 
brought 
back by 
effigies of 
animals. 

542 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap. 

An Indian who had been initiated into the Cannibal 
(Olaia) Society gave the following account of his initiation. 
During the festival at which the ceremony was to take place 
his friends drew their knives and pretended to kill him, 
cutting off the head of a dummy which was adroitly 
substituted for the living youth, while he slipped quietly 
away. Then they laid down the pretended corpse and 
covered it, and the women began to mourn and wail. The 
relations of the novice gave a feast, distributed blankets, 
slaves, canoes, and copper shields, and burnt the body In 
short, they held a regular funeral for their professedly dead 
kinsman. After his disappearance the novice resorted to a 
grave, took out a body, and lay with it all night wrapt in 
a blanket. In the morning he put the body back in the 
grave. He continued to do so for some time “in order to 
acquire courage.” All this time and for a year afterwards 
he might not be seen by any member of the tribe except by 
the members of his own society, the Cannibals (O/a/a). 
Finally, a year after his disappearance, his nephew invited 
all the tribes to bring him back. The ceremony resembled 
the one which has just been described. The novice 
appeared borne by an effigy of his totem animal. 

Some ofthe Niska Indians at initiation are brought back 
by the figure of a killer-whale,as we have seen; others are 
brought back by the effigy of a bear; others, again, appear 
on the back of an eagle which rises from the ground; while 
others come back riding on a frog. Sometimes the novice 
shews himself on a headland carrying a corpse in his arms 
and then appears to walk on the water across the bay to the 
village, the trick being performed by means of a submerged 
raft, which is hauled by the members of his society. On 
reaching the village he lands and eats of the corpse which he 
carries ; formerly, too, one or other of the chiefs used to kill 
a slave and throw the body to the Cannibals, who devoured 
it. It is said that before eating human flesh the Cannibals 
always use emetics, and that afterwards they tickle their 
throats with feathers to make them vomit. Also after biting 
people they chew the bark of ‘ devil’s club, which acts as a 
purgative. 

At the festivals which take place during the dancing 

XX SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE NISKAS 543 

season the Cannibal receives his share of food first, and Customs 
nobody may eat till he has begun to eat. He has a dish aoe 
and spaon of his own, which are wound with bark. When Society. 
he hears the word “ghost” (4o/ek), he grows excited and 
begins to bite again. When he ceases to bite and devour 

men, a heavy ring of red cedar-bark is placed round his 

neck and he is led slowly round the fire. This is called 
“making him heavy” and is intended to prevent his 
flying away and growing excited again. In his dances the 
Cannibal (Ola/a), among all the northern tribes, wearg a 
head-dress representing a corpse. The whistles which are The 
used to imitate the cry of the Cannibal Spirit are large and eee 
give out a deep, hollow sound. They are all carved or rattles. 
painted with the design of a death’s head. Some are attached 

to bellows and being carried under the arm, concealed 

by a blanket, can be blown by pressure without being seen, 

The rattles carried by the companions of the Cannibal also 

shew a death’s head. When members of the Nanestat and 
Honanatl Societies are in a state of ecstasy, they throw fire- 
brands about and destroy canoes, houses, and anything they 

can lay hands on.' These wild acts are no doubt attributed 

to the inspiration of the spirit. 

In olden times the appearance of the artificial totem In old 
animal, or of the guardian spirit, was considered a matter \i'y, 
of great importance, and any blunder which allowed the novice was 
uninitiated to detect the pious fraud was a misfortune which ely ae 
could only be atoned for by the death of the clumsy effigy of 
manipulators of the sacred machinery. For example, in the eae 
Heiltsuk tribe three brothers once invited all the tribes, guardian 
including the Tsimshians, to a festival. The eldest brother ahi io 
was to return from the bottom of the sea. When the i 
guests arrived on the scene of action in their canoes, they machinery 
landed and stood or sat on the beach awaiting thetmergence “ih 
of the modern Jonah. Soon there was a bubbling and .dis- uninitiated 
turbance of the water at some distance from the shore; ewe: 
rock, or what looked like a rock, covered with kelp rose to fraud was 

1 Franz Boas, in Tenth Report of the Organization and the Secret Societies eee 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes of the Kwakiutl Indians,” Refurt of the 
of Canada, pp. 57 sg. (Report of the United States National Museum for 
British Association, Ipswich, 1895, 7895 (Washington, 1897), pp. 653, 
separate reprint); zd. ‘*The Social 654, 657-659, 

Secret 

Societies of 
the Haidas, 

each 
with its 
guardian 
spirit. 

544 SECRET SOCIETIES iN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuss. 

the surface, and from it stepped sure enough the lost , 
brother, decked with his ceremonial head-dress. He danced 
his dance and then sank with the rock beneath the waves. 
Once more he emerged from the water, danced his dance, and 
sank, this time to rise no more. The ropes which regulated 
the movements of the rock, or rather of the raft, had become 
entangled, and though the workers of the oracle, concealed in 
the recesses of the woods, tugged and sweated away, they 
could not disentangle them, and the man was drowned. His 
family put a brave face on it and gave out, with a certain 
measure of truth, that their departed kinsman had stayed 
with the spirit at the bottom of the sea. They celebrated 
the rest of the festival with outward calm. But when it was 
over and the guests were gone, all the members of the 
family marched to the top of a cliff overhanging deep water. 
There they roped -themselves together, sang the cradle song 
of their family, and leaping from the brow of the cliff rejoined 
their drowned brother in the bottom of the sea.? 

§ 8. Secret Societies among’ the Haidas 

The Haidas of Queen Charlotte Islands have a number of 
Secret Societies, each presided over by its guardian spirit. 
Among these guardian spirits are the Cannibal Spirit (Uda/a), 
the Grizzly Bear Spirit, the Wolf Spirit, the Dog-eating 
Spirit, the Fire-throwing Spirit, the Club-bearing Spirits, the 
Dress Spirit, and the Wrestling Spirit. The whole body of 
those who belong to these Secret Societies are denominated 
by a general name meaning “ the Inspired,” because they are 
supposed to be inspired by their guardian spirits. But apart 
from having been initiated and inspired by the same spirit, 
it does not appear that there is any bond of union between 
the members of a Secret Society ; hence Mr. J. R. Swanton, 
our authority on this subject, prefers to treat all the so-called 
inspired or initiated as forming a single Secret Society, not- 
withstanding thedifference between the various spirits by which 
aman might be initiated into it. The traditions, and all the 

1 Franz Boas, in Tenth Report of the "British Association, Ipswich, 1895, 
Committee on the North-Western Tribes separate reprint). 
of Canada, pp. §8 sg. (Report of the 

xx', SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE HAIDAS 545 

other evidence, point to the conclusion that the Haidas have These 

borréwed the Secret Society or Societies from the Tsimshians Sorr''s 

or the Bellabellas. Apparently the introduction of the have been 

Societies took place not much earlier than the year 1700. oo i 

Dances of the Secret Societies were an indispensable Haidas 

accompaniment of a fotlatch, that is, of a festival attended ae 

by a distribution of property to the guests; and these dances or Bella- 

were never performed on any other occasion.! Pai 
The ceremonies at the initiation of a Cannibal (U/a/a) the 

consisted of the usual medley of savagery and fraud. ae 

The novice bit the arms of people, and a pretence was made Cannibal. 

of killing him and bringing him to life again. His family 

wept crocodile tears over his seemingly dead body, then sang 

a spirit-song, and soon he reappeared from behind a curtain, 

alive and well, with a mask on his head. Even more 

dreaded than the inspired Cannibals were the inspired Fire- 

Throwers, from whose assaults people sought shelter behind 

boards? The Dog-eating Spirit inspired both men and The Dog- 

women, and moved by the spirit they killed dogs and ears 

devoured them as they walked along, but people were not 

afraid of them.2 A man high in rank could be inspired bya 

new spirit at each successive potlatch, provided that none of 

these spirits was owned by a chief of the other clan. 

Among the Southern Haidas a man who had been inspired 

ten times was free to do what he liked.* 

§ 9. Secret Societies among the Tinnehs 

Among the Western Tinnehs or Dénés we find that the bnayis 
tribe of the Carriers possessed what Father A. G. Morice «\ ponodne 

calls “ honorific totems” in addition to the totems of their totems : 
. amon 
four clans. These “ honorific totems ” appear to have been Carriers ‘i 

of the nature of guardian spirits, so that all persons who had Ee 

the same guardian spirit may perhaps be said to have seem to 
constituted a Secret Society, though that is not affirmed by “mae five 
Father Morice. He tells us that the “ honorific totem” was ey 

. indivi : 
1 J. R. Swanton, Contributions to 2 J. R. Swanton, of. cit. pp. 163- ana 

the Ethnology of the Haida (Leyden and 170, 
New York, 1905), pp. 156, 160 59., 3 J. R. Swanton, of. cit. p. 171. 
181. 4 J. R. Swanton, of. cét. p. 161. 

VOL. HI 2N 

The 
“honorific 
totem” of 
the Bear. 

The 
“honorific 
totem” 

of the 

“ Darding 
Knife’; the 
initiation 
ceremony 
includes 

a pretence 
of death 
and re- 
surrection. 

List of the 
‘honorific 
totems ” or 
guardian 
spirits of 
the clans. 

346 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuav. 

personal to a man and did not pass to his descendants. It 
was voluntarily assumed by any person who wished to raise. 
himself in the social scale ; and certain initiatory ceremonies 
appropriate to the particular “honorific totem” had to’ be 
observed. Thus if a man wished to acquire the Bear as his 
“honorific totem,” he would strip himself, don a bearskin, 
and thus attired would spend three or four days in the 
woods, “in deference to the wonts of his intended totem 
animal.” Every night a party of his fellow-villagers would 
go out to search for him, and to their loud calls he would 
answer by growling in imitation of a bear. As a rule he 
could not be found but had to come back of himself. When 
he did so, he was apprehended and led to the ceremonial 
lodge, where he danced his first bear-dance along with all 
the other totem people, each of whom then personated his 
own particular totem. (Afterwards followed a potlatch, that 
is, a feast accompanied by a distribution of property, at 
which the newly initiated Bear presented his captor with a 
newly dressed skin. Amongst the “honorific totems” or 
guardian spirits was one called a “darding knife.” The 
initiation ceremony at acquiring this particular “ honorific 
totem” included a simulated death and resurrection. A 
lance was prepared with a hollow shaft so arranged that the 
least pressure on the lance-head caused it to sink into the 
shaft. This being thrust at the bare chest of the novice 
seemed to penetrate his body; he fell down and blood 
gushed from his mouth, though not from his wound. While 
the uninitiated gaped, one of those in the secret struck up a 
particular chant, at the sound of which the seemingly dead 
man gradually came back to life. He had to pay the 
songster a handsome fee for his resurrection. 

Of these “honorific totems” or guardian spirits there 

¢ . . 
were many ; each of the four totem clans had its own, which 
could not be adopted by members of another clan. Some 
of these “honorific totems” are now forgotten. The follow- 
ing were remembered down to 1892 :— 

1. In the Grouse clan there were the Owl, the Moose, 
the Weasel, the Crane, the Wolf, the Brook Trout, the Full 
Moon, the “ Darding Knife,” and the “ Rain of Stones.” 

2. In the Beaver clan there was the Mountain Goat. 

xx SECRET SOCIETIES AMONG THE TINNEHS 547 

3. In the Toad clan there were the Sturgeon, the 
-Porcupine, the Wolverine, the Red-headed Woodpecker, the 
Cattle, the Arrow, and the Ze/tsa,a fabulous animal like a 
gigantic toad, with large bulging eyes. 

4. In the Grizzly Bear clan there was the Goose. 

The connexion of a man with his “ honorific totem” or persona. 
guardian spirit appeared especially at ceremonial dances, when “honerif 
the man, attired if possible in the spoils of the animal, totem” in 
personated it before an admiring assembly. “On all such clas 
occasions, man and totem were also called by the same ; 

name,” ! 

§ 10. Observations on the Secret Societies of the North 
American Indians 

From the foregoing account of the Religious Associations Resem- 
or Secret Societies of the North American Indians it will ee 
be seen that they present a number of resemblances to the Secret 
totemic clans. For they are commonly called after animals, aes 
and in some cases members of the societies will not kill totemic 
the animal after which their own particular society is ‘*"* 
named.” Further, on ceremonial occasions the members 
usually dress in the skins, wear the masks, and imitate the 
gait and voice of their tutelary animals, thus identifying 
themselves with the creatures in a fashion characteristic of 
totemism. Moreover, members of these associations are 
regularly supposed to be endowed with supernatural or 
magical power, and this power they sometimes exercise for 
the public benefit, just as members of totemic clans in 
Central Australia and elsewhere perform magical ceremonies 
for the multiplication of game, the making of rain, and so 
forth. Thus the members of a Buffalo Society amgng the 
Omahas make rain in time of drought;* and the Grand 
Master of the Secret Society of the Maidus not only makes 
rain but multiplies salmon and edible acorns for the good of 
the community. Again, members of the Salmon Society 
among the Kwakiutl imitate the leap of the salmon and 

1 Father A. G. Morice, ‘Notes, (1892-93) pp. 203-206. 
Archeological, Industrial, and Socio- 2 See above, pp. 479, 484. 

logical, on the Western Dénés,” 7yans- 3 See above, p- 462. 
actions of the Canadian IJnstttete, iv. 4 See above, P- 493- 

The chief 
difference 
between 
Secret 
Societies 
and 
totemic 
clans is 
that the 
latter are 
hereditary 
and the 
former 
are not. 

Yet this 
distinction 
does not 
always 

hold good. 

Resem- 
blance 
between 
the mode 
of joining 
a Secret 

Society and 
the mode of 

648 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cuap. 

sing a salmon song for the purpose, apparently, of increasing 
the number of the fish and thereby ensuring an abundant 
supply of food.’ The chief difference between a Secret Society 
and a totemic clan is that, whereas the totemic clans are 
hereditary and every person is born into one or other of 
them, admission to the Secret Societies is acquired by 
each individual for himself or herself by means of an 
imaginary interview with the patron spirit of the society in 
a dream; hence, while the bond between members of a 
totemic clan is one of kinship or blood, the bond between 
members of a Secret Society is participation in a common 
vision or spiritual revelation. Yet even this distinction 
between the two institutions sometimes breaks down; for 
we have seen that in some tribes of North-West America 
the right to be initiated in certain Secret Societies is 
hereditary.” But hereditdry Secret Societies, named after 
animals and mimicking them in costume, gait, and voice, 
are not far removed from totemic clans. 

Further, the usual mode in which a man or woman 
becomes a member of a Secret Society is very like the mode 
in which a person regularly acquires a guardian spirit or 
what I formerly called an individual totem. In both cases 
the novice is commonly believed to encounter the super- 

acquiring a Natural patron in a vision or dream and to receive from him 

guardian 
spirit, 

Resem- 
blance of 
graduated 
Secret 
Societies 
to age- 
grades. 

certain supernatural or magical powers, which are highly 
valued and which confer a greater or less degree of social 
distinction on their owner. Indeed it would appear that the 
Secret Societies are essentially associations of persons’ who 
have received the same spiritual gifts from the same spirits ; 
so that the disintegration of society, which such personal 
revelations are apt to engender, is counteracted by the union 
of all the votaries of the same supernatural patron in a 
single corporation.2 Sometimes, as we have seen, the Secret 
Societies are graduated according to ages, and members pass 
from one to the other with advancing years.‘ Societies so 
graduated present an analogy to the age-grades of many savage 
tribes ® and may perhaps have been developed out of them. 

1 See above, p- 530. 4 = above, pp. 470-473, 475, 
477-491. 
® See above, PP 513 57+» 540. 6 For examples see above, vol. ii, 

3 See above, Pp. 453 57+» 400. 59-62, 412-416, 419, 431, 445 59. 

xx OBSERVATIONS ON THE SECRET SOCIETIES 549 

A very remarkable feature in the rites of initiation into A remark- 
many Secret Societies of North America is the pretence of 2 ©aure 
killing tha novice and bringing him to life again. Such a ofinitiation 
pretence appears natural enough when the Society into which gna” 
he is to be initiated happens to be that of the Ghosts ; for Societies 
if he is to acquire the supernatural power of ghosts, the ek 
surest way of attaining that desirable end is to convert him of killing 

the novice 
into a ghost by killing him and so disengaging his pure ana bring- 
spirit from its gross material clog, the body. But the ae 
simulation of death and resurrection is by no means limited 
to budding Ghosts ; it is practised by many other societies, 
for example by the Wolf Society of the Nootkas and the 
Cannibal Society of the Niskas.' Its exact meaning is 
obscure. Elsewhere I have suggested that the intention of It has been 
such ceremonies is to extract the soul of the novice from his f'seeted 
body and to deposit it for safety in another place, whether intention 
in an animal or elsewhere, an interchange of life being %3"C",, 
effected so that, for example, the man dies as a man and effect an 
revives as a wolf, while the wolf on the contrary dies as a oeange 
wolf and comes to life as a man On this theory the man between a 
and the animal are both were-wolves ; the man has in his and 
body the soul of the wolf, and the wolf has in its body the S° that a 
soul of the man, and a sympathetic relation exists between the Pathe 
two such that whenever the one dies the other dies also. It hen 
is on this principle, for instance, that I would explain the bush exists 
souls of West Africa and the naguals of Central America? ea 
The American facts which we have just passed in review 
lend some support to the theory ; for the Nootka ceremony 
of initiation, which seems to imply that the novice is killed 
as a man and restored to life as a wolf,’ may perhaps without 
undue straining be interpreted as an exchange of life or soul 
between a man and a wolf; and the custom of bringjng back 
the novice after initiation on an effigy of an animal is 
possibly susceptible of a similar interpretation.” But the 
whole cycle of initiatory rites, as I have already pointed 

out,® stands sorely in need of elucidation. 

1 See above, pp. 505, 542. vol. iii. pp. 443 599. 
2 The Golden Bough, Second Edition, 4 See above, PP- 504 59- 
iii, 422-446, 5 See above, PP. 537 5%» 541» 542+ 

3 See above, vol. ii. pp. 593 599-5 6 See above, P- 458. 

550 SECRET SOCIETIES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA cu. xx 

The per- Lastly, it may be observed that the personation of gods, 
of gods, SPirits, and other beings, whether natural or supernatural, 

eared by masked actors, and the representation of their myths by 
so th, . * soe 
by masked action, song, and dance, clearly constitute a religious drama 

padaat : analogous to that of ancient Greece. The intention of all 
constitutes . . 
areligious Such sacred dramas, we may assume, was primarily not to 

rr awe the people with the spectacle of a solemn pageant or 
ancient to amuse them with grotesque buffoonery ; it was to accom- 
Co plish certain high and serious objects, such as the acquisition 
favourable Of supernatural powers and the production of an adequate 
pookdpad supply of food for the community. Nowhere among the 
this | aborigines of North America have such miracle plays, 
religious’ as we may call them, been staged and acted with so 

ane North elaborate, indeed so gorgeous an apparatus of costumes and 
Indians. scenic effects as among the Pueblo Indians of Arizona and 
mightin New Mexico and the cbast tribes of British Columbia ; 
time have : Paar : se 
developed Nowhere, accordingly, is it so likely that these solemn religious 
ay rites would gradually have shrivelled or blossomed into a 
secular purely secular drama, if the course of evolution had not 
theatre. been cut short by the advent of the! whites. The seed was 
sown ; it needed only time and favourable circumstances to 
spring up and bear the fine flower of art, whether in the 
desert air and under the blue skies of Arizona or in the 

rain-saturated forests of British Columbia. 

CHAPTER XxI 
TOTEMISM AMONG THE INDIANS OF CENTRAL AMERICA 

§ 1. Totemism among the Indians of Costa Rica 

On the Atlantic slope of Costa Rica there are three tribes Indian 
of Indians, the Cabecars, the Bri-bris, and the Tiribis. veal Of 
Though they differ markedly in language, they are allied Rica, the 
in their social, political, and religious institutions. The Sucre 
Cabecars inhabit the country from the frontiers of civilisa- andTiribis. 
tion to the western side of the Coen branch of the Tiliri or 
Sicsola River. Adjoining them, the Bri-bris occupy the east 

side of the Coen, all the regions of the Lari, Uren, and 
Zhorquin and the valley lying round the mouths of these 
streams. The Tiribis live or lived in two villages on the 
Tilorio or Changinola River; but in the year 1875 their 
numbers were reduced to barely a hundred, and they may 

be now extinct. Physically, the Indians of these and the 

other tribes of Costa Rica bear a strong resemblance to each 

other. They are a short, broad-shouldered, heavily-built, and 
muscular race, with full chests and shapely limbs ; they have 

the copper complexion of the North American, Indians, 
perhaps a shade lighter in colour, though they live much 
nearer to the Equator. There seems to be little, if any, 
admixture of foreign blood in them. Nor should we expect 

to find it. They have lived aloof from foreigners, and it is 

only some eighty years since they ceased to wage open war 

on all intruders from the side of the sea. The Spanish 
occupation closed disastrously some two centuries ago, and 

was of too short duration, and the whites were too few, to 

551 

é : : 
552 TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL AMERICA CHAP. 

make a deep impression on what was then:a populous 

- country.’ 

Strict 
rule of 
exogamy- 

The 
families or 
clans exo- 
gamous. 

All 
marriages 
of cousins 
forbidden 
and 
formerly 
punished 
with death. 

Care 
taken to 
ascertain 
consan- 
guinity. 

The Cabecars, Bri-bris, and Tiribis appear all to have 
been divided into exogamous clans, and to have enforced 
the rule of exogamy with great severity. Not only marriage 
but sexual jntercourse within the forbidden limits was 
punished by burying both the culprits alive. On this 
subject Mr. W. W. Gabb, one of the few authorities on 
the Indians of Costa Rica, writes as follows :— 

“There are certain limits within which parties may not 
marry. The tribes are divided into families, or something 
analogous to clans. Two persons of the same clan cannot 
marry. This is now a source of difficulty among the Tiribis. 
The tribe is so reduced that a number of marriageable 
persons of both sexes are unable to find eligible mates. I 
could not ascertain exactly how the question is settled as 
to which clan a person belongs, whether he inherits from 
father or mother, but so far as I could gather, I think 
from the father. Cousins, even to a remote degree, are 
called brother and sister, and are most strictly prohibited 
from intermarriage. The law, or custom, is not an intro- 
duced one, but one handed down from remote times. 
The penalty for its violation was originally very severe ; 
nothing less than the burial alive of both parties. This 
penalty was not only enforced against improper marriage, 
but even against illicit intercourse on the part of persons 
within the forbidden limits. Mr. Lyon related to me a 
case that occurred since he has been living in the country, 
where the power of the chief Chirimo was insufficient to 
protect a man who married his second or third cousin. 
Fortunately for the delinquents, they succeeded in making 
their esgape, though with difficulty, being followed two or 
three days’ journey by the avengers. 

“Infidelity is not rare, and the husband has the redress 
of whipping the woman and dismissing her if he desires, 
and of whipping her paramour if he is able. But so 
cautious are the people about the blood limit of inter- 

1 Wm. W. Gabb, “On the Indian sophical Society held at Philadelphia, 
Tribes and Languages of Costa Rica,” xiv. (Philadelphia, 1876) pp. 486 s9., 
Proceedings of the American Philo- 493+ 

fT 

xx1 JOTEMISM AMONG INDIANS OF COSTA RICA 553 

marriage, that a woman on giving birth to an illegitimate 
child, for fear that it will not know the family to which 
it belongs, will usually brave the punishment, and at once 
confess its paternity. 

“As cousins are called brother and sister, so are not The terms 
only the brothers and sisters, but even the cousins of a Dromer 
wife or husband all called indiscriminately brother and extended 
sister-in-law ; so that a person may on a single marriage 0°" 
find that he has annexed fifty or a hundred of these 
interesting relations.” ? 

The custom mentioned by Mr. Gabb, of bestowing the 
names of “brother” and “sister” on cousins of all degrees 
points to the existence of the classificatory system of 
relationship among these tribes. 

From a later account of these Indians we learn the The _ 
names of many of the exogamous divisions of the Bri-bris. PVD" 
The tribe is divided into two exogamous classes _ or into two 
phratries, each of which is subdivided into a number of Gneecor 
clans. To judge from their names, these clans. appear to phratries 
be totemic. The two classes or phratries are called Zubor aera 
and Kork or Dybar respectively. As is implied in the a number 
statement that the phratries are exogamous, a man .may ae 
not marry a woman of his own phratry ; he may only take coe be 
a wife from the other. Thus, if he is a Zubor, his wife ; 
must be a Kork; if he is a Kork, his wife must be a Zubor. 

It does not appear whether the children take their clan 
from their father or from their mother. The Bri-bri name 
both for the phratry and the clan is wak. . The following 
is a list of the clans included in each phratry, together with 

such explanations of the names as are forthcoming :—? 

1 Wm. W. Gabb, ‘On the Indian Sprache der Bribri-Indianer in Costa 
Tribes and Languages of Costa Rica,” Rica,” ‘Sitsungsberichte der philo- 
Proceedings of the American Philo- sophischen-historischen Classe der 
sophical Society held at Philadelphia, Katserlichen Akademie der Wissen- 
xiv. (Philadelphia, 1876) pp. 496 sg. schaften, cxxxviii. (Vienna, 1898) pp. 

2H. Pittier de Fabrega, “Die 22 sg. 

{TABLE 

Totems or 
guardian 
animals 

554 

TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL AMERICA 

CHAP, 

SOCIAL ORGANISATION OF THE BRI-BRIS 

TUBOR-UAK. 

Surits-uak 1 
Duts-uak 2 
Bokir-uak 
Doyk-uak 
Sark-uak 3 
Dogdi-uak 4 
Orori-uak 5 
Kugdi-uak 6 
Tkiut-uak 7 
Duri-uak 8 
Arau-uak 9 
Uriyk-uak 1° 

KoRK-UAK OR DxBAR-UAK. 

Dxbar-uak 
Di-u-uak 4 
Tkbiri-uak 12 
Kos-uak 18 
Kipiryk-uak 14 
Amu-kir-uak 4 
Tsiru-ru-uak 16 
Uni-uak 
Sibri-uak 17 
Dauibri-uak 18 
Amuk-uak 
Akter-uak 20 
Kur-ki-uak 2! 
KatSa-ut-uak 22 
Bobri-uak 23 

' 
§ 2. Traces of Totemism among the Guaymdt Indians 
of Panama 

Speaking of the Guaymi Indians of Panama a French 
traveller, M. Alphonse Pinart, observes: “We find among 

1 Surt, wild (or wild beasts, German 
wild), 7 

2 Du, bird. 

3 Sar, ape. This is the family of 
the kings, of whom in 1898 only one 
man and one woman survived. 

4 Dog-di, dug-di, mussel river. 

5 Orori, name of a tributary at the 
head-waters of the Arari. 

6 Kug, German TZextilpalme; di, 
water; name of a tributary of the 
Uren. 

7 Tkz, flea; wt, contraction of z-Z- 
itz, place of the house. 

8 Du, bird; rz, stream. 

9 Avra, thunder; x, house. 

10 Uri, ant-bear. 

11 Di, water ; u, house. 

12 Tkbi, serpent ; vz, stream. 

13 Kos, mountain-slope. 

MM Kipi, fruit of a wild creeper, 
eatable when boiled. 

13 Amu, agave, amuk, plantation of 
agaves. 

16 Tszru, cacao, ru, derived from 
eri, ripe. 

17 Sz, posts, d2, water, brook. 

18 Daui-bri must be the name of a 
brook. 

39 Amu, agave; amuk, plantation 
of agaves, 

2%” Alter, stone-field. 

21 Kurki, name of a place at the 
head-waters of the Uren; probably 
from yur, ant-tree (Cecropia sp.) 3 4&2, 
in, upon. 

22 Katsa, Spanish achzote ; ut, con- 
traction from x-t-zte, place of the 
house. 

23 Bobri, place at the head-waters 
of the Uren. Uak, people, tribe. 

XXI TOTEMISM AMONG INDIANS OF PANAMA 555 

the Guaymis traces of the totemic system, each tribe, each among the 
family, and each individual having a guardian animal, The @%™' 
commonest of these totemic animals appears to be the ore, Panama. 
a species of small parrot in honour of which I have heard 

a number of songs.” At certain times of the year the Rites of 
Guaymis observe rites of initiation for young men. These bee 
rites are called wrote and are kept very secret: M. Pinart men. 
could only collect vague information on the subject. It 
appears that the medicine-men or shamans (svkias) or their 
agents gather together by night, and in great secrecy, all 

the young men who have reached the age of puberty. 

The place of assembly is a secluded spot in the depth 

of the forest. There the ¢hungun, or master of the 
ceremonies, takes charge of the proceedings and teaches 

the young men the ancient traditions and the national 
songs; he exhorts them to be brave in war. So long 

as the rites (wrote) last, the master of the ceremonies and 

his assistants never shew themselves to the youths except 
painted and wearing on their faces large wooden masks 
surrounded with leaves. Their persons are absolutely 
sacred and they make a great mystery of the whole 
affair. The young men have to submit to certain severe 
ordeals. Such as pass through them without a murmur 

are deemed worthy of the title of warriors; those who 
flinch are despised as poltroons. The ceremonies last about 

a fortnight, and during their continuance there is no inter- 
course with the outer world. The women whose duty it 

is to wait on the celebrants and on the novices are called 
thungumza; they do their work naked, but with their bodies 
painted and their heads covered by masks, which are sur- 
rounded with leaves and from which long pendants of moss 

droop to their heels. The rites over, all disperse py night to 

their homes, and no questions are asked by others as to what 

they have been doing? After this ceremony of initiation a New 
Guaymi lad takes another name, which he chooses for 2Ssumea 
himself. It may be derived from his personal qualities or after 
from an animal, bird, etc, which he has chosen as his “tio 
guardian animal. The name may be afterwards changed. 

2 Alphonse Pinart, ‘‘Les Indiens ogrvaphie, vi. (Paris, 1887) p. 36. 
de PEtat de Panama,” Revue @Eth- 2 Alphonse Pinart, of. c¢f. pp. 40 59. 

556 TOTEMISM IN CENTRAL AMERICA CHAP, XXI 

The Guaymi, like most American Indians, has several 
names; but the one by which he is known to his relations 
and friends is never mentioned to a stranger ; for according 
to their notions a stranger who succeeded in learning a 
man’s name would thereby obtain a secret power over him.! 
Tt is un- From this somewhat vague and meagre account it is 
cccther the Hardly possible to decide whether the “guardian animals” 
Guaymi of which the writer speaks are the totems of clans or the 
nda guardian spirits of individuals. If we press his words, it 
are totems. would seem that the Guaymis have both these institutions, 
and so far their customs would agree with those of many 

tribes of North American Indians, 

1 Alphonse Pinart, ‘‘ Les Indiens de Etat de Panama,” Revue a’Ethno- 
graphie, vi. (Paris, 1887) pp. 43 59. 

CHAPTER XXII 
TOTEMISM AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTH AMERICA 

§ 1. Totemism among the Goajiros 

THE Goajiros are a South American tribe of Indians in- The_ 
habiting the Goajira peninsula in Colombia. The peninsula eras of 

is a land of bare arid volcanic hills and broad plains, where Colombia 
é P oe and their 

water is scarce and has to be procured mainly by digging wells country. 

in the dry beds of the wadies. Only the mountains at the 

seaward end of the peninsula catch the rain-clouds from the 

ocean and draw down the fertilising showers to water the 

gardens on their verdant slopes. The Goajiros form a single 

tribe, but little or nothing is known of their history. They 

have a tradition that they came from a great distance and they 

point out traces of villages‘which belonged to the former 

inhabitants, whom they assert to have been the Arhuacos 

of the Sierra Nevada. It is remarkable that the Goajiros 

should have been able to remain down to the present time 

free and independent, with their ancient manners and 

customs uncontaminated, though they inhabit a peninsula 

which ‘is accessible on all sides and lies on the highway of 

commerce. Till about the year 1882 their country was 

unexplored.” : 

1 ¥. A. A. Simons, ‘An Explora- 
tion of the Goajira Peninsula, U.S. 
of Colombia,” Proceedings of the Royal 
Geographical Society, New Series, vii. 
(1885) pp. 781-786. Mr. Simons, 
a Civil Engineer, was commissioned 
by the National Government of 
Colombia about 1882 to explore and 
report on the Goajira Peninsula. His 
article in the Proceedings of the Royal 

Geographical Society contains a sum- 
mary of his results. It remains our 
chief, indeed almost only, authority 
on the country and its inhabitants. 
Subsequent writers appear to have 
drawn much, if not all, of their 
information about the customs of these 
Indians either avowedly or tacitly 
from Mr. Simons’s report. See A. 
Ernst, ‘* Die ethnographische Stellung 

557 

Mr. F. A.A, 

Simons's 

account of Castes, bearing much analogy to the ancient ‘clans’ 

the Goajiro Scotland. Each caste or rather family circle is united 

totemic 
clans. 

The large 
Uriana 
clan, sub- 
divided 
into 
sections, 

which take such as Uriana ti 
their names 

from the 
tiger, 
rabbit, 

and lizard. formerly the wealthiest of the land. 

558 

TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA 

CHAP. 

The Goajiros “are subdivided into many families or 

of 

against all comers, taking up the quarrel of any one of 

its members to make it general. 

The Goajiros are strictly 

conservative and aristocratic in their ideas, wealth and 

interest are omnipotent. 

A poor man may be insulted 

with impunity, when the same to a rich man would cause 

certain bloodshed. 

They have no veritable rulers, but each 

community recognises the wealthiest of its members as the 
chief or corporal, as he has been dubbed by the Spaniards, 

and look to him for protection. 
cannot become wealthy and great. 

An Indian born poor, 
Whatever herds he 

may accumulate, his humble origin would never be for- 
gotten ; he could, however, marry into a high caste family, 
having the means, and his children could become, through 

their mother’s relations, great chiefs. 

Besides the name, 

each caste or family represents some animal, and many 
of the minor castes, over and above their own symbol, 
adopt another of some more powerful denomination, to enjoy 

the privilege of a good protector. 

There are at present, 

altogether, some thirty odd castes among the Goajiros. 
Of these I was able to discover the names of twenty-two. 
The remainder are insignificant, little known castes, chiefly 

inhabiting the hills. 

There are about ten of importance, 
chief among these the Urianas. 

This, the largest caste in the 

Goajira, has subdivided or split up into many ramifications, 

ger, Uriana rabbit, Uriana paularate (a 
song bird), Uriana gecko (lizard). 

This family-is at present 

not only by far the most numerous, but also the richest ; 
paularate, due to its connections by marriage with the Pushainas, 

to-day still 

der Guajiro-Indianer,” Verhandlungen 
der Berliner Gesellschaft fiir Anthro- 
pologie, Ethnologte und Urgeschichte 
4887 (Berlin, 1887), pp. (425) sgq. 
(appended to the Zeitschrift fiir Eth- 
nologieé, xix. 1887); W. Sievers, 
Retse in der Sierra Nevada de Santa 
Marta (Leipsic, 1887), pp. 243 sgg. 3 
H. Candelier, Rio-Hacha et les 

The Pushainas are 

great holders of ¢amas* and ornaments, but 

Indiens Goajires (Paris, 1893); 
Francis C. Nicholas, ‘* The Aborigines 
of the Province of Santa Marta, 
Colombia,” American Anthropologist, 
New Series, iii. (1901) pp. 645-649. 
This last account, though brief, seems 
to be quite independent. 

1A tuma is a piece of polished 
stone with a hole drilled through it. 

XXII TOTEMISM AMONG THE GOAJIRQS 559 

with the Indian, only cattle, mules, and horses are real 
estate. The Urianas on receiving the ¢wmas, sold out for 
cattle. The second in numbers are the Epieyues ; as a rule 
they are poor. Under their protection are the Secuanas, 
again under these the small caste of the Guorguoriyues.” 
With the exception of a few small local tribes, “the other The clans 
castes are distributed throughout the breadth and width ‘stributed 
of the land in the greatest confusion. Living as the country 
.Goajiro does, in continual strife and warfare, whole families ™ Set 
would speedily become poor or extinct, if they did not 
take the precaution to separate their wealth and herds, 
and only keep a few in one place at a time. Scarcity of 
water and pasture compels them to lead a nomadic life, 
and makes house-building out of the question, for they are 
eternally changing abode, now in the upper Goajira and 
then in the lower or plains. Some branches among the 
castes have, in spite of their roving propensities, predis- 
positions for certain spots. For example, the proud and 
wealthy Pushainas are chiefly found round and about 
Parashi and Ataipa. Urianas tiger frequent Taroa and 
Bahia Honda a great deal, while near Portete, Ipuanas 
and Epinayues abound.” ? 

The following is the list which Mr. Simons gives of List of 
the Goajiro castes or clans together with their animals Ae: 
and their favourite resting-places :—* 

Such stones (all carnelian, jasper, or 
other reddish varieties of silica) are 
found with gold ornaments in old 
graves, and the Goajiros value them 
above everything. See F. A. A. 
Simons, ‘‘An_ Exploration of the 
Goajira Peninsula, U.S. of Colombia,” 
Proceedings of the Royal Geographical 
Soctety, New Series, vii. (1885) pp. 
781 sq. 

1 F, A. A, Simons, of. cit. pp. 78659. 

2 FL A. A. Simons, of, zt. p. 796. 
A list of ten clans is given by H. 
Candelier (A10-Hacha et les Indiens 
Goajtres, pp. 247 sq.), but it seems 
to have no independent value. A 
Spanish writer of the eighteenth 
century, Father Alvarez Don Jose 
Nicolas de la Rosa, in his Florestia 

de la Santa Iglesia Catedral de la 
Ciudad de Santa Marta (written in 
1739 and published at Valencia in 
1833), mentions six castes of the 
Goajiros or Guagiros, as he calls 
them, namely, the castes of the Macaw, 
Turkey, a kind of Brush Hen, 
Monkey, Small Monkey, and Turkey 
Buzzard, of which the first was the 
highest and the last the lowest. The 
burial ceremonies, which consisted of 
crying, dancing, and eating, differed 
for each of the castes. See Francis 
C. Nicholas, ‘*The Aborigines of the 
Province of Santa Marta, Colombia,” 
American Anthropologist, iii. (1901) 
pp. 606, 634. I have not seen the 
Spanish work of Father de Ia Rosa 
to which Mr. Nicholas refers. 

TOTEMISM IN,SOUTH AMERICA. 

560 CHAP. 
SS ae eae ee eS 
Clans. Animals. Favourite Resting Places. 
Uriana Canahapur . Tiger About Taroa and Bahia 
Honda. 
re Arpana . Rabbit About Cuce and Mara- 
caybo coast. 
s3 Guinpirai . A singing bird Everywhere. 
$9 Hokoriu - Gecko (lizard) Only in the plains. 
Epieyu Guaruseche . Aspeciesofvulture| Bahia Honda, Puerto 
Estrella, and plains 
Pushaina . Puiche, . A species of small | Parashi, Ataipa,and plains. 
peccary 
Jpuana Musharé . A sort of hawk Portete Joroy, Ciapana,etc. 
Jayariu £r . Dog Macuira and plains. 
Jusayu Kastaurie . Rat-snake Teta, Hayare. 
Arpushaina Samur . Vulture Guincua and plains, Cohoro, 
Sapuana . Garina . Hen Plains, Guarero, 
» ‘ Carrai . . A species of stork ? 
Epinayu . Cyara . - A small buck Portete, Hayarure. 
Jirnu or Pieri Guarir . Fox Only in the Macuira valley, 
Secuana . oo {Species of vulture | Only in the Upper Goajira. 
Urariyu . Mara . . Rattlesnake Everywhere, 
Pausayu . Huche . . ? ? 
Sijuana Coord . . Wasp Upper Goajira only. 
Guaririn . Guarir . Fox Only in the hills of Macuira, 
eet Per. - Partridge Taroa and Upper Goajira, 
Arapainayu Anuwana . Species of vulture | Upper Goajira only. 
Samuriu , Hepepa - Owl 39 ” 
Arpusiata Tschu - Red cardinal bird a 5 
Ucharaiu. All Cocina (robber) Indians Cohoro hills only. 
Araurujuna A small almost unknown 

Guorguor or 

tribe in the hills of 
Macuira. 
Only in the hills of Upper 

Guorguoriyu. 

Caarises aa Species of vulture 

Goajira. - 

Each of these castes or clans is responsible for the acts 
of any of its members. “Of course, like all Indians, they 

Compensa- 
tion for 
injuries 

clsied’ « “are singularly proficient in begging, stealing, and drinking, 
py te 4) but besidés these capital vices they add a fourth, that is 
uncle, 

demanding compensation, tear- or blood-money—principal 
cause of all the strife and blood feuds between the castes, 
and an everlasting danger to Indians and strangers alike. 
. . . The laws that govern these compensation cases are very 
intricate, their number is legion. First is the terrible law of 
retribution, that makes a whole caste responsible for the acts 
of any single member. . . . It must be borne in mind that it 

XXII TOTEMISM AMONG THE GOAJIROS 561 

is not the injured individual that demands compensation, 

but his relations, uncles on the mother’s side as a rule. 

From this has arisen the common error that the father is 
ignored ; as will be seen further on, this is not the case. In The clan is 
compensation it is the caste that reclaims, and the caste is eee 
always the mother’s side. For example, a Pushaina man maternal 
marries an Uriana girl; the children are Urianas. If one '™* 

of these now should kill an Epieyu, for example, the whole 

caste of Uriana is at war with all the Epieyues, unless the 

matter is amicably settled by paying blood-money.”? 

The statement that “the caste is always the mother’s apparently 
side” appears to imply that husband and wife are always of seed mans 
different castes or clans, and that children always belong to exogamous. 
their mother’s clan ; in other words, we seem to be justified 
in inferring that the Goajiro clans are exogamous with 
descent in the female line? 

The Goajiros are polygamous. A man may have as The 
many wives as he can maintain, and the more he has, the sate 
greater is his social importance. “The Indian girls are gamous; 
sold to their husbands, but their parents have nothing to say ead 
in the matter, the maternal uncles having full authority from their 
which the girl must recognize. The marriage ceremony tice not 
consists of a series of fastings and exchanges of presents aie oo 
between the family of the bride and her husband; every , 
present must be returned with another of equal value: and 
as the endowment must first be provided, it is for them a 
matter of some expense to be married. This endowment 
must be sufficient to maintain the wife in the position in 
which she was born, and as no Goajira will marry beneath 
his position, many of the men must remain without wives, 
though the greater number of them usually manage to 

obtain one, and polygamy is not so frequent among,them as 

1 ¥F. A. A. Simons, ‘An Explora- 
tion of the Goajira Peninsula, U.S. 
of Colombia,” Proceedings of the Royal 

und Urgeschichte, 1887, p.» 442). I 
do not know what his authority for 
this statement is, His information as 

Geographical Society, New Series, vii. 
(1885) PP 789 sg. 

? Mr. A. Ernst says that ‘only in 
rare cases do marriages take place 
between members of different families ” 
(Verhandlungen deo Berliner Gesell- 
schaft fiir Anthropologie, Ethnologie 

VOL, III 

to the Goajiro families, castes, or clans 
appears to be drawn wholly from Mr. 
Simons’s report, to which he refers ; 
and in that report the statement in 
question, so far as I see, is not made, 
indeed it is implicitly contradicted. 

, 

20 

Payment 
for wives 
is usually 
made in 
cattle. 

True 
relation- 
ship only 
on the 
maternal 
side. 

The 
Levirate. 

TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP. 

562 

one might expect. After the, purchase of the bride has 
been negotiated with her maternal uncles, who fix the value 
of her social position, they are supposed to take charge of 
whatever is received, payment being usually made in cattle. 
Among the ruling classes a small herd is required, but with 
the poor people five goats are regarded as sufficient. The 
uncles, on receiving the property, take careful account of it 
and put the animals out on the range for pasture; there 
they are maintained and allowed to increase.”! Similarly, 
another writer observes that “according to the Goajiro law 
true relationship exists only on the maternal side, the side 
of blood: hence the son or daughter, for example, forms 
part of his mother’s caste and not of his father’s. With 
regard to marriage, the father cannot dispose of his daughter ; 

that right belongs to the mother’s brothers, the maternal 

uncles; they are considered by the Goajiro law as the 
proper natural protectots, the true fathers of the child. It 
is they who accept or refuse a proposal of marriage for their 
niece, who fix the amount of her price or, if you please, of 
her dowry: in case the proposal is accepted, they are the 
receivers, the depositaries of this dowry. Similarly, the 
young Indian woman does not inherit from her father, but 
from her maternal uncles and from her mother.” ? 

The Goajiros observe the law of the levirate. Ona man’s 
death his widow goes to his brother, usually his youngest 
brother. If he has no brothers, his nephew inherits her.* 

1 Francis C. Nicholas, ‘‘ The Abor- 
igines of the Province of Santa Marta, 

the other hand Mr. Simons writes : 
“* Matrimony is a mere case of barter. 

Colombia,” American Anthropologist, 
New Series, iii. (1901) pp. 647 5g. 

2 H. Candelier, Rzo-Hacha et les 
Indiens Goajires (Paris, 1893), pp. 207 
sg. Similarly the Spanish writer Don 
José Nicolas de la Rosa observes : 
‘*Among the Indians it is not the 
child of the father who inherits; the 
property goes to the maternal nephews, 
the Indian saying, ‘They are more 
nearly of my blood.’ The sons of the 
sisters not only inherit the property 
of their uncle, but also his wives.” 
See F. C. Nicholas, ‘*The Aborigines 
of the Province of Santa Marta, 
Colombia,” American Anthropologist, 
New Series, iii. (1901) p. 633. On 

The girl is sold for a certain price, 
fixed by the father. This is paid by 
the intended husband, and divided by 
the father, who appropriates the best 
part for himself and his relations, the 
rest going to the wife’s relations. As 
it is chiefly in cattle, these are killed 
and a kind of bridal festival held ” 
(Proceedings of the Royal Geographical 
Society, New Series, vii. (1885) p. 
792). 

3 F. A.,A. Simons, ‘* An Explora- 
tion of the Goajira Peninsula,” /ro- 
ceedings of the Royal Geographical 
Society, New Series, vii. (1885) 
p- 792. 

XXII TOTEMISM AMONG THE GOAJIROS 563 

The law of blood-revenge is pushed by the Goajiros to The law 
a curious extreme. Not only is a whole caste or clan iba 
responsible for a murder committed by any one of its pushed 
members, but if a man accidentally wounds himself, he is ete - 
bound to compensate his mother’s clan for the injury he has extremes. 
done them by shedding their blood. “If an Indian,” we ing 
are told, “ accidentally cuts himself, say with his own knife, himself, 
breaks a limb, or otherwise does himself an injury, his family pea 
on the mother’s side immediately demands blood-money. iret 
Being of their blood, he is not allowed to spill it without cian. 
paying for it. The father’s relations demand tear-money, 
not so much. Friends present demand compensation to 
repay their sorrow at seeing a friend in pain. If anybody 
present can seize the instrument that caused the accident it 
is appropriated. The pay is in ratio to the injury. A 
slightly cut finger is settled with a little Indian corn, a kid, 
or such trifle. A bad cut requires at least a goat or a 
sheep, with other sundries. In all cases of compensation 
when the Indian has not the wherewith to satisfy his 
creditors, he goes round begging until it is obtained.” ? 

The law of blood-revenge is the source of much hostility Blood- 
between the various clans ; they are frequently at war with voveeor 
each other, and the hatred thus aroused is very bitter, war. 
Feuds are carried out to the extermination of the foe, and 
life is but little valued in the Goajiro country. It is 
estimated that a quarter of the male population perishes 
through the law of blood-revenge.” 

With regard to the relation which exists between a Nothing 
Goajiro clan and the animal which it is said to represent, Sea tks 
we have no exact information ; but as the clans appear to relation 
be exogamous with descent in the female line, we may fairly og 
conjecture that the relation between a clan and its animal is and their 
totemic. If that is so, the Goajiros have a totemic system of “™* 

the normal pattern. 

1 F. A. A. Simons, ‘An Explora- 
tion of the Goajira Peninsula,” Pro- 
ceedings of the Royal Geographical 
Society, New Series, vii. (1885) 
p- 790. 

2 F, A. A. Simons, of. cét. p. 789; 
F.C. Nicholas, ‘* Aborigines of Santa 
Marta, Colombia,” 4merican Anthro- 
Dologist, New Series, iii. (1901) 
p. 647. 

564 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP. 

§ 2. Totemism among the Arawaks of British Guiana 

The Unlike the warlike Goajiros who are a nomadic cattle- 
Arawak rearing people roaming over an open arid country, the 
Guiana. Arawaks of British Guiana live in permanent houses or 
ee villages built in clearings of the dense tropical woods and 
they subsist to a great extent by agriculture. All round 
such a clearing rise like a wall the giants of the forest. 
Irregularly + planted cassava, sugar-cane, pine - apples, and 
other plants which the Indian cultivates grow intermingled 
with wild seedlings and shoots from the stumps of the trees 
which once stood there ; and the whole is matted together 
by thickly-growing yam-vines, by razor-grass, with its stems 
and leaves edged like knives, and by passion-flowers with 
their great purple, crimson, and white blossoms. Charred 
trunks of felled trees lie in all directions amongst this dense 
mass of rankly luxuriant vegetation. A narrow, much- 
trodden path leads from the house through the clearing 
into the forest and through it down to the nearest water. 
Their So sheltered are the huts by the surrounding woods that 
houses. they are built without walls; a roof thatched with palm- 
leaves and supported on posts suffices, though on the long 
sides the thatch nearly reaches to the ground. Sometimes 
a partition of palm-leaves or bark ensures a certain degree 
of privacy. Many of these houses are clean and well cared 
for; and floored as they are with glittering white sand and 
bordered by coffee and cashew trees, among which the 
beautiful crimson lilies (Wzppeastrum equestre) cluster thickly, 
they are pleasant places in which to while away the sultry 
Their agri- hours of the tropical day.’ The staple vegetable food of 
canes these Indjans is cassava-bread. To iprepare their fields the 
cultivation. men fell the trees, cut down the underwood, and set fire to 
the whole fallen mass. In the clearings thus produced the 
women plant the cassava, and it is they who dig up the 
roots and grate them into the pulp of which the bread is. 
baekd. After three or four crops have been taken from a 
field, it is deserted and a new clearing made in the forest. 

1 Everard F. im Thurn, Among the Indians of Guiana (London, 1883),. 
PP. 202-204, 250 sgq. 

XXH TOTEMISM AMONG THE ARAWAKS 565 

“The reason of this periodical desertion of the old, and 
clearing of new ground is uncertain,” says Sir Everard F. 
im Thurn, “but it is perhaps connected with some super- 
stition.”+ Yet the partial exhaustion of the soil under this 
rude systein of tillage may be a sufficient motive for shifting 
the patches of cultivation. While the women till the fields, 
the men hunt and fish ; for the Indians of Guiana subsist 
in about equal measure on the products of agriculture and 
of the chase.” 

The Arawaks are divided into a large number of The 
exogamous clans with descent in the female line; and as esa reh 4 
most of the names of the clans appear to be drawn from the into 
animals or plants of the country, we may reasonably infer [r0b*™0"s 
that they are totemic, and hence that the Arawaks, like the apparently 
Goajiros, either have or had a totemic system of the ordinary jem"... 
type. The existence of exogamous clans among _ the descent in 
Arawaks was first detected by an English surveyor of ek 
Demerara, Mr. William Hilhouse, in the early part of the 
nineteenth century. He published the names of twenty- 
seven clans or families, as he called them, and he observed 
in regard to them that “the cast (séc) of blood is derived 
from the mother, and the family genealogy is preserved with 
the greatest care, as a preservative from incestuous inter- 
course—one family not being allowed to intermarry within 
itself. The children of a Maratakayu father cannot, therefore 
be Maratakayu; but if the mother be Queyurunto, the 
children are also Queyurunto, and can marry into the father’s 
family, but not the mother’s. 

“ Marriages are frequently contracted by the parents for Marriage 
their children when infants. In this case the young man is Ser" 
bound to assist the family of his wife till she arrives at Arawaks. 
puberty ; he then takes her where he pleases, and establishes 
his own household. But young men and women who are 
free, at a more advanced age consult their inclinations 
without any ceremony beyond the mere permission of the 
parent, which is never withheld but on account of family 
feuds. Polygamy is allowed and practised by all those 

1 Everard F. im Thurn, Among the 2 E. F. im Thum, of. cf. pp. 227 
Indians of Gutana, pp. 250-253, 59g. 
260-264. 

566 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA cHapP. 

who have the means of maintenance for a plurality of wives. 
This is generally the case with the chiefs or captains, who 
have sometimes three or four wives.” ? 

Sir E. F. Subsequent enquiries have enlarged the number of 
in Poun's Arawak clans to nearly fifty, and it is thought to be certain 
Arawak that there are still others to be recorded. Ai full list of the 

plans: names, so far as they are known, has been published by 

Sir Everard F. im Thurn, who received them from “ Mr. 
McClintock, 4 man well known in Guiana, who has lived 
longer among the Arawaks, and has mixed more freely with 
them than any other European.” The following is the full list 
of the names of the clans, together with the most probable 
explanations of these names, so far as Sir Everard F.im Thurn 

was able, after careful enquiries, to ascertain them :—® 

Names of Clans. 

1. Karuafona . : . 
2. Onishena . . . 
3. Kotarno . . : 
4. Urahkana . 

5. Hairena 

Meanings of Names, 

“From the grassy land.” 

‘*From the rain or water.” 

*¢ From the deer.” 

‘¢ From the oxvali or bloodwood tree.” 

‘¢ From the wild plantain tree.” The plant usually 

known under this name is the very striking 
Ravenala guianensis, but the same name is also 
applied to several species of He/zronia, 

1 ¢¢ Notices of the Indians settled in 
the Interior of Britisn Guiana,” by 
William Hilhouse, Esq., Surveyor, 
Demerara, communicated by Captain 
J. E. Alexander, Journal of the Royal 
Geographical Society, ti. (1832) p. 228. 
In a note (p. 227) it is said that “ Mr. 
Hilhouse’s book was published in 
1825, but iS very little known,” and 
that his statements were ‘founded an 
a very intimate acquaintance with the 
people he d&cribes.” The names of 
the families or clans recorded by Mr. 
Hilhouse (of. czt. p. 228) are these :— 
1. Maratakayu; 2. Queyurunto; 3. 
Wooneseedo ; 4. Demaridy ; 5. Coro- 
bahady ; 6. Wurallikaddy; 7. Ebesu- 
ana; 8. Dacamocaddy; 9. Aramu- 
kunyu: 10. Baboana; 11. Kanahea, 
Mackoveyu; 12. Daharabetady; 13. 
Carabunury ; 14. Nebebeetaddy; 15. 
Seewedey; 16. Jorobalina; 17. Hadua- 
dafunha; 18. Boerybetady ; 19. Carua- 

‘ fuddy ; 20. Bakurucaddy ; 21. Eubo- 

quaddy; 22. Wakuyaddy; 23. Ehbeh- 

selio; 24. Wareerobaquady ; 25. 
Aramkritu; 26. Kariwheete; 27. 
Eubotaddy. The names of the clans 

are repeated, after Hilhouse, by Sir 
Robert Schomburgk (ezsenén Britisch- 
Guiana (Leipsic, 1847-1848), ii. 459), 
who tells us that Hilhouse lived long 
among the Arawaks and married an 
Arawak wife. Compare Rev. W. H. 
Brett, Zhe Jndian Tribes of Guiana 
(London, 186), p. 98. 

2 Everard F. im Thurn, Among the 
Indians of Guiana (London, 1883), 
pp. 176-183. In these names the final 
syllable 2a is a collective termination 
and has nothing to do with the root. 
The masculine termination is de and 
the feminine do. For example, a man 
of the Aaruafona clan is Karuafodie 
and a woman is Aaruafodo. 

XXII 

TOTEMISM AMONG THE ARAWAKS 567 

Names of Clans. 

Meanings of Names. 

6. Yobotana . . _ 

7. Haiawdfona : ; 

8. Demarena . 7 i 

9. Wakuyana . zs . 

10. Kamikathimikina or 
Akamikina 

11. Dakamokana . 

12. Afadayalena, also given 
as Moukina 

13. Hekerowana ; 

14. Awarakana, 

15. Aaiokana 

16. Ematana . 

17. Hbesowana . A . 

18, Babowna 

19. Eeyztcono 

‘© From the black monkey.” The species referred 
to is thought to be Ateles beelzebub. 

‘From the hyawa tree” (Icica heptaphylla), The 
tree produces an abundant and very sweet 
scented resin, which is much used by the Indians 
for the rapid kindling of fire, making torches, 
and perfuming the oils with which they anoint 
their bodies. 

This name is variously interpreted. Some say 
that it means ‘‘from the water mama” pr 
rather ‘‘from certain spirits” dwelling usually 
underground. The water mama is a spirit 
supposed to live under the water of rivers, 
The name is often used for supernatural beings 
in general. This family is said to intermarry 
with the Aa@robahana (No. 25) in accordance 
with an old legend. 

The family sprung ‘from the redbreast bird” 
(Lezstes americana), which is called wakuya in 
Arawak. This bird is one of the commonest 
and most striking in the coast region of Guiana, 
to which the Arawaks are confined. 

The transcription of the name is believed to be 
erroneous. There is no satisfactory interpreta- 
tion of it. 

‘*From the dakama tree.” This tree bears a 
nut like souari (Pekea tuberculosa), the kernel of 
which is grated and baked with cassava meal 
when cassava is scarce. 

The family coming ‘‘ from a treeless place,” 
perhaps ‘‘ from a savannah.” - 

‘* From a tortoise.” Hekorte is the Arawak name 
of the tortoise. 

“From the awara palm” (Astrocaryum tucu- 
motdes). This is a very common palm near 
Indian settlements on the coast. The fruit is 
much relished, and oil is extracted from it. 
The young leaves are used as fans for blowing 
up the fire. . 

‘‘From a rat.” The word azo is the Arawak 
name for a species of rat. 

Meaning unknown. 9 

“The changed or transformed.” The word 
ebesoa means ‘*to change.” The members of 
the family derive the name from a tradition 
that an ancestress of theirs was changed or 
magically transformed. Caterpillars are ebesoa 
or transformed into butterflies. 

So called from a tree which produces a milk-like 
juice used medicinally to dress ulcers. 

Apparently, ‘the newly come family,” from 
ceyato, “raw,” ** fresh.” 

20. 

2i. 

Names of Clans. 
moe a a 
e 
LEbesoleno . F : 
Warerokana 

22. 
23. 

24. 

25. 
26. 

27. 

28, 

29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33- 

34. 

35 

TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA 

CHAP, 

Partana « 
Yabieno, or 

perhaps 
Sabieno J 

Kabolifona . 

Karobahana 

Maratakayona 

Miekariona : 

Barakana (or Baraka- 
tana ?) 

Tahatahabetano (or Ta- 
tabetano ?) 

Turubalena (or Turu- 
balolu) 

Aramokena {or Aramo- 
Réyu, plural) 

Kamonena . : 
Dahati-betana 

Kaboribetana . 

Mibibitana . 

. Bakuriekana ‘ ‘ 

Vabokaguana 2 

. Atiyokana (or perhaps 

Antiyokana) 

Meanings of Names. 

Interpreted by several as ‘the changed”; by one 
as ‘‘ faithful, truthful, or heedful family.” 

“From a wild plantain.” This wild plantain 
appears to differ from the one mentioned above 
(No. 5), and to be a species of Heliconia, 

“ From a kind of bee.” 

‘They family sprung from the mocking-bird ” 
(Casszcus persicus). Here again the bird 
chosen as name-father is one of the most 
prominent in the district. 

‘* From the wild thorn tree” (according to Mr, 
Brett). ‘‘ From the white winged ant ” (accord- 
ing to Mr. McClintock). 

**Related to the Cortaki parrot.” This clan 
intermarried with the Demarena (No. 8). 

Sprung ‘‘ from a (small) bee.” 

No derivation suggested. 

“ From an armadillo.” Barkata is the Arawak 
name for one species of armadillo, but which 
species is meant is unknown. 

The family sprung ‘ from a hawk.” (?) 

‘From the cur palm” (Aenocarpus baccaba), ‘the 
seed of which being dark, répresents persons of 
dark complexion.” 

‘From the avara tree.” 

' 

Derivation not suggested. 

Sprung ‘‘from the pepper plant.” The red 
pepper, or capsicum, is grown and used in very 
great quantities by the Indians. 

Said to mean ‘*sprung from the 4adori tree.” 
What tree that may be is not known. Another 
interpretation is ‘‘ from the wild yam,” the 
fruit of which is much used by the Indians as 
bait for fish, The weight of evidence is in 
favour of this latter interpretation. A less 
probable derivation is from a kind of fish, 
species unknown. 

«From the bush rope called m16z” (Carludovica), 
This rope is much used by the Indians in making 
their rough baskets, and in binding together 
the various parts of which their houses are 
built. 

“From another, smaller kind of bush rope.” 
According to a less probable derivation, the 
name is connected with dakarze, ‘‘ mother-in- 
law.” 

“The deformed family.” 

Afamily sprung ‘from the wild cherry tree.” 
This tree is not uncommon in the forest. Its 
fruit resembles a cherry in shape and colour and 
is much relished by the Indians. 

XXII TOTEMISM AMONG THE ARAWAKS 569 

Names of Clans. Meanings of Names. 
Py 
39. Arase ‘ . | Perhaps Haraschino from harasche, *‘‘ without 
hair.” The form of the word is abnormal. : 
40. Seana . . , . | Said to mean sprung ‘‘from a bee,” namely from 

another of the numerous species of bees. Com- 
pare Nos. 22, 26. 

41. Seima ; . . | This family is said to be of no antiquity and its 
name gp refer to an admixture of Spanish 
blood. 

42. Sewenana . ‘ . | A family sprung ‘from the razor-grinder,” an 

insect remarkable for the extraordinarily loud 
sound with which it makes the forest resound. 
43. Yateyo sr % . | The form of this word is quite abnormal. My. 
McClintock says that it means “the offspring of 
a cannibal.” 
Waruwakana . . - | **From the warxwaka, or wild liquorice tree.” 
The tree is Cassia grandis. It grows to a 
large size, and is one of the most beautiful trees 
in Guiana. When it is in bloom, every bough 
is covered with masses of small delicate pink 
flowers. 
Kortkurena . . | Said to be connected with 4ortkurd or, more 
. probably, karukuri, ‘* gold.” 
Tetebetana . . . | A family sprung ‘from a kind of night-jar” or 
. goatsucker. There are several species of this 
bird in Guiana, and all of them are more or 
less remarkable for the extraordinary cries with 
which they make night hideous, 
Arubunoona (or Haru- | “From the velvet-leaf plant.” This plant is 
bunoona) common about Indian houses. Another 
authority says that the name refers to some 
mixture of Ackawoi blood with the true 
Arawak. 

44 

45 

46 

47 

— 

The authorities consulted by Sir Everard F. im Thurn Many of 

: : . th 
with reference to the names of the clans agreed in saying meray - 

that many of the names are derived from expressions now from 
bsol d th hi . f th h obsolete 
obsolete, and that the meanings of the rest were even then expressions, 

known only to a very few aged persons.’ 

As to the names of the clans and the traditionary The names 
explanations of them Sir Everard F. im Thurn observes : ine 
“The fact chiefly evident is that the names are generally generally 
those of animals or plants common in Guiana. Two Rames of 

traditionary explanations of the origin of the names are pate 
given by the Arawaks themselves, one simple and the other pianations 

marvellous. Some say that when the Arawak families in of the 

Everard F. im Thurn, dmong the Indians of Guiana, p. 183. 

570 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP. 

names are Guiana were increasing in number, at a meeting of the heads 

any of these families, each arbitrarily chose a distinctive family 
Arawaks name. One chief, specially mentioned, chose the name of 
say that the tree called avara (see No. 31), the leaves of which 

eae happened to be on the ground on which he sat; another 
eponymous Chose the name of another which grew behind him; a third 
animal, chose the name of a bird which happened to be heard at the 
bird, or ‘ : 
plant. moment ; and qa fourth that of an insect which was at the 
moment in sight. Most Arawaks, however, emphatically 
deny this account, and assert that each family is descended 
—their fathers knew how, but they themselves have forgotten 
—from its eponymous animal, bird, or plant. It is a matter 
of much regret that I have been unable to find examples of 
these legends of descent. In the present state of knowledge, 
all that can be observed is, the names are evidently almost 
invariably derived from natural objects, animal or vegetable, 
and that almost as invariably these eponymous objects are 
such as are in some way very prominent in Indian life.” ? 
‘This is Of these two competing explanations of the clan names, 
eee there can be no reasonable doubt that the tradition of 
explana- descent from the animals and plants, which is emphatically 
eee maintained by most of the Arawaks, 'is the more ancient ; 
and that the other, which derives the names from the 
arbitrary choice of ancestors, is a later attempt to rationalise 
the old mystic relation between the clanspeople and their 
eponymous animals or plants. A belief in the descent of 
an exogamous totemic clan from its eponymous animal or 
plant is so common as to make it in the highest degree 
probable that the exogamous clans of the Arawaks, named 
after animals or plants from which most of the Indians them- 
selves stoutly claim to be descended, are in the full and 
strict sense of the word totemic. 
Rules of The rules of marriage and descent in the Arawak clans, 
arta or, as he calls them, families, are stated by Sir Everard F. 
descent im Thurn as follows :—“ Each family is, or was, kept distinct 
Se by the fact that the descent is solely and rigidly in the 
female line, and that no intermarriage with relations on the 
mother’s side is permitted among these Indians. The first 
of these regulations, the descent in the female line, is doubt- 

1 Everard F. im Thurn, Among the Indians of Guiana, pp. 184 sg. 

XXII TOTEMISM AMONG THE ARAWAKS 571 

less founded on the fact that, while there can be no doubt as Descent is 
to the mother of a child, there may be considerable doubt as ene 

to the father. The fundamental idea of the second regula- female 
tion, which forbids the intermarriage of those related on the ee 
mother’s side, is not so apparent. According to it, a child with 
may marry a husband or wife, as the case may be, of its pasa 
father’s family, or of any other family but that of its mother, ta 
If the said child is a man, the offspring of his marriage forbidden. 
belong to his wife’s family, and bear her name; if it be a 
woman, the offspring of her marriage belong to her family, 

and consequently to her mother’s. It is evident that the 

two regulations, taken together, ensure the purity of descent 

in each family. Quite in accordance with this system of A man 
retaining the descent in the female line is the fact . . . that 83 eve 
an Indian, when he marries, goes to live in the house of his father-in- 
father-in-law, and works for him; he becomes, in fact, a” 
part of his wife’s family.”’ To put it in other words, the 
Arawak clans are exogamous with descent in the femule 

line ; no man may marry a woman of his own clan, but he 

may marry a woman of any other, and the children always 
belong to her clan, not to his. In short the Arawaks have, 

to all appearance, or had till lately, a totemic system of the 

regular pattern. 

§ 3. Traces of Totemtsm among other Tribes of South 
America 

Of all the many Indian tribes of South America the Apart from 
Goajiros and the Arawaks are the only two of whom it can eee 
be affirmed with a degree of probability approaching to Arawaks, 
certainty that they have a system of totemism and exogamy. ae ‘ 
Over the other Indian tribes, who inhabit the dense tropical evidence of 
forests, the great open savannahs, and the lofty tablelands ede 
of that beautiful and wonderful continent, the supine Indian 
indifference of Spaniards and Portuguese in modern times ities 
has spread a thick veil of ignorance, which has been rent America, 
only here and there by travellers or settlers of other races ; 
and through the rifts we can catch a few glimpses of some- 
thing that looks more or Jess like totemism. In this last 

1 Everard F, im Thurn, Among the Indians of Guiana, pp. 185 sq. 

572 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP. 

section of my survey I propose to collect the scanty indica- 
tions of this sort that I have met with, hoping that they 
may yet stimulate others to make enquiries before it is too 
late. For we may conjecture, though we cannot prove, that 
totemism and exogamy exist, or have existed, among many 
tribes of South America where their existence has not yet 
been recorded. 

Indication In the first place, we are told that the Bush Negroes of 
pA Surinam, or Dutch Guiana, worship certain animals; one 
Bush family respects the red ape, another the tortoise, another the 
aeeroes Of crocodile, and so forth This points to a system of totemism. 
The Bush Negroes are communities of negroes living in the 
forests of Dutch Guiana; they are the descendants of slaves 
who escaped from their Dutch masters before 1712, and were 
reinforced in that year by others. In 1762 these communities 
concluded a treaty of peace with the Dutch.? They may 
have either brought totemism with them from Africa or 
borrowed it from a neighbouring Indian tribe. 
The Salivas Amongst the Salivas of the Orinocd one tribe claimed to 
ae be descended from the earth, others from trees, and others 
The from the sun.2 The Piaroas, an Indian tribe on the right 

Piaroas bank of the Orinoco, “admit the doctrine of metempsychosis, 
tN Thus, the tapir is their grandfather. The soul of the dying 
man transmigrates into the body of the beast. Hence they 
will never hunt the animal nor eat of its flesh,“ any more 
than of the jaguar, of which they stand in great fear. 
Though a tapir should pass and repass through their fields 
and ravage their crop, they will not even attempt to turn it 
aside or frightef’ it, they will rather abandon the place 
and go and settle elsewhere. With respect to the other 
animals, they are affiliated to different tribes. Certain spirits 
Ceremonies animate thg plants and direct the beasts. At the time of 
es for the migrations of the peccaries and of certain fish, the Indians 
enchanting don their ornaments of feathers, teeth, and fish-bones, and 
notes assemble for a nocturnal liturgy, in which they enchant the 

me ee game they are about to hunt or the fish they are about to 
are about 

to hunt. 1 J.Crevaux, Vovagesdans? Amérique this work, but do not know from what 
du sud (Paris, 1883), p. 59. periodical it is extracted. 
2 See A, M. Coster, ‘* De Bosch- 3 J. Gumilla, Aésto’re naturelle, 

negers in de Kolonie Suriname,” p.6 civile et gtographique de TOrdnoque 
(separate reprint). I possess a copyof (Avignon, 1758), i. 174-178. 

xxl TRACES OF TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER TRIBES 573 

catch. On the eve of the day fixed for the expedition, at 

sunset, the comrades assemble round the hut of the most 

expert huntsman. The chief thunders out a chant in 

honour of the animal, the object of their desire, recites its 
history, and extols its virtues; then addressing himself to 

his friends, he chants the place of meeting, the attack and 

the victory, winding up with a boastful account of his own 
exploits and those of his predecessors. The principal objects 

of these litanies are the ‘peccary, a small boar which only 

goes in herds’; the palometa and the morocoto, two delicious 

and delicate fishes, which are dried and preserved ; and the 

cartbe, another fish which they fry and make into a nutritious 
powder. He also sings to the manioc, the maize, and the Incanta. 
banana called g/atano, which is dried in order to be kept.” ? Hons of the 
In this account the affiliation of certain tribes to certain maize, and 
animals, together with the belief in the transmigration of °**"™ 
human souls into the bodies of beasts, are at least hints of 
totemism. 

Some of the Indian tribes of Brazil are named after 
animals, plants, or other objects, and the nomenclature may 
perhaps be an indication of totemism. Thus among the Tribes of 
Indians of the trackless forests on the Uaupés River, one of yea 
the tributaries of the Rio Negro in north-west Brazil, we find named after 
tribes named as follows :—Ananas, “ Pine-apples” ; Piraiuru, ssa anie 
“Fish’s mouth”; Pzsa, “Net”; Carapana, “Mosquito” ; 

Tapiiva, “Tapir” ; Uaracu, a fish; Tucundera, “an Ant”; 
Jacamt, “Trumpeter”; Mzrcte, “ Mauritia Palm”; Zazassu, 
“Pig Indians” ; Zzjuco,““ Mud Indians” ; Arapasso, “ Wood- 
peckers” ; Zucanos,“ Toucans” ; Uacarras,“ Herons”; Prva, 
“Fish”; Jpecas, “Ducks”; Gz, “Axe”; Coua, “Wasp”; 
Corocoro, “Green Ibis”; Zatus, “ Armadillos” ; Zendmbuca, 
“ Ashes”; and Mucura, “Opossum.”? All these tribes are 
settled and agricultural: they cultivate manioc, sugar-cane, 
sweet potatoes, maize, plantains, bananas, pine-apples, and so 
forth; and they live in large well-built communal houses, 
which lodge many families or even a whole tribe? “The 

1 J. Chaffanjon, L’Orénogue et le Negro (London, 1889), pp. 334 59- 
Caura (Paris, 1889), pp. 203 59. (Minerva Library), 

2A. R. Wallace, Narrative of 3 A, R. Wallace, of. cet. pp- 336, 
Travels on the Amazon and Rio 341. 

Their 
marriage 
customs. 

Secret 
Society 
of the 

Jurupart : 

its sacred 
flutes or 
trumpets. 

TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP, 

574 

men generally have but one wife, but there is no special 
limit, and many have .two or three, and some of the 
chiefs more; the elder one is never turned away, but 
remains the mistress of the house. They have no particular 
ceremony at their marriages, except that of always carrying 
away the girl by force, or making a show of doing so, even 
when she and her parents are quite willing. They do not 
often marry with relations, or even neighbours,—preferring 
those from a distance, or even from other tribes.”! These 
customs afford an indication of exogamy. If that is 
so, and if the names of the tribes are based on a -mystic 
relation between the people and the animals or plants 
after which they are named, we might conclude that the 
tribes of the Uaupés River have a full system of 
totemism and exogamy. But the evidence is too slender 
to support this conclusion. The men of these tribes 
appear to have a secret society, the mysteries of which 
are concerned with a certain evil spirit called /urugtari, who 
is the cause of thunder, of eclipses of the moon, and of deaths 
which we should call natural. At their festivals they play 
on certain flutes or trumpets, either eight or twelve in 
number, each pair of which gives out a distinct note pro- 
ducing a concert like that of clarionets and bassoons. This 
they call the /urupari music. These instruments are sur- 
rounded with mystery ; no woman may see them under pain 
of death. They are always kept at a distance from the 
village ; and when they are heard approaching for a festival, 
every woman retires into hiding till the ceremony is over. 
It would be as much as her life is worth to have seen, or 
even to be suspected of having seen, the sacred trumpets. 
For such a sacrilege a father will not hesitate to sacrifice his 
daughter nor a husband his wife.? 

1A. R. Wallace, Narrative of (Paris, 1887) p. 176. 
Travels on the Amazon and Rio 2A. R. Wallace, Marrative of 

Negro (London, 1889), p. 346. A Travels on the Amason and Rio 

more recent authority on the Uaupés 
Indians says of them: ‘‘ Exogamy is 
the general practice. A wife is taken 
from a neighbouring tribe, but without 
capture or pretence ofcapture. Gener- 
ally, the Indian of the Uaupés is 
monogamous.” See Henri A. Cou- 
dreau, La France éguinoxtiale, ii. 

Negro (London, 1889), pp. 348 sg. 
For details of the religion of /urzpari, 
the festivals, and the sacred trumpets 
or flutes, see Henri A. Coudreau, Za 
France équinoxiale, ii. (Paris, 1887), 
pp. '181 sgg. M. Coudreau is of 
opinion that this religion contains 
numerous reminiscences of Christian 

xx TRACES OF TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER TRIBES 575 

Again, among the Indians on the Isanna River there Tribes of 
are tribes called Manzvas, “Manioc”; Ciugi, “ Stars” eeragaiad 
Coatt, the Nasua coatimundi ; Jurupari, “Devils” ; and [peca, 
“Ducks.” -Unlike the Uaupés tribes these Indians of the 
Isanna River do not live in large communal houses ; each 
family has a separate house; and far from exhibiting a 
tendency to exogamy, “they marry one, two, or three wives, Marriages 
and prefer relations, marrying with cousins, uncles with nieces, “2D 
and nephews with aunts, so that in a village all are con- among the 

nected.” In this preference for marriage with blood relations aoa aes 
the Indians of the Isanna agree with other Indian tribes of 

South America, especially of Brazil. Thus with regard to 

the Indians of south-eastern Brazil, in the neighbourhood of 

what is now Rio de Janeiro, we learn from an early 
French settler that, while sons did not have intercourse with 

their mothers nor brothers with their sisters, “every other 
degree of relationship is there confounded, the uncle 
marrying his niece and the male cousin his female cousin, 
however near she may be to him. ... The true and Marriages 
legitimate wives in this country are the daughters of their Se 
sisters, whom they call Cherainditmebut, that is to say, ‘ the sisters’ 
daughter of my sister,’ and Cheremtrekorem, ‘my future ee 
wife’ And on this it is to be remarked that as soon as 

the girls are born the maternal uncle takes them up from 

the ground and keeps them to. be his future wife.” If a 

girl refuséd to marry her maternal uncle and accepted 
another man for her husband, she was treated with 
contempt as a lewd woman; there was a special name 
(souaragt) for her; and her uncle could even divorce her 
mother (his sister) from her father, so that the girl was 

said to be without a father (Zoupu-éum). Women divorced 

for such an infamous cause as the refusal of, their own 

_ daughter to marry her own uncle sometimes killed them- 

selves for shame and despair.2 Indeed, where a Brazilian 

tribe lives dispersed in, small isolated hordes or families, it 

is said that marriages between brothers and sisters are 
doctrines, such as the Immaculate Travels on the Amazon and Rio | 
Conception, the Passion, the Ascension, Megro (London, 1889), pp. 352 59. 

the forbidden fruit, and so on (af. ct. 2 André Thevet, La Cosmographie 

p- 196). universelle (Paris, 1575), ii. 931 
1A. R. Wallace, Narrative of [965] sg. 

576 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP. 

common. Tribes in which such unions are reported to 
occur are the Coerunas and Uainumas. “And in general,” 
says von Martius, “it may be asserted that incest in all 
degrees is of frequent occurrence among the numerous 
tribes and hordes on the Amazon and the Rio Negto.”? 

Tribes of Again, among the Juri Indians on the Yapura River, 
Ree ie? another tributary of the Rio Negro in north-western Brazil, 
Brazil we find various families or subordinate herdes which take 
Framed . i : . 

after their names from animals, plants, and other natural objects. 

animals, One horde is named after the toucan, another after another 
plants, etc. 5 4 A 5 
species of large bird, another after a species of palm, 
another after the sun, and another after the wind. On 
the Pureos River there is a horde of these Juri Indians 
who take their name from cacao.? Similarly the Uainuma 
Indians on the Yapura River fare divided into families or 
hordes, which take their names fram animals or plants. 
Thus, two of them are called after two different, kinds of 
palms, another after the bird jacamz, another after the 
ounce (Fels uncia), and another after wood.’ 
The Again, the Bororos of Matogrosso, in Brazil, identify 
poreros , @themselves with red macaws; they say that the red 
identify | macaws are Bororos, and that the Bororos are red macaws. 
wmemselv’S They never eat a red macaw, and when one of the tame 
macaws. birds dies, they lament for it. But they kill the wild 
macaws for the sake of their gorgeous feathers, and for 
the same reason they pluck thé tame ones.* But this 
curious identification of themselves with the birds does 
not of itself constitute totemism, though it may be said 
Some © to be totemic in principle. So much can hardly be said 
mga of the taboos which some Brazilian tribes observe in regard 

ae the to the flesh of certain animals. _ Thus “the Coroados of 
Kets the South will not taste the meat of deer, lest’ they should 

: - @ : 
oe are lose their rich black hair; or the protuberance on the neck 
nm 

sympa. Of the tapir, which is the best morsel, lest they should lose 

wage the love of their wives. In the same way they avoid the 
Snes 1 C.F. Phil. v. Martius, Zr Ethno- 3 Spix und Martius, " Reise * dz 

grapie Amerikas, sumal Brasiliens Brasilien, iii, 1208. 
(Leipsic, 1867), p. 116. : 

2 J. B. von Spix und C. F. Ph. von 4K. von den Steinen, Unter dex 
Martius, Reise in Brasilien (Munich, Naturvolkern Central-Brasiliens (Ber-, 
1823-1831), iil, 1236. . lin, 1894), pp. 352 5g.) 512. 

xxH TRACES OF TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER TRIBES 577 

meat of the duck ahd of the cuéza, a very savoury rodent, 
lest, their children “should acquire big, ugly-shaped feet and 
ears. He who has shot the deadly arrow must not eat of 
the game if he would have"steady aim and good luck for 
the future ; and the women also, to the evident advantage 
of their selfish, law-giving halves, are prohibited from the 
eating of many animals.”' There is nothing to suggest 
*that these and similar taboos are totemic; some of them 
appear to be based on the principle of sympathetic magic. 
It is on that principle, and not from totemic scruples, that 
the Zaparo Indians of Ecuador generally abstain from heavy 
meats, such as tapir and peccary, but eat birds, monkeys, 
deer, fish, and so forth, “ principally because they argue that 
the heavier meats make them also unwieldy, like the animals 
who supply the flesh, impeding their agility, and unfitting 
them, for the chase.” ” 

It is said that the aborigines of Peru, before the country Animals, 
was conquered by the Incas, worshipped many sorts of ee and 
natural objects, such as rocks, hills, herbs, slants, all kinds natural 

' Of trees, and all kinds of animals, for example pumas, jaguars, Sy 
bears, foxes, monkeys, dogs, serpents, lizards, toads, frogs, by the 
conders, eagles, falcons, and owls. Others “worshipped certain pees 
things from. which they derived benefit, such as great fountains 
and rivers, which supplied water for irrigating their crops. 

Some worshipped the earth, and called it Mother, because it 
* yielded their fruits ; otherg*adored the air for its gift of breath 
fo them, 'saying that it gave. them life; others the fire for 
its heat, and because they cooked their food with it; 
others worshipped a sheep, because of the great flocks they 
reared ; others the great chain of snowy mountains for its 
height and grandeur, and for the many rivers which flow 
from it and furnish irrigation; others adored maize or 
sara, 'as they call it, because it was their bPead ; others 
worshipped other kinds of corn and pulse, according to 
the abundance of the yield in each province. The in- 
habitants of the sea-coast, besides an infinity of other gods, 

1 Franz Keller, Ze Amazon and 168; 7d. ‘* Notes on the Zaparos,” 
Madeira Rivers (London, 1874), p. 84. _Journal of the Anthropological Institute, 
2 Alfred Simson, ‘Travels in the vii. (1878) p. 503. 
Wilds of Ecuador (London, 1886), p 

VOL, Il 2P 

People of 
different 
provinces 

worshipped 

the kind of 

fish which 
they caught 
in greatest 
abundance, 
as sardines, 
skate, dog- 
fish, gold- 
fish, and 
crabs. 

Worship 
of a white 
sheep. 

Some 
Indians 

of Peru 
claimed to 
be de- 
scended 
from lions 
(pumas), 
and others 
from 
conders, 

578 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP. 

worshipped the sea, which they call J/ama-ccocha, or 
‘Mother Sea,’ meaning that it filled the office of a mother, 
by supplying them with fish. They also worshipped the 
whale for its monstrous greatness. Besides this ordinary 
system of worshif, which prevailed throughout the coast, 
the people of different provinces adored the fish that they 
caught in greatest abundance; for they said that the first 
fish that was made in the world above (for so they named 
Heaven) gave birth to all other fish of that species, and 
took care to send them plenty of its children to sustain 
their tribe. For this reason: they worshipped sardines in 
one region, where they killed more of them than of any 
other fish ; in others, the skate; in others, the dog fish; 
in others, the golden fish for its beauty; in others, the 
craw fish; in others, for want of larger gods, the crabs, 
where they had no other fish or where they knew not how 
to catch and kill them. In short, they had whatever fish 
was most serviceable to them as their gods.”’ Some of 
the Collas of Peru “thought that their first progenitor had 
come out of a river, and they held it in great reverence and 
veneration as a father, looking upon the killing of fish in 
that river as sacrilege ; for they said !that the fish were their 
brothers. They believed in many other fables respecting 
their origin; and, from the same cause, they had many 
different gods, some for one reason and others for another. 
There was only one deity which all the Collas united in 
worshipping and holding as their principal god. This was 
a white sheep, for they were the lords of innumerable 
flocks.” Yet they offered up lambs and grease as sacrifices.” 

The Chancas of Peru “ boasted that they were descended 
from a lion, wherefore they adored the lion as a god, and, 
both before and after they were conquered by the Yncas, it 
was the ci&tom among them, on days of festival, for two 
dozen Indians to come ferth dressed in the way Hercules is 
painted, covered with lion skins, and their heads thrust into 
the skulls of lions. I have seen them so attired in the feast 

1 Garcilasso de la Vega, First Part 50 (bk. i. chapters 9 and 10): | 
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas, 2 Garcilasso de la Vega, of. c?t. 
translated by Clements R. Markham vol. i. pp. 168 sg. (bk. ii. ch. 19). 
{London, 1869-1871), vol. i. pp. 47- 

xx TRACES OF TOTEM/SAL AMONG OTHER TRIBES 579 

of the most holy sacrament at Cuzco.”! Other Indians, of ana they 
Peru believed themselves to be descended from conders, and ana 
accordingly at festivals they dressed themselves up in the of the 
great black and white wings of these huge birds.” rar or 

The Huancas of Peru, before they were conquered by +, 
the Incas, “worshipped the figure of a dog and had it in Huancas 
their temples as an idol, and they considered the flesh of a woruinbel 
dog to be most savoury meat. It may be supposed that pi feel 
they worshipped the dog because they were fond of its and feasted 
flesh ; and their greatest festival was the repast they provided on ne 
with dog’s meat.. To show their devotion to dogs, they 
made a sort of trumpet of their heads which, when they 
played at their feasts and dances, made a music that was 
very sweet to their ears ; and when they went to tar they 
also played on these trumpets to terrify and astonish their 
enemies, saying that the power of their god caused these 
two contrary effects.” When the Incas conquered these 
people, they destroyed their dog idols, forbade them to 
worship the figures of animals, and obliged them to make 
their trumpets out of the heads of deer instead of dogs.® 

These accounts of the ancient religion and superstition of These 
the Peruvian aborigines, which we have on the high authority 5o\5)' 
of Garcilasso de la Vega, himself the son of an Inca princess, hints of 
may perhaps be regarded as indications that these people j pen 
had totemism or something like it. But the evidence is 
too slight to allow us to pronounce a decided opinion on 
the question. 

The report which Garcilasso de la Vega gives of the Some 
marriage customs of the Peruvian aborigines seems to shew tela 

that endogamy rather than exogamy was the rule with some of Peru 

2 ati * contracted 
of these people. Hesays: “In many nations they cohabited ieee 

like beasts, without any special wife, but just. as chance.marriages 

directed. Others followed their own desires, without except- a 

ing sisters, daughters, or mothers. Others excepted their relations, 
mothers, but none else. In other provinces it was lawful, 

1 Garcilasso de la Vega, ?rst Part no lions in South America, 
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas, 
translated by Clements R. Markham 
(London, 1869-1871), vol. i, p. 323 
(bk. iv. ch. 15). The animal referred 3 Garcilasso de la Vega, of. cit, 
to isno doubt the puma. There are vol. ii. pp. 128 sg. (bk. vi. chy 10). 

VOL. III, 2P2 

2 Garcilasso de la Vega, of. cit. 
vol. ii. p. 156 (bk. vi. ch. 20). 

580 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP. 

and even praiseworthy, for the girls to be as immodest and 
abandoned as they pleased, and the most dissolute were 
more certain of marriage than those who were faithful. At 
all events the abandoned sorts of girls were held to be more 
lusty, while of the modest it was said that they had had 
no desire for any one because they were torpid. In other 
provinces they had an opposite custom, for the mothers 
guarded their daughters with great care; and when they 
were sought in marriage, they were brought out in public, 
and, in presence of the relations who had made the contract, 
the mothers deflowered them with their own hands, to show 
to all present the proof of the care that had been taken of 
them. In other provinces the nearest relations of the bride 
and her most intimate friends had connection with her, 
and on this condition the marriage was agreed to, and she 
was thus received by the husband.” ! 
The The divergencies in the matrimonial customs thus 
sent recorded by Garcilasso de la Vega seem to shew that he 
marriages was well acquainted with the facts; and accordingly we may 
ae accept with some confidence his statement that incestuous 
of Peru is marriages between the nearest relations were common among 
Fuerbey many of the aboriginal tribes of Peru. We have seen that 
a similar state of things is reported among the Eastern 
Tinnehs of North-West America,’ and that marriages between 
a father and his daughter are sanctioned by custom in some 
parts of New Guinea and Melanesia.’ 
Among the The Mataranes of Paraguay celebrated an annual festival 
Mataranes of their dead, and part of the festival consisted of a solemn 
of Peru the « * : 
human procession in which each deceased persdn was represented 
dead were by a dead ostrich. All the relations and friends of the 
represented 7 P 
by dead departed who assembled on this occasion were expected to 
pon bring as many dead ostriches as they had dead kinsfolk to 
the ostrich mourn. Tf festival lasted four days, and on the fourth day 
ek the dead were lamented for the space of one hour‘ It is 
the tribe. possible that the dead Mataranes were supposed to trans- 

migrate into ostriches ; and if that were so, the ostrich may 

1 Garcilasso de la Vega, Férst Part 2 See above, pp. 362 sg. 
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas, See vol. ii. pp. 40, 118. 
translated by Clements R. Markham * De Charlevoix, Histoire du 

(London, 1869-1871), vol. i. pp. 585g. Paraguay (Paris, 1756), i. 462 (where 
(bk. i. ch. 14). 482 is a misprint). 

xxi. ZRACES OF TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER TRIBES 581 

have been their totem. This is merely a conjecture, but it 
is supported to some extent by the example of the Moluches 
or Araucanians, as we shall see immediately ; for in that 
Indian nation there was an Ostrich clan, and the dead were 
supposed to live with the presiding deity of their clan, who 

in the case of the Ostrich clan might naturally be an 
ostrich. 

The last people whom we shall notice in our survey of The 
totemism are the Moluches, as they call themselves, or the pees 
Araucanians, as they are called by the Spaniards. They canians of 
are a powerful and warlike tribe or rather nation of Southern Chae 
Chili. The evidence that they had a totemic system is famities 
fairly strong, though it does not amount to a complete or 
proof. In the first place they are divided into families or named after 
clans, which take their names from animals, plants, and 3m" 
other natural objects. On this subject the Abbé Molina, and other 
the “historian of Chili, writes thus: “The names of the sche 
Araucanians are composed of the proper name, which is 
generally either an adjective or a numeral, and the family 
appellative or surname, which.is always placed after the 
proper name, according to the European custom, as cart- 
demu, green bush; melt-antu, four suns. The first depotes 
one of the family of the Jesus, or bushes, and the second 
one of that of the antus, or suns. Nor is there scarcely a 
material object which does not furnish them with a dis- 
criminative name. From hence, we meet among them with 
the families of Rivers, Mountains, Stones, Lions, etc. These 
families, which are called cuga, or e/pa, are more or less 
respected according to their rank, or the heroes they have 
given to their country. The origin of these surnames 
is unknown, but is certainly of a period much earlier 
than that of the Spanish conquests.”* A later writer 
on the Araucanians gives as examples of heir family 

the west of the Andes of Chili from 
the borders of Peru to the Straits of 
Magellan, and they may be divided 

1 Don J. Ignatius Molina, Zhe 
Geographical; Natural, and Civil 
History of Chili (London, 1809), 

nations of the 

ii, 113 sg. The name Araucanians 
(Araucanos) has been bestowed on 
these Indians by the Spaniards, but 
they call themselves Moluches. Ac- 
cording to Falkner, they are dispersed 
over the country both to the east and 

into the different 
Picunches, Pehuenches, and Huilliches. 
See Thomas Falkner, 4 Description g 
Patagonia and of the Adjoining Parts 
of South America (Hereford, 1774), 

p- 96. 

582 TOTEMISM IN SOUTH AMERICA CHAP, 

names Hueno, “Heaven”; Coyam, “Oak”; -and Lem, 

“ Forest.” | : 
Each clan In the second place, the Moluches or Araucanians 
pedi . believe that each family or clan has its presiding deity. On 

deity, who: this subject Thomas Falkner, who resided in their country 

lives in'@ for nearly forty years, tells us that “they have formed a 
under multiplicity of these deities ; each of whom they believe to 

d, : ‘ : : ‘ 
ad the - Preside over one particular cast or family of Indians, of which 

dead clans- he is supposed to have been thecreator. Some make them- 
poe selves of the cast of the Tiger, some of the Lion, some of the 
ee Guanaco, and others of the Ostrich, etc. They imagine 
names and that these deities have each their separate habitations, in vast 
ee of caverns under the earth, beneath some lake, hill, etc. and 
totemism. that when an Indian di¢s, his soul goes to live with the 
deity who presides over his particular family, there to enjoy 
the happiness of being eternally drunk.” ? These beliefs, 
taken together with the names of the families or clans, raise 
a fairly strong presumption that the Moluches or Araucanians 
have or once had a totemic system. 
Form of In their marriages the Moluches or Araucanians 
capture of « scrupulously avoid the more immediate degrees of 
at marriage relationship ” ;* and the pretence of capturing the bride, 
among the : . . 
‘Arai which forms a regular part of an Araucanian marriage 
canians. ceremony, may perhaps point to a custom of exogamy. 
“Their marriage ceremonies,’ says Molina, “have little 
formality, or, to speak more accurately, consist in nothing 
more than in carrying off the bride by prétended violence, 
which is considered by them, as by the negroes of Africa, 
an essential prerequisite to the nuptials. The husband, in 
‘concert with the father, conceals himself with some friends 
near the place where they know the bride is to pass. As 
soon as she arrives she is seized and put on horseback behind 
-the bridegroom, notwithstanding her pretended resistance 
and her shrieks, which are far from being serious. In this 
manner she is conducted with much noise to the house of 
her husband, where her relations are assembled, and receive 
1E. R. Smith, Zhe Araucanians, Patagonia and the Adjoining Parts of 
or Notes of a Tour among the Inditn South America (Hereford, 1774), 
Tribes of Southern Child (London, p. 114. : . ; 
1855), p. 262, 3 Molina, History of Chili, ii. 
2 Thomas Falkner, 4 Description of 115. : 

xxl TRACES OF TOTEMISM AMONG OTHER TRIBES 583 

the presents agreed upon, after having partaken of the 
nuptial entertainment.” ! 

Amongst the Moluches or Araucanians, as among so Custom of 
many other Indian tribes, we find that a woman avoids’ the *oldance 
man who has married her daughter. Sometimes, we are man and 

. . : Fi his wife's 
told, this ceremonial avoidance is carried so far that for jother. 
years after her -daughter’s Marriage “the mother never 
addresses her son-in-law face to face ; though with her. back 
turned, or with the interposition of a fence or a partition, 
she will converse with him freely.” ? 

1 Molina, History of Chili, ii. 115 2 E. R. Smith, 74e Araucanians, 
sg. Compare FE. R. Smith, Zhe p. 217. 
Araucanians, pp. 215 5qq. 

“END OF VOL III. 

Printed by R. & R. Ciark, Limitep, Edinburgh. 

NTE 

00083141 

on n 23 sania 201 9
